The Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, 1665, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, 1665
       Transcribed From The Shorthand Manuscript In The Pepysian
       Library Magdalene College Cambridge By The Rev. Mynors
       Bright

Author: Samuel Pepys

Commentator: Lord Braybrooke

Editor: Henry B. Wheatley

Release Date: October 12, 2006 [EBook #4162]
Posting Date: March 22, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, 1665 ***




Produced by David Widger







THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

(Unabridged)

WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

1965

By Samuel Pepys

Edited With Additions By

Henry B. Wheatley F.S.A.




    LONDON
    GEORGE BELL & SONS YORK ST.  COVENT GARDEN
    CAMBRIDGE DEIGHTON BELL & CO.


    1893




JANUARY 1664-1665

January 1st (Lord's day). Lay long in bed, having been busy late last
night, then up and to my office, where upon ordering my accounts
and papers with respect to my understanding my last year's gains and
expense, which I find very great, as I have already set down yesterday.
Now this day I am dividing my expense, to see what my clothes and every
particular hath stood me in: I mean all the branches of my expense. At
noon a good venison pasty and a turkey to ourselves without any body
so much as invited by us, a thing unusuall for so small a family of my
condition: but we did it and were very merry. After dinner to my office
again, where very late alone upon my accounts, but have not brought them
to order yet, and very intricate I find it, notwithstanding my care all
the year to keep things in as good method as any man can do. Past 11
o'clock home to supper and to bed.

2nd. Up, and it being a most fine, hard frost I walked a good way toward
White Hall, and then being overtaken with Sir W. Pen's coach, went into
it, and with him thither, and there did our usual business with the
Duke. Thence, being forced to pay a great deale of money away in boxes
(that is, basins at White Hall), I to my barber's, Gervas, and there had
a little opportunity of speaking with my Jane alone, and did give her
something, and of herself she did tell me a place where I might come to
her on Sunday next, which I will not fail, but to see how modestly and
harmlessly she brought it out was very pretty. Thence to the Swan, and
there did sport a good while with Herbert's young kinswoman without
hurt, though they being abroad, the old people. Then to the Hall, and
there agreed with Mrs. Martin, and to her lodgings which she has now
taken to lie in, in Bow Streete, pitiful poor things, yet she thinks
them pretty, and so they are for her condition I believe good enough.
Here I did 'ce que je voudrais avec' her most freely, and it having
cost 2s. in wine and cake upon her, I away sick of her impudence, and
by coach to my Lord Brunker's, by appointment, in the Piazza, in
Covent-Guarding; where I occasioned much mirth with a ballet I brought
with me, made from the seamen at sea to their ladies in town; saying
Sir W. Pen, Sir G. Ascue, and Sir J. Lawson made them. Here a most noble
French dinner and banquet, the best I have seen this many a day and good
discourse. Thence to my bookseller's and at his binder's saw Hooke's
book of the Microscope,

     ["Micrographia: or some physiological descriptions of minute bodies
     made by Magnifying Glasses.  London, 1665," a very remarkable work
     with elaborate plates, some of which have been used for lecture
     illustrations almost to our own day.  On November 23rd, 1664, the
     President of the Royal Society was "desired to sign a licence for
     printing of Mr. Hooke's microscopical book."  At this time the book
     was mostly printed, but it was delayed, much to Hooke's disgust, by
     the examination of several Fellows of the Society.  In spite of this
     examination the council were anxious that the author should make it
     clear that he alone was responsible for any theory put forward, and
     they gave him notice to that effect.  Hooke made this clear in his
     dedication (see Birch's "History," vol. i., pp. 490-491)]

which is so pretty that I presently bespoke it, and away home to the
office, where we met to do something, and then though very late by coach
to Sir Ph. Warwicke's, but having company with him could not speak with
him. So back again home, where thinking to be merry was vexed with my
wife's having looked out a letter in Sir Philip Sidney about jealousy
for me to read, which she industriously and maliciously caused me to do,
and the truth is my conscience told me it was most proper for me, and
therefore was touched at it, but tooke no notice of it, but read it out
most frankly, but it stucke in my stomach, and moreover I was vexed to
have a dog brought to my house to line our little bitch, which they make
him do in all their sights, which, God forgive me, do stir my jealousy
again, though of itself the thing is a very immodest sight. However, to
cards with my wife a good while, and then to bed.

3rd. Up, and by coach to Sir Ph. Warwicke's, the streete being full
of footballs, it being a great frost, and found him and Mr. Coventry
walking in St. James's Parke. I did my errand to him about the felling
of the King's timber in the forests, and then to my Lord of Oxford,
Justice in Eyre, for his consent thereto, for want whereof my Lord Privy
Seale stops the whole business. I found him in his lodgings, in but an
ordinary furnished house and roome where he was, but I find him to be a
man of good discreet replys. Thence to the Coffee-house, where certain
newes that the Dutch have taken some of our colliers to the North; some
say four, some say seven. Thence to the 'Change a while, and so home
to dinner and to the office, where we sat late, and then I to write
my letters, and then to Sir W. Batten's, who is going out of towne to
Harwich to-morrow to set up a light-house there, which he hath lately
got a patent from the King to set up, that will turne much to his
profit. Here very merry, and so to my office again, where very late, and
then home to supper and to bed, but sat up with my wife at cards till
past two in the morning.

4th. Lay long, and then up and to my Lord of Oxford's, but his Lordshipp
was in bed at past ten o'clock: and, Lord helpe us! so rude a dirty
family I never saw in my life. He sent me out word my business was not
done, but should against the afternoon. I thence to the Coffee-house,
there but little company, and so home to the 'Change, where I hear of
some more of our ships lost to the Northward. So to Sir W. Batten's, but
he was set out before I got thither. I sat long talking with my lady,
and then home to dinner. Then come Mr. Moore to see me, and he and I to
my Lord of Oxford's, but not finding him within Mr. Moore and I to "Love
in a Tubb," which is very merry, but only so by gesture, not wit at all,
which methinks is beneath the House. So walked home, it being a very
hard frost, and I find myself as heretofore in cold weather to begin to
burn within and pimples and pricks all over my body, my pores with cold
being shut up. So home to supper and to cards and to bed.

5th. Up, it being very cold and a great snow and frost tonight. To the
office, and there all the morning. At noon dined at home, troubled at
my wife's being simply angry with Jane, our cook mayde (a good servant,
though perhaps hath faults and is cunning), and given her warning to
be gone. So to the office again, where we sat late, and then I to my
office, and there very late doing business. Home to supper and to the
office again, and then late home to bed.

6th. Lay long in bed, but most of it angry and scolding with my wife
about her warning Jane our cookemayde to be gone and upon that she
desires to go abroad to-day to look a place. A very good mayde she is
and fully to my mind, being neat, only they say a little apt to scold,
but I hear her not. To my office all the morning busy. Dined at home.
To my office again, being pretty well reconciled to my wife, which I
did desire to be, because she had designed much mirthe to-day to end
Christmas with among her servants. At night home, being twelfenight, and
there chose my piece of cake, but went up to my viall, and then to bed,
leaving my wife and people up at their sports, which they continue till
morning, not coming to bed at all.

7th. Up and to the office all the morning. At noon dined alone, my wife
and family most of them a-bed. Then to see my Lady Batten and sit with
her a while, Sir W. Batten being out of town, and then to my office
doing very much business very late, and then home to supper and to bed.

8th (Lord's day). Up betimes, and it being a very fine frosty day, I and
my boy walked to White Hall, and there to the Chappell, where one Dr.
Beaumont' preached a good sermon, and afterwards a brave anthem upon the
150 Psalm, where upon the word "trumpet" very good musique was made. So
walked to my Lady's and there dined with her (my boy going home), where
much pretty discourse, and after dinner walked to Westminster, and there
to the house where Jane Welsh had appointed me, but it being sermon time
they would not let me in, and said nobody was there to speak with me. I
spent the whole afternoon walking into the Church and Abbey, and up and
down, but could not find her, and so in the evening took a coach and
home, and there sat discoursing with my wife, and by and by at supper,
drinking some cold drink I think it was, I was forced to go make water,
and had very great pain after it, but was well by and by and continued
so, it being only I think from the drink, or from my straining at stool
to do more than my body would. So after prayers to bed.

9th. Up and walked to White Hall, it being still a brave frost, and I
in perfect good health, blessed be God! In my way saw a woman that broke
her thigh, in her heels slipping up upon the frosty streete. To the
Duke, and there did our usual worke. Here I saw the Royal Society bring
their new book, wherein is nobly writ their charter' and laws, and comes
to be signed by the Duke as a Fellow; and all the Fellows' hands are to
be entered there, and lie as a monument; and the King hath put his with
the word Founder. Thence I to Westminster, to my barber's, and found
occasion to see Jane, but in presence of her mistress, and so could
not speak to her of her failing me yesterday, and then to the Swan to
Herbert's girl, and lost time a little with her, and so took coach, and
to my Lord Crew's and dined with him, who receives me with the greatest
respect that could be, telling me that he do much doubt of the successe
of this warr with Holland, we going about it, he doubts, by the
instigation of persons that do not enough apprehend the consequences of
the danger of it, and therein I do think with him. Holmes was this day
sent to the Tower,--[For taking New York from the Dutch]--but I perceive
it is made matter of jest only; but if the Dutch should be our masters,
it may come to be of earnest to him, to be given over to them for a
sacrifice, as Sir W. Rawly [Raleigh] was. Thence to White Hall to a
Tangier Committee, where I was accosted and most highly complimented by
my Lord Bellasses,

     [John Belasyse, second son of Thomas, first Viscount Fauconberg,
     created Baron Belasyse of Worlaby, January 27th, 1644, Lord
     Lieutenant of the East Riding of Yorkshire, and Governor of Hull.
     He was appointed Governor of Tangier, and Captain of the Band of
     Gentlemen Pensioners.  He was a Roman Catholic, and therefore was
     deprived of all his appointments in 1672 by the provisions of the
     Test Act, but in 1684 James II. made him First Commissioner of the
     Treasury.  He died 1689.]

our new governor, beyond my expectation, or measure I could imagine he
would have given any man, as if I were the only person of business that
he intended to rely on, and desires my correspondence with him. This I
was not only surprized at, but am well pleased with, and may make good
use of it. Our patent is renewed, and he and my Lord Barkeley, and Sir
Thomas Ingram put in as commissioners. Here some business happened which
may bring me some profit. Thence took coach and calling my wife at her
tailor's (she being come this afternoon to bring her mother some apples,
neat's tongues, and wine); I home, and there at my office late with Sir
W. Warren, and had a great deal of good discourse and counsel from him,
which I hope I shall take, being all for my good in my deportment in my
office, yet with all honesty. He gone I home to supper and to bed.

10th. Lay long, it being still very cold, and then to the office, where
till dinner, and then home, and by and by to the office, where we sat
and were very late, and I writing letters till twelve at night, and then
after supper to bed.

11th. Up, and very angry with my boy for lying long a bed and forgetting
his lute. To my office all the morning. At noon to the 'Change, and so
home to dinner. After dinner to Gresham College to my Lord Brunker and
Commissioner Pett, taking, Mr. Castle with me there to discourse over
his draught of a ship he is to build for us. Where I first found reason
to apprehend Commissioner Pett to be a man of an ability extraordinary
in any thing, for I found he did turn and wind Castle like a chicken
in his business, and that most pertinently and mister-like, and great
pleasure it was to me to hear them discourse, I, of late having studied
something thereof, and my Lord Brunker is a very able person also
himself in this sort of business, as owning himself to be a master in
the business of all lines and Conicall Sections: Thence home, where very
late at my office doing business to my content, though [God] knows with
what ado it was that when I was out I could get myself to come home to
my business, or when I was there though late would stay there from
going abroad again. To supper and to bed. This evening, by a letter from
Plymouth, I hear that two of our ships, the Leopard and another, in the
Straights, are lost by running aground; and that three more had like to
have been so, but got off, whereof Captain Allen one: and that a Dutch
fleete are gone thither; which if they should meet with our lame ships,
God knows what would become of them. This I reckon most sad newes;
God make us sensible of it! This night, when I come home, I was much
troubled to hear my poor canary bird, that I have kept these three or
four years, is dead.

12th. Up, and to White Hall about getting a privy seal for felling of
the King's timber for the navy, and to the Lords' House to speak with
my Lord Privy Seale about it, and so to the 'Change, where to my last
night's ill news I met more. Spoke with a Frenchman who was taken, but
released, by a Dutch man-of-war of thirty-six guns (with seven more of
the like or greater ships), off the North Foreland, by Margett. Which
is a strange attempt, that they should come to our teeth; but the wind
being easterly, the wind that should bring our force from Portsmouth,
will carry them away home. God preserve us against them, and pardon our
making them in our discourse so contemptible an enemy! So home and to
dinner, where Mr. Hollyard with us dined. So to the office, and there
late till 11 at night and more, and then home to supper and to bed.

13th. Up betimes and walked to my Lord Bellasses's lodgings in
Lincolne's Inne Fieldes, and there he received and discoursed with me in
the most respectfull manner that could be, telling me what a character
of my judgment, and care, and love to Tangier he had received of me,
that he desired my advice and my constant correspondence, which he much
valued, and in my courtship, in which, though I understand his designe
very well, and that it is only a piece of courtship, yet it is a comfort
to me that I am become so considerable as to have him need to say that
to me, which, if I did not do something in the world, would never have
been. Here well satisfied I to Sir Ph. Warwicke, and there did some
business with him; thence to Jervas's and there spent a little idle
time with him, his wife, Jane, and a sweetheart of hers. So to the Hall
awhile and thence to the Exchange, where yesterday's newes confirmed,
though in a little different manner; but a couple of ships in the
Straights we have lost, and the Dutch have been in Margaret [Margate]
Road. Thence home to dinner and so abroad and alone to the King's house,
to a play, "The Traytor," where, unfortunately, I met with Sir W. Pen,
so that I must be forced to confess it to my wife, which troubles me.
Thence walked home, being ill-satisfied with the present actings of the
House, and prefer the other House before this infinitely. To my Lady
Batten's, where I find Pegg Pen, the first time that ever I saw her to
wear spots. Here very merry, Sir W. Batten being looked for to-night,
but is not yet come from Harwich. So home to supper and to bed.

14th. Up and to White Hall, where long waited in the Duke's chamber for
a Committee intended for Tangier, but none met, and so I home and to the
office, where we met a little, and then to the 'Change, where our late
ill newes confirmed in loss of two ships in the Straights, but are now
the Phoenix and Nonsuch! Home to dinner, thence with my wife to the
King's house, there to see "Vulpone," a most excellent play; the best I
think I ever saw, and well, acted. So with Sir W. Pen home in his coach,
and then to the office. So home, to supper, and bed, resolving by the
grace of God from this day to fall hard to my business again, after some
weeke or fortnight's neglect.

15th (Lord's day). Up, and after a little at my office to prepare a
fresh draught of my vowes for the next yeare, I to church, where a most
insipid young coxcomb preached. Then home to dinner, and after dinner to
read in "Rushworth's Collections" about the charge against the late Duke
of Buckingham, in order to the fitting me to speak and understand the
discourse anon before the King about the suffering the Turkey merchants
to send out their fleete at this dangerous time, when we can neither
spare them ships to go, nor men, nor King's ships to convoy them. At
four o'clock with Sir W. Pen in his coach to my Lord Chancellor's, where
by and by Mr. Coventry, Sir W. Pen, Sir J. Lawson, Sir G. Ascue, and
myself were called in to the King, there being several of the Privy
Council, and my Lord Chancellor lying at length upon a couch (of the
goute I suppose); and there Sir W. Pen begun, and he had prepared heads
in a paper, and spoke pretty well to purpose, but with so much leisure
and gravity as was tiresome; besides, the things he said were but very
poor to a man in his trade after a great consideration, but it was to
purpose, indeed to dissuade the King from letting these Turkey ships to
go out: saying (in short) the King having resolved to have 130 ships out
by the spring, he must have above 20 of them merchantmen. Towards which,
he in the whole River could find but 12 or 14, and of them the five
ships taken up by these merchants were a part, and so could not be
spared. That we should need 30,000 [sailors] to man these 130 ships,
and of them in service we have not above 16,000; so we shall need 14,000
more. That these ships will with their convoys carry above 2,000 men,
and those the best men that could be got; it being the men used to the
Southward that are the best men for warr, though those bred in the North
among the colliers are good for labour. That it will not be safe for the
merchants, nor honourable for the King, to expose these rich ships
with his convoy of six ships to go, it not being enough to secure them
against the Dutch, who, without doubt, will have a great fleete in the
Straights. This, Sir J. Lawson enlarged upon. Sir G. Ascue he chiefly
spoke that the warr and trade could not be supported together, and,
therefore, that trade must stand still to give way to them. This Mr.
Coventry seconded, and showed how the medium of the men the King hath
one year with another employed in his Navy since his coming, hath not
been above 3,000 men, or at most 4,000 men; and now having occasion
of 30,000, the remaining 26,000 must be found out of the trade of the
nation. He showed how the cloaths, sending by these merchants to Turkey,
are already bought and paid for to the workmen, and are as many as they
would send these twelve months or more; so the poor do not suffer by
their not going, but only the merchant, upon whose hands they lit dead;
and so the inconvenience is the less. And yet for them he propounded,
either the King should, if his Treasure would suffer it, buy them, and
showed the losse would not be so great to him: or, dispense with the Act
of Navigation, and let them be carried out by strangers; and ending
that he doubted not but when the merchants saw there was no remedy, they
would and could find ways of sending them abroad to their profit. All
ended with a conviction (unless future discourse with the merchants
should alter it) that it was not fit for them to go out, though the
ships be loaded. The King in discourse did ask me two or three questions
about my newes of Allen's loss in the Streights, but I said nothing as
to the business, nor am not much sorry for it, unless the King had spoke
to me as he did to them, and then I could have said something to the
purpose I think. So we withdrew, and the merchants were called in.
Staying without, my Lord Fitz Harding come thither, and fell to
discourse of Prince Rupert, and made nothing to say that his disease was
the pox and that he must be fluxed, telling the horrible degree of the
disease upon him with its breaking out on his head. But above all I
observed how he observed from the Prince, that courage is not what men
take it to be, a contempt of death; for, says he, how chagrined the
Prince was the other day when he thought he should die, having no more
mind to it than another man. But, says he, some men are more apt to
think they shall escape than another man in fight, while another is
doubtfull he shall be hit. But when the first man is sure he shall die,
as now the Prince is, he is as much troubled and apprehensive of it as
any man else; for, says he, since we told [him] that we believe he would
overcome his disease, he is as merry, and swears and laughs and curses,
and do all the things of a [man] in health, as ever he did in his life;
which, methought, was a most extraordinary saying before a great many
persons there of quality. So by and by with Sir W. Pen home again, and
after supper to the office to finish my vows, and so to bed.

16th. Up and with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen to White Hall, where we
did our business with the Duke. Thence I to Westminster Hall and walked
up and down. Among others Ned Pickering met me and tells me how active
my Lord is at sea, and that my Lord Hinchingbroke is now at Rome,
and, by all report, a very noble and hopefull gentleman. Thence to Mr.
Povy's, and there met Creed, and dined well after his old manner of
plenty and curiosity. But I sat in pain to think whether he would begin
with me again after dinner with his enquiry after my bill, but he did
not, but fell into other discourse, at which I was glad, but was vexed
this morning meeting of Creed at some bye questions that he demanded of
me about some such thing, which made me fear he meant that very matter,
but I perceive he did not. Thence to visit my Lady Sandwich and so to
a Tangier Committee, where a great company of the new Commissioners,
Lords, that in behalfe of my Lord Bellasses are very loud and busy and
call for Povy's accounts, but it was a most sorrowful thing to see
how he answered to questions so little to the purpose, but to his owne
wrong. All the while I sensible how I am concerned in my bill of L100
and somewhat more. So great a trouble is fear, though in a case that at
the worst will bear enquiry. My Lord Barkeley was very violent against
Povy. But my Lord Ashly, I observe, is a most clear man in matters of
accounts, and most ingeniously did discourse and explain all matters.
We broke up, leaving the thing to a Committee of which I am one. Povy,
Creed, and I staid discoursing, I much troubled in mind seemingly for
the business, but indeed only on my own behalf, though I have no great
reason for it, but so painfull a thing is fear. So after considering how
to order business, Povy and I walked together as far as the New Exchange
and so parted, and I by coach home. To the office a while, then to
supper and to bed. This afternoon Secretary Bennet read to the Duke of
Yorke his letters, which say that Allen

     [Among the State Papers is a letter from Captain Thomas Allin to Sir
     Richard Fanshaw, dated from "The Plymouth, Cadiz Bay," December
     25th, 1664, in which he writes: "On the 19th attacked with his seven
     ships left, a Dutch fleet of fourteen, three of which were men-of-
     war; sunk two vessels and took two others, one a rich prize from
     Smyrna; the others retired much battered.  Has also taken a Dutch
     prize laden with iron and planks, coming from Lisbon ("Calendar,"
     Domestic, 1664-65, p. 122).]

has met with the Dutch Smyrna fleet at Cales,--[The old form of the name
Cadiz.]--and sunk one and taken three. How true or what these ships are
time will show, but it is good newes and the newes of our ships being
lost is doubted at dales and Malaga. God send it false!

17th. Up and walked to Mr. Povy's by appointment, where I found him and
Creed busy about fitting things for the Committee, and thence we to my
Lord Ashly's, where to see how simply, beyond all patience, Povy did
again, by his many words and no understanding, confound himself and his
business, to his disgrace, and rendering every body doubtfull of his
being either a foole or knave, is very wonderfull. We broke up all
dissatisfied, and referred the business to a meeting of Mr. Sherwin
and others to settle, but here it was mighty strange methought to find
myself sit herein Committee with my hat on, while Mr. Sherwin stood bare
as a clerke, with his hat off to his Lord Ashlyand the rest, but I thank
God I think myself never a whit the better man for all that. Thence
with Creed to the 'Change and Coffee-house, and so home, where a brave
dinner, by having a brace of pheasants and very merry about Povy's
folly. So anon to the office, and there sitting very late, and then
after a little time at Sir W. Batten's, where I am mighty great and
could if I thought it fit continue so, I to the office again, and there
very late, and so home to the sorting of some of my books, and so to
bed, the weather becoming pretty warm, and I think and hope the frost
will break.

18th. Up and by and by to my bookseller's, and there did give thorough
direction for the new binding of a great many of my old books, to make
my whole study of the same binding, within very few. Thence to my Lady
Sandwich's, who sent for me this morning. Dined with her, and it was to
get a letter of hers conveyed by a safe hand to my Lord's owne hand at
Portsmouth, which I did undertake. Here my Lady did begin to talk of
what she had heard concerning Creed, of his being suspected to be a
fanatique and a false fellow. I told her I thought he was as shrewd and
cunning a man as any in England, and one that I would feare first should
outwit me in any thing. To which she readily concurred. Thence to Mr.
Povy's by agreement, and there with Mr. Sherwin, Auditor Beale, and
Creed and I hard at it very late about Mr. Povy's accounts, but such
accounts I never did see, or hope again to see in my days. At night,
late, they gone, I did get him to put out of this account our sums that
are in posse only yet, which he approved of when told, but would never
have stayed it if I had been gone. Thence at 9 at night home, and so to
supper vexed and my head akeing and to bed.

19th. Up, and it being yesterday and to-day a great thaw it is not for
a man to walk the streets, but took coach and to Mr. Povy's, and there
meeting all of us again agreed upon an answer to the Lords by and by,
and thence we did come to Exeter House, and there was a witness of most
[base] language against Mr. Povy, from my Lord Peterborough, who is most
furiously angry with him, because the other, as a foole, would needs
say that the L26,000 was my Lord Peterborough's account, and that he had
nothing to do with it. The Lords did find fault also with our answer,
but I think really my Lord Ashly would fain have the outside of
an Exchequer,--[This word is blotted, and the whole sentence is
confused.]--but when we come better to be examined. So home by coach,
with my Lord Barkeley, who, by his discourse, I find do look upon Mr.
Coventry as an enemy but yet professes great justice and pains. I at
home after dinner to the office, and there sat all the afternoon and
evening, and then home to supper and to bed. Memorandum. This day and
yesterday, I think it is the change of the weather, I have a great deal
of pain, but nothing like what I use to have. I can hardly keep myself
loose, but on the contrary am forced to drive away my pain. Here I am so
sleepy I cannot hold open my eyes, and therefore must be forced to break
off this day's passages more shortly than I would and should have
done. This day was buried (but I could not be there) my cozen Percivall
Angier; and yesterday I received the newes that Dr. Tom Pepys is dead,
at Impington, for which I am but little sorry, not only because he would
have been troublesome to us, but a shame to his family and profession;
he was such a coxcomb.

20th. Up and to Westminster, where having spoke with Sir Ph. Warwicke,
I to Jervas, and there I find them all in great disorder about Jane, her
mistress telling me secretly that she was sworn not to reveal anything,
but she was undone. At last for all her oath she told me that she had
made herself sure to a fellow that comes to their house that can only
fiddle for his living, and did keep him company, and had plainly told
her that she was sure to him never to leave him for any body else. Now
they were this day contriving to get her presently to marry one Hayes
that was there, and I did seem to persuade her to it. And at last got
them to suffer me to advise privately, and by that means had her company
and think I shall meet her next Sunday, but I do really doubt she will
be undone in marrying this fellow. But I did give her my advice, and so
let her do her pleasure, so I have now and then her company. Thence to
the Swan at noon, and there sent for a bit of meat and dined, and had my
baiser of the fille of the house there, but nothing plus. So took coach
and to my Lady Sandwich's, and so to my bookseller's, and there took
home Hooke's book of microscopy, a most excellent piece, and of which
I am very proud. So home, and by and by again abroad with my wife
about several businesses, and met at the New Exchange, and there to our
trouble found our pretty Doll is gone away to live they say with her
father in the country, but I doubt something worse. So homeward, in
my way buying a hare and taking it home, which arose upon my discourse
to-day with Mr. Batten, in Westminster Hall, who showed me my mistake
that my hare's foote hath not the joynt to it; and assures me he never
had his cholique since he carried it about him: and it is a strange
thing how fancy works, for I no sooner almost handled his foote but my
belly began to be loose and to break wind, and whereas I was in some
pain yesterday and t'other day and in fear of more to-day, I became very
well, and so continue. At home to my office a while, and so to supper,
read, and to cards, and to bed.

21st. At the office all the morning. Thence my Lord Brunker carried me
as far as Mr. Povy's, and there I 'light and dined, meeting Mr. Sherwin,
Creed, &c., there upon his accounts. After dinner they parted and
Mr. Povy carried me to Somersett House, and there showed me the
Queene-Mother's chamber and closett, most beautiful places for furniture
and pictures; and so down the great stone stairs to the garden, and
tried the brave echo upon the stairs; which continues a voice so long
as the singing three notes, concords, one after another, they all three
shall sound in consort together a good while most pleasantly. Thence
to a Tangier Committee at White Hall, where I saw nothing ordered by
judgment, but great heat and passion and faction now in behalf of my
Lord Bellasses, and to the reproach of my Lord Tiviott, and dislike as
it were of former proceedings. So away with Mr. Povy, he carrying me
homeward to Mark Lane in his coach, a simple fellow I now find him, to
his utter shame in his business of accounts, as none but a sorry foole
would have discovered himself; and yet, in little, light, sorry things
very cunning; yet, in the principal, the most ignorant man I ever met
with in so great trust as he is. To my office till past 12, and then
home to supper and to bed, being now mighty well, and truly I cannot but
impute it to my fresh hare's foote. Before I went to bed I sat up
till two o'clock in my chamber reading of Mr. Hooke's Microscopicall
Observations, the most ingenious book that ever I read in my life.

22nd (Lord's day). Up, leaving my wife in bed, being sick of her months,
and to church. Thence home, and in my wife's chamber dined very merry,
discoursing, among other things, of a design I have come in my head this
morning at church of making a match between Mrs. Betty Pickering and
Mr. Hill, my friend the merchant, that loves musique and comes to me
a'Sundays, a most ingenious and sweet-natured and highly accomplished
person. I know not how their fortunes may agree, but their disposition
and merits are much of a sort, and persons, though different, yet
equally, I think, acceptable. After dinner walked to Westminster, and
after being at the Abbey and heard a good anthem well sung there, I as
I had appointed to the Trumpett, there expecting when Jane Welsh should
come, but anon comes a maid of the house to tell me that her mistress
and master would not let her go forth, not knowing of my being here, but
to keep her from her sweetheart. So being defeated, away by coach home,
and there spent the evening prettily in discourse with my wife and
Mercer, and so to supper, prayers, and to bed.

23rd. Up, and with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen to White Hall; but there
finding the Duke gone to his lodgings at St. James's for all together,
his Duchesse being ready to lie in, we to him, and there did our usual
business. And here I met the great newes confirmed by the Duke's own
relation, by a letter from Captain Allen. First, of our own loss of two
ships, the Phoenix and Nonesuch, in the Bay of Gibraltar: then of his,
and his seven ships with him, in the Bay of Cales, or thereabouts,
fighting with the 34 Dutch Smyrna fleete; sinking the King Salamon,
a ship worth a L150,000 or more, some say L200,000, and another; and
taking of three merchant-ships. Two of our ships were disabled, by the
Dutch unfortunately falling against their will against them; the Advice,
Captain W. Poole, and Antelope, Captain Clerke: The Dutch men-of-war did
little service. Captain Allen did receive many shots at distance
before he would fire one gun, which he did not do till he come within
pistol-shot of his enemy. The Spaniards on shore at Cales did stand
laughing at the Dutch, to see them run away and flee to the shore, 34 or
thereabouts, against eight Englishmen at most. I do purpose to get the
whole relation, if I live, of Captain Allen himself. In our loss of the
two ships in the Bay of Gibraltar, it is observable how the world do
comment upon the misfortune of Captain Moone of the Nonesuch (who did
lose, in the same manner, the Satisfaction), as a person that hath
ill-luck attending him; without considering that the whole fleete was
ashore. Captain Allen led the way, and Captain Allen himself writes that
all the masters of the fleete, old and young, were mistaken, and did
carry their ships aground. But I think I heard the Duke say that Moone,
being put into the Oxford, had in this conflict regained his credit, by
sinking one and taking another. Captain Seale of the Milford hath done
his part very well, in boarding the King Salamon, which held out half an
hour after she was boarded; and his men kept her an hour after they did
master her, and then she sunk, and drowned about 17 of her men. Thence
to Jervas's, my mind, God forgive me, running too much after some folly,
but 'elle' not being within I away by coach to the 'Change, and thence
home to dinner. And finding Mrs. Bagwell waiting at the office after
dinner, away she and I to a cabaret where she and I have eat before,
and there I had her company 'tout' and had 'mon plaisir' of 'elle'. But
strange to see how a woman, notwithstanding her greatest pretences of
love 'a son mari' and religion, may be 'vaincue'. Thence to the Court of
the Turkey Company at Sir Andrew Rickard's to treat about carrying some
men of ours to Tangier, and had there a very civil reception, though a
denial of the thing as not practicable with them, and I think so too.
So to my office a little and to Jervas's again, thinking 'avoir
rencontrais' Jane, 'mais elle n'etait pas dedans'. So I back again and
to my office, where I did with great content 'ferais' a vow to mind my
business, and 'laisser aller les femmes' for a month, and am with all
my heart glad to find myself able to come to so good a resolution, that
thereby I may follow my business, which and my honour thereby lies a
bleeding. So home to supper and to bed.

24th. Up and by coach to Westminster Hall and the Parliament House, and
there spoke with Mr. Coventry and others about business and so back to
the 'Change, where no news more than that the Dutch have, by consent of
all the Provinces, voted no trade to be suffered for eighteen months,
but that they apply themselves wholly to the warr.

     [This statement of a total prohibition of all trade, and for so long
     a period as eighteen months, by a government so essentially
     commercial as that of the United Provinces, seems extraordinary.
     The fact was, that when in the beginning of the year 1665 the States
     General saw that the war with England was become inevitable, they
     took several vigorous measures, and determined to equip a formidable
     fleet, and with a view to obtain a sufficient number of men to man
     it, prohibited all navigation, especially in the great and small
     fisheries as they were then called, and in the whale fishery.  This
     measure appears to have resembled the embargoes so commonly resorted
     to in this country on similar occasions, rather than a total
     prohibition of trade.--B.]

And they say it is very true, but very strange, for we use to believe
they cannot support themselves without trade. Thence home to dinner
and then to the office, where all the afternoon, and at night till
very late, and then home to supper and bed, having a great cold, got on
Sunday last, by sitting too long with my head bare, for Mercer to comb
my hair and wash my eares.

25th. Up, and busy all the morning, dined at home upon a hare pye, very
good meat, and so to my office again, and in the afternoon by coach to
attend the Council at White Hall, but come too late, so back with Mr.
Gifford, a merchant, and he and I to the Coffee-house, where I met Mr.
Hill, and there he tells me that he is to be Assistant to the Secretary
of the Prize Office (Sir Ellis Layton), which is to be held at Sir
Richard Ford's, which, methinks, is but something low, but perhaps may
bring him something considerable; but it makes me alter my opinion of
his being so rich as to make a fortune for Mrs. Pickering. Thence home
and visited Sir J. Minnes, who continues ill, but is something better;
there he told me what a mad freaking fellow Sir Ellis Layton hath been,
and is, and once at Antwerp was really mad. Thence to my office late,
my cold troubling me, and having by squeezing myself in a coach hurt my
testicles, but I hope will cease its pain without swelling. So home out
of order, to supper and to bed.

26th. Lay, being in some pain, but not much, with my last night's
bruise, but up and to my office, where busy all the morning, the like
after dinner till very late, then home to supper and to bed. My wife
mightily troubled with the tooth ake, and my cold not being gone yet,
but my bruise yesterday goes away again, and it chiefly occasioned I
think now from the sudden change of the weather from a frost to a great
rayne on a sudden.

27th. Called up by Mr. Creed to discourse about some Tangier business,
and he gone I made me ready and found Jane Welsh, Mr. Jervas his mayde,
come to tell me that she was gone from her master, and is resolved
to stick to this sweetheart of hers, one Harbing (a very sorry little
fellow, and poor), which I did in a word or two endeavour to dissuade
her from, but being unwilling to keep her long at my house, I sent her
away and by and by followed her to the Exchange, and thence led her
about down to the 3 Cranes, and there took boat for the Falcon, and at
a house looking into the fields there took up and sat an hour or two
talking and discoursing .... Thence having endeavoured to make her think
of making herself happy by staying out her time with her master and
other counsels, but she told me she could not do it, for it was her
fortune to have this man, though she did believe it would be to her
ruine, which is a strange, stupid thing, to a fellow of no kind of worth
in the world and a beggar to boot. Thence away to boat again and landed
her at the Three Cranes again, and I to the Bridge, and so home, and
after shifting myself, being dirty, I to the 'Change, and thence to
Mr. Povy's and there dined, and thence with him and Creed to my Lord
Bellasses', and there debated a great while how to put things in order
against his going, and so with my Lord in his coach to White Hall, and
with him to my Lord Duke of Albemarle, finding him at cards. After a
few dull words or two, I away to White Hall again, and there delivered
a letter to the Duke of Yorke about our Navy business, and thence walked
up and down in the gallery, talking with Mr. Slingsby, who is a very
ingenious person, about the Mint and coynage of money. Among other
things, he argues that there being L700,000 coined in the Rump time, and
by all the Treasurers of that time, it being their opinion that the Rump
money was in all payments, one with another, about a tenth part of all
their money. Then, says he, to my question, the nearest guess we can
make is, that the money passing up and down in business is L7,000,000.
To another question of mine he made me fully understand that the old law
of prohibiting bullion to be exported, is, and ever was a folly and an
injury, rather than good. Arguing thus, that if the exportations exceed
importations, then the balance must be brought home in money, which,
when our merchants know cannot be carried out again, they will forbear
to bring home in money, but let it lie abroad for trade, or keepe in
foreign banks: or if our importations exceed our exportations, then,
to keepe credit, the merchants will and must find ways of carrying out
money by stealth, which is a most easy thing to do, and is every where
done; and therefore the law against it signifies nothing in the world.
Besides, that it is seen, that where money is free, there is great
plenty; where it is restrained, as here, there is a great want, as in
Spayne. These and many other fine discourses I had from him. Thence by
coach home (to see Sir J. Minnes first), who is still sick, and I doubt
worse than he seems to be. Mrs. Turner here took me into her closet, and
there did give me a glass of most pure water, and shewed me her Rocke,
which indeed is a very noble thing but a very bawble. So away to my
office, where late, busy, and then home to supper and to bed.

28th. Up and to my office, where all the morning, and then home to
dinner, and after dinner abroad, walked to Paul's Churchyard, but my
books not bound, which vexed me. So home to my office again, where
very late about business, and so home to supper and to bed, my cold
continuing in a great degree upon me still. This day I received a good
sum of money due to me upon one score or another from Sir G. Carteret,
among others to clear all my matters about Colours,--[Flags]--wherein a
month or two since I was so embarrassed and I thank God I find myself to
have got clear, by that commodity, L50 and something more; and earned
it with dear pains and care and issuing of my owne money, and saved the
King near L100 in it.

29th (Lord's day). Up and to my office, where all the morning, putting
papers to rights which now grow upon my hands. At noon dined at home.
All the afternoon at my business again. In the evening come Mr. Andrews
and Hill, and we up to my chamber and there good musique, though my
great cold made it the less pleasing to me. Then Mr. Hill (the other
going away) and I to supper alone, my wife not appearing, our
discourse upon the particular vain humours of Mr. Povy, which are very
extraordinary indeed. After supper I to Sir W. Batten's, where I found
him, Sir W. Pen, Sir J. Robinson, Sir R. Ford and Captain Cocke and
Mr. Pen, junior. Here a great deal of sorry disordered talk about the
Trinity House men, their being exempted from land service. But, Lord! to
see how void of method and sense their discourse was, and in what heat,
insomuch as Sir R. Ford (who we judged, some of us, to be a little
foxed) fell into very high terms with Sir W. Batten, and then with
Captain Cocke. So that I see that no man is wise at all times. Thence
home to prayers and to bed.

30th. This is solemnly kept as a Fast all over the City, but I kept my
house, putting my closett to rights again, having lately put it out of
order in removing my books and things in order to being made clean. At
this all day, and at night to my office, there to do some business, and
being late at it, comes Mercer to me, to tell me that my wife was in
bed, and desired me to come home; for they hear, and have, night after
night, lately heard noises over their head upon the leads. Now it is
strange to think how, knowing that I have a great sum of money in my
house, this puts me into a most mighty affright, that for more than two
hours, I could not almost tell what to do or say, but feared this and
that, and remembered that this evening I saw a woman and two men stand
suspiciously in the entry, in the darke; I calling to them, they made me
only this answer, the woman said that the men came to see her; but who
she was I could not tell. The truth is, my house is mighty dangerous,
having so many ways to be come to; and at my windows, over the stairs,
to see who goes up and down; but, if I escape to-night, I will remedy
it. God preserve us this night safe! So at almost two o'clock, I home to
my house, and, in great fear, to bed, thinking every running of a mouse
really a thiefe; and so to sleep, very brokenly, all night long, and
found all safe in the morning.

31st. Up and with Sir W. Batten to Westminster, where to speak at the
House with my Lord Bellasses, and am cruelly vexed to see myself put
upon businesses so uncertainly about getting ships for Tangier being
ordered, a servile thing, almost every day. So to the 'Change, back by
coach with Sir W. Batten, and thence to the Crowne, a taverne hard by,
with Sir W. Rider and Cutler, where we alone, a very good dinner. Thence
home to the office, and there all the afternoon late. The office being
up, my wife sent for me, and what was it but to tell me how Jane carries
herself, and I must put her away presently. But I did hear both sides
and find my wife much in fault, and the grounds of all the difference
is my wife's fondness of Tom, to the being displeased with all the house
beside to defend the boy, which vexes me, but I will cure it. Many high
words between my wife and I, but the wench shall go, but I will take a
course with the boy, for I fear I have spoiled him already. Thence to
the office, to my accounts, and there at once to ease my mind I have
made myself debtor to Mr. Povy for the L117 5s. got with so much joy
the last month, but seeing that it is not like to be kept without some
trouble and question, I do even discharge my mind of it, and so if I
come now to refund it, as I fear I shall, I shall now be ne'er a whit
the poorer for it, though yet it is some trouble to me to be poorer by
such a sum than I thought myself a month since. But, however, a quiet
mind and to be sure of my owne is worth all. The Lord be praised for
what I have, which is this month come down to L1257. I staid up about my
accounts till almost two in the morning.




FEBRUARY 1664-1665

February 1st. Lay long in bed, which made me, going by coach to St.
James's by appointment to have attended the Duke of Yorke and my Lord
Bellasses, lose the hopes of my getting something by the hire of a ship
to carry men to Tangier. But, however, according to the order of the
Duke this morning, I did go to the 'Change, and there after great pains
did light of a business with Mr. Gifford and Hubland [Houblon] for
bringing me as much as I hoped for, which I have at large expressed in
my stating the case of the "King's Fisher," which is the ship that I
have hired, and got the Duke of Yorke's agreement this afternoon after
much pains and not eating a bit of bread till about 4 o'clock. Going
home I put in to an ordinary by Temple Barr and there with my boy Tom
eat a pullet, and thence home to the office, being still angry with my
wife for yesterday's foolery. After a good while at the office, I with
the boy to the Sun behind the Exchange, by agreement with Mr. Young the
flag-maker, and there was met by Mr. Hill, Andrews, and Mr. Hubland,
a pretty serious man. Here two very pretty savoury dishes and good
discourse. After supper a song, or three or four (I having to that
purpose carried Lawes's book), and staying here till 12 o'clock got
the watch to light me home, and in a continued discontent to bed. After
being in bed, my people come and say there is a great stinke of burning,
but no smoake. We called up Sir J. Minnes's and Sir W. Batten's people,
and Griffin, and the people at the madhouse, but nothing could be found
to give occasion to it. At this trouble we were till past three o'clock,
and then the stinke ceasing, I to sleep, and my people to bed, and lay
very long in the morning.

2nd. Then up and to my office, where till noon and then to the 'Change,
and at the Coffee-house with Gifford, Hubland, the Master of the ship,
and I read over and approved a charter-party for carrying goods for
Tangier, wherein I hope to get some money. Thence home, my head akeing
for want of rest and too much business. So to the office. At night
comes, Povy, and he and I to Mrs. Bland's to discourse about my serving
her to helpe her to a good passage for Tangier. Here I heard her
kinswoman sing 3 or 4 very fine songs and in good manner, and then home
and to supper. My cook mayd Jane and her mistresse parted, and she
went away this day. I vexed to myself, but was resolved to have no more
trouble, and so after supper to my office and then to bed.

3rd. Up, and walked with my boy (whom, because of my wife's making him
idle, I dare not leave at home) walked first to Salsbury court, there to
excuse my not being at home at dinner to Mrs. Turner, who I perceive
is vexed, because I do not serve her in something against the great
feasting for her husband's Reading--[On his appointment as Reader in
Law.]--in helping her to some good penn'eths, but I care not. She was
dressing herself by the fire in her chamber, and there took occasion to
show me her leg, which indeed is the finest I ever saw, and she not a
little proud of it. Thence to my Lord Bellasses; thence to Mr. Povy's,
and so up and down at that end of the town about several businesses, it
being a brave frosty day and good walking. So back again on foot to the
'Change, in my way taking my books from binding from my bookseller's.
My bill for the rebinding of some old books to make them suit with my
study, cost me, besides other new books in the same bill, L3; but it
will be very handsome. At the 'Change did several businesses, and here
I hear that newes is come from Deale, that the same day my Lord Sandwich
sailed thence with the fleete, that evening some Dutch men of warr were
seen on the back side of the Goodwin, and, by all conjecture, must be
seen by my Lord's fleete; which, if so, they must engage. Thence, being
invited, to my uncle Wight's, where the Wights all dined; and, among
the others, pretty Mrs. Margaret, who indeed is a very pretty lady; and
though by my vowe it costs me 12d. a kiss after the first, yet I did
adventure upon a couple. So home, and among other letters found one from
Jane, that is newly gone, telling me how her mistresse won't pay her her
Quarter's wages, and withal tells me how her mistress will have the boy
sit 3 or 4 hours together in the dark telling of stories, but speaks of
nothing but only her indiscretion in undervaluing herself to do it, but
I will remedy that, but am vexed she should get some body to write so
much because of making it publique. Then took coach and to visit my Lady
Sandwich, where she discoursed largely to me her opinion of a match,
if it could be thought fit by my Lord, for my Lady Jemimah, with Sir
G. Carteret's eldest son; but I doubt he hath yet no settled estate
in land. But I will inform myself, and give her my opinion. Then Mrs.
Pickering (after private discourse ended, we going into the other room)
did, at my Lady's command, tell me the manner of a masquerade

     [The masquerade at Court took place on the 2nd, and is referred to
     by Evelyn, who was present, in his Diary.  Some amusing incidents
     connected with the entertainment are related in the "Grammont
     Memoirs" (chapter vii.).]

before the King and Court the other day. Where six women (my Lady
Castlemayne and Duchesse of Monmouth being two of them) and six men (the
Duke of Monmouth and Lord Arran and Monsieur Blanfort, being three of
them) in vizards, but most rich and antique dresses, did dance admirably
and most gloriously. God give us cause to continue the mirthe! So home,
and after awhile at my office to supper and to bed.

4th. Lay long in bed discoursing with my wife about her mayds, which
by Jane's going away in discontent and against my opinion do make some
trouble between my wife and me. But these are but foolish troubles and
so not to be set to heart, yet it do disturb me mightily these things.
To my office, and there all the morning. At noon being invited, I to
the Sun behind the 'Change, to dinner to my Lord Belasses, where a great
deal of discourse with him, and some good, among others at table he told
us a very handsome passage of the King's sending him his message about
holding out the town of Newarke, of which he was then governor for the
King. This message he sent in a sluggbullet, being writ in cypher, and
wrapped up in lead and swallowed. So the messenger come to my Lord and
told him he had a message from the King, but it was yet in his belly;
so they did give him some physique, and out it come. This was a month
before the King's flying to the Scotts; and therein he told him that at
such a day, being the 3d or 6th of May, he should hear of his being come
to the Scotts, being assured by the King of France that in coming to
them he should be used with all the liberty, honour, and safety, that
could be desired. And at the just day he did come to the Scotts. He told
us another odd passage: how the King having newly put out Prince Rupert
of his generallshipp, upon some miscarriage at Bristoll, and Sir Richard
Willis

     [Sir Richard Willis, the betrayer of the Royalists, was one of the
     "Sealed Knot."  When the Restoration had become a certainty, he
     wrote to Clarendon imploring him to intercede for him with the king
     (see Lister's "Life of Clarendon," vol. iii., p. 87).]

of his governorship of Newarke, at the entreaty of the gentry of the
County, and put in my Lord Bellasses, the great officers of the King's
army mutinyed, and come in that manner with swords drawn, into the
market-place of the towne where the King was; which the King hearing,
says, "I must to horse." And there himself personally, when every body
expected they should have been opposed, the King come, and cried to the
head of the mutineers, which was Prince Rupert, "Nephew, I command you
to be gone." So the Prince, in all his fury and discontent, withdrew,
and his company scattered, which they say was the greatest piece of
mutiny in the world. Thence after dinner home to my office, and in the
evening was sent to by Jane that I would give her her wages. So I sent
for my wife to my office, and told her that rather than be talked on
I would give her all her wages for this Quarter coming on, though two
months is behind, which vexed my wife, and we begun to be angry, but I
took myself up and sent her away, but was cruelly vexed in my mind that
all my trouble in this world almost should arise from my disorders in
my family and the indiscretion of a wife that brings me nothing almost
(besides a comely person) but only trouble and discontent. She gone I
late at my business, and then home to supper and to bed.

5th (Lord's day). Lay in bed most of the morning, then up and down to my
chamber, among my new books, which is now a pleasant sight to me to
see my whole study almost of one binding. So to dinner, and all the
afternoon with W. Hewer at my office endorsing of papers there, my
business having got before me much of late. In the evening comes to
see me Mr. Sheply, lately come out of the country, who goes away again
to-morrow, a good and a very kind man to me. There come also Mr. Andrews
and Hill, and we sang very pleasantly; and so, they being gone, I and my
wife to supper, and to prayers and bed.

6th. Up and with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Pen to St. James's, but the
Duke is gone abroad. So to White Hall to him, and there I spoke with
him, and so to Westminster, did a little business, and then home to
the 'Change, where also I did some business, and went off and ended my
contract with the "Kingfisher" I hired for Tangier, and I hope to get
something by it. Thence home to dinner, and visited Sir W. Batten, who
is sick again, worse than he was, and I am apt to think is very ill. So
to my office, and among other things with Sir W. Warren 4 hours or more
till very late, talking of one thing or another, and have concluded a
firm league with him in all just ways to serve him and myself all I can,
and I think he will be a most usefull and thankfull man to me. So home
to supper and to bed. This being one of the coldest days, all say,
they ever felt in England; and I this day, under great apprehensions
of getting an ague from my putting a suit on that hath lain by without
ayring a great while, and I pray God it do not do me hurte.

7th. Up and to my office, where busy all the morning, and at home to
dinner. It being Shrove Tuesday, had some very good fritters. All the
afternoon and evening at the office, and at night home to supper and to
bed. This day, Sir W. Batten, who hath been sicke four or five days, is
now very bad, so as people begin to fear his death; and I am at a loss
whether it will be better for me to have him die, because he is a bad
man, or live, for fear a worse should come.

8th. Up and by coach to my Lord Peterborough's, where anon my Lord Ashly
and Sir Thomas Ingram met, and Povy about his accounts, who is one of
the most unhappy accountants that ever I knew in all my life, and one
that if I were clear in reference to my bill of L117 he should be hanged
before I would ever have to do with him, and as he understands nothing
of his business himself, so he hath not one about him that do. Here late
till I was weary, having business elsewhere, and thence home by coach,
and after dinner did several businesses and very late at my office, and
so home to supper and to bed.

9th. Up and to my office, where all the morning very busy. At noon home
to dinner, and then to my office again, where Sir William Petty come,
among other things to tell me that Mr. Barlow

     [Thomas Barlow, Pepys's predecessor as Clerk of the Acts, to whom he
     paid part of the salary.  Barlow held the office jointly with Dennis
     Fleeting.]

is dead; for which, God knows my heart, I could be as sorry as is
possible for one to be for a stranger, by whose death he gets L100 per
annum, he being a worthy, honest man; but after having considered that
when I come to consider the providence of God by this means unexpectedly
to give me L100 a year more in my estate, I have cause to bless God, and
do it from the bottom of my heart. So home late at night, after twelve
o'clock, and so to bed.

10th. Up and abroad to Paul's Churchyard, there to see the last of my
books new bound: among others, my "Court of King James,"

     ["The Court and Character of King James, written and taken by Sir
     Anthony Weldon, being an eye and eare witnesse," was published in
     1650, and reprinted in 1651 under the title of "Truth brought to
     Light" Weldon's book was answered in a work entitled "Aulicus
     Coquinariae."  Both the original book and the answer were reprinted
     in "The Secret History of the Court of King James," Edinburgh, 1811,
     two vols.  (edited by Sir Walter Scott).]

and "The Rise and Fall of the Family of the Stewarts;" and much pleased
I am now with my study; it being, methinks, a beautifull sight. Thence
(in Mr. Grey's coach, who took me up), to Westminster, where I heard
that yesterday the King met the Houses to pass the great bill for the
L2,500,000. After doing a little business I home, where Mr. Moore dined
with me, and evened our reckonings on my Lord Sandwich's bond to me for
principal and interest. So that now on both there is remaining due to
me L257. 7s., and I bless God it is no more. So all the afternoon at my
office, and late home to supper, prayers, and to bed.

11th. Up and to my office, where all the morning. At noon to 'Change by
coach with my Lord Brunkard, and thence after doing much business home
to dinner, and so to my office all the afternoon till past 12 at night
very busy. So home to bed.

12th (Lord's day). Up and to church to St. Lawrence to hear Dr. Wilkins,
the great scholar, for curiosity, I having never heard him: but was not
satisfied with him at all, only a gentleman sat in the pew I by chance
sat in, that sang most excellently, and afterward I found by his face
that he had been a Paul's scholler, but know not his name, and I was
also well pleased with the church, it being a very fine church. So home
to dinner, and then to my office all the afternoon doing of business,
and in the evening comes Mr. Hill (but no Andrews) and we spent the
evening very finely, singing, supping and discoursing. Then to prayers
and to bed.

13th. Up and to St. James's, did our usual business before the Duke.
Thence I to Westminster and by water (taking Mr. Stapely the rope-maker
by the way), to his rope-ground and to Limehouse, there to see the
manner of stoves and did excellently inform myself therein, and coming
home did go on board Sir W. Petty's "Experiment," which is a brave roomy
vessel, and I hope may do well. So went on shore to a Dutch [house] to
drink some mum, and there light upon some Dutchmen, with whom we had
good discourse touching stoveing

     [Stoveing, in sail-making, is the heating of the bolt-ropes, so as
     to make them pliable.--B.]

and making of cables. But to see how despicably they speak of us for
our using so many hands more to do anything than they do, they closing
a cable with 20, that we use 60 men upon. Thence home and eat something,
and then to my office, where very late, and then to supper and to bed.
Captain Stokes, it seems, is at last dead at Portsmouth.

14th (St. Valentine). This morning comes betimes Dicke Pen, to be my
wife's Valentine, and come to our bedside. By the same token, I had him
brought to my side, thinking to have made him kiss me; but he perceived
me, and would not; so went to his Valentine: a notable, stout, witty
boy. I up about business, and, opening the door, there was Bagwell's
wife, with whom I talked afterwards, and she had the confidence to say
she came with a hope to be time enough to be my Valentine, and so indeed
she did, but my oath preserved me from loosing any time with her, and
so I and my boy abroad by coach to Westminster, where did two or three
businesses, and then home to the 'Change, and did much business there.
My Lord Sandwich is, it seems, with his fleete at Alborough Bay. So home
to dinner and then to the office, where till 12 almost at night, and
then home to supper and to bed.

15th. Up and to my office, where busy all the morning. At noon with
Creed to dinner to Trinity-house, where a very good dinner among the old
sokers, where an extraordinary discourse of the manner of the loss of
the "Royall Oake" coming home from Bantam, upon the rocks of Scilly,
many passages therein very extraordinary, and if I can I will get it in
writing. Thence with Creed to Gresham College, where I had been by Mr.
Povy the last week proposed to be admitted a member;

     [According to the minutes of the Royal Society for February 15th,
     1664-65, "Mr. Pepys was unanimously elected and admitted."  Notes of
     the experiments shown by Hooke and Boyle are given in Birch's
     "History of the Royal Society," vol. ii., p. 15.]

and was this day admitted, by signing a book and being taken by the hand
by the President, my Lord Brunkard, and some words of admittance said to
me. But it is a most acceptable thing to hear their discourse, and see
their experiments; which were this day upon the nature of fire, and how
it goes out in a place where the ayre is not free, and sooner out where
the ayre is exhausted, which they showed by an engine on purpose. After
this being done, they to the Crowne Taverne, behind the 'Change, and
there my Lord and most of the company to a club supper; Sir P. Neale,
Sir R. Murrey, Dr. Clerke, Dr. Whistler, Dr. Goddard, and others of most
eminent worth. Above all, Mr. Boyle to-day was at the meeting, and above
him Mr. Hooke, who is the most, and promises the least, of any man in
the world that ever I saw. Here excellent discourse till ten at night,
and then home, and to Sir W. Batten's, where I hear that Sir Thos. Harvy
intends to put Mr. Turner out of his house and come in himself, which
will be very hard to them, and though I love him not, yet for his
family's sake I pity him. So home and to bed.

16th. Up, and with Mr. Andrews to White Hall, where a Committee of
Tangier, and there I did our victuallers' business for some more money,
out of which I hope to get a little, of which I was glad; but, Lord!
to see to what a degree of contempt, nay, scorn, Mr. Povy, through his
prodigious folly, hath brought himself in his accounts, that if he be
not a man of a great interest, he will be kicked out of his employment
for a foole, is very strange, and that most deservedly that ever man
was, for never any man, that understands accounts so little, ever went
through so much, and yet goes through it with the greatest shame and
yet with confidence that ever I saw man in my life. God deliver me in my
owne business of my bill out of his hands, and if ever I foul my fingers
with him again let me suffer for it! Back to the 'Change, and thence
home to dinner, where Mrs. Hunt dined with me, and poor Mrs. Batters;
who brought her little daughter with her, and a letter from her husband,
wherein, as a token, the foole presents me very seriously with his
daughter for me to take the charge of bringing up for him, and to make
my owne. But I took no notice to her at all of the substance of the
letter, but fell to discourse, and so went away to the office, where all
the afternoon till almost one in the morning, and then home to bed.

17th. Up, and it being bitter cold, and frost and snow, which I had
thought had quite left us, I by coach to Povy's, where he told me, as I
knew already, how he was handled the other day, and is still, by my Lord
Barkeley, and among other things tells me, what I did not know, how
my Lord Barkeley will say openly, that he hath fought more set
fields--[Battles or actions]--than any man in England hath done. I did
my business with him, which was to get a little sum of money paid, and
so home with Mr. Andrews, who met me there, and there to the office. At
noon home and there found Lewellin, which vexed me out of my old jealous
humour. So to my office, where till 12 at night, being only a little
while at noon at Sir W. Batten's to see him, and had some high words
with Sir J. Minnes about Sir W. Warren, he calling him cheating knave,
but I cooled him, and at night at Sir W. Pen's, he being to go to
Chatham to-morrow. So home to supper and to bed.

18th. Up, and to the office, where sat all the morning; at noon to the
'Change, and thence to the Royall Oake taverne in Lumbard Streete,
where Sir William Petty and the owners of the double-bottomed boat (the
Experiment) did entertain my Lord Brunkard, Sir R. Murrey, myself, and
others, with marrow bones and a chine of beefe of the victuals they have
made for this ship; and excellent company and good discourse: but,
above all, I do value Sir William Petty. Thence home; and took my Lord
Sandwich's draught of the harbour of Portsmouth down to Ratcliffe, to
one Burston, to make a plate for the King, and another for the Duke, and
another for himself; which will be very neat. So home, and till almost
one o'clock in the morning at my office, and then home to supper and
to bed. My Lord Sandwich, and his fleete of twenty-five ships in the
Downes, returned from cruising, but could not meet with any Dutchmen.

19th. Lay in bed, it being Lord's day, all the morning talking with
my wife, sometimes pleased, sometimes displeased, and then up and to
dinner. All the afternoon also at home, and Sir W. Batten's, and in the
evening comes Mr. Andrews, and we sung together, and then to supper, he
not staying, and at supper hearing by accident of my mayds their letting
in a rogueing Scotch woman that haunts the office, to helpe them to
washe and scoure in our house, and that very lately, I fell mightily
out, and made my wife, to the disturbance of the house and neighbours,
to beat our little girle, and then we shut her down into the cellar, and
there she lay all night. So we to bed.

20th. Up, and with Sir J. Minnes to attend the Duke, and then we back
again and rode into the beginning of my Lord Chancellor's new
house, near St. James's; which common people have already called
Dunkirke-house, from their opinion of his having a good bribe for the
selling of that towne. And very noble I believe it will be. Near that is
my Lord Barkeley beginning another on one side, and Sir J. Denham on the
other. Thence I to the House of Lords and spoke with my Lord Bellasses,
and so to the 'Change, and there did business, and so to the Sun
taverne, haling in the morning had some high words with Sir J. Lawson
about his sending of some bayled goods to Tangier, wherein the truth is
I did not favour him, but being conscious that some of my profits may
come out by some words that fell from him, and to be quiet, I have
accommodated it. Here we dined merry; but my club and the rest come
to 7s. 6d., which was too much. Thence to the office, and there found
Bagwell's wife, whom I directed to go home, and I would do her business,
which was to write a letter to my Lord Sandwich for her husband's
advance into a better ship as there should be occasion. Which I did, and
by and by did go down by water to Deptford, and then down further, and
so landed at the lower end of the town, and it being dark 'entrer en
la maison de la femme de Bagwell', and there had 'sa compagnie', though
with a great deal of difficulty, 'neanmoins en fin j'avais ma volont
d'elle', and being sated therewith, I walked home to Redriffe, it being
now near nine o'clock, and there I did drink some strong waters and eat
some bread and cheese, and so home. Where at my office my wife comes
and tells me that she hath hired a chamber mayde, one of the prettiest
maydes that ever she saw in her life, and that she is really jealous
of me for her, but hath ventured to hire her from month to month, but I
think she means merrily. So to supper and to bed.

21st. Up, and to the office (having a mighty pain in my forefinger of
my left hand, from a strain that it received last night) in struggling
'avec la femme que je' mentioned yesterday, where busy till noon, and
then my wife being busy in going with her woman to a hot-house to bathe
herself, after her long being within doors in the dirt, so that she now
pretends to a resolution of being hereafter very clean. How long it will
hold I can guess. I dined with Sir W. Batten and my Lady, they being now
a'days very fond of me. So to the 'Change, and off of the 'Change with
Mr. Wayth to a cook's shop, and there dined again for discourse with him
about Hamaccos

     [Or hammock-battens: cleats or battens nailed to the sides of a
     vessel's beams, from which to suspend the seamen's hammocks.]

and the abuse now practised in tickets, and more like every day to be.
Also of the great profit Mr. Fen makes of his place, he being, though he
demands but 5 per cent. of all he pays, and that is easily computed,
but very little pleased with any man that gives him no more. So to the
office, and after office my Lord Brunkerd carried me to Lincolne's
Inne Fields, and there I with my Lady Sandwich (good lady) talking of
innocent discourse of good housewifery and husbands for her daughters,
and the luxury and looseness of the times and other such things till
past 10 o'clock at night, and so by coach home, where a little at
my office, and so to supper and to bed. My Lady tells me how my Lord
Castlemayne is coming over from France, and is believed will be made
friends with his Lady again. What mad freaks the Mayds of Honour at
Court have: that Mrs. Jenings, one of the Duchesses mayds, the other
day dressed herself like an orange wench, and went up and down and cried
oranges; till falling down, or by such accident, though in the evening,
her fine shoes were discerned, and she put to a great deale of shame;
that such as these tricks being ordinary, and worse among them, thereby
few will venture upon them for wives: my Lady Castlemayne will in
merriment say that her daughter (not above a year old or two) will be
the first mayde in the Court that will be married. This day my Lord
Sandwich writ me word from the Downes, that he is like to be in towne
this week.

22nd. Lay last night alone, my wife after her bathing lying alone in
another bed. So cold all night. Up and to the office, where busy all the
morning. At noon at the 'Change, busy; where great talk of a Dutch ship
in the North put on shore, and taken by a troop of horse. Home to
dinner and Creed with me. Thence to Gresham College, where very noble
discourse, and thence home busy till past 12 at night, and then home to
supper and to bed. Mrs. Bland come this night to take leave of me and my
wife, going to Tangier.

23rd. This day, by the blessing of Almighty God, I have lived thirty-two
years in the world, and am in the best degree of health at this minute
that I have been almost in my life time, and at this time in the best
condition of estate that ever I was in-the Lord make me thankfull. Up,
and to the office, where busy all the morning. At noon to the 'Change,
where I hear the most horrid and astonishing newes that ever was
yet told in my memory, that De Ruyter with his fleete in Guinny hath
proceeded to the taking of whatever we have, forts, goods, ships, and
men, and tied our men back to back, and thrown them all into the sea,
even women and children also. This a Swede or Hamburgher is come into
the River and tells that he saw the thing done.

     [Similar reports of the cruelty of the English to the Dutch in
     Guinea were credited in Holland, and were related by Downing in a
     letter to Clarendon from the Hague, dated April 14th, 1665 (Lister's
     "Life of Clarendon," vol. iii., p. 374).]

But, Lord! to see the consternation all our merchants are in is
observable, and with what fury and revenge they discourse of it. But
I fear it will like other things in a few days cool among us. But that
which I fear most is the reason why he that was so kind to our men at
first should afterward, having let them go, be so cruel when he went
further. What I fear is that there he was informed (which he was not
before) of some of Holmes's dealings with his countrymen, and so was
moved to this fury. God grant it be not so! But a more dishonourable
thing was never suffered by Englishmen, nor a more barbarous done by
man, as this by them to us. Home to dinner, and then to the office,
where we sat all the afternoon, and then at night to take my finall
leave of Mrs. Bland, who sets out to-morrow for Tangier, and then I back
to my office till past 12, and so home to supper and to bed.

24th. Up, and to my office, where all the morning upon advising
again with some fishermen and the water bayliffe of the City, by Mr.
Coventry's direction, touching the protections which are desired for
the fishermen upon the River, and I am glad of the occasion to make
me understand something of it. At noon home to dinner, and all the
afternoon till 9 at night in my chamber, and Mr. Hater with me (to
prevent being disturbed at the office), to perfect my contract book,
which, for want of time, hath a long time lain without being entered
in as I used to do from month to month. Then to my office, where till
almost 12, and so home to bed.

25th. Up, and to the office, where all the morning. At noon to the
'Change; where just before I come, the Swede that had told the King and
the Duke so boldly this great lie of the Dutch flinging our men back
to back into the sea at Guinny, so particularly, and readily, and
confidently, was whipt round the 'Change: he confessing it a lie, and
that he did it in hopes to get something. It is said the judges, upon
demand, did give it their opinion that the law would judge him to be
whipt, to lose his eares, or to have his nose slit but I do not hear
that anything more is to be done to him. They say he is delivered over
to the Dutch Embassador to do what he pleased with him. But the world
do think that there is some design on one side or other, either of the
Dutch or French, for it is not likely a fellow would invent such a lie
to get money whereas he might have hoped for a better reward by telling
something in behalf of us to please us. Thence to the Sun taverne, and
there dined with Sir W. Warren and Mr. Gifford, the merchant: and I hear
how Nich. Colborne, that lately lived and got a great estate there, is
gone to live like a prince in the country, and that this Wadlow, that
did the like at the Devil by St. Dunstane's, did go into the country,
and there spent almost all he had got, and hath now choused this
Colborne out of his house, that he might come to his old trade again.
But, Lord! to see how full the house is, no room for any company almost
to come into it. Thence home to the office, where dispatched much
business; at night late home, and to clean myself with warm water; my
wife will have me, because she do herself, and so to bed.

26th (Sunday). Up and to church, and so home to dinner, and after dinner
to my office, and there busy all the afternoon, till in the evening
comes Mr. Andrews and Hill, and so home and to singing. Hill staid and
supped with me, and very good discourse of Italy, where he was, which is
always to me very agreeable. After supper, he gone, we to prayers and to
bed.

27th. Up and to St. James's, where we attended the Duke as usual. This
morning I was much surprized and troubled with a letter from Mrs. Bland,
that she is left behind, and much trouble it cost me this day to find
out some way to carry her after the ships to Plymouth, but at last I
hope I have done it. At noon to the 'Change to inquire what wages the
Dutch give in their men-of-warr at this day, and I hear for certain
they give but twelve guilders at most, which is not full 24s., a thing I
wonder at. At home to dinner, and then in Sir J. Minnes's coach, my wife
and I with him, and also Mercer, abroad, he and I to White Hall, and he
would have his coach to wait upon my wife on her visits, it being the
first time my wife hath been out of doors (but the other day to bathe
her) several weeks. We to a Committee of the Council to discourse
concerning pressing of men; but, Lord! how they meet; never sit down:
one comes, now another goes, then comes another; one complaining that
nothing is done, another swearing that he hath been there these two
hours and nobody come. At last it come to this, my Lord Annesly,
says he, "I think we must be forced to get the King to come to every
committee; for I do not see that we do any thing at any time but when he
is here." And I believe he said the truth and very constant he is at the
council table on council-days; which his predecessors, it seems, very
rarely did; but thus I perceive the greatest affair in the world at this
day is likely to be managed by us. But to hear how my Lord Barkeley and
others of them do cry up the discipline of the late times here, and in
the former Dutch warr is strange, wishing with all their hearts that the
business of religion were not so severely carried on as to discourage
the sober people to come among us, and wishing that the same law and
severity were used against drunkennesse as there was then, saying that
our evil living will call the hand of God upon us again. Thence to
walk alone a good while in St. James's Parke with Mr. Coventry, who I
perceive is grown a little melancholy and displeased to see things go
as they do so carelessly. Thence I by coach to Ratcliffe highway, to the
plate-maker's, and he has begun my Lord Sandwich's plate very neatly,
and so back again. Coming back I met Colonell Atkins, who in other
discourse did offer to give me a piece to receive of me 20 when he
proves the late news of the Dutch, their drowning our men, at Guinny,
and the truth is I find the generality of the world to fear that there
is something of truth in it, and I do fear it too. Thence back by coach
to Sir Philip Warwicke's; and there he did contract with me a kind of
friendship and freedom of communication, wherein he assures me to make
me understand the whole business of the Treasurer's business of the
Navy, that I shall know as well as Sir G. Carteret what money he
hath; and will needs have me come to him sometimes, or he meet me, to
discourse of things tending to the serving the King: and I am mighty
proud and happy in becoming so known to such a man. And I hope shall
pursue it. Thence back home to the office a little tired and out of
order, and then to supper and to bed.

28th: At the office all the morning. At noon dined at home. After dinner
my wife and I to my Lady batten's, it being the first time my wife hath
been there, I think, these two years, but I had a mind in part to take
away the strangenesse, and so we did, and all very quiett and kind. Come
home, I to the taking my wife's kitchen accounts at the latter end of
the month, and there find 7s. wanting, which did occasion a very high
falling out between us, I indeed too angrily insisting upon so poor a
thing, and did give her very provoking high words, calling her beggar,
and reproaching her friends, which she took very stomachfully and
reproached me justly with mine; and I confess, being myself, I cannot
see what she could have done less. I find she is very cunning, and when
she least shews it hath her wit at work; but it is an ill one, though I
think not so bad but with good usage I might well bear with it, and the
truth is I do find that my being over-solicitous and jealous and froward
and ready to reproach her do make her worse. However, I find that now
and then a little difference do no hurte, but too much of it will make
her know her force too much. We parted after many high words very angry,
and I to my office to my month's accounts, and find myself worth L1270,
for which the Lord God be praised! So at almost 2 o'clock in the
morning I home to supper and to bed, and so ends this month, with great
expectation of the Hollanders coming forth, who are, it seems, very high
and rather more ready than we. God give a good issue to it!




MARCH 1664-1665

March 1st. Up, and this day being the day than: by a promise, a great
while ago, made to my wife, I was to give her L20 to lay out in clothes
against Easter, she did, notwithstanding last night's falling out, come
to peace with me and I with her, but did boggle mightily at the parting
with my money, but at last did give it her, and then she abroad to buy
her things, and I to my office, where busy all the morning. At noon I to
dinner at Trinity House, and thence to Gresham College, where Mr. Hooke
read a second very curious lecture about the late Comett; among other
things proving very probably that this is the very same Comett that
appeared before in the year 1618, and that in such a time probably
it will appear again, which is a very new opinion; but all will be in
print. Then to the meeting, where Sir G. Carteret's two sons, his owne,
and Sir N. Slaning, were admitted of the society: and this day I did pay
my admission money, 40s. to the society. Here was very fine discourses
and experiments, but I do lacke philosophy enough to understand them,
and so cannot remember them. Among others, a very particular account of
the making of the several sorts of bread in France, which is accounted
the best place for bread in the world. So home, where very busy getting
an answer to some question of Sir Philip Warwicke touching the expense
of the navy, and that being done I by coach at 8 at night with my wife
and Mercer to Sir Philip's and discoursed with him (leaving them in the
coach), and then back with them home and to supper and to bed.

2nd. Begun this day to rise betimes before six o'clock, and, going down
to call my people, found Besse and the girle with their clothes on,
lying within their bedding upon the ground close by the fireside, and
a candle burning all night, pretending they would rise to scoure. This
vexed me, but Besse is going and so she will not trouble me long. Up,
and by water to Burston about my Lord's plate, and then home to the
office, so there all the morning sitting. At noon dined with Sir W.
Batten (my wife being gone again to-day to buy things, having bought
nothing yesterday for lack of Mrs. Pierces company), and thence to the
office again, where very busy till 12 at night, and vexed at my wife's
staying out so late, she not being at home at 9 o'clock, but at last she
is come home, but the reason of her stay I know not yet. So shut up my
books, and home to supper and to bed.

3rd. Up, and abroad about several things, among others to see Mr. Peter
Honiwood, who was at my house the other day, and I find it was for
nothing but to pay me my brother John's Quarterage. Thence to see Mrs.
Turner, who takes it mighty ill I did not come to dine with the Reader,
her husband, which, she says, was the greatest feast that ever was yet
kept by a Reader, and I believe it was well. But I am glad I did not go,
which confirms her in an opinion that I am growne proud. Thence to the
'Change, and to several places, and so home to dinner and to my office,
where till 12 at night writing over a discourse of mine to Mr. Coventry
touching the Fishermen of the Thames upon a reference of the business
by him to me concerning their being protected from presse. Then home to
supper and to bed.

4th. Up very betimes, and walked, it being bitter cold, to Ratcliffe,
to the plate-maker's and back again. To the office, where we sat all the
morning, I, with being empty and full of ayre and wind, had some pain
to-day. Dined alone at home, my wife being gone abroad to buy some more
things. All the afternoon at the office. William Howe come to see me,
being come up with my Lord from sea: he is grown a discreet, but very
conceited fellow. He tells me how little respectfully Sir W. Pen did
carry it to my Lord onboard the Duke's ship at sea; and that Captain
Minnes, a favourite of Prince Rupert's, do shew my Lord little respect;
but that every body else esteems my Lord as they ought. I am sorry for
the folly of the latter, and vexed at the dissimulation of the former.
At night home to supper and to bed. This day was proclaimed at the
'Change the war with Holland.

5th (Lord's day). Up, and Mr. Burston bringing me by order my Lord's
plates, which he has been making this week. I did take coach and to my
Lord Sandwich's and dined with my Lord; it being the first time he hath
dined at home since his coming from sea: and a pretty odd demand it was
of my Lord to my Lady before me: "How do you, sweetheart? How have you
done all this week?" himself taking notice of it to me, that he had
hardly seen her the week before. At dinner he did use me with the
greatest solemnity in the world, in carving for me, and nobody else, and
calling often to my Lady to cut for me; and all the respect possible.
After dinner looked over the plates, liked them mightily, and indeed I
think he is the most exact man in what he do in the world of that kind.
So home again, and there after a song or two in the evening with Mr.
Hill, I to my office, and then home to supper and to bed.

6th. Up, and with Sir J. Minnes by coach, being a most lamentable cold
day as any this year, to St. James's, and there did our business with
the Duke. Great preparations for his speedy return to sea. I saw him try
on his buff coat and hatpiece covered with black velvet. It troubles me
more to think of his venture, than of anything else in the whole warr.
Thence home to dinner, where I saw Besse go away; she having of all
wenches that ever lived with us received the greatest love and kindnesse
and good clothes, besides wages, and gone away with the greatest
ingratitude. I then abroad to look after my Hamaccoes, and so home, and
there find our new chamber-mayde, Mary, come, which instead of handsome,
as my wife spoke and still seems to reckon, is a very ordinary wench, I
think, and therein was mightily disappointed. To my office, where busy
late, and then home to supper and to bed, and was troubled all this
night with a pain in my left testicle, that run up presently into my
left kidney and there kept akeing all night. In great pain.

7th. Up, and was pretty well, but going to the office, and I think it
was sitting with my back to the fire, it set me in a great rage again,
that I could not continue till past noon at the office, but was forced
to go home, nor could sit down to dinner, but betook myself to my bed,
and being there a while my pain begun to abate and grow less and less.
Anon I went to make water, not dreaming of any thing but my testicle
that by some accident I might have bruised as I used to do, but in
pissing there come from me two stones, I could feel them, and caused my
water to be looked into; but without any pain to me in going out, which
makes me think that it was not a fit of the stone at all; for my pain
was asswaged upon my lying down a great while before I went to make
water. Anon I made water again very freely and plentifully. I kept my
bed in good ease all the evening, then rose and sat up an hour or two,
and then to bed and lay till 8 o'clock, and then,

8th. Though a bitter cold day, yet I rose, and though my pain and
tenderness in my testicle remains a little, yet I do verily think that
my pain yesterday was nothing else, and therefore I hope my disease of
the stone may not return to me, but void itself in pissing, which God
grant, but I will consult my physitian. This morning is brought me to
the office the sad newes of "The London," in which Sir J. Lawson's men
were all bringing her from Chatham to the Hope, and thence he was to
go to sea in her; but a little a'this side the buoy of the Nower,
she suddenly blew up. About 24 [men] and a woman that were in the
round-house and coach saved; the rest, being above 300, drowned: the
ship breaking all in pieces, with 80 pieces of brass ordnance. She lies
sunk, with her round-house above water. Sir J. Lawson hath a great loss
in this of so many good chosen men, and many relations among them. I
went to the 'Change, where the news taken very much to heart. So home to
dinner, and Mr. Moore with me. Then I to Gresham College, and there saw
several pretty experiments, and so home and to my office, and at night
about I I home to supper and to bed.

9th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the afternoon. At noon
to dinner at home, and then abroad with my wife, left her at the New
Exchange and I to Westminster, where I hear Mrs. Martin is brought to
bed of a boy and christened Charles, which I am very glad of, for I was
fearful of being called to be a godfather to it. But it seems it was to
be done suddenly, and so I escaped. It is strange to see how a liberty
and going abroad without purpose of doing anything do lead a man to
what is bad, for I was just upon going to her, where I must of necessity
[have] broken my oath or made a forfeit. But I did not, company being
(I heard by my porter) with her, and so I home again, taking up my wife,
and was set down by her at Paule's Schoole, where I visited Mr. Crumlum
at his house; and, Lord! to see how ridiculous a conceited pedagogue he
is, though a learned man, he being so dogmaticall in all he do and
says. But among other discourse, we fell to the old discourse of Paule's
Schoole; and he did, upon my declaring my value of it, give me one of
Lilly's grammars of a very old impression, as it was in the Catholique
times, which I shall much set by. And so, after some small discourse,
away and called upon my wife at a linen draper's shop buying linen, and
so home, and to my office, where late, and home to supper and to bed.
This night my wife had a new suit of flowered ash-coloured silke, very
noble.

10th. Up, and to the office all the morning. At noon to the 'Change,
where very hot, people's proposal of the City giving the King' another
ship for "The London," that is lately blown up, which would be very
handsome, and if well managed, might be done; but I fear if it be put
into ill hands, or that the courtiers do solicit it, it will never be
done. Home to dinner, and thence to the Committee of Tangier at White
Hall, where my Lord Barkely and Craven and others; but, Lord! to see how
superficially things are done in the business of the Lottery, which will
be the disgrace of the Fishery, and without profit. Home, vexed at
my loss of time, and thereto my office. Late at night come the two
Bellamys, formerly petty warrant Victuallers of the Navy, to take my
advice about a navy debt of theirs for the compassing of which they
offer a great deal of money, and the thing most just. Perhaps I may
undertake it, and get something by it, which will be a good job. So home
late to bed.

11th. Up and to the office, at noon home to dinner, and to the office
again, where very late, and then home to supper and to bed. This day
returned Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes from Lee Roade, where they have
been to see the wrecke of "The London," out of which, they say, the
guns may be got, but the hull of her will be wholly lost, as not being
capable of being weighed.

12th (Lord's day). Up, and borrowing Sir J. Minnes's coach, to my Lord
Sandwich's, but he was gone abroad. I sent the coach back for my wife,
my Lord a second time dining at home on purpose to meet me, he having
not dined once at home but those times since his coming from sea. I
sat down and read over the Bishop of Chichester's' sermon upon the
anniversary of the King's death, much cried up, but, methinks, but a
mean sermon. By and by comes in my Lord, and he and I to talke of
many things in the Navy, one from another, in general, to see how the
greatest things are committed to very ordinary men, as to parts and
experience, to do; among others, my Lord Barkeley. We talked also of
getting W. Howe to be put into the Muster-Mastershipp in the roome
of Creed, if Creed will give way, but my Lord do it without any great
gusto, calling Howe a proud coxcomb in passion. Down to dinner, where
my wife in her new lace whiske, which, indeed, is very noble, and I much
pleased with it, and so my Lady also. Here very pleasant my Lord was
at dinner, and after dinner did look over his plate, which Burston hath
brought him to-day, and is the last of the three that he will have made.
After satisfied with that, he abroad, and I after much discourse with my
Lady about Sir G. Carteret's son, of whom she hath some thoughts for a
husband for my Lady Jemimah, we away home by coach again, and there sang
a good while very pleasantly with Mr. Andrews and Hill. They gone; we to
supper, and betimes to bed.

13th. Up betimes, this being the first morning of my promise upon a
forfeite not to lie in bed a quarter of an hour after my first waking.
Abroad to St. James's, and there much business, the King also being with
us a great while. Thence to the 'Change, and thence with Captain Tayler
and Sir W. Warren dined at a house hard by for discourse sake, and so I
home, and there meeting a letter from Mrs. Martin desiring to speak
with me, I (though against my promise of visiting her) did go, and there
found her in her childbed dress desiring my favour to get her husband a
place. I staid not long, but taking Sir W. Warren up at White Hall home,
and among other discourse fell to a business which he says shall if
accomplished bring me L100. He gone, I to supper and to bed. This day
my wife begun to wear light-coloured locks, quite white almost, which,
though it makes her look very pretty, yet not being natural, vexes me,
that I will not have her wear them. This day I saw my Lord Castlemayne
at St. James's, lately come from France.

14th. Up before six, to the office, where busy all the morning. At noon
dined with Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, at the Tower, with Sir J.
Robinson, at a farewell dinner which he gives Major Holmes at his going
out of the Tower, where he hath for some time, since his coming from
Guinny, been a prisoner, and, it seems, had presented the Lieutenant
with fifty pieces yesterday. Here a great deale of good victuals and
company. Thence home to my office, where very late, and home to supper
and to bed weary of business.

15th. Up and by coach with Sir W. Batten to St. James's, where among
other things before the Duke, Captain Taylor was called in, and, Sir J.
Robinson his accuser not appearing, was acquitted quite from his charge,
and declared that he should go to Harwich, which I was very well pleased
at. Thence I to Mr. Coventry's chamber, and there privately an houre
with him in discourse of the office, and did deliver to him many notes
of things about which he is to get the Duke's command, before he goes,
for the putting of business among us in better order. He did largely
owne his dependance as to the office upon my care, and received
very great expressions of love from him, and so parted with great
satisfaction to myself. So home to the 'Change, and thence home to
dinner, where my wife being gone down upon a sudden warning from my Lord
Sandwich's daughters to the Hope with them to see "The Prince," I dined
alone. After dinner to the office, and anon to Gresham College, where,
among other good discourse, there was tried the great poyson of Maccassa
upon a dogg,

     ["The experiment of trying to poison a dog with some of the Macassar
     powder in which a needle had been dipped was made, but without
     success."--Pepys himself made a communication at this meeting of
     the information he had received from the master of the Jersey ship,
     who had been in company of Major Holmes in the Guinea voyage,
     concerning the pendulum watches (Birch's "History," vol. ii., p.
     23).]

but it had no effect all the time we sat there. We anon broke up and
I home, where late at my office, my wife not coming home. I to bed,
troubled, about 12 or past.

16th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, my wife coming
home from the water this morning, having lain with them on board "The
Prince" all night. At noon home to dinner, where my wife told me the
unpleasant journey she had yesterday among the children, whose fear upon
the water and folly made it very unpleasing to her. A good dinner, and
then to the office again. This afternoon Mr. Harris, the sayle-maker,
sent me a noble present of two large silver candlesticks and snuffers,
and a slice to keep them upon, which indeed is very handsome. At night
come Mr. Andrews with L36, the further fruits of my Tangier contract,
and so to bed late and weary with business, but in good content of mind,
blessing God for these his benefits.

17th. Up and to my office, and then with Sir W. Batten to St. James's,
where many come to take leave, as was expected, of the Duke, but he do
not go till Monday. This night my Lady Wood died of the small-pox, and
is much lamented among the great persons for a good-natured woman and a
good wife, but for all that it was ever believed she was as others are.
The Duke did give us some commands, and so broke up, not taking leave
of him. But the best piece of newes is, that instead of a great many
troublesome Lords, the whole business is to be left with the Duke of
Albemarle to act as Admirall in his stead; which is a thing that do
cheer my heart. For the other would have vexed us with attendance, and
never done the business. Thence to the Committee of Tangier, where the
Duke a little, and then left us and we staid. A very great Committee,
the Lords Albemarle, Sandwich, Barkely, Fitzharding, Peterborough,
Ashley, Sir Thos. Ingram, Sir G. Carteret and others. The whole business
was the stating of Povy's accounts, of whom to say no more, never could
man say worse himself nor have worse said of him than was by the company
to his face; I mean, as to his folly and very reflecting words to his
honesty. Broke up without anything but trouble and shame, only I got
my businesses done to the signing of two bills for the Contractors and
Captain Taylor, and so come away well pleased, and home, taking up my
wife at the 'Change, to dinner. After dinner out again bringing my wife
to her father's again at Charing Cross, and I to the Committee again,
where a new meeting of trouble about Povy, who still makes his business
worse and worse, and broke up with the most open shame again to him,
and high words to him of disgrace that they would not trust him with any
more money till he had given an account of this. So broke up. Then
he took occasion to desire me to step aside, and he and I by water to
London together. In the way, of his owne accord, he proposed to me
that he would surrender his place of Treasurer' to me to have half the
profit. The thing is new to me; but the more I think the more I like it,
and do put him upon getting it done by the Duke. Whether it takes or no
I care not, but I think at present it may have some convenience in it.
Home, and there find my wife come home and gone to bed, of a cold got
yesterday by water. At the office Bellamy come to me again, and I am in
hopes something may be got by his business. So late home to supper and
bed.

18th. Up and to the office, where all the morning. At noon to the
'Change, and took Mr. Hill along with me to Mr. Povy's, where we dined,
and shewed him the house to his good content, and I expect when we meet
we shall laugh at it. But I having business to stay, he went away, and
Povy and Creed and I to do some business upon Povy's accounts all the
afternoon till late at night, where, God help him! never man was so
confounded, and all his people about him in this world as he and his
are. After we had done something [to the] purpose we broke up, and
Povy acquainted me before Creed (having said something of it also this
morning at our office to me) what he had done in speaking to the Duke
and others about his making me Treasurer, and has carried it a great
way, so as I think it cannot well be set back. Creed, I perceive, envies
me in it, but I think as that will do me no hurte, so if it did I am at
a great losse to think whether it were not best for me to let it wholly
alone, for it will much disquiett me and my business of the Navy, which
in this warr will certainly be worth all my time to me. Home, continuing
in this doubtfull condition what to think of it, but God Almighty do
his will in it for the best. To my office, where late, and then home to
supper and to bed.

19th (Lord's day). Mr. Povy sent his coach for me betimes, and I to
him, and there to our great trouble do find that my Lord FitzHarding do
appear for Mr. Brunkard

     [Henry Brouncker, younger brother of William, Viscount Brouncker,
     President of the Royal Society.  He was Groom of the Bedchamber to
     the Duke of York, and succeeded to the office of Cofferer on the
     death of William Ashburnham in 1671.  His character was bad, and his
     conduct in the sea-fight of 1665 was impugned.  He was expelled from
     the House of Commons, but succeeded to his brother's title in 1684.
     He died in January, 1687.]

to be Paymaster upon Povy's going out, by a former promise of the
Duke's, and offering to give as much as any for it. This put us all into
a great dumpe, and so we went to Creed's new lodging in the Mewes, and
there we found Creed with his parrot upon his shoulder, which struck Mr.
Povy coming by just by the eye, very deep, which, had it hit his eye,
had put it out. This a while troubled us, but not proving very bad, we
to our business consulting what to do; at last resolved, and I to Mr.
Coventry, and there had his most friendly and ingenuous advice, advising
me not to decline the thing, it being that that will bring me to be
known to great persons, while now I am buried among three or four of us,
says he, in the Navy; but do not make a declared opposition to my Lord
FitzHarding. Thence I to Creed, and walked talking in the Park an hour
with him, and then to my Lord Sandwich's to dinner, and after dinner to
Mr. Povy's, who hath been with the Duke of Yorke, and, by the mediation
of Mr. Coventry, the Duke told him that the business shall go on, and
he will take off Brunkerd, and my Lord FitzHarding is quiett too. But to
see the mischief, I hear that Sir G. Carteret did not seem pleased, but
said nothing when he heard me proposed to come in Povy's room, which may
learn me to distinguish between that man that is a man's true and false
friend. Being very glad of this news Mr. Povy and I in his coach to Hyde
Parke, being the first day of the tour there. Where many brave ladies;
among others, Castlemayne lay impudently upon her back in her coach
asleep, with her mouth open. There was also my Lady Kerneguy,

     [Daughter of William, Duke of Hamilton, wife of Lord Carnegy, who
     became Earl of Southesk on his father's death.  She is frequently
     mentioned in the "Memoires de Grammont," and in the letters of the
     second Earl of Chesterfield.--B.]

once my Lady Anne Hambleton, that is said to have given the Duke a clap
upon his first coming over. Here I saw Sir J. Lawson's daughter and
husband, a fine couple, and also Mr. Southwell and his new lady, very
pretty. Thence back, putting in at Dr. Whore's, where I saw his lady, a
very fine woman. So home, and thither by my desire comes by and by Creed
and lay with me, very merry and full of discourse, what to do to-morrow,
and the conveniences that will attend my having of this place, and I do
think they may be very great.

20th. Up, Creed and I, and had Mr. Povy's coach sent for us, and we to
his house; where we did some business in order to the work of this day.
Povy and I to my Lord Sandwich, who tells me that the Duke is not only
a friend to the business, but to me, in terms of the greatest love and
respect and value of me that can be thought, which overjoys me. Thence
to St. James's, and there was in great doubt of Brunkerd, but at last
I hear that Brunkerd desists. The Duke did direct Secretary Bennet,
who was there, to declare his mind to the Tangier Committee, that he
approves of me for Treasurer; and with a character of me to be a man
whose industry and discretion he would trust soon as any man's in
England: and did the like to my Lord Sandwich. So to White Hall to the
Committee of Tangier, where there were present, my Lord of Albemarle,
my Lord Peterborough, Sandwich, Barkeley, FitzHarding, Secretary Bennet,
Sir Thomas Ingram, Sir John Lawson, Povy and I. Where, after other
business, Povy did declare his business very handsomely; that he was
sorry he had been so unhappy in his accounts, as not to give their
Lordships the satisfaction he intended, and that he was sure his
accounts are right, and continues to submit them to examination, and is
ready to lay down in ready money the fault of his account; and that for
the future, that the work might be better done and with more quiet to
him, he desired, by approbation of the Duke, he might resign his
place to Mr. Pepys. Whereupon, Secretary Bennet did deliver the Duke's
command, which was received with great content and allowance beyond
expectation; the Secretary repeating also the Duke's character of me.
And I could discern my Lord FitzHarding was well pleased with me, and
signified full satisfaction, and whispered something seriously of me to
the Secretary. And there I received their constitution under all their
hands presently; so that I am already confirmed their Treasurer, and put
into a condition of striking of tallys;

     [The practice of striking tallies at the Exchequer was a curious
     survival of an ancient method of keeping accounts.  The method
     adopted is described in Hubert Hall's "Antiquities and Curiosities
     of the Exchequer," 1891.  The following account of the use of
     tallies, so frequently alluded to in the Diary, was supplied by Lord
     Braybrooke.  Formerly accounts were kept, and large sums of money
     paid and received, by the King's Exchequer, with little other form
     than the exchange or delivery of tallies, pieces of wood notched or
     scored, corresponding blocks being kept by the parties to the
     account; and from this usage one of the head officers of the
     Exchequer was called the tallier, or teller.  These tallies were
     often negotiable; Adam Smith, in his "Wealth of Nations," book ii.,
     ch. xi., says that "in 1696 tallies had been at forty, and fifty,
     and sixty per cent. discount, and bank-notes at twenty per cent."
     The system of tallies was discontinued in 1824; and the destruction
     of the old Houses of Parliament, in the night of October 16th, 1834,
     is thought to have been occasioned by the overheating of the flues,
     when the furnaces were employed to consume the tallies rendered
     useless by the alteration in the mode of keeping the Exchequer
     accounts.]

and all without one harsh word or word of dislike, but quite the
contrary; which is a good fortune beyond all imagination. Here we
rose, and Povy and Creed and I, all full of joy, thence to dinner, they
setting me down at Sir J. Winter's, by promise, and dined with him; and
a worthy fine man he seems to be, and of good discourse, our business
was to discourse of supplying the King with iron for anchors, if it can
be judged good enough, and a fine thing it is to see myself come to
the condition of being received by persons of this rank, he being, and
having long been, Secretary to the Queene-Mother. Thence to Povy's, and
there sat and considered of business a little and then home, where late
at it, W. Howe being with me about his business of accounts for his
money laid out in the fleet, and he gone, I home to supper and to bed.
Newes is this day come of Captain Allen's being come home from the
Straights, as far as Portland, with eleven of the King's ships, and
about twenty-two of merchantmen.

21st. Up, and my taylor coming to me, did consult all my wardrobe how to
order my clothes against next summer. Then to the office, where busy all
the morning. At noon to the 'Change, and brought home Mr. Andrews, and
there with Mr. Sheply dined and very merry, and a good dinner. Thence to
Mr. Povy's to discourse about settling our business of Treasurer, and
I think all things will go very fayre between us and to my content, but
the more I see the more silly the man seems to me. Thence by coach to
the Mewes, but Creed was not there. In our way the coach drove through
a lane by Drury Lane, where abundance of loose women stood at the doors,
which, God forgive me, did put evil thoughts in me, but proceeded no
further, blessed be God. So home, and late at my office, then home and
there found a couple of state cups, very large, coming, I suppose, each
to about L6 a piece, from Burrows the slopseller.

22nd. Up, and to Mr. Povy's about our business, and thence I to see Sir
Ph. Warwicke, but could not meet with him. So to Mr. Coventry, whose
profession of love and esteem for me to myself was so large and free
that I never could expect or wish for more, nor could have it from any
man in England, that I should value it more. Thence to Mr. Povy's, and
with Creed to the 'Change and to my house, but, it being washing day,
dined not at home, but took him (I being invited) to Mr. Hubland's, the
merchant, where Sir William Petty, and abundance of most ingenious men,
owners and freighters of "The Experiment," now going with her two bodies
to sea. Most excellent discourse. Among others, Sir William Petty did
tell me that in good earnest he hath in his will left such parts of his
estate to him that could invent such and such things. As among others,
that could discover truly the way of milk coming into the breasts of a
woman; and he that could invent proper characters to express to another
the mixture of relishes and tastes. And says, that to him that invents
gold, he gives nothing for the philosopher's stone; for (says he) they
that find out that, will be able to pay themselves. But, says he,
by this means it is better than to give to a lecture; for here my
executors, that must part with this, will be sure to be well convinced
of the invention before they do part with their money. After dinner Mr.
Hill took me with Mrs. Hubland, who is a fine gentlewoman, into another
room, and there made her sing, which she do very well, to my great
content. Then to Gresham College, and there did see a kitling killed
almost quite, but that we could not quite kill her, with such a way; the
ayre out of a receiver, wherein she was put, and then the ayre being let
in upon her revives her immediately;

     ["Two experiments were made for the finding out a way to breathe
     under water, useful for divers."  The first was on a bird and the
     second on "a kitling" (Birch's "History," vol. ii., p. 25).]

nay, and this ayre is to be made by putting together a liquor and some
body that ferments, the steam of that do do the work. Thence home,
and thence to White Hall, where the house full of the Duke's going
to-morrow, and thence to St. James's, wherein these things fell out: (1)
I saw the Duke, kissed his hand, and had his most kind expressions of
his value and opinion of me, which comforted me above all things in the
world, (2) the like from Mr. Coventry most heartily and affectionately.
(3) Saw, among other fine ladies, Mrs. Middleton,

     [Jane, daughter to Sir Robert Needham, is frequently mentioned in
     the "Grammont Memoirs," and Evelyn calls her "that famous and indeed
     incomparable beauty" ("Diary," August 2nd, 1683).  Her portrait is
     in the Royal Collection amongst the beauties of Charles II.'s Court.
     Sir Robert Needham was related to John Evelyn.]

a very great beauty I never knew or heard of before; (4) I saw Waller
the poet, whom I never saw before. So, very late, by coach home with W.
Pen, who was there. To supper and to bed, with my heart at rest, and
my head very busy thinking of my several matters now on foot, the new
comfort of my old navy business, and the new one of my employment on
Tangier.

23rd. Up and to my Lord Sandwich, who follows the Duke this day by water
down to the Hope, where "The Prince" lies. He received me, busy as he
was, with mighty kindness and joy at my promotions; telling me most
largely how the Duke hath expressed on all occasions his good opinion of
my service and love for me. I paid my thanks and acknowledgement to him;
and so back home, where at the office all the morning. At noon to the
'Change. Home, and Lewellin dined with me. Thence abroad, carried my
wife to Westminster by coach, I to the Swan, Herbert's, and there had
much of the good company of Sarah and to my wish, and then to see Mrs.
Martin, who was very kind, three weeks of her month of lying in is over.
So took up my wife and home, and at my office a while, and thence to
supper and to bed. Great talk of noises of guns heard at Deale, but
nothing particularly whether in earnest or not.

24th. Up betimes, and by agreement to the Globe taverne in Fleet Street
to Mr. Clerke, my sollicitor, about the business of my uncle's accounts,
and we went with one Jefferys to one of the Barons (Spelman), and
there my accounts were declared and I sworn to the truth thereof to my
knowledge, and so I shall after a few formalities be cleared of all.
Thence to Povy's, and there delivered him his letters of greatest import
to him that is possible, yet dropped by young Bland, just come from
Tangier, upon the road by Sittingburne, taken up and sent to Mr. Pett,
at Chatham. Thus everything done by Povy is done with a fatal folly and
neglect. Then to our discourse with him, Creed, Mr. Viner, myself and
Poyntz about the business of the Workehouse at Clerkenwell, and after
dinner went thither and saw all the works there, and did also consult
the Act concerning the business and other papers in order to our coming
in to undertake it with Povy, the management of the House, but I do not
think we can safely meddle with it, at least I, unless I had time to
look after it myself, but the thing is very ingenious and laudable.
Thence to my Lady Sandwich's, where my wife all this day, having kept
Good Friday very strict with fasting. Here we supped, and talked very
merry. My Lady alone with me, very earnest about Sir G. Carteret's son,
with whom I perceive they do desire my Lady Jemimah may be matched.
Thence home and to my office, and then to bed.

25th (Lady day). Up betimes and to my office, where all the morning.
At noon dined alone with Sir W. Batten, where great discourse of Sir
W. Pen, Sir W. Batten being, I perceive, quite out of love with him,
thinking him too great and too high, and began to talk that the world
do question his courage, upon which I told him plainly I have been told
that he was articled against for it, and that Sir H. Vane was his great
friend therein. This he was, I perceive, glad to hear. Thence to the
office, and there very late, very busy, to my great content. This
afternoon of a sudden is come home Sir W. Pen from the fleete, but upon
what score I know not. Late home to supper and to bed.

26th (Lord's day and Easter day). Up (and with my wife, who has not been
at church a month or two) to church. At noon home to dinner, my wife and
I (Mercer staying to the Sacrament) alone. This is the day seven years
which, by the blessing of God, I have survived of my being cut of the
stone, and am now in very perfect good health and have long been; and
though the last winter hath been as hard a winter as any have been these
many years, yet I never was better in my life, nor have not, these
ten years, gone colder in the summer than I have done all this winter,
wearing only a doublet, and a waistcoate cut open on the back; abroad,
a cloake and within doors a coate I slipped on. Now I am at a losse to
know whether it be my hare's foot which is my preservative against wind,
for I never had a fit of the collique since I wore it, and nothing but
wind brings me pain, and the carrying away of wind takes away my pain,
or my keeping my back cool; for when I do lie longer than ordinary upon
my back in bed, my water the next morning is very hot, or whether it be
my taking of a pill of turpentine every morning, which keeps me always
loose, or all together, but this I know, with thanks to God Almighty,
that I am now as well as ever I can wish or desire to be, having now and
then little grudgings of wind, that brings me a little pain, but it is
over presently, only I do find that my backe grows very weak, that I
cannot stoop to write or tell money without sitting but I have pain for
a good while after it. Yet a week or two ago I had one day's great pain;
but it was upon my getting a bruise on one of my testicles, and then I
did void two small stones, without pain though, and, upon my going
to bed and bearing up of my testicles, I was well the next. But I did
observe that my sitting with my back to the fire at the office did then,
as it do at all times, make my back ake, and my water hot, and brings me
some pain. I sent yesterday an invitation to Mrs. Turner and her family
to come to keep this day with me, which she granted, but afterward
sent me word that it being Sunday and Easter day she desired to choose
another and put off this. Which I was willing enough to do; and so put
it off as to this day, and will leave it to my own convenience when to
choose another, and perhaps shall escape a feast by it. At my office all
the afternoon drawing up my agreement with Mr. Povy for me to sign to
him tomorrow morning. In the evening spent an hour in the garden walking
with Sir J. Minnes, talking of the Chest business, wherein Sir W. Batten
deals so unfairly, wherein the old man is very hot for the present,
but that zeal will not last nor is to be trusted. So home to supper,
prayers, and to bed.

27th. Up betimes to Mr. Povy's, and there did sign and seal my agreement
with him about my place of being Treasurer for Tangier, it being the
greatest part of it drawnout of a draught of his own drawing up, only I
have added something here and there in favour of myself. Thence to the
Duke of Albemarle, the first time that we officers of the Navy have
waited upon him since the Duke of Yorke's going, who hath deputed him to
be Admirall in his absence. And I find him a quiet heavy man, that will
help business when he can, and hinder nothing, and am very well pleased
with our attendance on him. I did afterwards alone give him thanks for
his favour to me about my Tangier business, which he received kindly,
and did speak much of his esteem of me. Thence, and did the same to Sir
H. Bennet, who did the like to me very fully, and did give me all his
letters lately come from hence for me to read, which I returned in the
afternoon to him. Thence to Mrs. Martin, who, though her husband is gone
away, as he writes, like a fool into France, yet is as simple and wanton
as ever she was, with much I made myself merry and away. So to my
Lord Peterborough's; where Povy, Creed, Williamson, Auditor Beale, and
myself, and mighty merry to see how plainly my Lord and Povy did abuse
one another about their accounts, each thinking the other a foole, and I
thinking they were not either of them, in that point, much in the
wrong, though in everything, and even in this manner of reproaching one
another, very witty and pleasant. Among other things, we had here the
genteelest dinner and the neatest house that I have seen many a day,
and the latter beyond anything I ever saw in a nobleman's house. Thence
visited my Lord Barkeley, and did sit discoursing with him in his
chamber a good while, and [he] mighty friendly to me about the same
business of Tangier. From that to other discourse of the times and the
want of money, and he said that the Parliament must be called again
soon, and more money raised, not by tax, for he said he believed the
people could not pay it, but he would have either a general excise upon
everything, or else that every city incorporate should pay a toll into
the King's revenue, as he says it is in all the cities in the world; for
here a citizen hath no more laid on them than their neighbours in the
country, whereas, as a city, it ought to pay considerably to the King
for their charter; but I fear this will breed ill blood. Thence to Povy,
and after a little talk home to my office late. Then to supper and to
bed.

28th. Up betimes and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and I
did most of the business there, God wot. Then to the 'Change, and thence
to the Coffee-house with Sir W. Warren, where much good discourse for us
both till 9 o'clock with great pleasure and content, and then parted
and I home to dinner, having eat nothing, and so to my office. At night
supped with my wife at Sir W. Pen's, who is to go back for good and all
to the fleete to-morrow. Took leave and to my office, where till 12 at
night, and then home to bed.

29th. Up betimes and to Povy's, where a good while talking about our
business; thence abroad into the City, but upon his tally could not get
any money in Lumbard Streete, through the disrepute which he suffers,
I perceive, upon his giving up his place, which people think was not
choice, but necessity, as indeed it was. So back to his house, after we
had been at my house to taste my wine, but my wife being abroad nobody
could come at it, and so we were defeated. To his house, and before
dinner he and I did discourse of the business of freight, wherein I am
so much concerned, above L100 for myself, and in my over hasty making
a bill out for the rest for him, but he resolves to move Creed in it.
Which troubled me much, and Creed by and by comes, and after dinner
he did, but in the most cunning ingenious manner, do his business with
Creed by bringing it in by the by, that the most subtile man in the
world could never have done it better, and I must say that he is a
most witty, cunning man and one that I (am) most afeard of in my
conversation, though in all serious matters of business the eeriest
foole that ever I met with. The bill was produced and a copy given
Creed, whereupon he wrote his Intratur upon the originall, and I hope
it will pass, at least I am now put to it that I must stand by it
and justify it, but I pray God it may never come to that test. Thence
between vexed and joyed, not knowing what yet to make of it, home,
calling for my Lord Cooke's 3 volumes at my bookseller's, and so home,
where I found a new cook mayd, her name is-----that promises very
little. So to my office, where late about drawing up a proposal for
Captain Taylor, for him to deliver to the City about his building the
new ship, which I have done well, and I hope will do the business, and
so home to supper and to bed.

30th. Up, and to my Lord Ashly, but did nothing, and to Sir Ph. Warwicke
and spoke with him about business, and so back to the office, where
all the morning. At noon home to dinner, and thence to the Tangier
Committee, where, Lord! to see how they did run into the giving of Sir
J. Lawson (who is come to towne to-day to get this business done) L4000
about his Mole business, and were going to give him 4s. per yarde more,
which arises in the whole Mole to L36,000, is a strange thing, but the
latter by chance was stopped, the former was given. Thence to see Mrs.
Martin, whose husband being it seems gone away, and as she is informed
he hath another woman whom he uses, and has long done, as a wife, she is
mighty reserved and resolved to keep herself so till the return of her
husband, which a pleasant thing to think of her. Thence home, and to my
office, where late, and to bed.

31st. Up betimes and walked to my Lord Ashly, and there with Creed after
long waiting spoke with him, and was civilly used by him; thence to
Sir Ph. Warwicke, and then to visit my Lord of Falmouth, who did also
receive me pretty civilly, but not as I expected; he, I perceive,
believing that I had undertaken to justify Povy's accounts, taking them
upon myself, but I rectified him therein. So to my Lady Sandwich's to
dinner, and up to her chamber after dinner, and there discoursed
about Sir G. Carteret's son, in proposition between us two for my Lady
Jemimah. So to Povy, and with him spent the afternoon very busy, till I
was weary of following this and neglecting my navy business. So at night
called my wife at my Lady's, and so home. To my office and there made up
my month's account, which, God be praised! rose to L1300. Which I bless
God for. So after 12 o'clock home to supper and to bed. I find Creed
mightily transported by my Lord of Falmouth's kind words to him, and
saying that he hath a place in his intention for him, which he believes
will be considerable. A witty man he is in every respect, but of no good
nature, nor a man ordinarily to be dealt with. My Lady Castlemayne is
sicke again, people think, slipping her filly.




APRIL 1665

April 1st. All the morning very busy at the office preparing a last
half-year's account for my Lord Treasurer. At noon eat a bit and stepped
to Sir Ph. Warwicke, by coach to my Lord Treasurer's, and after some
private conference and examining of my papers with him I did return into
the City and to Sir G. Carteret, whom I found with the Commissioners of
Prizes dining at Captain Cocke's, in Broad Streete, very merry. Among
other tricks, there did come a blind fiddler to the doore, and Sir G.
Carteret did go to the doore and lead the blind fiddler by the hand in.
Thence with Sir G. Carteret to my Lord Treasurer, and by and by come Sir
W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, and anon we come to my Lord, and there did
lay open the expence for the six months past, and an estimate of the
seven months to come, to November next: the first arising to above
L500,000, and the latter will, as we judge, come to above L1,000,000.
But to see how my Lord Treasurer did bless himself, crying he could do
no more than he could, nor give more money than he had, if the occasion
and expence were never so great, which is but a sad story. And then
to hear how like a passionate and ignorant asse Sir G. Carteret did
harangue upon the abuse of Tickets did make me mad almost and yet was
fain to hold my tongue. Thence home, vexed mightily to see how simply
our greatest ministers do content themselves to understand and do
things, while the King's service in the meantime lies a-bleeding. At my
office late writing letters till ready to drop down asleep with my late
sitting up of late, and running up and down a-days. So to bed.

2nd (Lord's day). At my office all the morning, renewing my vowes in
writing and then home to dinner. All the afternoon, Mr. Tasborough,
one of Mr. Povy's clerks, with me about his master's accounts. In the
evening Mr. Andrews and Hill sang, but supped not with me, then after
supper to bed.

3rd. Up and to the Duke of Albemarle and White Hall, where much
business. Thence home and to dinner, and then with Creed, my wife, and
Mercer to a play at the Duke's, of my Lord Orrery's, called "Mustapha,"
which being not good, made Betterton's part and Ianthe's but ordinary
too, so that we were not contented with it at all. Thence home and to
the office a while, and then home to supper and to bed. All the pleasure
of the play was, the King and my Lady Castlemayne were there; and
pretty witty Nell,--[Nell Gwynne]--at the King's house, and the younger
Marshall sat next us; which pleased me mightily.

4th. All the morning at the office busy, at noon to the 'Change, and
then went up to the 'Change to buy a pair of cotton stockings, which I
did at the husband's shop of the most pretty woman there, who did also
invite me to buy some linnen of her, and I was glad of the occasion,
and bespoke some bands of her, intending to make her my seamstress, she
being one of the prettiest and most modest looked women that ever I did
see. Dined at home and to the office, where very late till I was ready
to fall down asleep, and did several times nod in the middle of my
letters.

5th. This day was kept publiquely by the King's command, as a fast
day against the Dutch warr, and I betimes with Mr. Tooker, whom I have
brought into the Navy to serve us as a husband to see goods timely
shipped off from hence to the Fleete and other places, and took him with
me to Woolwich and Deptford, where by business I have been hindered a
great while of going, did a very great deale of business, and home, and
there by promise find Creed, and he and my wife, Mercer and I by coach
to take the ayre; and, where we had formerly been, at Hackney, did there
eat some pullets we carried with us, and some things of the house; and
after a game or two at shuffle-board, home, and Creed lay with me; but,
being sleepy, he had no mind to talk about business, which indeed I
intended, by inviting him to lie with me, but I would not force it on
him, and so to bed, he and I, and to sleep, being the first time I have
been so much at my ease and taken so much fresh ayre these many weeks or
months.

6th. At the office sat all the morning, where, in the absence of Sir W.
Batten, Sir G. Carteret being angry about the business of tickets, spoke
of Sir W. Batten for speaking some words about the signing of tickets,
and called Sir W. Batten in his discourse at the table to us (the
clerks being withdrawn) "shitten foole," which vexed me. At noon to the
'Change, and there set my business of lighters' buying for the King, to
Sir W. Warren, and I think he will do it for me to very great advantage,
at which I am mightily rejoiced. Home and after a mouthfull of dinner to
the office, where till 6 o'clock, and then to White Hall, and there
with Sir G. Carteret and my Lord Brunkerd attended the Duke of Albemarle
about the business of money. I also went to Jervas's, my barber, for my
periwigg that was mending there, and there do hear that Jane is quite
undone, taking the idle fellow for her husband yet not married, and lay
with him several weeks that had another wife and child, and she is now
going into Ireland. So called my wife at the 'Change and home, and at my
office writing letters till one o'clock in the morning, that I was
ready to fall down asleep again. Great talke of a new Comett; and it is
certain one do now appear as bright as the late one at the best; but I
have not seen it myself.

7th. Up betimes to the Duke of Albemarle about money to be got for the
Navy, or else we must shut up shop. Thence to Westminster Hall and up
and down, doing not much; then to London, but to prevent Povy's dining
with me (who I see is at the 'Change) I went back again and to Herbert's
at Westminster, there sent for a bit of meat and dined, and then to
my Lord Treasurer's, and there with Sir Philip Warwicke, and thence to
White Hall in my Lord Treasurer's chamber with Sir Philip Warwicke
till dark night, about fower hours talking of the business of the
Navy Charge, and how Sir G. Carteret do order business, keeping us in
ignorance what he do with his money, and also Sir Philip did shew me
nakedly the King's condition for money for the Navy; and he do assure
me, unless the King can get some noblemen or rich money-gentlemen to
lend him money, or to get the City to do it, it is impossible to find
money: we having already, as he says, spent one year's share of the
three-years' tax, which comes to L2,500,000. Being very glad of this
day's discourse in all but that I fear I shall quite lose Sir G.
Carteret, who knows that I have been privately here all this day with
Sir Ph. Warwicke. However, I will order it so as to give him as little
offence as I can. So home to my office, and then to supper and to bed.

8th. Up, and all the morning full of business at the office. At noon
dined with Mr. Povy, and then to the getting some business looked over
of his, and then I to my Lord Chancellor's, where to have spoke with the
Duke of Albemarle, but the King and Council busy, I could not; then
to the Old Exchange and there of my new pretty seamstress bought four
bands, and so home, where I found my house mighty neat and clean.
Then to my office late, till past 12, and so home to bed. The French
Embassadors

     [The French ambassadors were Henri de Bourbon, Duc de Verneuil,
     natural son of Henry IV. and brother of Henrietta Maria, and M. de
     Courtin.--B.]

are come incognito before their train, which will hereafter be very
pompous. It is thought they come to get our King to joyne with the King
of France in helping him against Flanders, and they to do the like to
us against Holland. We have laine a good while with a good fleete at
Harwich. The Dutch not said yet to be out. We, as high as we make our
shew, I am sure, are unable to set out another small fleete, if this
should be worsted. Wherefore, God send us peace! I cry.

9th (Lord's day). To church with my wife in the morning, in her new
light-coloured silk gowne, which is, with her new point, very noble.
Dined at home, and in the afternoon to Fanchurch, the little church in
the middle of Fanchurch Streete, where a very few people and few of
any rank. Thence, after sermon, home, and in the evening walking in the
garden, my Lady Pen and her daughter walked with my wife and I, and so
to my house to eat with us, and very merry, and so broke up and to bed.

10th. Up, and to the Duke of Albemarle's, and thence to White Hall to
a Committee for Tangier, where new disorder about Mr. Povy's accounts,
that I think I shall never be settled in my business of Treasurer for
him. Here Captain Cooke met me, and did seem discontented about my boy
Tom's having no time to mind his singing nor lute, which I answered him
fully in, that he desired me that I would baste his coate. So home and
to the 'Change, and thence to the "Old James" to dine with Sir W. Rider,
Cutler, and Mr. Deering, upon the business of hemp, and so hence to
White Hall to have attended the King and Lord Chancellor about the debts
of the navy and to get some money, but the meeting failed. So my Lord
Brunkard took me and Sir Thomas Harvy in his coach to the Parke, which
is very troublesome with the dust; and ne'er a great beauty there to-day
but Mrs. Middleton, and so home to my office, where Mr. Warren proposed
my getting of L100 to get him a protection for a ship to go out, which I
think I shall do. So home to supper and to bed.

11th. Up and betimes to Alderman Cheverton to treat with him about
hempe, and so back to the office. At noon dined at the Sun, behind the
'Change, with Sir Edward Deering and his brother and Commissioner Pett,
we having made a contract with Sir Edward this day about timber. Thence
to the office, where late very busy, but with some trouble have also
some hopes of profit too. So home to supper and to bed.

12th. Up, and to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier, where, contrary
to all expectation, my Lord Ashly, being vexed with Povy's accounts, did
propose it as necessary that Povy should be still continued Treasurer of
Tangier till he had made up his accounts; and with such arguments as,
I confess, I was not prepared to answer, but by putting off of the
discourse, and so, I think, brought it right again; but it troubled
me so all the day after, and night too, that I was not quiet, though I
think it doubtfull whether I shall be much the worse for it or no, if
it should come to be so. Dined at home and thence to White Hall again
(where I lose most of my time now-a-days to my great trouble, charge,
and loss of time and benefit), and there, after the Council rose, Sir
G. Carteret, my Lord Brunkard, Sir Thomas Harvy, and myself, down to
my Lord Treasurer's chamber to him and the Chancellor, and the Duke of
Albemarle; and there I did give them a large account of the charge of
the Navy, and want of money. But strange to see how they held up their
hands crying, "What shall we do?" Says my Lord Treasurer, "Why, what
means all this, Mr. Pepys? This is true, you say; but what would you
have me to do? I have given all I can for my life. Why will not people
lend their money? Why will they not trust the King as well as Oliver?
Why do our prizes come to nothing, that yielded so much heretofore?" And
this was all we could get, and went away without other answer, which
is one of the saddest things that, at such a time as this, with the
greatest action on foot that ever was in England, nothing should be
minded, but let things go on of themselves do as well as they can. So
home, vexed, and going to my Lady Batten's, there found a great many
women with her, in her chamber merry, my Lady Pen and her daughter,
among others; where my Lady Pen flung me down upon the bed, and herself
and others, one after another, upon me, and very merry we were, and
thence I home and called my wife with my Lady Pen to supper, and very
merry as I could be, being vexed as I was. So home to bed.

13th. Lay long in bed, troubled a little with wind, but not much. So to
the office, and there all the morning. At noon to Sheriff Waterman's
to dinner, all of us men of the office in towne, and our wives, my Lady
Carteret and daughters, and Ladies Batten, Pen, and my wife, &c., and
very good cheer we had and merry; musique at and after dinner, and a
fellow danced a jigg; but when the company begun to dance, I came away
lest I should be taken out; and God knows how my wife carried herself,
but I left her to try her fortune. So home, and late at the office, and
then home to supper and to bed.

14th. Up, and betimes to Mr. Povy, being desirous to have an end of my
trouble of mind touching my Tangier business, whether he hath any desire
of accepting what my Lord Ashly offered, of his becoming Treasurer
again; and there I did, with a seeming most generous spirit, offer him
to take it back again upon his owne terms; but he did answer to me
that he would not above all things in the world, at which I was for the
present satisfied; but, going away thence and speaking with Creed, he
puts me in doubt that the very nature of the thing will require that he
be put in again; and did give me the reasons of the auditors, which, I
confess, are so plain, that I know not how to withstand them. But he
did give me most ingenious advice what to do in it, and anon, my Lord
Barkeley and some of the Commissioners coming together, though not in
a meeting, I did procure that they should order Povy's payment of his
remain of accounts to me; which order if it do pass will put a good stop
to the fastening of the thing upon me. At noon Creed and I to a cook's
shop at Charing Cross, and there dined and had much discourse, and his
very good upon my business, and upon other things, among the rest upon
Will Howe's dissembling with us, we discovering one to another his
carriage to us, present and absent, being a very false fellow. Thence to
White Hall again, and there spent the afternoon, and then home to fetch
a letter for the Council, and so back to White Hall, where walked an
hour with Mr. Wren, of my Lord Chancellor's, and Mr. Ager, and then to
Unthanke's and called my wife, and with her through the city to Mile-End
Greene, and eat some creame and cakes and so back home, and I a little
at the office, and so home to supper and to bed. This morning I was
saluted with newes that the fleetes, ours and the Dutch, were engaged,
and that the guns were heard at Walthamstow to play all yesterday, and
that Captain Teddiman's legs were shot off in the Royall Katherine.
But before night I hear the contrary, both by letters of my owne and
messengers thence, that they were all well of our side and no enemy
appears yet, and that the Royall Katherine is come to the fleete, and
likely to prove as good a ship as any the King hath, of which I am
heartily glad, both for Christopher Pett's sake and Captain Teddiman
that is in her.

15th. Up, and to White Hall about several businesses, but chiefly to
see the proposals of my warrants about Tangier under Creed, but to my
trouble found them not finished. So back to the office, where all the
morning, busy, then home to dinner, and then all the afternoon till very
late at my office, and then home to supper and to bed, weary.

16th (Lord's day). Lay long in bed, then up and to my chamber and
my office, looking over some plates which I find necessary for me to
understand pretty well, because of the Dutch warr. Then home to dinner,
where Creed dined with us, and so after dinner he and I walked to the
Rolls' Chappell, expecting to hear the great Stillingfleete preach, but
he did not; but a very sorry fellow, which vexed me. The sermon done,
we parted, and I home, where I find Mr. Andrews, and by and by comes
Captain Taylor, my old acquaintance at Westminster, that understands
musique very well and composes mighty bravely; he brought us some things
of two parts to sing, very hard; but that that is the worst, he is very
conceited of them, and that though they are good makes them troublesome
to one, to see him every note commend and admire them. He supped with
me, and a good understanding man he is and a good scholler, and, among
other things, a great antiquary, and among other things he can, as he
says, show the very originall Charter to Worcester, of King Edgar's,
wherein he stiles himself, Rex Marium Brittanniae, &c.; which is the
great text that Mr. Selden and others do quote, but imperfectly and upon
trust. But he hath the very originall, which he says he will shew me. He
gone we to bed. This night I am told that newes is come of our taking of
three Dutch men-of-warr, with the loss of one of our Captains.

17th. Up and to the Duke of Albemarle's, where he shewed me Mr.
Coventry's letters, how three Dutch privateers are taken, in one whereof
Everson's' son is captaine. But they have killed poor Captaine Golding
in The Diamond. Two of them, one of 32 and the other of 20 odd guns, did
stand stoutly up against her, which hath 46, and the Yarmouth that hath
52 guns, and as many more men as they. So that they did more than we
could expect, not yielding till many of their men were killed. And
Everson, when he was brought before the Duke of Yorke, and was observed
to be shot through the hat, answered, that he wished it had gone through
his head, rather than been taken. One thing more is written: that two
of our ships the other day appearing upon the coast of Holland, they
presently fired their beacons round the country to give notice. And
newes is brought the King, that the Dutch Smyrna fleete is seen upon the
back of Scotland; and thereupon the King hath wrote to the Duke, that
he do appoint a fleete to go to the Northward to try to meet them coming
home round: which God send! Thence to White Hall; where the King seeing
me, did come to me, and calling me by name, did discourse with me about
the ships in the River: and this is the first time that ever I knew the
King did know me personally; so that hereafter I must not go thither,
but with expectation to be questioned, and to be ready to give good
answers. So home, and thence with Creed, who come to dine with me, to
the Old James, where we dined with Sir W. Rider and Cutler, and, by
and by, being called by my wife, we all to a play, "The Ghosts," at the
Duke's house, but a very simple play. Thence up and down, with my wife
with me, to look [for] Sir Ph. Warwicke (Mr. Creed going from me), but
missed of him and so home, and late and busy at my office. So home to
supper and to bed. This day was left at my house a very neat silver
watch, by one Briggs, a scrivener and sollicitor, at which I was angry
with my wife for receiving, or, at least, for opening the box wherein it
was, and so far witnessing our receipt of it, as to give the messenger
5s. for bringing it; but it can't be helped, and I will endeavour to do
the man a kindnesse, he being a friend of my uncle Wight's.

18th. Up and to Sir Philip Warwicke, and walked with him an houre with
great delight in the Parke about Sir G. Carteret's accounts, and the
endeavours that he hath made to bring Sir G. Carteret to show his
accounts and let the world see what he receives and what he pays. Thence
home to the office, where I find Sir J. Minnes come home from Chatham,
and Sir W. Batten both this morning from Harwich, where they have
been these 7 or 8 days. At noon with my wife and Mr. Moore by water to
Chelsey about my Privy Seale for Tangier, but my Lord Privy Seale was
gone abroad, and so we, without going out of the boat, forced to return,
and found him not at White Hall. So I to Sir Philip Warwicke and with
him to my Lord Treasurer, who signed my commission for Tangier-Treasurer
and the docquet of my Privy Seale, for the monies to be paid to me.
Thence to White Hall to Mr. Moore again, and not finding my Lord I home,
taking my wife and woman up at Unthanke's. Late at my office, then to
supper and to bed.

19th. Up by five o'clock, and by water to White Hall; and there took
coach, and with Mr. Moore to Chelsy; where, after all my fears what
doubts and difficulties my Lord Privy Seale would make at my Tangier
Privy Seale, he did pass it at first reading, without my speaking with
him. And then called me in, and was very civil to me. I passed my time
in contemplating (before I was called in) the picture of my Lord's son's
lady, a most beautiful woman, and most like to Mrs. Butler. Thence very
much joyed to London back again, and found out Mr. Povy; told him this;
and then went and left my Privy Seale at my Lord Treasurer's; and so
to the 'Change, and thence to Trinity-House; where a great dinner of
Captain Crisp, who is made an Elder Brother. And so, being very pleasant
at dinner, away home, Creed with me; and there met Povy; and we to
Gresham College, where we saw some experiments upon a hen, a dogg, and a
cat, of the Florence poyson.

     ["Sir Robert Moray presented the Society from the King with a phial
     of Florentine poison sent for by his Majesty from Florence, on
     purpose to have those experiments related of the efficacy thereof,
     tried by the Society."  The poison had little effect upon the kitten
     (Birch's "History;" vol. ii., p. 31).]

The first it made for a time drunk, but it come to itself again quickly;
the second it made vomitt mightily, but no other hurt. The third I did
not stay to see the effect of it, being taken out by Povy. He and I
walked below together, he giving me most exceeding discouragements in
the getting of money (whether by design or no I know not, for I am now
come to think him a most cunning fellow in most things he do, but his
accounts), and made it plain to me that money will be hard to get, and
that it is to be feared Backewell hath a design in it to get the thing
forced upon himself. This put me into a cruel melancholy to think I may
lose what I have had so near my hand; but yet something may be hoped for
which to-morrow will shew. He gone, Creed and I together a great while
consulting what to do in this case, and after all I left him to do what
he thought fit in his discourse to-morrow with my Lord Ashly. So home,
and in my way met with Mr. Warren, from whom my hopes I fear will fail
of what I hoped for, by my getting him a protection. But all these
troubles will if not be over, yet we shall see the worst of there in a
day or two. So to my office, and thence to supper, and my head akeing,
betimes, that is by 10 or 11 o'clock, to bed.

20th. Up, and all the morning busy at the office. At noon dined, and Mr.
Povy by agreement with me (where his boldness with Mercer, poor innocent
wench, did make both her and me blush, to think how he were able to
debauch a poor girl if he had opportunity) at a dish or two of plain
meat of his own choice. After dinner comes Creed and then Andrews, where
want of money to Andrews the main discourse, and at last in confidence
of Creed's judgement I am resolved to spare him 4 or L500 of what lies
by me upon the security of some Tallys. This went against my heart to
begin, but when obtaining Mr. Creed to joyne with me we do resolve to
assist Mr. Andrews. Then anon we parted, and I to my office, where late,
and then home to supper and to bed. This night I am told the first play
is played in White Hall noon-hall, which is now turned to a house of
playing. I had a great mind, but could not go to see it.

21st. Up and to my office about business. Anon comes Creed and Povy, and
we treat about the business of our lending money, Creed and I, upon a
tally for the satisfying of Andrews, and did conclude it as in papers
is expressed, and as I am glad to have an opportunity of having 10 per
cent. for my money, so I am as glad that the sum I begin this trade with
is no more than L350. We all dined at Andrews' charge at the Sun behind
the 'Change, a good dinner the worst dressed that ever I eat any, then
home, and there found Kate Joyce and Harman come to see us. With them,
after long talk, abroad by coach, a tour in the fields, and drunk at
Islington, it being very pleasant, the dust being laid by a little rain,
and so home very well pleased with this day's work. So after a while at
my office to supper and to bed. This day we hear that the Duke and the
fleete are sailed yesterday. Pray God go along with them, that they have
good speed in the beginning of their worke.

22nd. Up, and Mr. Caesar, my boy's lute-master, being come betimes to
teach him, I did speak with him seriously about the boy, what my mind
was, if he did not look after his lute and singing that I would turn him
away; which I hope will do some good upon the boy. All the morning busy
at the office. At noon dined at home, and then to the office again very
busy till very late, and so home to supper and to bed. My wife making
great preparation to go to Court to Chappell to-morrow. This day I have
newes from Mr. Coventry that the fleete is sailed yesterday from Harwich
to the coast of Holland to see what the Dutch will do. God go along with
them!

23rd (Lord's day). Mr. Povy, according to promise, sent his coach
betimes, and I carried my wife and her woman to White Hall Chappell and
set them in the Organ Loft, and I having left to untruss went to the
Harp and Ball and there drank also, and entertained myself in talke with
the mayde of the house, a pretty mayde and very modest. Thence to the
Chappell and heard the famous young Stillingfleete, whom I knew at
Cambridge, and is now newly admitted one of the King's chaplains;
and was presented, they say, to my Lord Treasurer for St. Andrew's,
Holborne, where he is now minister, with these words: that they (the
Bishops of Canterbury, London, and another) believed he is the ablest
young man to preach the Gospel of any since the Apostles. He did make
the most plain, honest, good, grave sermon, in the most unconcerned
and easy yet substantial manner, that ever I heard in my life, upon the
words of Samuell to the people, "Fear the Lord in truth with all your
heart, and remember the great things that he hath done for you." It
being proper to this day, the day of the King's Coronation. Thence to
Mr. Povy's, where mightily treated, and Creed with us. But Lord! to see
how Povy overdoes every thing in commending it, do make it nauseous
to me, and was not (by reason of my large praise of his house) over
acceptable to my wife. Thence after dinner Creed and we by coach took
the ayre in the fields beyond St. Pancras, it raining now and then,
which it seems is most welcome weather, and then all to my house, where
comes Mr. Hill, Andrews, and Captain Taylor, and good musique, but at
supper to hear the arguments we had against Taylor concerning a Corant,
he saying that the law of a dancing Corant is to have every barr to end
in a pricked crochet and quaver, which I did deny, was very strange. It
proceeded till I vexed him, but all parted friends, for Creed and I to
laugh at when he was gone. After supper, Creed and I together to bed, in
Mercer's bed, and so to sleep.

24th. Up and with Creed in Sir W. Batten's coach to White Hall. Sir
W. Batten and I to the Duke of Albemarle, where very busy. Then I to
Creed's chamber, where I received with much ado my two orders about
receiving Povy's monies and answering his credits, and it is strange how
he will preserve his constant humour of delaying all business that comes
before him. Thence he and I to London to my office, and back again to
my Lady Sandwich's to dinner, where my wife by agreement. After dinner
alone, my Lady told me, with the prettiest kind of doubtfullnesse,
whether it would be fit for her with respect to Creed to do it, that is,
in the world, that Creed had broke his desire to her of being a servant
to Mrs. Betty Pickering, and placed it upon encouragement which he had
from some discourse of her ladyship, commending of her virtues to him,
which, poor lady, she meant most innocently. She did give him a cold
answer, but not so severe as it ought to have been; and, it seems, as
the lady since to my Lady confesses, he had wrote a letter to her, which
she answered slightly, and was resolved to contemn any motion of his
therein. My Lady takes the thing very ill, as it is fit she should; but
I advise her to stop all future occasions of the world's taking notice
of his coming thither so often as of late he hath done. But to think
that he should have this devilish presumption to aime at a lady so near
to my Lord is strange, both for his modesty and discretion. Thence to
the Cockepitt, and there walked an houre with my Lord Duke of Albemarle
alone in his garden, where he expressed in great words his opinion of
me; that I was the right hand of the Navy here, nobody but I taking any
care of any thing therein; so that he should not know what could be done
without me. At which I was (from him) not a little proud. Thence to a
Committee of Tangier, where because not a quorum little was done, and
so away to my wife (Creed with me) at Mrs. Pierce's, who continues very
pretty and is now great with child. I had not seen her a great while.
Thence by coach to my Lord Treasurer's, but could not speak with Sir Ph.
Warwicke. So by coach with my wife and Mercer to the Parke; but the
King being there, and I now-a-days being doubtfull of being seen in
any pleasure, did part from the tour, and away out of the Parke to
Knightsbridge, and there eat and drank in the coach, and so home, and
after a while at my office, home to supper and to bed, having got a
great cold I think by my pulling off my periwigg so often.

25th. At the office all the morning, and the like after dinner, at home
all the afternoon till very late, and then to bed, being very hoarse
with a cold I did lately get with leaving off my periwigg. This
afternoon W. Pen, lately come from his father in the fleete, did give
me an account how the fleete did sayle, about 103 in all, besides small
catches, they being in sight of six or seven Dutch scouts, and sent
ships in chase of them.

26th. Up very betimes, my cold continuing and my stomach sick with the
buttered ale that I did drink the last night in bed, which did lie upon
me till I did this morning vomitt it up. So walked to Povy's, where
Creed met me, and there I did receive the first parcel of money as
Treasurer of Tangier, and did give him my receipt for it, which was
about L2,800 value in Tallys; we did also examine and settle several
other things, and then I away to White Hall, talking, with Povy
alone, about my opinion of Creed's indiscretion in looking after Mrs.
Pickering, desiring him to make no more a sport of it, but to correct
him, if he finds that he continues to owne any such thing. This I did
by my Lady's desire, and do intend to pursue the stop of it. So to the
Carrier's by Cripplegate, to see whether my mother be come to towne or
no, I expecting her to-day, but she is not come. So to dinner to my Lady
Sandwich's, and there after dinner above in the diningroom did spend an
houre or two with her talking again about Creed's folly; but strange
it is that he should dare to propose this business himself of Mrs.
Pickering to my Lady, and to tell my Lady that he did it for her virtue
sake, not minding her money, for he could have a wife with more, but,
for that, he did intend to depend upon her Ladyshipp to get as much of
her father and mother for her as she could; and that, what he did, was
by encouragement from discourse of her Ladyshipp's: he also had wrote to
Mrs. Pickering, but she did give him a slighting answer back again. But
I do very much fear that Mrs. Pickering's honour, if the world comes
to take notice of it, may be wronged by it. Thence home, and all the
afternoon till night at my office, then home to supper and to bed.

27th. Up, and to my office, where all the morning, at noon Creed dined
with me; and, after dinner, walked in the garden, he telling me that my
Lord Treasurer now begins to be scrupulous, and will know what becomes
of the L26,000 saved by my Lord Peterborough, before he parts with any
more money, which puts us into new doubts, and me into a great fear,
that all my cake will be doe still.

     [An obsolete proverb, signifying to lose one's hopes, a cake coming
     out of the oven in a state of dough being considered spoiled.

         "My cake is dough; but I'll in among the rest;
          Out of hope of all, but my share in the feast."
               Shakespeare, Taming of the Shrew, act v., sc.  i.-M. B.]

But I am well prepared for it to bear it, being not clear whether it
will be more for my profit to have it, or go without it, as my profits
of the Navy are likely now to be. All the afternoon till late hard
at the office. Then to supper and to bed. This night William Hewer is
returned from Harwich, where he hath been paying off of some ships this
fortnight, and went to sea a good way with the fleete, which was 96
in company then, men of warr, besides some come in, and following them
since, which makes now above 100, whom God bless!

28th. Up by 5 o'clock, and by appointment with Creed by 6 at his
chamber, expecting Povy, who come not. Thence he and I out to Sir Philip
Warwicke's, but being not up we took a turn in the garden hard by, and
thither comes Povy to us. After some discourse of the reason of the
difficulty that Sir Philip Warwicke makes in issuing a warrant for my
striking of tallys, namely, the having a clear account of the L26,000
saved by my Lord of Peterborough, we parted, and I to Sir P. Warwicke,
who did give me an account of his demurr, which I applied myself to
remove by taking Creed with me to my Lord Ashly, from whom, contrary to
all expectation, I received a very kind answer, just as we could have
wished it, that he would satisfy my Lord Treasurer. Thence very well
satisfied I home, and down the River to visit the victualling-ships,
where I find all out of order. And come home to dinner, and then to
write a letter to the Duke of Albemarle about the victualling-ships, and
carried it myself to the Council-chamber, where it was read; and when
they rose, my Lord Chancellor passing by stroked me on the head, and
told me that the Board had read my letter, and taken order for the
punishing of the watermen for not appearing on board the ships.

     [Among the State Papers are lists of watermen impressed and put on
     board the victualling ships.  Attached to one of these is a "note of
     their unfitness and refractory conduct; also that many go ashore to
     sleep, and are discontent that they, as masters of families, are
     pressed, while single men are excused on giving money to the
     pressmen" ("Calendar," Domestic, 1664-65, p. 323).]

And so did the King afterwards, who do now know me so well, that he
never sees me but he speaks to me about our Navy business. Thence got my
Lord Ashly to my Lord Treasurer below in his chamber, and there removed
the scruple, and by and by brought Mr. Sherwin to Sir Philip Warwicke
and did the like, and so home, and after a while at my office, to bed.

29th. All the morning busy at the office. In the afternoon to my Lord
Treasurer's, and there got my Lord Treasurer to sign the warrant for my
striking of tallys, and so doing many jobbs in my way home, and there
late writeing letters, being troubled in my mind to hear that Sir W.
Batten and Sir J. Minnes do take notice that I am now-a-days much from
the office upon no office business, which vexes me, and will make me
mind my business the better, I hope in God; but what troubles me more
is, that I do omit to write, as I should do, to Mr. Coventry, which I
must not do, though this night I minded it so little as to sleep in the
middle of my letter to him, and committed forty blotts and blurrs in my
letter to him, but of this I hope never more to be guilty, if I have not
already given him sufficient offence. So, late home, and to bed.

30th (Lord's day). Up and to my office alone all the morning, making up
my monthly accounts, which though it hath been very intricate, and very
great disbursements and receipts and odd reckonings, yet I differed not
from the truth; viz.: between my first computing what my profit ought
to be and then what my cash and debts do really make me worth, not above
10s., which is very much, and I do much value myself upon the account,
and herein I with great joy find myself to have gained this month above
L100 clear, and in the whole to be worth above L1400, the greatest sum I
ever yet was worth. Thence home to dinner, and there find poor Mr. Spong
walking at my door, where he had knocked, and being told I was at the
office staid modestly there walking because of disturbing me, which
methinks was one of the most modest acts (of a man that hath no need of
being so to me) that ever I knew in my life. He dined with me, and then
after dinner to my closet, where abundance of mighty pretty discourse,
wherein, in a word, I find him the man of the world that hath of his own
ingenuity obtained the most in most things, being withall no scholler.
He gone, I took boat and down to Woolwich and Deptford, and made it
late home, and so to supper and to bed. Thus I end this month in great
content as to my estate and gettings: in much trouble as to the pains I
have taken, and the rubs I expect yet to meet with, about the business
of Tangier. The fleete, with about 106 ships upon the coast of Holland,
in sight of the Dutch, within the Texel. Great fears of the sickenesse
here in the City, it being said that two or three houses are already
shut up. God preserve as all!




MAY 1665

May 1st. Up and to Mr. Povy's, and by his bedside talked a good while.
Among other things he do much insist I perceive upon the difficulty of
getting of money, and would fain have me to concur in the thinking of
some other way of disposing of the place of Treasurer to one Mr. Bell,
but I did seem slight of it, and resolved to try to do the best or to
give it up. Thence to the Duke of Albemarle, where I was sorry to find
myself to come a little late, and so home, and at noon going to the
'Change I met my Lord Brunkard, Sir Robert Murry, Deane Wilkins, and Mr.
Hooke, going by coach to Colonell Blunts to dinner. So they stopped and
took me with them. Landed at the Tower-wharf, and thence by water to
Greenwich; and there coaches met us; and to his house, a very stately
sight for situation and brave plantations; and among others, a vineyard,
the first that ever I did see. No extraordinary dinner, nor any
other entertainment good; but only after dinner to the tryall of some
experiments about making of coaches easy. And several we tried; but one
did prove mighty easy (not here for me to describe, but the whole body
of the coach lies upon one long spring), and we all, one after another,
rid in it; and it is very fine and likely to take. These experiments
were the intent of their coming, and pretty they are. Thence back by
coach to Greenwich, and in his pleasure boat to Deptford, and there
stopped and in to Mr. Evelyn's,--[Sayes Court, the well-known residence
of John Evelyn.]--which is a most beautiful place; but it being dark
and late, I staid not; but Deane Wilkins and Mr. Hooke and I walked to
Redriffe; and noble discourse all day long did please me, and it
being late did take them to my house to drink, and did give them some
sweetmeats, and thence sent them with a lanthorn home, two worthy
persons as are in England, I think, or the world. So to my Lady Batten,
where my wife is tonight, and so after some merry talk home and to bed.

2nd. Up and to the office all day, where sat late, and then to the
office again, and by and by Sir W. Batten and my Lady and my wife and I
by appointment yesterday (my Lady Pen failed us, who ought to have been
with us) to the Rhenish winehouse at the Steelyard, and there eat a
couple of lobsters and some prawns, and pretty merry, especially to see
us four together, while my wife and my Lady did never intend ever to be
together again after a year's distance between one another. Hither by
and by come Sir Richard Ford and also Mrs. Esther, that lived formerly
with my Lady Batten, now well married to a priest, come to see my Lady.
Thence toward evening home, and to my office, where late, and then home
to supper and to bed.

3rd. Up betimes and walked to Sir Ph. Warwicke's, where a long time with
him in his chamber alone talking of Sir G. Carteret's business, and the
abuses he puts on the nation by his bad payments to both our vexations,
but no hope of remedy for ought I see. Thence to my Lord Ashly to a
Committee of Tangier for my Lord Rutherford's accounts, and that done we
to my Lord Treasurer's, where I did receive my Lord's warrant to Sir
R. Long for drawing a warrant for my striking of tallys. So to the Inne
again by Cripplegate, expecting my mother's coming to towne, but she is
not come this weeke neither, the coach being too full. So to the 'Change
and thence home to dinner, and so out to Gresham College, and saw a cat
killed with the Duke of Florence's poyson, and saw it proved that the
oyle of tobacco

     ["Mr. Daniel Coxe read an account of the effects of tobacco-oil
     distilled in a retort, by one drop of which given at the mouth he
     had killed a lusty cat, which being opened, smelled strongly of the
     oil, and the blood of the heart more strongly than the rest....
     One drop of the Florentine 'oglio di tobacco' being again given to a
     dog, it proved stupefying and vomitive, as before" (Birch's "History
     of the Royal Society," vol, ii., pp. 42, 43).]

drawn by one of the Society do the same effect, and is judged to be the
same thing with the poyson both in colour and smell, and effect. I
saw also an abortive child preserved fresh in spirits of salt. Thence
parted, and to White Hall to the Councilchamber about an order touching
the Navy (our being empowered to commit seamen or Masters that do not,
being hired or pressed, follow their worke), but they could give us
none. So a little vexed at that, because I put in the memorial to the
Duke of Albemarle alone under my own hand, home, and after some time at
the office home to bed. My Lord Chief Justice Hide did die suddenly this
week, a day or two ago, of an apoplexy.

4th. Up, and to the office, where we sat busy all the morning. At
noon home to dinner, and then to the office again all day till almost
midnight, and then, weary, home to supper and to bed.

5th. Up betimes, and by water to Westminster, there to speak the
first time with Sir Robert Long, to give him my Privy Seal and my Lord
Treasurer's order for Tangier Tallys; he received me kindly enough.
Thence home by water, and presently down to Woolwich and back to
Blackewall, and there, viewed the Breach, in order to a Mast Docke, and
so to Deptford to the Globe, where my Lord Brunkard, Sir J. Minnes,
Sir W. Batten, and Commissioner Pett were at dinner, having been at the
Breach also, but they find it will be too great charge to make use of
it. After dinner to Mr. Evelyn's; he being abroad, we walked in his
garden, and a lovely noble ground he hath indeed. And among other
rarities, a hive of bees, so as being hived in glass, you may see the
bees making their honey and combs mighty pleasantly. Thence home, and I
by and by to Mr. Povy's to see him, who is yet in his chamber not well,
and thence by his advice to one Lovett's, a varnisher, to see his
manner of new varnish, but found not him at home, but his wife, a very
beautiful woman, who shewed me much variety of admirable work, and is in
order to my having of some papers fitted with his lines for my use for
tables and the like. I know not whether I was more pleased with the
thing, or that I was shewed it by her, but resolved I am to have some
made. So home to my office late, and then to supper and to bed. My wife
tells me that she hears that my poor aunt James hath had her breast cut
off here in town, her breast having long been out of order. This day,
after I had suffered my owne hayre to grow long, in order to wearing it,
I find the convenience of periwiggs is so great, that I have cut off all
short again, and will keep to periwiggs.

6th. Up, and all day at the office, but a little at dinner, and there
late till past 12. So home to bed, pleased as I always am after I have
rid a great deal of work, it being very satisfactory to me.

7th (Lord's day). Up, and to church with my wife. Home and dined. After
dinner come Mr. Andrews and spent the afternoon with me, about our
Tangier business of the victuals, and then parted, and after sermon
comes Mr. Hill and a gentleman, a friend of his, one Mr. Scott, that
sings well also, and then comes Mr. Andrews, and we all sung and
supped, and then to sing again and passed the Sunday very pleasantly and
soberly, and so I to my office a little, and then home to prayers and to
bed. Yesterday begun my wife to learn to, limn of one Browne,

     [Alexander Browne, a printseller, who taught drawing, and practised
     it with success.  He published in 1669, "Ars Pictoria, or an Academy
     treating of Drawing, Painting, Limning and Etching."]

which Mr. Hill helps her to, and, by her beginning upon some eyes, I
think she will [do] very fine things, and I shall take great delight in
it.

8th. Up very betimes, and did much business before I went out with
several persons, among others Captain Taylor, who would leave the
management of most of his business now he is going to Harwich, upon me,
and if I can get money by it, which I believe it will, I shall take some
of it upon me. Thence with Sir W. Batten to the Duke of Albemarle's and
there did much business, and then to the 'Change, and thence off with
Sir W. Warren to an ordinary, where we dined and sat talking of most
usefull discourse till 5 in the afternoon, and then home, and very busy
till late, and so home and to bed.

9th. Up betimes, and to my business at the office, where all the
morning. At noon comes Mrs. The. Turner, and dines with us, and my
wife's painting-master staid and dined; and I take great pleasure in
thinking that my wife will really come to something in that business.
Here dined also Luellin. So after dinner to my office, and there very
busy till almost midnight, and so home to supper and to bed. This day
we have newes of eight ships being taken by some of ours going into the
Texel, their two men of warr, that convoyed them, running in. They come
from about Ireland, round to the north.

10th. Up betimes, and abroad to the Cocke-Pitt, where the Duke [of
Albemarle] did give Sir W. Batten and me an account of the late taking
of eight ships, and of his intent to come back to the Gunfleete--[The
Gunfleet Sand off the Essex coast.]--with the fleete presently; which
creates us much work and haste therein, against the fleete comes. So to
Mr. Povy, and after discourse with him home, and thence to the Guard in
Southwarke, there to get some soldiers, by the Duke's order, to go keep
pressmen on board our ships. So to the 'Change and did much business,
and then home to dinner, and there find my poor mother come out of the
country today in good health, and I am glad to see her, but my business,
which I am sorry for, keeps me from paying the respect I ought to her
at her first coming, she being grown very weak in her judgement, and
doating again in her discourse, through age and some trouble in her
family. I left her and my wife to go abroad to buy something, and then
I to my office. In the evening by appointment to Sir W. Warren and Mr.
Deering at a taverne hard by with intent to do some good upon their
agreement in a great bargain of planks. So home to my office again, and
then to supper and to bed, my mother being in bed already.

11th. Up betimes, and at the office all the morning. At home dined, and
then to the office all day till late at night, and then home to supper,
weary with business, and to bed.

12th. Up betimes, and find myself disappointed in my receiving presently
of my L50 I hoped for sure of Mr. Warren upon the benefit of my press
warrant, but he promises to make it good. So by water to the Exchequer,
and there up and down through all the offices to strike my tallys for
L17,500, which methinks is so great a testimony of the goodness of God
to me, that I, from a mean clerke there, should come to strike tallys
myself for that sum, and in the authority that I do now, is a very
stupendous mercy to me. I shall have them struck to-morrow. But to see
how every little fellow looks after his fees, and to get what he can for
everything, is a strange consideration; the King's fees that he must pay
himself for this L17,500 coming to above L100. Thence called my wife at
Unthanke's to the New Exchange and elsewhere to buy a lace band for me,
but we did not buy, but I find it so necessary to have some handsome
clothes that I cannot but lay out some money thereupon. To the 'Change
and thence to my watchmaker, where he has put it [i.e. the watch] in
order, and a good and brave piece it is, and he tells me worth L14 which
is a greater present than I valued it. So home to dinner, and after
dinner comes several people, among others my cozen, Thomas Pepys, of
Hatcham,

     [Thomas Pepys, of Hatcham Barnes, Surrey, Master of the Jewel House
     to Charles II. and James II.]

to receive some money, of my Lord Sandwich's, and there I paid him what
was due to him upon my uncle's score, but, contrary to my expectation,
did get him to sign and seale to my sale of lands for payment of debts.
So that now I reckon myself in better condition by L100 in my content
than I was before, when I was liable to be called to an account and
others after me by my uncle Thomas or his children for every foot of
land we had sold before. This I reckon a great good fortune in the
getting of this done. He gone, come Mr. Povy, Dr. Twisden, and Mr.
Lawson about settling my security in the paying of the L4000 ordered to
Sir J. Lawson. So a little abroad and then home, and late at my office
and closet settling this day's disordering of my papers, then to supper
and to bed.

13th. Up, and all day in some little gruntings of pain, as I used to
have from winde, arising I think from my fasting so long, and want of
exercise, and I think going so hot in clothes, the weather being hot,
and the same clothes I wore all winter. To the 'Change after office,
and received my watch from the watchmaker, and a very fine [one] it is,
given me by Briggs, the Scrivener. Home to dinner, and then I abroad
to the Atturney Generall, about advice upon the Act for Land Carriage,
which he desired not to give me before I had received the King's and
Council's order therein; going home bespoke the King's works, will cost
me 50s., I believe. So home and late at my office. But, Lord! to see how
much of my old folly and childishnesse hangs upon me still that I cannot
forbear carrying my watch in my hand in the coach all this afternoon,
and seeing what o'clock it is one hundred times; and am apt to think
with myself, how could I be so long without one; though I remember
since, I had one, and found it a trouble, and resolved to carry one
no more about me while I lived. So home to supper and to bed, being
troubled at a letter from Mr. Gholmly from Tangier, wherein he do advise
me how people are at worke to overthrow our Victualling business, by
which I shall lose L300 per annum, I am much obliged to him for this,
secret kindnesse, and concerned to repay it him in his own concernments
and look after this.

14th (Lord's day). Up, and with my wife to church, it being Whitsunday;
my wife very fine in a new yellow bird's-eye hood, as the fashion is
now. We had a most sorry sermon; so home to dinner, my mother having her
new suit brought home, which makes her very fine. After dinner my wife
and she and Mercer to Thomas Pepys's wife's christening of his first
child, and I took a coach, and to Wanstead, the house where Sir H.
Mildmay died, and now Sir Robert Brookes lives, having bought it of
the Duke of Yorke, it being forfeited to him. A fine seat, but an
old-fashioned house; and being not full of people looks desolately.
Thence to Walthamstow, where (failing at the old place) Sir W. Batten
by and by come home, I walking up and down the house and garden with my
Lady very pleasantly, then to supper very merry, and then back by coach
by dark night. I all the afternoon in the coach reading the treasonous
book of the Court of King James, printed a great while ago, and worth
reading, though ill intended. As soon as I come home, upon a letter from
the Duke of Albemarle, I took boat at about 12 at night, and down
the River in a gally, my boy and I, down to the Hope and so up again,
sleeping and waking, with great pleasure, my business to call upon every
one of

15th. Our victualling ships to set them agoing, and so home, and after
dinner to the King's playhouse, all alone, and saw "Love's Maistresse."
Some pretty things and good variety in it, but no or little fancy in it.
Thence to the Duke of Albemarle to give him account of my day's works,
where he shewed me letters from Sir G. Downing, of four days' date, that
the Dutch are come out and joyned, well-manned, and resolved to board
our best ships, and fight for certain they will. Thence to the Swan at
Herbert's, and there the company of Sarah a little while, and so
away and called at the Harp and Ball, where the mayde, Mary, is very
'formosa'--[handsome]--; but, Lord! to see in what readiness I am, upon
the expiring of my vowes this day, to begin to run into all my pleasures
and neglect of business. Thence home, and being sleepy to bed.

16th. Up betimes, and to the Duke of Albemarle with an account of my
yesterday's actions in writing. So back to the office, where all the
morning very busy. After dinner by coach to see and speak with Mr. Povy,
and after little discourse back again home, where busy upon letters till
past 12 at night, and so home to supper and to bed, weary.

17th. Up, and by appointment to a meeting of Sir John Lawson and Mr.
Cholmly's atturney and Mr. Povy at the Swan taverne at Westminster to
settle their business about my being secured in the payment of money
to Sir J. Lawson in the other's absence. Thence at Langford's, where I
never was since my brother died there. I find my wife and Mercer, having
with him agreed upon two rich silk suits for me, which is fit for me to
have, but yet the money is too much, I doubt, to lay out altogether; but
it is done, and so let it be, it being the expense of the world that
I can the best bear with and the worst spare. Thence home, and after
dinner to the office, where late, and so home to supper and to bed. Sir
J. Minnes and I had an angry bout this afternoon with Commissioner Pett
about his neglecting his duty and absenting himself, unknown to us, from
his place at Chatham, but a most false man I every day find him more
and more, and in this very full of equivocation. The fleete we doubt
not come to Harwich by this time. Sir W. Batten is gone down this day
thither, and the Duchesse of Yorke went down yesterday to meet the Duke.

18th. Up, and with Sir J. Minnes to the Duke of Albemarle, where we did
much business, and I with good content to myself; among other things
we did examine Nixon and Stanesby, about their late running from two
Dutchmen;

     [Captain Edward Nixon, of the "Elizabeth," and Captain John
     Stanesby, of the "Eagle."  John Lanyon wrote to the Navy
     Commissioners from Plymouth, May 16th: "Understands from the seamen
     that the conduct of Captains Nixon and Stanesby in their late
     engagement with two Dutch capers was very foul; the night they left
     the Dutch, no lights were put out as formerly, and though in sight
     of them in the morning, they still kept on their way; the Eagle lay
     by some time, and both the enemy's ships plied on her, but finding
     the Elizabeth nearly out of sight she also made sail; it is true the
     wind and sea were high, but there were no sufficient reasons for
     such endeavours to get from them." ("Calendar of State Papers,"
     Domestic, 1664-65, p. 367).  Both captains were tried; Nixon was
     condemned to be shot but Stanesby was cleared, and Charnock asserts
     that he was commander the "Happy Return" in 1672.]

for which they are committed to a vessel to carry them to the fleete
to be tried. A most fowle unhandsome thing as ever was heard, for plain
cowardice on Nixon's part. Thence with the Duke of Albemarle in his
coach to my Lord Treasurer, and there was before the King (who ever now
calls me by my name) and Lord Chancellor, and many other great Lords,
discoursing about insuring of some of the King's goods, wherein the King
accepted of my motion that we should; and so away, well pleased. To the
office, and dined, and then to the office again, and abroad to speak
with Sir G. Carteret; but, Lord! to see how fraile a man I am, subject
to my vanities, that can hardly forbear, though pressed with never so
much business, my pursuing of pleasure, but home I got, and there very
busy very late. Among other things consulting with Mr. Andrews about our
Tangier business, wherein we are like to meet with some trouble, and
my Lord Bellasses's endeavour to supplant us, which vexes my mind; but,
however, our undertaking is so honourable that we shall stand a tug for
it I think. So home to supper and to bed.

19th. Up, and to White Hall, where the Committee for Tangier met, and
there, though the case as to the merit of it was most plain and most of
the company favourable to our business, yet it was with much ado that
I got the business not carried fully against us, but put off to another
day, my Lord Arlington being the great man in it, and I was sorry to be
found arguing so greatly against him. The business I believe will in the
end be carried against us, and the whole business fall; I must therefore
endeavour the most I can to get money another way. It vexed me to see
Creed so hot against it, but I cannot much blame him, having never
declared to him my being concerned in it. But that that troubles me most
is my Lord Arlington calls to me privately and asks me whether I had
ever said to any body that I desired to leave this employment, having
not time to look after it. I told him, No, for that the thing being
settled it will not require much time to look after it. He told me
then he would do me right to the King, for he had been told so, which I
desired him to do, and by and by he called me to him again and asked
me whether I had no friend about the Duke, asking me (I making a stand)
whether Mr. Coventry was not my friend. I told him I had received many
friendships from him. He then advised me to procure that the Duke would
in his next letter write to him to continue me in my place and remove
any obstruction; which I told him I would, and thanked him. So parted,
vexed at the first and amazed at this business of my Lord Arlington's.
Thence to the Exchequer, and there got my tallys for L17,500, the first
payment I ever had out of the Exchequer, and at the Legg spent 14s.
upon my old acquaintance, some of them the clerks, and away home with my
tallys in a coach, fearful every step of having one of them fall out,
or snatched from me. Being come home, I much troubled out again by coach
(for company taking Sir W. Warren with me), intending to have spoke to
my Lord Arlington to have known the bottom of it, but missed him, and
afterwards discoursing the thing as a confidant to Sir W. Warren, he did
give me several good hints and principles not to do anything suddenly,
but consult my pillow upon that and every great thing of my life, before
I resolve anything in it. Away back home, and not being fit for business
I took my wife and Mercer down by water to Greenwich at 8 at night,
it being very fine and cool and moonshine afterward. Mighty pleasant
passage it was; there eat a cake or two, and so home by 10 or 11 at
night, and then to bed, my mind not settled what to think.

20th. Up, and to my office, where busy all the morning. At noon dined at
home, and to my office, very busy.

21st. Till past one, Lord's day, in the morning writing letters to the
fleete and elsewhere, and my mind eased of much business, home to bed
and slept till 8. So up, and this day is brought home one of my new silk
suits, the plain one, but very rich camelott and noble. I tried it and
it pleases me, but did not wear it, being I would not go out today to
church. So laid it by, and my mind changed, thinking to go see my Lady
Sandwich, and I did go a little way, but stopped and returned home to
dinner, after dinner up to my chamber to settle my Tangier accounts,
and then to my office, there to do the like with other papers. In the
evening home to supper and to bed.

22nd. Up, and down to the ships, which now are hindered from going down
to the fleete (to our great sorrow and shame) with their provisions, the
wind being against them. So to the Duke of Albemarle, and thence down by
water to Deptford, it being Trinity Monday, and so the day of choosing
the Master of Trinity House for the next yeare, where, to my great
content, I find that, contrary to the practice and design of Sir W.
Batten, to breake the rule and custom of the Company in choosing their
Masters by succession, he would have brought in Sir W. Rider or Sir W.
Pen, over the head of Hurleston (who is a knave too besides, I believe),
the younger brothers did all oppose it against the elder, and with great
heat did carry it for Hurleston, which I know will vex him to the heart.
Thence, the election being over, to church, where an idle sermon from
that conceited fellow, Dr. Britton, saving that his advice to unity, and
laying aside all envy and enmity among them was very apposite. Thence
walked to Redriffe, and so to the Trinity House, and a great dinner, as
is usual, and so to my office, where busy all the afternoon till late,
and then home to bed, being much troubled in mind for several things,
first, for the condition of the fleete for lacke of provisions, the
blame this office lies under and the shame that they deserve to have
brought upon them for the ships not being gone out of the River, and
then for my business of Tangier which is not settled, and lastly for
fear that I am not observed to have attended the office business of
late as much as I ought to do, though there has been nothing but my
attendance on Tangier that has occasioned my absence, and that of late
not much.

23rd. Up, and at the office busy all the morning. At noon dined alone,
my wife and mother being gone by invitation to dine with my mother's old
servant Mr. Cordery, who made them very welcome. So to Mr. Povy's, where
after a little discourse about his business I home again, and late at
the office busy. Late comes Sir Arthur Ingram to my office, to tell me
that, by letters from Amsterdam of the 28th of this month (their style),

     [The new style was adopted by most of the countries of Europe long
     before it was legalized in England, although Russia still retains
     the old style.]

the Dutch fleete, being about 100 men-of-war, besides fire-ships,
&c., did set out upon the 23rd and 24th inst. Being divided into seven
squadrons; viz., 1. Generall Opdam. 2. Cottenar, of Rotterdam. 3. Trump.
4. Schram, of Horne. 5. Stillingworth, of Freezland. 6. Everson. 7. One
other, not named, of Zealand.

24th. Up, and by 4 o'clock in the morning, and with W. Hewer, there
till 12 without intermission putting some papers in order. Thence to the
Coffee-house with Creed, where I have not been a great while, where all
the newes is of the Dutch being gone out, and of the plague growing upon
us in this towne; and of remedies against it: some saying one thing,
some another. So home to dinner, and after dinner Creed and I to
Colvill's, thinking to shew him all the respect we could by obliging him
in carrying him 5 tallys of L5000 to secure him for so much credit he
has formerly given Povy to Tangier, but he, like an impertinent fool,
cavills at it, but most ignorantly that ever I heard man in my life.
At last Mr. Viner by chance comes, who I find a very moderate man,
but could not persuade the fool to reason, but brought away the tallys
again, and so vexed to my office, where late, and then home to my supper
and to bed.

25th. Up, and to the office, where all the morning. At noon dined at
home, and then to the office all the afternoon, busy till almost 12 at
night, and then home to supper and to bed.

26th. Up at 4 o'clock, and all the morning in my office with W. Hewer
finishing my papers that were so long out of order, and at noon to my
bookseller's, and there bespoke a book or two, and so home to dinner,
where Creed dined with me, and he and I afterwards to Alderman
Backewell's to try him about supplying us with money, which he denied
at first and last also, saving that he spoke a little fairer at the end
than before. But the truth is I do fear I shall have a great deale of
trouble in getting of money. Thence home, and in the evening by water
to the Duke of Albemarle, whom I found mightily off the hooks, that the
ships are not gone out of the River; which vexed me to see, insomuch
that I am afeard that we must expect some change or addition of new
officers brought upon us, so that I must from this time forward resolve
to make myself appear eminently serviceable in attending at my office
duly and no where else, which makes me wish with all my heart that I had
never anything to do with this business of Tangier. After a while at my
office, home to supper vexed, and to bed.

27th. Up, and to the office, where all the morning; at noon dined at
home, and then to my office again,, where late, and so to bed, with my
mind full of fears for the business of this office and troubled with
that of Tangier, concerning which Mr. Povy was with me, but do give me
little help, but more reason of being troubled. So that were it not for
our Plymouth business I would be glad to be rid of it.

28th (Lord's day). By water to the Duke of Albemarle, where I hear that
Nixon is condemned to be shot to death, for his cowardice, by a Council
of War. Went to chapel and heard a little musique, and there met with
Creed, and with him a little while walking, and to Wilkinson's for me to
drink, being troubled with winde, and at noon to Sir Philip Warwicke's
to dinner, where abundance of company come in unexpectedly; and here I
saw one pretty piece of household stuff, as the company increaseth, to
put a larger leaf upon an oval table. After dinner much good discourse
with Sir Philip, who I find, I think, a most pious, good man, and
a professor of a philosophical manner of life and principles like
Epictetus, whom he cites in many things. Thence to my Lady Sandwich's,
where, to my shame, I had not been a great while before. Here, upon my
telling her a story of my Lord Rochester's running away on Friday night
last with Mrs. Mallett, the great beauty and fortune of the North, who
had supped at White Hall with Mrs. Stewart, and was going home to
her lodgings with her grandfather, my Lord Haly, by coach; and was at
Charing Cross seized on by both horse and foot men, and forcibly taken
from him, and put into a coach with six horses, and two women provided
to receive her, and carried away. Upon immediate pursuit, my Lord of
Rochester (for whom the King had spoke to the lady often, but with no
successe) was taken at Uxbridge; but the lady is not yet heard of, and
the King mighty angry, and the Lord sent to the Tower. Hereupon my Lady
did confess to me, as a great secret, her being concerned in this story.
For if this match breaks between my Lord Rochester and her, then, by the
consent of all her friends, my Lord Hinchingbroke stands fair, and is
invited for her. She is worth, and will be at her mother's death (who
keeps but a little from her), L2500 per annum. Pray God give a good
success to it! But my poor Lady, who is afeard of the sickness, and
resolved to be gone into the country, is forced to stay in towne a day
or two, or three about it, to see the event of it. Thence home and to
see my Lady Pen, where my wife and I were shown a fine rarity: of fishes
kept in a glass of water, that will live so for ever; and finely marked
they are, being foreign.--[Gold-fish introduced from China.]--So
to supper at home and to bed, after many people being with me about
business, among others the two Bellamys about their old debt due to them
from the King for their victualling business, out of which I hope to get
some money.

29th. Lay long in bed, being in some little pain of the wind collique,
then up and to the Duke of Albemarle, and so to the Swan, and there
drank at Herbert's, and so by coach home, it being kept a great holiday
through the City, for the birth and restoration of the King. To my
office, where I stood by and saw Symson the joyner do several things,
little jobbs, to the rendering of my closet handsome and the setting up
of some neat plates that Burston has for my money made me, and so home
to dinner, and then with my wife, mother, and Mercer in one boat, and I
in another, down to Woolwich. I walking from Greenwich, the others going
to and fro upon the water till my coming back, having done but little
business. So home and to supper, and, weary, to bed. We have every
where taken some prizes. Our merchants have good luck to come home
safe: Colliers from the North, and some Streights men just now. And our
Hambrough ships, of whom we were so much afeard, are safe in Hambrough.
Our fleete resolved to sail out again from Harwich in a day or two.

30th. Lay long, and very busy all the morning, at noon to the 'Change,
and thence to dinner to Sir G. Carteret's, to talk upon the business of
insuring our goods upon the Hambrough [ships]. Here a very fine, neat
French dinner, without much cost, we being all alone with my Lady and
one of the house with her; thence home and wrote letters, and then in
the evening, by coach, with my wife and mother and Mercer, our usual
tour by coach, and eat at the old house at Islington; but, Lord! to
see how my mother found herself talk upon every object to think of
old stories. Here I met with one that tells me that Jack Cole, my old
schoolefellow, is dead and buried lately of a consumption, who was a
great crony of mine. So back again home, and there to my closet to write
letters. Hear to my great trouble that our Hambrough ships,

     [On May 29th Sir William Coventry wrote to Lord Arlington: "Capt.
     Langhorne has arrived with seven ships, and reports the taking of
     the Hamburg fleet with the man of war their convoy; mistaking the
     Dutch fleet for the English, he fell into it" ("Calendar of State
     Papers," Domestic, 1664-65, p. 393)]

valued of the King's goods and the merchants' (though but little of the
former) to L200,000 [are lost]. By and by, about 11 at night, called
into the garden by my Lady Pen and daughter, and there walked with them
and my wife till almost twelve, and so in and closed my letters, and
home to bed.

31st. Up, and to my office, and to Westminster, doing business till
noon, and then to the 'Change, where great the noise and trouble of
having our Hambrough ships lost; and that very much placed upon Mr.
Coventry's forgetting to give notice to them of the going away of our
fleete from the coast of Holland. But all without reason, for he did;
but the merchants not being ready, staid longer than the time ordered
for the convoy to stay, which was ten days. Thence home with Creed and
Mr. Moore to dinner. Anon we broke up, and Creed and I to discourse
about our Tangier matters of money, which vex me. So to Gresham College,
staid a very little while, and away and I home busy, and busy late, at
the end of the month, about my month's accounts, but by the addition
of Tangier it is rendered more intricate, and so (which I have not done
these 12 months, nor would willingly have done now) failed of having it
done, but I will do it as soon as I can. So weary and sleepy to bed. I
endeavoured but missed of seeing Sir Thomas Ingram at Westminster, so
went to Houseman's the Painter, who I intend shall draw my wife, but he
was not within, but I saw several very good pictures.




JUNE 1665

June 1st. Up and to the office, where sat all the morning, at noon to
the 'Change, and there did some business, and home to dinner, whither
Creed comes, and after dinner I put on my new silke camelott sute; the
best that ever I wore in my life, the sute costing me above L24. In
this I went with Creed to Goldsmiths' Hall, to the burial of Sir Thomas
Viner; which Hall, and Haberdashers also, was so full of people, that
we were fain for ease and coolness to go forth to Pater Noster Row, to
choose a silke to make me a plain ordinary suit. That done, we walked to
Cornehill, and there at Mr. Cade's' stood in the balcon and saw all
the funeral, which was with the blue-coat boys and old men, all the
Aldermen, and Lord Mayor, &c., and the number of the company very great;
the greatest I ever did see for a taverne. Hither come up to us Dr.
Allen, and then Mr. Povy and Mr. Fox. The show being over, and my
discourse with Mr. Povy, I took coach and to Westminster Hall, where
I took the fairest flower, and by coach to Tothill Fields for the ayre
till it was dark. I 'light, and in with the fairest flower to eat a
cake, and there did do as much as was safe with my flower, and that was
enough on my part. Broke up, and away without any notice, and, after
delivering the rose where it should be, I to the Temple and 'light, and
come to the middle door, and there took another coach, and so home to
write letters, but very few, God knows, being by my pleasure made to
forget everything that is. The coachman that carried [us] cannot know me
again, nor the people at the house where we were. Home to bed, certain
news being come that our fleete is in sight of the Dutch ships.

2nd. Lay troubled in mind abed a good while, thinking of my Tangier and
victualling business, which I doubt will fall. Up and to the Duke
of Albemarle, but missed him. Thence to the Harp and Ball and to
Westminster Hall, where I visited "the flowers" in each place, and so
met with Mr. Creed, and he and I to Mrs. Croft's to drink and did, but
saw not her daughter Borroughes. I away home, and there dined and did
business. In the afternoon went with my tallys, made a fair end with
Colvill and Viner, delivering them L5000 tallys to each and very quietly
had credit given me upon other tallys of Mr. Colvill for L2000 and
good words for more, and of Mr. Viner too. Thence to visit the Duke of
Albemarle, and thence my Lady Sandwich and Lord Crew. Thence home, and
there met an expresse from Sir W. Batten at Harwich, that the fleete is
all sailed from Solebay, having spied the Dutch fleete at sea, and that,
if the calmes hinder not, they must needs now be engaged with them.
Another letter also come to me from Mr. Hater, committed by the Council
this afternoon to the Gate House, upon the misfortune of having his name
used by one, without his knowledge or privity, for the receiving of
some powder that he had bought. Up to Court about these two, and for the
former was led up to my Lady Castlemayne's lodgings, where the King and
she and others were at supper, and there I read the letter and returned;
and then to Sir G. Carteret about Hater, and shall have him released
to-morrow, upon my giving bail for his appearance, which I have promised
to do. Sir G. Carteret did go on purpose to the King to ask this, and it
was granted. So home at past 12, almost one o'clock in the morning. To
my office till past two, and then home to supper and to bed.

3rd. Up and to White Hall, where Sir G. Carteret did go with me to
Secretary Morris, and prevailed with him to let Mr. Hater be released
upon bail for his appearance. So I at a loss how to get another besides
myself, and got Mr. Hunt, who did patiently stay with me all the morning
at Secretary Morris's chamber, Mr. Hater being sent for with his
keeper, and at noon comes in the Secretary, and upon entering [into]
recognizances, he for L200, and Mr. Hunt and I for L100 each for his
appearance upon demand, he was released, it costing him, I think, above
L3. I thence home, vexed to be kept from the office all the morning,
which I had not been in many months before, if not some years. At home
to dinner, and all the afternoon at the office, where late at night, and
much business done, then home to supper and to bed. All this day by all
people upon the River, and almost every where else hereabout were heard
the guns, our two fleets for certain being engaged; which was confirmed
by letters from Harwich, but nothing particular: and all our hearts full
of concernment for the Duke, and I particularly for my Lord Sandwich and
Mr. Coventry after his Royall Highnesse.

4th (Sunday). Up and at my chamber all the forenoon, at evening my
accounts, which I could not do sooner, for the last month, and, blessed
be God! am worth L1400 odd money, something more than ever I was yet in
the world. Dined very well at noon, and then to my office, and there
and in the garden discoursed with several people about business, among
others Mr. Howell, the turner, who did give me so good a discourse about
the practices of the Paymaster J. Fenn that I thought fit to recollect
all when he was gone, and have entered it down to be for ever
remembered. Thence to my chamber again to settle my Tangier accounts
against tomorrow and some other things, and with great joy ended them,
and so to supper, where a good fowl and tansy, and so to bed. Newes
being come that our fleete is pursuing the Dutch, who, either by
cunning, or by being worsted, do give ground, but nothing more for
certain. Late to bed upon my papers being quite finished.

5th. Up very betimes to look some other papers, and then to White
Hall to a Committee of Tangier, where I offered my accounts with great
acceptation, and so had some good words and honour by it, and one or two
things done to my content in my business of Treasurer, but I do clearly
see that we shall lose our business of victualling, Sir Thomas Ingram
undertaking that it shall be done by persons there as cheap as we do
it, and give the seamen their full allowance and themselves give good
security here for performance of contract, upon which terms there is no
opposing it. This would trouble me, but that I hope when that fails to
spend my time to some good advantage other ways, and so shall permit it
all to God Almighty's pleasure. Thence home to dinner, after 'Change,
where great talke of the Dutch being fled and we in pursuit of them, and
that our ship Charity

     [Sir William Coventry and Sir William Penn to the Navy
     Commissioners, June 4th: "Engaged yesterday with the Dutch; they
     began to stand away at 3 p.m.  Chased them all the rest of the day
     and night; 20 considerable ships are destroyed and taken; we have
     only lost the Great Charity.  The Earl of Marlborough, Rear-Admiral
     Sansum, and Captain Kirby are slain, and Sir John Lawson wounded"
     ("Calendar of State Papers," Domestic, 1664-65, p. 406).]

is lost upon our Captain's, Wilkinson, and Lieutenant's yielding, but of
this there is no certainty, save the report of some of the sicke men of
the Charity, turned adrift in a boat out of the Charity and taken up and
brought on shore yesterday to Sole Bay, and the newes hereof brought by
Sir Henry Felton. Home to dinner, and Creed with me. Then he and I down
to Deptford, did some business, and back again at night. He home, and
I to my office, and so to supper and to bed. This morning I had great
discourse with my Lord Barkeley about Mr. Hater, towards whom from a
great passion reproaching him with being a fanatique and dangerous for
me to keepe, I did bring him to be mighty calme and to ask me pardons
for what he had thought of him and to desire me to ask his pardon of
Hater himself for the ill words he did give him the other day alone at
White Hall (which was, that he had always thought him a man that was no
good friend to the King, but did never think it would breake out in a
thing of this nature), and did advise him to declare his innocence to
the Council and pray for his examination and vindication. Of which I
shall consider and say no more, but remember one compliment that in
great kindness to me he did give me, extolling my care and diligence,
that he did love me heartily for my owne sake, and more that he did will
me whatsoever I thought for Mr. Coventry's sake, for though the world
did think them enemies, and to have an ill aspect, one to another, yet
he did love him with all his heart, which was a strange manner of noble
compliment, confessing his owning me as a confidant and favourite of Mr.
Coventry's.

6th. Waked in the morning before 4 o'clock with great pain to piss, and
great pain in pissing by having, I think, drank too great a draught of
cold drink before going to bed. But by and by to sleep again, and then
rose and to the office, where very busy all the morning, and at noon
to dinner with Sir G. Carteret to his house with all our Board, where a
good pasty and brave discourse. But our great fear was some fresh news
of the fleete, but not from the fleete, all being said to be well and
beaten the Dutch, but I do not give much belief to it, and indeed the
news come from Sir W. Batten at Harwich, and writ so simply that we
all made good mirth of it. Thence to the office, where upon Sir G.
Carteret's accounts, to my great vexation there being nothing done by
the Controller to right the King therein. I thence to my office and
wrote letters all the afternoon, and in the evening by coach to Sir Ph.
Warwicke's about my Tangier business to get money, and so to my Lady
Sandwich's, who, poor lady, expects every hour to hear of my Lord; but
in the best temper, neither confident nor troubled with fear, that
I ever did see in my life. She tells me my Lord Rochester is now
declaredly out of hopes of Mrs. Mallett, and now she is to receive
notice in a day or two how the King stands inclined to the giving leave
for my Lord Hinchingbroke to look after her, and that being done to
bring it to an end shortly. Thence by coach home, and to my office a
little, and so before 12 o'clock home and to bed.

7th. This morning my wife and mother rose about two o'clock; and with
Mercer, Mary, the boy, and W. Hewer, as they had designed, took boat
and down to refresh themselves on the water to Gravesend. Lay till
7 o'clock, then up and to the office upon Sir G. Carteret's accounts
again, where very busy; thence abroad and to the 'Change, no news of
certainty being yet come from the fleete. Thence to the Dolphin Taverne,
where Sir J. Minnes, Lord Brunkard, Sir Thomas Harvy, and myself dined,
upon Sir G. Carteret's charge, and very merry we were, Sir Thomas Harvy
being a very drolle. Thence to the office, and meeting Creed away with
him to my Lord Treasurer's, there thinking to have met the goldsmiths,
at White Hall, but did not, and so appointed another time for my Lord to
speak to them to advance us some money. Thence, it being the hottest day
that ever I felt in my life, and it is confessed so by all other people
the hottest they ever knew in England in the beginning of June, we to
the New Exchange, and there drunk whey, with much entreaty getting it
for our money, and [they] would not be entreated to let us have one
glasse more. So took water and to Fox-Hall, to the Spring garden, and
there walked an houre or two with great pleasure, saving our minds ill
at ease concerning the fleete and my Lord Sandwich, that we have no
newes of them, and ill reports run up and down of his being killed, but
without ground. Here staid pleasantly walking and spending but 6d. till
nine at night, and then by water to White Hall, and there I stopped
to hear news of the fleete, but none come, which is strange, and so by
water home, where, weary with walking and with the mighty heat of the
weather, and for my wife's not coming home, I staying walking in the
garden till twelve at night, when it begun to lighten exceedingly,
through the greatness of the heat. Then despairing of her coming home,
I to bed. This day, much against my will, I did in Drury Lane see two
or three houses marked with a red cross upon the doors, and "Lord have
mercy upon us" writ there; which was a sad sight to me, being the first
of the kind that, to my remembrance, I ever saw. It put me into an ill
conception of myself and my smell, so that I was forced to buy some
roll-tobacco to smell to and chaw, which took away the apprehension.

8th. About five o'clock my wife come home, it having lightened all night
hard, and one great shower of rain. She come and lay upon the bed; I up
and to the office, where all the morning. Alone at home to dinner, my
wife, mother, and Mercer dining at W. Joyce's; I giving her a caution to
go round by the Half Moone to his house, because of the plague. I to
my Lord Treasurer's by appointment of Sir Thomas Ingram's, to meet the
Goldsmiths; where I met with the great news at last newly come, brought
by Bab May' from the Duke of Yorke, that we have totally routed the
Dutch; that the Duke himself, the Prince, my Lord Sandwich, and Mr.
Coventry are all well: which did put me into such joy, that I forgot
almost all other thoughts. The particulars I shall set down by and
by. By and by comes Alderman Maynell and Mr. Viner, and there my Lord
Treasurer did intreat them to furnish me with money upon my tallys, Sir
Philip Warwicke before my Lord declaring the King's changing of the hand
from Mr. Povy to me, whom he called a very sober person, and one whom
the Lord Treasurer would owne in all things that I should concern myself
with them in the business of money. They did at present declare they
could not part with money at present. My Lord did press them very hard,
and I hope upon their considering we shall get some of them. Thence with
great joy to the Cocke-pitt; where the Duke of Albemarle, like a man out
of himself with content, new-told me all; and by and by comes a letter
from Mr. Coventry's own hand to him, which he never opened (which was a
strange thing), but did give it me to open and read, and consider what
was fit for our office to do in it, and leave the letter with Sir W.
Clerke; which upon such a time and occasion was a strange piece of
indifference, hardly pardonable. I copied out the letter, and did also
take minutes out of Sir W. Clerke's other letters; and the sum of the
newes is:

                 VICTORY OVER THE DUTCH, JUNE 3RD, 1665.

This day they engaged; the Dutch neglecting greatly the opportunity
of the wind they had of us, by which they lost the benefit of their
fire-ships. The Earl of Falmouth, Muskerry, and Mr. Richard Boyle killed
on board the Duke's ship, the Royall Charles, with one shot: their blood
and brains flying in the Duke's face; and the head of Mr. Boyle
striking down the Duke, as some say. Earle of Marlborough, Portland,
Rear-Admirall Sansum (to Prince Rupert) killed, and Capt. Kirby and
Ableson. Sir John Lawson wounded on the knee; hath had some bones taken
out, and is likely to be well again. Upon receiving the hurt, he sent to
the Duke for another to command the Royall Oake. The Duke sent Jordan

     [Afterwards Sir Joseph Jordan, commander of the "Royal Sovereign,"
     and Vice-Admiral of the Red, 1672.  He was knighted on July 1st,
     1665.--B.]

out of the St. George, who did brave things in her. Capt. Jer. Smith
of the Mary was second to the Duke, and stepped between him and Captain
Seaton of the Urania (76 guns and 400 men), who had sworn to board the
Duke; killed him, 200 men, and took the ship; himself losing 99 men, and
never an officer saved but himself and lieutenant. His master indeed is
saved, with his leg cut off: Admirall Opdam blown up, Trump killed,
and said by Holmes; all the rest of their admiralls, as they say, but
Everson (whom they dare not trust for his affection to the Prince of
Orange), are killed: we having taken and sunk, as is believed, about 24
of their best ships; killed and taken near 8 or 10,000 men, and lost, we
think, not above 700. A great[er] victory never known in the world. They
are all fled, some 43 got into the Texell, and others elsewhere, and we
in pursuit of the rest. Thence, with my heart full of joy; home, and to
my office a little; then to my Lady Pen's, where they are all joyed and
not a little puffed up at the good successe of their father;

     [In the royal charter granted by Charles II. in 1680 to William Penn
     for the government of his American province, to be styled
     Pennsylvania, special reference is made to "the memory and merits of
     Sir William Penn in divers services, and particularly his conduct,
     courage, and discretion under our dearest brother, James, Duke of
     York, in that signal battle and victory fought and obtained against
     the Dutch fleet commanded by Heer van Opdam in 1665" ("Penn's
     Memorials of Sir W. Penn," vol. ii., p. 359).]

and good service indeed is said to have been done by him. Had a great
bonefire at the gate; and I with my Lady Pen's people and others to Mrs.
Turner's great room, and then down into the streete. I did give the boys
4s. among them, and mighty merry. So home to bed, with my heart at great
rest and quiett, saving that the consideration of the victory is too
great for me presently to comprehend.

     [Mrs. Ady (Julia Cartwright), in her fascinating life of Henrietta,
     Duchess of Orleans, gives an account of the receipt of the news of
     the great sea-fight in Paris, and quotes a letter of Charles II. to
     his sister, dated, "Whitehall, June 8th, 1665"  The first report
     that reached Paris was that "the Duke of York's ship had been blown
     up, and he himself had been drowned."  "The shock was too much for
     Madame...  she was seized with convulsions, and became so
     dangerously ill that Lord Hollis wrote to the king, 'If things had
     gone ill at sea I really believe Madame would have died.'"  Charles
     wrote: "I thanke God we have now the certayne newes of a very
     considerable victory over the Duch; you will see most of the
     particulars by the relation my Lord Hopis will shew you, though I
     have had as great a losse as 'tis possible in a good frinde, poore
     C. Barckely.  It troubles me so much, as I hope you will excuse the
     shortnesse of this letter, haveing receaved the newes of it but two
     houres agoe" ("Madame," 1894, pp.  215, 216).]

9th. Lay long in bed, my head akeing with too much thoughts I think
last night. Up and to White Hall, and my Lord Treasurer's to Sir Ph.
Warwicke, about Tangier business, and in my way met with Mr. Moore, who
eases me in one point wherein I was troubled; which was, that I heard
of nothing said or done by my Lord Sandwich: but he tells me that Mr.
Cowling, my Lord Chamberlain's secretary, did hear the King say that my
Lord Sandwich had done nobly and worthily. The King, it seems, is much
troubled at the fall of my Lord of Falmouth; but I do not meet with any
man else that so much as wishes him alive again, the world conceiving
him a man of too much pleasure to do the King any good, or offer any
good office to him. But I hear of all hands he is confessed to have been
a man of great honour, that did show it in this his going with the Duke,
the most that ever any man did. Home, where my people busy to make ready
a supper against night for some guests, in lieu of my stonefeast. At
noon eat a small dinner at home, and so abroad to buy several things,
and among others with my taylor to buy a silke suit, which though I had
one lately, yet I do, for joy of the good newes we have lately had
of our victory over the Dutch, which makes me willing to spare myself
something extraordinary in clothes; and after long resolution of having
nothing but black, I did buy a coloured silk ferrandin. So to the Old
Exchange, and there at my pretty seamstresses bought a pair of stockings
of her husband, and so home, where by and by comes Mr. Honiwood and Mrs.
Wilde, and Roger Pepys and, after long time spent, Mrs. Turner, The.
and Joyce. We had a very good venison pasty, this being instead of my
stone-feast the last March, and very merry we were, and the more I know
the more I like Mr. Honiwood's conversation. So after a good supper they
parted, walking to the 'Change for a coach, and I with them to see them
there. So home and to bed, glad it was over.

10th. Lay long in bed, and then up and at the office all the morning.
At noon dined at home, and then to the office busy all the afternoon.
In the evening home to supper; and there, to my great trouble, hear that
the plague is come into the City (though it hath these three or four
weeks since its beginning been wholly out of the City); but where
should it begin but in my good friend and neighbour's, Dr. Burnett,
in Fanchurch Street: which in both points troubles me mightily. To the
office to finish my letters and then home to bed, being troubled at
the sicknesse, and my head filled also with other business enough, and
particularly how to put my things and estate in order, in case it should
please God to call me away, which God dispose of to his glory!

11th (Lord's day). Up, and expected long a new suit; but, coming not,
dressed myself in my late new black silke camelott suit; and, when fully
ready, comes my new one of coloured ferrandin, which my wife puts me out
of love with, which vexes me, but I think it is only my not being used
to wear colours which makes it look a little unusual upon me. To my
chamber and there spent the morning reading. At noon, by invitation,
comes my two cozen Joyces and their wives, my aunt James and he-cozen
Harman, his wife being ill. I had a good dinner for them, and as merry
as I could be in such company. They being gone, I out of doors a little,
to shew, forsooth, my new suit, and back again, and in going I saw poor
Dr. Burnett's door shut; but he hath, I hear, gained great goodwill
among his neighbours; for he discovered it himself first, and caused
himself to be shut up of his own accord: which was very handsome. In
the evening comes Mr. Andrews and his wife and Mr. Hill, and staid and
played, and sung and supped, most excellent pretty company, so pleasant,
ingenious, and harmless, I cannot desire better. They gone we to bed, my
mind in great present ease.

12th. Up, and in my yesterday's new suit to the Duke of Albemarle, and
after a turne in White Hall, and then in Westminster Hall, returned, and
with my taylor bought some gold lace for my sleeve hands in Pater Noster
Row. So home to dinner, and then to the office, and down the River to
Deptford, and then back again and to my Lord Treasurer's, and up and
down to look after my Tangier business, and so home to my office, then
to supper and to bed. The Duke of Yorke is sent for last night and
expected to be here to-morrow.

13th. Up and to the office, where all the morning doing business. At
noon with Sir G. Carteret to my Lord Mayor's to dinner, where much
company in a little room, and though a good, yet no extraordinary table.
His name, Sir John Lawrence, whose father, a very ordinary old man, sat
there at table, but it seems a very rich man. Here were at table
three Sir Richard Brownes, viz.: he of the Councill, a clerk, and the
Alderman, and his son; and there was a little grandson also Richard, who
will hereafter be Sir Richard Browne. The Alderman did here openly tell
in boasting how he had, only upon suspicion of disturbances, if there
had been any bad newes from sea, clapped up several persons that he was
afeard of; and that he had several times done the like and would do, and
take no bail where he saw it unsafe for the King. But by and by he said
that he was now sued in the Exchequer by a man for false imprisonment,
that he had, upon the same score, imprisoned while he was Mayor four
years ago, and asked advice upon it. I told him I believed there was
none, and told my story of Field, at which he was troubled, and said
that it was then unsafe for any man to serve the King, and, I believed,
knows not what to do therein; but that Sir Richard Browne, of the
Councill, advised him to speak with my Lord Chancellor about it. My Lord
Mayor very respectfull to me; and so I after dinner away and found Sir
J. Minnes ready with his coach and four horses at our office gate, for
him and me to go out of towne to meet the Duke of Yorke coming from
Harwich to-night, and so as far as Ilford, and there 'light. By and by
comes to us Sir John Shaw and Mr. Neale, that married the rich widow
Gold, upon the same errand. After eating a dish of creame, we took
coach again, hearing nothing of the Duke, and away home, a most pleasant
evening and road. And so to my office, where, after my letters wrote,
to supper and to bed. All our discourse in our way was Sir J. Minnes's
telling me passages of the late King's and his father's, which I was
mightily pleased to hear for information, though the pride of some
persons and vice of most was but a sad story to tell how that brought
the whole kingdom and King to ruine.

14th. Up, and to Sir Ph. Warwicke's and other places, about Tangier
business, but to little purpose. Among others to my Lord Treasurer's,
there to speak with him, and waited in the lobby three long hours for to
speake with him, to the trial of my utmost patience, but missed him at
last, and forced to go home without it, which may teach me how I make
others wait. Home to dinner and staid Mr. Hater with me, and after
dinner drew up a petition for Mr. Hater to present to the Councill about
his troublesome business of powder, desiring a trial that his absence
may be vindicated, and so to White Hall, but it was not proper to
present it to-day. Here I met with Mr. Cowling, who observed to me how
he finds every body silent in the praise of my Lord Sandwich, to set up
the Duke and the Prince; but that the Duke did both to the King and my
Lord Chancellor write abundantly of my Lord's courage and service.

     [Charles II.'s letter of thanks to Lord Sandwich, dated "Whitehall,
     June 9th, 1665," written entirely in the king's hand, is printed in
     Ellis's "Original Letters," 1st series, vol. iii., p. 327.]

And I this day met with a letter of Captain Ferrers, wherein he tells
[us] my Lord was with his ship in all the heat of the day, and did most
worthily. Met with Creed, and he and I to Westminster; and there saw my
Lord Marlborough

     [Of the four distinguished men who died after the late action with
     the Dutch and were buried in Westminster Abbey, the Earl of
     Marlborough was interred on June 14th, Viscount Muskerry on the
     19th, the Earl of Falmouth on the 22nd, and Sir Edward Broughton on
     the 26th.  After the entries in the Abbey Registers is this note:
     "These four last Honble Persons dyed in his Majy's service against
     the Dutch, excepting only that ST Ed Br received his death's wound
     at sea, but dyed here at home" (Chester's "Westminster Abbey
     Registers," p. 162).]

brought to be buried, several Lords of the Council carrying him, and
with the herald in some state. Thence, vexed in my mind to think that
I do so little in my Tangier business, and so home, and after supper to
bed.

15th. Up, and put on my new stuff suit with close knees, which becomes
me most nobly, as my wife says. At the office all day. At noon, put on
my first laced band, all lace; and to Kate Joyce's to dinner, where my
mother, wife, and abundance of their friends, and good usage. Thence,
wife and Mercer and I to the Old Exchange, and there bought two lace
bands more, one of my semstresse, whom my wife concurs with me to be
a pretty woman. So down to Deptford and Woolwich, my boy and I. At
Woolwich, discoursed with Mr. Sheldon about my bringing my wife down for
a month or two to his house, which he approves of, and, I think, will be
very convenient. So late back, and to the office, wrote letters, and
so home to supper and to bed. This day the Newes book upon Mr. Moore's
showing L'Estrange

     ["The Public Intelligencer," published by Roger L'Estrange, the
     predecessor of the "London Gazette."]

(Captain Ferrers's letter) did do my Lord Sandwich great right as to the
late victory. The Duke of Yorke not yet come to towne. The towne grows
very sickly, and people to be afeard of it; there dying this last
week of the plague 112, from 43 the week before, whereof but [one] in
Fanchurch-streete, and one in Broad-streete, by the Treasurer's office.

16th. Up and to the office, where I set hard to business, but was
informed that the Duke of Yorke is come, and hath appointed us to attend
him this afternoon. So after dinner, and doing some business at the
office, I to White Hall, where the Court is full of the Duke and his
courtiers returned from sea. All fat and lusty, and ruddy by being in
the sun. I kissed his hands, and we waited all the afternoon. By and by
saw Mr. Coventry, which rejoiced my very heart. Anon he and I, from all
the rest of the company, walked into the Matted Gallery; where after
many expressions of love, we fell to talk of business. Among other
things, how my Lord Sandwich, both in his counsells and personal
service, hath done most honourably and serviceably. Sir J. Lawson is
come to Greenwich; but his wound in his knee yet very bad. Jonas Poole,
in the Vantguard, did basely, so as to be, or will be, turned out of his
ship. Captain Holmes

     [Captain Robert Holmes (afterwards knighted).  Sir William Coventry,
     in a letter to Lord Arlington (dated from "The Royal Charles,"
     Southwold Bay, June 13th), writes: "Capt. Holmes asked to be rear
     admiral of the white squadron in place of Sansum who was killed, but
     the Duke gave the place to Captain Harman, on which he delivered up
     his commission, which the Duke received, and put Captain Langhorne
     in his stead" ("Calendar of State Papers," Domestic, 1664-65, p.
     423).]

expecting upon Sansum's death to be made Rear-admirall to the Prince
(but Harman is

     [John Harman, afterwards knighted.  He had served with great
     reputation in several naval fights, and was desperately wounded in
     1673, while]

put in) hath delivered up to the Duke his commission, which the Duke
took and tore. He, it seems, had bid the Prince, who first told him of
Holmes's intention, that he should dissuade him from it; for that he
was resolved to take it if he offered it. Yet Holmes would do it, like
a rash, proud coxcombe. But he is rich, and hath, it seems, sought an
occasion of leaving the service. Several of our captains have done ill.
The great ships are the ships do the business, they quite deadening the
enemy. They run away upon sight of "The Prince."

     ["The Prince" was Lord Sandwich's ship; the captain was Roger
     Cuttance.  It was put up at Chatham for repair at this date.]

It is strange to see how people do already slight Sir William Barkeley,

     [Sir William Berkeley, see note, vol.  iii., p.  334.  His behaviour
     after the death of his brother, Lord Falmouth, is severely commented
     on in "Poems on State Affairs," vol. i., p. 29

              "Berkeley had heard it soon, and thought not good
               To venture more of royal Harding's blood;
               To be immortal he was not of age,
               And did e'en now the Indian Prize presage;
               And judged it safe and decent, cost what cost,
               To lose the day, since his dear brother's lost.
               With his whole squadron straight away he bore,
               And, like good boy, promised to fight no more."--B.]

my Lord FitzHarding's brother, who, three months since, was the delight
of the Court. Captain Smith of "The Mary" the Duke talks mightily of;
and some great thing will be done for him. Strange to hear how the Dutch
do relate, as the Duke says, that they are the conquerors; and bonefires
are made in Dunkirke in their behalf; though a clearer victory can never
be expected. Mr. Coventry thinks they cannot have lost less than 6000
men, and we not dead above 200, and wounded about 400; in all about 600.
Thence home and to my office till past twelve, and then home to supper
and to bed, my wife and mother not being yet come home from W. Hewer's
chamber, who treats my mother tonight. Captain Grovel the Duke told us
this day, hath done the basest thing at Lowestoffe, in hearing of the
guns, and could not (as others) be got out, but staid there; for which
he will be tried; and is reckoned a prating coxcombe, and of no courage.

17th. My wife come to bed about one in the morning. I up and abroad
about Tangier business, then back to the office, where we sat, and at
noon home to dinner, and then abroad to Mr. Povy's, after I and Mr.
Andrews had been with Mr. Ball and one Major Strange, who looks after
the getting of money for tallys and is helping Mr. Andrews. I had much
discourse with Ball, and it may be he may prove a necessary man for our
turns. With Mr. Povy I spoke very freely my indifference as to my place
of Treasurer, being so much troubled in it, which he took with much
seeming trouble, that I should think of letting go so lightly the place,
but if the place can't be held I will. So hearing that my Lord Treasurer
was gone out of town with his family because of the sicknesse, I
returned home without staying there, and at the office find Sir W.
Pen come home, who looks very well; and I am gladder to see him than
otherwise I should be because of my hearing so well of him for his
serviceablenesse in this late great action. To the office late, and then
home to bed. It struck me very deep this afternoon going with a hackney
coach from my Lord Treasurer's down Holborne, the coachman I found to
drive easily and easily, at last stood still, and come down hardly able
to stand, and told me that he was suddenly struck very sicke, and almost
blind, he could not see; so I 'light and went into another coach, with
a sad heart for the poor man and trouble for myself, lest he should have
been struck with the plague, being at the end of the towne that I took
him up; but God have mercy upon us all! Sir John Lawson, I hear, is
worse than yesterday: the King went to see him to-day most kindly. It
seems his wound is not very bad; but he hath a fever, a thrush, and a
hickup, all three together, which are, it seems, very bad symptoms.

18th (Lord's day). Up, and to church, where Sir W. Pen was the first
time [since he] come from sea, after the battle. Mr. Mills made a sorry
sermon to prove that there was a world to come after this. Home and
dined and then to my chamber, where all the afternoon. Anon comes Mr.
Andrews to see and sing with me, but Mr. Hill not coming, and having
business, we soon parted, there coming Mr. Povy and Creed to discourse
about our Tangier business of money. They gone, I hear Sir W. Batten and
my Lady are returned from Harwich. I went to see them, and it is pretty
to see how we appear kind one to another, though neither of us care 2d.
one for another. Home to supper, and there coming a hasty letter from
Commissioner Pett for pressing of some calkers (as I would ever on
his Majesty's service), with all speed, I made a warrant presently and
issued it. So to my office a little, and then home to bed.

19th. Up, and to White Hall with Sir W. Batten (calling at my Lord
Ashly's, but to no purpose, by the way, he being not up), and there had
our usual meeting before the Duke with the officers of the Ordnance
with us, which in some respects I think will be the better for us, for
despatch sake. Thence home to the 'Change and dined alone (my wife gone
to her mother's), after dinner to my little new goldsmith's,

     [John Colvill of Lombard Street, see ante, May 24th.  He lost
     L85,832  17s. 2d.  by the closing of the Exchequer in 1672, and he
     died between 1672 and 1677 (Price's "Handbook of London Bankers ").]

whose wife indeed is one of the prettiest, modest black women that ever
I saw. I paid for a dozen of silver salts L6 14s. 6d. Thence with Sir
W. Pen from the office down to Greenwich to see Sir J. Lawson, who is
better, but continues ill; his hickupp not being yet gone, could have
little discourse with him. So thence home and to supper, a while to the
office, my head and mind mightily vexed to see the multitude of papers
and business before [me] and so little time to do it in. So to bed.

20th. Thankes-giving-day for victory over ye Dutch. Up, and to the
office, where very busy alone all the morning till church time, and
there heard a mean sorry sermon of Mr. Mills. Then to the Dolphin
Taverne, where all we officers of the Navy met with the Commissioners
of the Ordnance by agreement, and dined: where good musique at my
direction. Our club--[share]

             ["Next these a sort of Sots there are,
               Who crave more wine than they can bear,
               Yet hate, when drunk, to pay or spend
               Their equal Club or Dividend,
               But wrangle, when the Bill is brought,
               And think they're cheated when they're not."

     The Delights of the Bottle, or the Compleat Vintner, 3rd ed., 1721,
     p. 29.]

--come to 34s. a man, nine of us. Thence after dinner, to White Hall
with Sir W. Berkely in his coach, and so walked to Herbert's and there
spent a little time.... Thence by water to Fox-hall, and there walked
an hour alone, observing the several humours of the citizens that were
there this holyday, pulling of cherries,--[The game of bob-cherry]--and
God knows what, and so home to my office, where late, my wife not being
come home with my mother, who have been this day all abroad upon the
water, my mother being to go out of town speedily. So I home and to
supper and to bed, my wife come home when I come from the office. This
day I informed myself that there died four or five at Westminster of the
plague in one alley in several houses upon Sunday last, Bell Alley, over
against the Palace-gate; yet people do think that the number will be
fewer in the towne than it was the last weeke! The Dutch are come out
again with 20 sail under Bankert; supposed gone to the Northward to
meete their East India fleete.

21st. Up, and very busy all the morning. At noon with Creed to the
Excise Office, where I find our tallys will not be money in less than
sixteen months, which is a sad thing for the King to pay all that
interest for every penny he spends; and, which is strange, the
goldsmiths with whom I spoke, do declare that they will not be moved
to part with money upon the increase of their consideration of ten per
cent. which they have, and therefore desire I would not move in it, and
indeed the consequence would be very ill to the King, and have its ill
consequences follow us through all the King's revenue. Home, and my
uncle Wight and aunt James dined with me, my mother being to go
away to-morrow. So to White Hall, and there before and after Council
discoursed with Sir Thomas Ingram about our ill case as to Tangier for
money. He hath got the King to appoint a meeting on Friday, which I hope
will put an end one way or other to my pain. So homewards and to the
Cross Keys at Cripplegate, where I find all the towne almost going out
of towne, the coaches and waggons being all full of people going into
the country. Here I had some of the company of the tapster's wife a
while, and so home to my office, and then home to supper and to bed.

22nd. Up pretty betimes, and in great pain whether to send my another
into the country to-day or no, I hearing, by my people, that she, poor
wretch, hath a mind to stay a little longer, and I cannot blame her,
considering what a life she will through her own folly lead when she
comes home again, unlike the pleasure and liberty she hath had here. At
last I resolved to put it to her, and she agreed to go, so I would not
oppose it, because of the sicknesse in the towne, and my intentions of
removing my wife. So I did give her money and took a kind leave of her,
she, poor wretch, desiring that I would forgive my brother John, but I
refused it to her, which troubled her, poor soul, but I did it in kind
words and so let the discourse go off, she leaving me though in a great
deal of sorrow. So I to my office and left my wife and people to see her
out of town, and I at the office all the morning. At noon my wife tells
me that she is with much ado gone, and I pray God bless her, but it
seems she was to the last unwilling to go, but would not say so, but put
it off till she lost her place in the coach, and was fain to ride in the
waggon part. After dinner to the office again till night, very busy, and
so home not very late to supper and to bed.

23rd. Up and to White Hall to a Committee for Tangier, where his Royal
Highness was. Our great design was to state to them the true condition
of this Committee for want of money, the want whereof was so great as to
need some sudden help, and it was with some content resolved to see it
supplied and means proposed towards the doing of it. At this Committee,
unknown to me, comes my Lord of Sandwich, who, it seems, come to towne
last night. After the Committee was up, my Lord Sandwich did take me
aside, and we walked an hour alone together in the robe-chamber, the
door shut, telling me how much the Duke and Mr. Coventry did, both in
the fleete and here, make of him, and that in some opposition to the
Prince; and as a more private message, he told me that he hath been with
them both when they have made sport of the Prince and laughed at him:
yet that all the discourse of the towne, and the printed relation,
should not give him one word of honour my Lord thinks mighty strange;
he assuring me, that though by accident the Prince was in the van the
beginning of the fight for the first pass, yet all the rest of the day
my Lord was in the van, and continued so. That notwithstanding all this
noise of the Prince, he had hardly a shot in his side nor a man killed,
whereas he hath above 30 in her hull, and not one mast whole nor yard;
but the most battered ship of the fleet, and lost most men, saving
Captain Smith of "The Mary." That the most the Duke did was almost out
of gun-shot; but that, indeed, the Duke did come up to my Lord's rescue
after he had a great while fought with four of them. How poorly Sir John
Lawson performed, notwithstanding all that was said of him; and how his
ship turned out of the way, while Sir J. Lawson himself was upon the
deck, to the endangering of the whole fleete. It therefore troubles my
Lord that Mr. Coventry should not mention a word of him in his relation.
I did, in answer, offer that I was sure the relation was not compiled
by Mr. Coventry, but by L'Estrange, out of several letters, as I could
witness; and that Mr. Coventry's letter that he did give the Duke of
Albemarle did give him as much right as the Prince, for I myself read
it first and then copied it out, which I promised to show my Lord, with
which he was somewhat satisfied. From that discourse my Lord did begin
to tell me how much he was concerned to dispose of his children, and
would have my advice and help; and propounded to match my Lady Jemimah
to Sir G. Carteret's eldest son, which I approved of, and did undertake
the speaking with him about it as from myself, which my Lord liked. So
parted, with my head full of care about this business. Thence home to
the 'Change, and so to dinner, and thence by coach to Mr. Povy's.
Thence by appointment with him and Creed to one Mr. Finch; one of the
Commissioners for the Excise, to be informed about some things of the
Excise, in order to our settling matters therein better for us for our
Tangier business. I find him a very discreet, grave person. Thence well
satisfied I and Creed to Mr. Fox at White Hall to speak with him about
the same matter, and having some pretty satisfaction from him also,
he and I took boat and to Fox Hall, where we spent two or three hours
talking of several matters very soberly and contentfully to me, which,
with the ayre and pleasure of the garden, was a great refreshment to me,
and, 'methinks, that which we ought to joy ourselves in. Thence back
to White Hall, where we parted, and I to find my Lord to receive his
farther direction about his proposal this morning. Wherein I did that I
should first by another hand break my intentions to Sir G. Carteret. I
pitched upon Dr. Clerke, which my Lord liked, and so I endeavoured but
in vain to find him out to-night. So home by hackney-coach, which is
become a very dangerous passage now-a-days, the sickness increasing
mightily, and to bed.

24th (Midsummer-day). Up very betimes, by six, and at Dr. Clerke's at
Westminster by 7 of the clock, having over night by a note acquainted
him with my intention of coming, and there I, in the best manner I
could, broke my errand about a match between Sir G. Carteret's eldest
son and my Lord Sandwich's eldest daughter, which he (as I knew he
would) took with great content: and we both agreed that my Lord and he,
being both men relating to the sea, under a kind aspect of His Majesty,
already good friends, and both virtuous and good familys, their allyance
might be of good use to us; and he did undertake to find out Sir George
this morning, and put the business in execution. So being both well
pleased with the proposition, I saw his niece there and made her sing me
two or three songs very prettily, and so home to the office, where to
my great trouble I found Mr. Coventry and the board met before I come.
I excused my late coming by having been on the River about office
business. So to business all the morning. At noon Captain Ferrers and
Mr. Moore dined with me, the former of them the first time I saw him
since his corning from sea, who do give me the best conversation in
general, and as good an account of the particular service of the Prince
and my Lord of Sandwich in the late sea-fight that I could desire. After
dinner they parted. So I to White Hall, where I with Creed and Povy
attended my Lord Treasurer, and did prevail with him to let us have an
assignment for 15 or L20,000, which, I hope, will do our business
for Tangier. So to Dr. Clerke, and there found that he had broke the
business to Sir G. Carteret, and that he takes the thing mighty well.
Thence I to Sir G. Carteret at his chamber, and in the best manner I
could, and most obligingly, moved the business: he received it with
great respect and content, and thanks to me, and promised that he would
do what he could possibly for his son, to render him fit for my Lord's
daughter, and shewed great kindness to me, and sense of my kindness to
him herein. Sir William Pen told me this day that Mr. Coventry is to be
sworn a Privy Counsellor, at which my soul is glad. So home and to my
letters by the post, and so home to supper and bed.

25th (Lord's day). Up, and several people about business come to me
by appointment relating to the office. Thence I to my closet about my
Tangier papers. At noon dined, and then I abroad by water, it raining
hard, thinking to have gone down to Woolwich, but I did not, but back
through bridge to White Hall, where, after I had again visited Sir
G. Carteret, and received his (and now his Lady's) full content in my
proposal, I went to my Lord Sandwich, and having told him how Sir G.
Carteret received it, he did direct me to return to Sir G. Carteret, and
give him thanks for his kind reception of this offer, and that he would
the next day be willing to enter discourse with him about the business.
Which message I did presently do, and so left the business with great
joy to both sides. My Lord, I perceive, intends to give L5000 with
her, and expects about L800 per annum joynture. So by water home and to
supper and bed, being weary with long walking at Court, but had a Psalm
or two with my boy and Mercer before bed, which pleased me mightily.
This night Sir G. Carteret told me with great kindnesse that the order
of the Council did run for the making of Hater and Whitfield incapable
of any serving the King again, but that he had stopped the entry of it,
which he told me with great kindnesse, but the thing troubles me. After
dinner, before I went to White Hall, I went down to Greenwich by water,
thinking to have visited Sir J. Lawson, where, when I come, I find that
he is dead, and died this morning, at which I was much surprized;
and indeed the nation hath a great loss; though I cannot, without
dissembling, say that I am sorry for it, for he was a man never kind to
me at all. Being at White Hall, I visited Mr. Coventry, who, among other
talk, entered about the great question now in the House about the Duke's
going to sea again; about which the whole House is divided. He did
concur with me that, for the Duke's honour and safety, it were best,
after so great a service and victory and danger, not to go again; and,
above all, that the life of the Duke cannot but be a security to the
Crowne; if he were away, it being more easy to attempt anything upon
the King; but how the fleete will be governed without him, the
Prince--[Rupert]--being a man of no government and severe in council,
that no ordinary man can offer any advice against his; saying truly that
it had been better he had gone to Guinny, and that were he away, it were
easy to say how matters might be ordered, my Lord Sandwich being a man
of temper and judgment as much as any man he ever knew, and that upon
good observation he said this, and that his temper must correct the
Prince's. But I perceive he is much troubled what will be the event of
the question. And so I left him.

26th. Up and to White Hall with Sir J. Minnes, and to the Committee of
Tangier, where my Lord Treasurer was, the first and only time he ever
was there, and did promise us L15,000 for Tangier and no more, which
will be short. But if I can pay Mr. Andrews all his money I care for no
more, and the bills of Exchange. Thence with Mr. Povy and Creed below to
a new chamber of Mr. Povy's, very pretty, and there discourse about his
business, not to his content, but with the most advantage I could to
him, and Creed also did the like. Thence with Creed to the King's Head,
and there dined with him at the ordinary, and good sport with one Mr.
Nicholls, a prating coxcombe, that would be thought a poet, but would
not be got to repeat any of his verses. Thence I home, and there find
my wife's brother and his wife, a pretty little modest woman, where they
dined with my wife. He did come to desire my assistance for a living,
and, upon his good promises of care, and that it should be no burden to
me, I did say and promise I would think of finding something for him,
and the rather because his wife seems a pretty discreet young thing, and
humble, and he, above all things, desirous to do something to maintain
her, telling me sad stories of what she endured with him in Holland, and
I hope it will not be burdensome. So down by water to Woolwich, walking
to and again from Greenwich thither and back again, my business being to
speak again with Sheldon, who desires and expects my wife coming thither
to spend the summer, and upon second thoughts I do agree that it will
be a good place for her and me too. So, weary, home, and to my office
a while, till almost midnight, and so to bed. The plague encreases
mightily, I this day seeing a house, at a bitt-maker's over against St.
Clement's Church, in the open street, shut up; which is a sad sight.

27th. Up and to the office, where all the morning. At noon dined by
chance at my Lady Batten's, and they sent for my wife, and there was my
Lady Pen and Pegg. Very merry, and so I to my office again, where till
12 o'clock at night, and so home to supper and to bed.

28th. Sir J. Minnes carried me and my wife to White Hall, and thence his
coach along with my wife where she would. There after attending the Duke
to discourse of the navy. We did not kiss his hand, nor do I think, for
all their pretence, of going away to-morrow. Yet I believe they will not
go for good and all, but I did take my leave of Sir William Coventry,
who, it seems, was knighted and sworn a Privy-Counsellor two days since;
who with his old kindness treated me, and I believe I shall ever find
[him] a noble friend. Thence by water to Blackfriars, and so to Paul's
churchyard and bespoke severall books, and so home and there dined,
my man William giving me a lobster sent him by my old maid Sarah. This
morning I met with Sir G. Carteret, who tells me how all things proceed
between my Lord Sandwich and himself to full content, and both sides
depend upon having the match finished presently, and professed great
kindnesse to me, and said that now we were something akin. I am
mightily, both with respect to myself and much more of my Lord's family,
glad of this alliance. After dinner to White Hall, thinking to
speak with my Lord Ashly, but failed, and I whiled away some time in
Westminster Hall against he did come, in my way observing several plague
houses in King's Street and [near] the Palace. Here I hear Mrs. Martin
is gone out of town, and that her husband, an idle fellow, is since come
out of France, as he pretends, but I believe not that he hath been. I
was fearful of going to any house, but I did to the Swan, and thence to
White Hall, giving the waterman a shilling, because a young fellow and
belonging to the Plymouth. Thence by coach to several places, and so
home, and all the evening with Sir J. Minnes and all the women of the
house (excepting my Lady Batten) late in the garden chatting. At 12
o'clock home to supper and to bed. My Lord Sandwich is gone towards the
sea to-day, it being a sudden resolution, I having taken no leave of
him.

29th. Up and by water to White Hall, where the Court full of waggons and
people ready to go out of towne. To the Harp and Ball, and there drank
and talked with Mary, she telling me in discourse that she lived
lately at my neighbour's, Mr. Knightly, which made me forbear further
discourse. This end of the towne every day grows very bad of the plague.
The Mortality Bill is come to 267;

     [According to the Bills of Mortality, the total number of deaths in
     London for the week ending June 27th was 684, of which number 267
     were deaths from the plague.  The number of deaths rose week by week
     until September 19th, when the total was 8,297, and the deaths from
     the plague 7,165.  On September 26th the total had fallen to 6,460,
     and deaths from the plague to 5,533 The number fell gradually, week
     by week, till October 31st, when the total was 1,388, and deaths
     from the plague 1,031.  On November 7th there was a rise to 1,787
     and 1,414 respectively.  On November 14th the numbers had gone down
     to 1,359 and 1,050 respectively.  On December 12th the total had
     fallen to 442, and deaths from the plague to 243.  On December 19th
     there was a rise to 525 and 281 respectively.  The total of burials
     in 1665 was 97,506, of which number the plague claimed 68,596
     victims.]

which is about ninety more than the last: and of these but four in the
City, which is a great blessing to us. Thence to Creed, and with him up
and down about Tangier business, to no purpose. Took leave again of Mr.
Coventry; though I hope the Duke has not gone to stay, and so do others
too. So home, calling at Somersett House, where all are packing up
too: the Queene-Mother setting out for France this day to drink Bourbon
waters this year, she being in a consumption; and intends not to come
till winter come twelvemonths.

     [The Queen-Mother never came to England again.  She retired to her
     chateau at Colombes, near Paris, where she died in August, 1669,
     after a long illness; the immediate cause of her death being an
     opiate ordered by her physicians.  She was buried, September 12th,
     in the church of St. Denis.  Her funeral sermon was preached by
     Bossuet.  Sir John Reresby speaks of Queen Henrietta Maria in high
     terms.  He says that in the winter, 1659-60, although the Court of
     France was very splendid, there was a greater resort to the Palais
     Royal, "the good humour and wit of our Queen Mother, and the beauty
     of the Princess [Henrietta] her daughter, giving greater invitation
     than the more particular humour of the French Queen, being a
     Spaniard."  In another place he says: "Her majesty had a great
     affection for England, notwithstanding the severe usage she and hers
     had received from it.  Her discourse was much with the great men and
     ladies of France in praise of the people and of the country; of
     their courage, generosity, good nature; and would excuse all their
     miscarriages in relation to unfortunate effects of the late war, as
     if it were a convulsion of some desperate and infatuated persons,
     rather than from the genius and temper of the kingdom" ("Memoirs of
     Sir John Reresby," ed.  Cartwright, pp. 43, 45).]

So by coach home, where at the office all the morning, and at noon
Mrs. Hunt dined with us. Very merry, and she a very good woman. To the
office, where busy a while putting some things in my office in order,
and then to letters till night. About 10 a'clock home, the days being
sensibly shorter before I have once kept a summer's day by shutting
up office by daylight; but my life hath been still as it was in winter
almost. But I will for a month try what I can do by daylight. So home to
supper and to bed.

30th. Up and to White Hall, to the Duke of Albemarle, who I find at
Secretary Bennet's, there being now no other great Statesman, I think,
but my Lord Chancellor, in towne. I received several commands from
them; among others, to provide some bread and cheese for the garrison at
Guernsey, which they promised to see me paid for. So to the 'Change, and
home to dinner. In the afternoon I down to Woolwich and after me my wife
and Mercer, whom I led to Mr. Sheldon's to see his house, and I find
it a very pretty place for them to be at. So I back again, walking both
forward and backward, and left my wife to come by water. I straight to
White Hall, late, to Secretary Bennet's to give him an account of the
business I received from him to-day, and there staid weary and sleepy
till past 12 at night. Then writ my mind to him, and so back by water
and in the dark and against tide shot the bridge, groping with their
pole for the way, which troubled me before I got through. So home, about
one or two o'clock in the morning, my family at a great losse what was
become of me. To supper, and to bed. Thus this book of two years ends.
Myself and family in good health, consisting of myself and wife, Mercer,
her woman, Mary, Alice, and Susan our maids, and Tom my boy. In a sickly
time of the plague growing on. Having upon my hands the troublesome care
of the Treasury of Tangier, with great sums drawn upon me, and nothing
to pay them with: also the business of the office great. Consideration
of removing my wife to Woolwich; she lately busy in learning to paint,
with great pleasure and successe. All other things well; especially a
new interest I am making, by a match in hand between the eldest son of
Sir G. Carteret, and my Lady Jemimah Montage. The Duke of Yorke gone
down to the fleete, but all suppose not with intent to stay there, as it
is not fit, all men conceive, he should.




JULY 1665

July 1st, 1665. Called up betimes, though weary and sleepy, by
appointment by Mr. Povy and Colonell Norwood to discourse about some
payments of Tangier. They gone, I to the office and there sat all the
morning. At noon dined at home, and then to the Duke of Albemarle's,
by appointment, to give him an account of some disorder in the Yarde at
Portsmouth, by workmen's going away of their owne accord, for lacke of
money, to get work of hay-making, or any thing else to earne themselves
bread.

     [There are several letters among the State Papers from Commissioner
     Thomas Middleton relating to the want of workmen at Portsmouth
     Dockyard.  On June 29th Middleton wrote to Pepys, "The ropemakers
     have discharged themselves for want of money, and gone into the
     country to make hay."  The blockmakers, the joiners, and the sawyers
     all refused to work longer without money ("Calendar," 1664-65, p.
     453).]

Thence to Westminster, where I hear the sicknesse encreases greatly, and
to the Harp and Ball with Mary talking, who tells me simply her losing
of her first love in the country in Wales, and coming up hither unknown
to her friends, and it seems Dr. Williams do pretend love to her, and
I have found him there several times. Thence by coach and late at the
office, and so to bed. Sad at the newes that seven or eight houses in
Bazing Hall street, are shut up of the plague.

2nd (Sunday). Up, and all the morning dressing my closet at the office
with my plates, very neatly, and a fine place now it is, and will be
a pleasure to sit in, though I thank God I needed none before. At noon
dined at home, and after dinner to my accounts and cast them up, and
find that though I have spent above L90 this month yet I have saved L17,
and am worth in all above L1450, for which the Lord be praised! In the
evening my Lady Pen and daughter come to see, and supped with us, then a
messenger about business of the office from Sir G. Carteret at Chatham,
and by word of mouth did send me word that the business between my Lord
and him is fully agreed on,

     [The arrangements for the marriage of Lady Jemimah Montagu to Philip
     Carteret were soon settled, for the wedding took place on July 31st]

and is mightily liked of by the King and the Duke of Yorke, and that
he sent me this word with great joy; they gone, we to bed. I hear this
night that Sir J. Lawson was buried late last night at St. Dunstan's by
us, without any company at all, and that the condition of his family
is but very poor, which I could be contented to be sorry for, though he
never was the man that ever obliged me by word or deed.

3rd. Up and by water with Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes to White Hall
to the Duke of Albemarle, where, after a little business, we parted, and
I to the Harp and Ball, and there staid a while talking to Mary, and so
home to dinner. After dinner to the Duke of Albemarle's again, and so to
the Swan, and there 'demeurais un peu'de temps con la fille', and so to
the Harp and Ball, and alone 'demeurais un peu de temps baisant la',
and so away home and late at the office about letters, and so home,
resolving from this night forwards to close all my letters, if possible,
and end all my business at the office by daylight, and I shall go near
to do it and put all my affairs in the world in good order, the season
growing so sickly, that it is much to be feared how a man can escape
having a share with others in it, for which the good Lord God bless
me, or to be fitted to receive it. So after supper to bed, and mightily
troubled in my sleep all night with dreams of Jacke Cole, my old
schoolfellow, lately dead, who was born at the same time with me, and we
reckoned our fortunes pretty equal. God fit me for his condition!

4th. Up, and sat at the office all the morning. At noon to the 'Change
and thence to the Dolphin, where a good dinner at the cost of one Mr.
Osbaston, who lost a wager to Sir W. Batten, Sir W. Rider, and Sir R.
Ford, a good while since and now it is spent. The wager was that ten
of our ships should not have a fight with ten of the enemy's before
Michaelmas. Here was other very good company, and merry, and at last
in come Mr. Buckeworth, a very fine gentleman, and proves to be a
Huntingdonshire man. Thence to my office and there all the afternoon
till night, and so home to settle some accounts of Tangier and other
papers. I hear this day the Duke and Prince Rupert are both come back
from sea, and neither of them go back again. The latter I much wonder
at, but it seems the towne reports so, and I am very glad of it. This
morning I did a good piece of work with Sir W. Warren, ending the
business of the lotterys, wherein honestly I think I shall get above
L100. Bankert, it seems, is come home with the little fleete he hath
been abroad with, without doing any thing, so that there is nobody of an
enemy at sea. We are in great hopes of meeting with the Dutch East India
fleete, which is mighty rich, or with De Ruyter, who is so also. Sir
Richard Ford told me this day, at table, a fine account, how the Dutch
were like to have been mastered by the present Prince of Orange

     [The period alluded to is 1650, when the States-General disbanded
     part of the forces which the Prince of Orange (William) wished to
     retain.  The prince attempted, but unsuccessfully, to possess
     himself of Amsterdam.  In the same year he died, at the early age of
     twenty-four; some say of the small-pox; others, with Sir Richard
     Ford, say of poison.--B.]

his father to be besieged in Amsterdam, having drawn an army of foot
into the towne, and horse near to the towne by night, within three miles
of the towne, and they never knew of it; but by chance the Hamburgh post
in the night fell among the horse, and heard their design, and knowing
the way, it being very dark and rainy, better than they, went from
them, and did give notice to the towne before the others could reach the
towne, and so were saved. It seems this De Witt and another family, the
Beckarts, were among the chief of the familys that were enemys to the
Prince, and were afterwards suppressed by the Prince, and continued so
till he was, as they say, poysoned; and then they turned all again, as
it was, against the young Prince, and have so carried it to this day, it
being about 12 and 14 years, and De Witt in the head of them.

5th. Up, and advised about sending of my wife's bedding and things to
Woolwich, in order to her removal thither. So to the office, where all
the morning till noon, and so to the 'Change, and thence home to dinner.
In the afternoon I abroad to St. James's, and there with Mr. Coventry a
good while, and understand how matters are ordered in the fleete: that
is, my Lord Sandwich goes Admiral; under him Sir G. Ascue, and Sir T.
Teddiman; Vice-Admiral, Sir W. Pen; and under him Sir W. Barkeley, and
Sir Jos. Jordan: Reere-Admiral, Sir Thomas Allen; and under him Sir
Christopher Mings,

     [The son of a shoemaker, bred to the sea-service; he rose to the
     rank of an admiral, and was killed in the fight with the Dutch,
     June, 1666.--B.  See post, June 10th, 1666.]

and Captain Harman. We talked in general of business of the Navy, among
others how he had lately spoken to Sir G. Carteret, and professed great
resolution of friendship with him and reconciliation, and resolves to
make it good as well as he can, though it troubles him, he tells me,
that something will come before him wherein he must give him offence,
but I do find upon the whole that Mr. Coventry do not listen to these
complaints of money with the readiness and resolvedness to remedy that
he used to do, and I think if he begins to draw in it is high time for
me to do so too. From thence walked round to White Hall, the Parke being
quite locked up; and I observed a house shut up this day in the Pell
Mell, where heretofore in Cromwell's time we young men used to keep our
weekly clubs. And so to White Hall to Sir G. Carteret, who is come this
day from Chatham, and mighty glad he is to see me, and begun to talk of
our great business of the match, which goes on as fast as possible, but
for convenience we took water and over to his coach to Lambeth, by which
we went to Deptford, all the way talking, first, how matters are quite
concluded with all possible content between my Lord and him and signed
and sealed, so that my Lady Sandwich is to come thither to-morrow or
next day, and the young lady is sent for, and all likely to be ended
between them in a very little while, with mighty joy on both sides, and
the King, Duke, Lord Chancellor, and all mightily pleased. Thence to
newes, wherein I find that Sir G. Carteret do now take all my Lord
Sandwich's business to heart, and makes it the same with his owne. He
tells me how at Chatham it was proposed to my Lord Sandwich to be joined
with the Prince in the command of the fleete, which he was most willing
to; but when it come to the Prince, he was quite against it; saying,
there could be no government, but that it would be better to have two
fleetes, and neither under the command of the other, which he would not
agree to. So the King was not pleased; but, without any unkindnesse,
did order the fleete to be ordered as above, as to the Admirals and
commands: so the Prince is come up; and Sir G. Carteret, I remember, had
this word thence, that, says he, by this means, though the King told him
that it would be but for this expedition, yet I believe we shall keepe
him out for altogether. He tells me how my Lord was much troubled at Sir
W. Pen's being ordered forth (as it seems he is, to go to Solebay, and
with the best fleete he can, to go forth), and no notice taken of my
Lord Sandwich going after him, and having the command over him. But
after some discourse Mr. Coventry did satisfy, as he says, my Lord, so
as they parted friends both in that point and upon the other wherein I
know my Lord was troubled, and which Mr. Coventry did speak to him of
first thinking that my Lord might justly take offence at, his not being
mentioned in the relation of the fight in the news book, and did clear
all to my Lord how little he was concerned in it, and therewith my Lord
also satisfied, which I am mightily glad of, because I should take it
a very great misfortune to me to have them two to differ above all the
persons in the world. Being come to Deptford, my Lady not being within,
we parted, and I by water to Woolwich, where I found my wife come, and
her two mayds, and very prettily accommodated they will be; and I left
them going to supper, grieved in my heart to part with my wife, being
worse by much without her, though some trouble there is in having the
care of a family at home in this plague time, and so took leave, and I
in one boat and W. Hewer in another home very late, first against tide,
we having walked in the dark to Greenwich. Late home and to bed, very
lonely.

6th. Up and forth to give order to my pretty grocer's wife's house, who,
her husband tells me, is going this day for the summer into the country.
I bespoke some sugar, &c., for my father, and so home to the office,
where all the morning. At noon dined at home, and then by water to White
Hall to Sir G. Carteret about money for the office, a sad thought, for
in a little while all must go to wracke, winter coming on apace, when
a great sum must be ready to pay part of the fleete, and so far we are
from it that we have not enough to stop the mouths of poor people and
their hands from falling about our eares here almost in the office. God
give a good end to it! Sir G. Carteret told me one considerable thing:
Alderman Backewell is ordered abroad upon some private score with a
great sum of money; wherein I was instrumental the other day in shipping
him away. It seems some of his creditors have taken notice of it, and he
was like to be broke yesterday in his absence; Sir G. Carteret telling
me that the King and the kingdom must as good as fall with that man
at this time; and that he was forced to get L4000 himself to answer
Backewell's people's occasions, or he must have broke; but committed
this to me as a great secret and which I am heartily sorry to hear.
Thence, after a little merry discourse of our marrying business, I
parted, and by coach to several places, among others to see my Lord
Brunkerd, who is not well, but was at rest when I come. I could not see
him, nor had much mind, one of the great houses within two doors of him
being shut up: and, Lord! the number of houses visited, which this day I
observed through the town quite round in my way by Long Lane and London
Wall. So home to the office, and thence to Sir W. Batten, and spent the
evening at supper; and, among other discourse, the rashness of Sir John
Lawson, for breeding up his daughter so high and proud, refusing a
man of great interest, Sir W. Barkeley, to match her with a melancholy
fellow, Colonell Norton's' son, of no interest nor good nature nor
generosity at all, giving her L6000, when the other would have taken her
with two; when he himself knew that he was not worth the money himself
in all the world, he did give her that portion, and is since dead, and
left his wife and two daughters beggars, and the other gone away
with L6000, and no content in it, through the ill qualities of her
father-in-law and husband, who, it seems, though a pretty woman,
contracted for her as if he had been buying a horse; and, worst of all,
is now of no use to serve the mother and two little sisters in any stead
at Court, whereas the other might have done what he would for her: so
here is an end of this family's pride, which, with good care, might have
been what they would, and done well. Thence, weary of this discourse, as
the act of the greatest rashness that ever I heard of in all my little
conversation, we parted, and I home to bed. Sir W. Pen, it seems, sailed
last night from Solebay with, about sixty sail of ship, and my Lord
Sandwich in "The Prince" and some others, it seems, going after them to
overtake them, for I am sure my Lord Sandwich will do all possible to
overtake them, and will be troubled to the heart if he do it not.

7th. Up, and having set my neighbour, Mr. Hudson, wine coopers, at work
drawing out a tierce of wine for the sending of some of it to my wife,
I abroad, only taking notice to what a condition it hath pleased God
to bring me that at this time I have two tierces of Claret, two quarter
casks of Canary, and a smaller vessel of Sack; a vessel of Tent, another
of Malaga, and another of white wine, all in my wine cellar together;
which, I believe, none of my friends of my name now alive ever had of
his owne at one time. To Westminster, and there with Mr. Povy and Creed
talking of our Tangier business, and by and by I drew Creed aside and
acquainted him with what Sir G. Carteret did tell me about Backewell the
other day, because he hath money of his in his hands. So home, taking
some new books, L5 worth, home to my great content. At home all the day
after busy. Some excellent discourse and advice of Sir W. Warren's in
the afternoon, at night home to look over my new books, and so late to
bed.

8th. All day very diligent at the office, ended my letters by 9 at
night, and then fitted myself to go down to Woolwich to my wife, which
I did, calling at Sir G. Carteret's at Deptford, and there hear that
my Lady Sandwich is come, but not very well. By 12 o'clock to Woolwich,
found my wife asleep in bed, but strange to think what a fine night I
had down, but before I had been one minute on shore, the mightiest storm
come of wind and rain that almost could be for a quarter of an houre
and so left. I to bed, being the first time I come to her lodgings, and
there lodged well.

9th (Lord's day). Very pleasant with her and among my people, while she
made her ready, and, about 10 o'clock, by water to Sir G. Carteret, and
there find my Lady [Sandwich] in her chamber, not very well, but looks
the worst almost that ever I did see her in my life. It seems her
drinking of the water at Tunbridge did almost kill her before she could
with most violent physique get it out of her body again. We are received
with most extraordinary kindnesse by my Lady Carteret and her children,
and dined most nobly. Sir G. Carteret went to Court this morning. After
dinner I took occasion to have much discourse with Mr. Ph. Carteret, and
find him a very modest man; and I think verily of mighty good nature,
and pretty understanding. He did give me a good account of the fight
with the Dutch. My Lady Sandwich dined in her chamber. About three
o'clock I, leaving my wife there, took boat and home, and there shifted
myself into my black silke suit, and having promised Harman yesterday,
I to his house, which I find very mean, and mean company. His wife very
ill; I could not see her. Here I, with her father and Kate Joyce, who
was also very ill, were godfathers and godmother to his boy, and was
christened Will. Mr. Meriton christened him. The most observable thing I
found there to my content, was to hear him and his clerk tell me that in
this parish of Michell's, Cornhill, one of the middlemost parishes and
a great one of the towne, there hath, notwithstanding this sickliness,
been buried of any disease, man, woman, or child, not one for thirteen
months last past; which [is] very strange. And the like in a good degree
in most other parishes, I hear, saving only of the plague in them, but
in this neither the plague nor any other disease. So back again home and
reshifted myself, and so down to my Lady Carteret's, where mighty merry
and great pleasantnesse between my Lady Sandwich and the young ladies
and me, and all of us mighty merry, there never having been in the world
sure a greater business of general content than this match proposed
between Mr. Carteret and my Lady Jemimah. But withal it is mighty pretty
to think how my poor Lady Sandwich, between her and me, is doubtfull
whether her daughter will like of it or no, and how troubled she is for
fear of it, which I do not fear at all, and desire her not to do it, but
her fear is the most discreet and pretty that ever I did see. Late here,
and then my wife and I, with most hearty kindnesse from my Lady Carteret
by boat to Woolwich, come thither about 12 at night, and so to bed.

10th. Up, and with great pleasure looking over a nest of puppies of Mr.
Shelden's, with which my wife is most extraordinary pleased, and one
of them is promised her. Anon I took my leave, and away by water to the
Duke of Albemarle's, where he tells me that I must be at Hampton Court
anon. So I home to look over my Tangier papers, and having a coach of
Mr. Povy's attending me, by appointment, in order to my coming to dine
at his country house at Brainford, where he and his family is, I went
and Mr. Tasbrough with me therein, it being a pretty chariot, but most
inconvenient as to the horses throwing dust and dirt into one's eyes
and upon one's clothes. There I staid a quarter of an houre, Creed being
there, and being able to do little business (but the less the better).
Creed rode before, and Mr. Povy and I after him in the chariot; and I
was set down by him at the Parke pale, where one of his saddle horses
was ready for me, he himself not daring to come into the house or be
seen, because that a servant of his, out of his horse, happened to be
sicke, but is not yet dead, but was never suffered to come into his
house after he was ill. But this opportunity was taken to injure
Povy, and most horribly he is abused by some persons hereupon, and his
fortune, I believe, quite broke; but that he hath a good heart to bear,
or a cunning one to conceal his evil. There I met with Sir W. Coventry,
and by and by was heard by my Lord Chancellor and Treasurer about our
Tangier money, and my Lord Treasurer had ordered me to forbear meddling
with the L15,000 he offered me the other day, but, upon opening the case
to them, they did offer it again, and so I think I shall have it, but
my Lord General must give his consent in it, this money having been
promised to him, and he very angry at the proposal. Here though I have
not been in many years, yet I lacke time to stay, besides that it is,
I perceive, an unpleasing thing to be at Court, everybody being fearful
one of another, and all so sad, enquiring after the plague, so that I
stole away by my horse to Kingston, and there with trouble was forced,
to press two sturdy rogues to carry me to London, and met at the
waterside with Mr. Charnocke, Sir Philip Warwicke's clerke, who had been
in company and was quite foxed. I took him with me in my boat, and so
away to Richmond, and there, by night, walked with him to Moreclacke, a
very pretty walk, and there staid a good while, now and then talking and
sporting with Nan the servant, who says she is a seaman's wife, and at
last bade good night.

11th. And so all night down by water, a most pleasant passage, and come
thither by two o'clock, and so walked from the Old Swan home, and there
to bed to my Will, being very weary, and he lodging at my desire in
my house. At 6 o'clock up and to Westminster (where and all the towne
besides, I hear, the plague encreases), and, it being too soon to go to
the Duke of Albemarle, I to the Harp and Ball, and there made a bargain
with Mary to go forth with me in the afternoon, which she with much ado
consented to. So I to the Duke of Albemarle's, and there with much ado
did get his consent in part to my having the money promised for Tangier,
and the other part did not concur. So being displeased with this, I back
to the office and there sat alone a while doing business, and then by
a solemn invitation to the Trinity House, where a great dinner and
company, Captain Dobbin's feast for Elder Brother. But I broke up before
the dinner half over and by water to the Harp and Ball, and thence had
Mary meet me at the New Exchange, and there took coach and I with
great pleasure took the ayre to Highgate, and thence to Hampstead, much
pleased with her company, pretty and innocent, and had what pleasure
almost I would with her, and so at night, weary and sweaty, it being
very hot beyond bearing, we back again, and I set her down in St.
Martin's Lane, and so I to the evening 'Change, and there hear all the
towne full that Ostend is delivered to us, and that Alderman Backewell

     [Among the State Papers is a letter from the king to the Lord
     General (dated August 8th, 1665): "Alderman Backwell being in great
     straits for the second payment he has to make for the service in
     Flanders, as much tin is to be transmitted to him as will raise the
     sum.  Has authorized him and Sir George Carteret to treat with the
     tin farmers for 500 tons of tin to be speedily transported under
     good convoy; but if, on consulting with Alderman Backwell, this plan
     of the tin seems insufficient, then without further difficulty he is
     to dispose for that purpose of the L10,000 assigned for pay of the
     Guards, not doubting that before that comes due, other ways will be
     found for supplying it; the payment in Flanders is of such
     importance that some means must be found of providing for it"
     ("Calendar," Domestic, 1664-65, pp. 508, 509)]

did go with L50,000 to that purpose. But the truth of it I do not know,
but something I believe there is extraordinary in his going. So to the
office, where I did what I could as to letters, and so away to bed,
shifting myself, and taking some Venice treakle, feeling myself out of
order, and thence to bed to sleep.

12th. After doing what business I could in the morning, it being a
solemn fast-day

     ["A form of Common Prayer; together with an order for fasting for
     the averting of God's heavy visitation upon many places of this
     realm.  The fast to be observed within the cities of London and
     Westminster and places adjacent, on Wednesday the twelfth of this
     instant July, and both there and in all parts of this realm on the
     first Wednesday in every month during the visitation" ("Calendar of
     State Papers," Domestic, 1664-65, p. 466).]

for the plague growing upon us, I took boat and down to Deptford,
where I stood with great pleasure an houre or two by my Lady Sandwich's
bedside, talking to her (she lying prettily in bed) of my Lady Jemimah's
being from my Lady Pickering's when our letters come to that place; she
being at my Lord Montagu's, at Boughton. The truth is, I had received
letters of it two days ago, but had dropped them, and was in a very
extraordinary straite what to do for them, or what account to give my
Lady, but sent to every place; I sent to Moreclacke, where I had been
the night before, and there they were found, which with mighty joy come
safe to me; but all ending with satisfaction to my Lady and me, though I
find my Lady Carteret not much pleased with this delay, and principally
because of the plague, which renders it unsafe to stay long at Deptford.
I eat a bit (my Lady Carteret being the most kind lady in the world),
and so took boat, and a fresh boat at the Tower, and so up the river,
against tide all the way, I having lost it by staying prating to and
with my Lady, and, from before one, made it seven ere we got to Hampton
Court; and when I come there all business was over, saving my finding
Mr. Coventry at his chamber, and with him a good while about several
businesses at his chamber, and so took leave, and away to my boat, and
all night upon the water, staying a while with Nan at Moreclacke, very
much pleased and merry with her, and so on homeward, and come home by
two o'clock, shooting the bridge at that time of night, and so to bed,
where I find Will is not, he staying at Woolwich to come with my wife
to dinner tomorrow to my Lady Carteret's. Heard Mr. Williamson repeat at
Hampton Court to-day how the King of France hath lately set out a most
high arrest against the Pope, which is reckoned very lofty and high.

     [Arret.  The rupture between Alexander VII. and Louis XIV. was
     healed in 1664, by the treaty signed at Pisa, on February 12th.  On
     August 9th, the pope's nephew, Cardinal Chigi, made his entry into
     Paris, as legate, to give the king satisfaction for the insult
     offered at Rome by the Corsican guard to the Duc de Crequi, the
     French ambassador; (see January 25th, 1662-63).  Cardinal Imperiali,
     Governor of Rome, asked pardon of the king in person, and all the
     hard conditions of the treaty were fulfilled.  But no arret against
     the pope was set forth in 1665.  On the contrary, Alexander, now
     wishing to please the king, issued a constitution on February 2nd,
     1665, ordering all the clergy of France, without any exception, to
     sign a formulary condemning the famous five propositions extracted
     from the works of Jansenius; and on April 29th, the king in person
     ordered the parliament to register the bull.  The Jansenist party,
     of course, demurred to this proceeding; the Bishops of Alais,
     Angers, Beauvais, and Pamiers, issuing mandates calling upon their
     clergy to refuse.  It was against these mandates, as being contrary
     to the king's declaration and the pope's intentions, that the arret
     was directed.--B.]

13th. Lay long, being sleepy, and then up to the office, my Lord Brunker
(after his sickness) being come to the office, and did what business
there was, and so I by water, at night late, to Sir G. Carteret's, but
there being no oars to carry me, I was fain to call a skuller that had a
gentleman already in it, and he proved a man of love to musique, and he
and I sung together the way down with great pleasure, and an incident
extraordinary to be met with. There come to dinner, they haveing dined,
but my Lady caused something to be brought for me, and I dined well and
mighty merry, especially my Lady Slaning and I about eating of creame
and brown bread, which she loves as much as I. Thence after long
discourse with them and my Lady alone, I and [my] wife, who by agreement
met here, took leave, and I saw my wife a little way down (it troubling
me that this absence makes us a little strange instead of more fond),
and so parted, and I home to some letters, and then home to bed. Above
700 died of the plague this week.

14th. Up, and all the morning at the Exchequer endeavouring to strike
tallys for money for Tangier, and mightily vexed to see how people
attend there, some out of towne, and others drowsy, and to others it was
late, so that the King's business suffers ten times more than all
their service is worth. So I am put off to to-morrow. Thence to the
Old Exchange, by water, and there bespoke two fine shirts of my pretty
seamstress, who, she tells me, serves Jacke Fenn. Upon the 'Change all
the news is that guns have been heard and that news is come by a Dane
that my Lord was in view of De Ruyter, and that since his parting from
my Lord of Sandwich he hath heard guns, but little of it do I think
true. So home to dinner, where Povy by agreement, and after dinner we
to talk of our Tangier matters, about keeping our profit at the pay and
victualling of the garrison, if the present undertakers should leave it,
wherein I did [not] nor will do any thing unworthy me and any just man,
but they being resolved to quit it, it is fit I should suffer Mr. Povy
to do what he can with Mr. Gauden about it to our profit. Thence to the
discoursing of putting some sums of money in order and tallys, which
we did pretty well. So he in the evening gone, I by water to Sir G.
Carteret's, and there find my Lady Sandwich and her buying things for
my Lady Jem.'s wedding; and my Lady Jem. is beyond expectation come to
Dagenhams, where Mr. Carteret is to go to visit her to-morrow; and
my proposal of waiting on him, he being to go alone to all persons
strangers to him, was well accepted, and so I go with him. But, Lord!
to see how kind my Lady Carteret is to her! Sends her most rich jewells,
and provides bedding and things of all sorts most richly for her, which
makes my Lady and me out of our wits almost to see the kindnesse she
treats us all with, as if they would buy the young lady. Thence away
home and, foreseeing my being abroad two days, did sit up late making of
letters ready against tomorrow, and other things, and so to bed, to be
up betimes by the helpe of a larum watch, which by chance I borrowed of
my watchmaker to-day, while my owne is mending.

15th. Up, and after all business done, though late, I to Deptford, but
before I went out of the office saw there young Bagwell's wife returned,
but could not stay to speak to her, though I had a great mind to it, and
also another great lady, as to fine clothes, did attend there to have
a ticket signed; which I did do, taking her through the garden to my
office, where I signed it and had a salute--[kiss]--of her, and so I
away by boat to Redriffe, and thence walked, and after dinner, at Sir G.
Carteret's, where they stayed till almost three o'clock for me, and anon
took boat, Mr. Carteret and I to the ferry-place at Greenwich, and
there staid an hour crossing the water to and again to get our coach and
horses over; and by and by set out, and so toward Dagenhams. But, Lord!
what silly discourse we had by the way as to love-matters, he being the
most awkerd man I ever met with in my life as to that business. Thither
we come, by that time it begun to be dark, and were kindly received
by Lady Wright and my Lord Crew. And to discourse they went, my Lord
discoursing with him, asking of him questions of travell, which he
answered well enough in a few words; but nothing to the lady from him at
all. To supper, and after supper to talk again, he yet taking no notice
of the lady. My Lord would have had me have consented to leaving the
young people together to-night, to begin their amours, his staying being
but to be little. But I advised against it, lest the lady might be
too much surprised. So they led him up to his chamber, where I staid a
little, to know how he liked the lady, which he told me he did mightily;
but, Lord! in the dullest insipid manner that ever lover did. So I bid
him good night, and down to prayers with my Lord Crew's family, and
after prayers, my Lord, and Lady Wright, and I, to consult what to do;
and it was agreed at last to have them go to church together, as the
family used to do, though his lameness was a great objection against it.
But at last my Lady Jem. sent me word by my Lady Wright that it would
be better to do just as they used to do before his coming; and therefore
she desired to go to church, which was yielded then to.

16th (Lord's day). I up, having lain with Mr. Moore in the chaplin's
chamber. And having trimmed myself, down to Mr. Carteret; and he being
ready we down and walked in the gallery an hour or two, it being a most
noble and pretty house that ever, for the bigness, I saw. Here I taught
him what to do: to take the lady always by the hand to lead her, and
telling him that I would find opportunity to leave them two together, he
should make these and these compliments, and also take a time to do the
like to Lord Crew and Lady Wright. After I had instructed him, which he
thanked me for, owning that he needed my teaching him, my Lord Crew come
down and family, the young lady among the rest; and so by coaches to
church four miles off; where a pretty good sermon, and a declaration
of penitence of a man that had undergone the Churches censure for his
wicked life. Thence back again by coach, Mr. Carteret having not had the
confidence to take his lady once by the hand, coming or going, which
I told him of when we come home, and he will hereafter do it. So to
dinner. My Lord excellent discourse. Then to walk in the gallery, and to
sit down. By and by my Lady Wright and I go out (and then my Lord Crew,
he not by design), and lastly my Lady Crew come out, and left the young
people together. And a little pretty daughter of my Lady Wright's most
innocently come out afterward, and shut the door to, as if she had done
it, poor child, by inspiration; which made us without, have good sport
to laugh at. They together an hour, and by and by church-time, whither
he led her into the coach and into the church, and so at church all
the afternoon, several handsome ladies at church. But it was most
extraordinary hot that ever I knew it. So home again and to walk in
the gardens, where we left the young couple a second time; and my Lady
Wright and I to walk together, who to my trouble tells me that my Lady
Jem. must have something done to her body by Scott before she can be
married, and therefore care must be had to send him, also that some more
new clothes must of necessity be made her, which and other things I took
care of. Anon to supper, and excellent discourse and dispute between my
Lord Crew and the chaplin, who is a good scholler, but a nonconformist.
Here this evening I spoke with Mrs. Carter, my old acquaintance, that
hath lived with my Lady these twelve or thirteen years, the sum of all
whose discourse and others for her, is, that I would get her a good
husband; which I have promised, but know not when I shall perform. After
Mr. Carteret was carried to his chamber, we to prayers again and then to
bed.

17th. Up all of us, and to billiards; my Lady Wright, Mr. Carteret,
myself, and every body. By and by the young couple left together. Anon
to dinner; and after dinner Mr. Carteret took my advice about giving
to the servants, and I led him to give L10 among them, which he did, by
leaving it to the chief man-servant, Mr. Medows, to do for him. Before
we went, I took my Lady Jem. apart, and would know how she liked this
gentleman, and whether she was under any difficulty concerning him. She
blushed, and hid her face awhile; but at last I forced her to tell me.
She answered that she could readily obey what her father and mother had
done; which was all she could say, or I expect. So anon I took leave,
and for London. But, Lord! to see, among other things, how all these
great people here are afeard of London, being doubtfull of anything that
comes from thence, or that hath lately been there, that I was forced to
say that I lived wholly at Woolwich. In our way Mr. Carteret did give
me mighty thanks for my care and pains for him, and is mightily pleased,
though the truth is, my Lady Jem. hath carried herself with mighty
discretion and gravity, not being forward at all in any degree, but
mighty serious in her answers to him, as by what he says and I observed,
I collect. To London to my office, and there took letters from the
office, where all well, and so to the Bridge, and there he and I took
boat and to Deptford, where mighty welcome, and brought the good newes
of all being pleased to them. Mighty mirth at my giving them an account
of all; but the young man could not be got to say one word before me or
my Lady Sandwich of his adventures, but, by what he afterwards related
to his father and mother and sisters, he gives an account that pleases
them mightily. Here Sir G. Carteret would have me lie all night, which I
did most nobly, better than ever I did in my life, Sir G. Carteret being
mighty kind to me, leading me to my chamber; and all their care now is,
to have the business ended, and they have reason, because the sicknesse
puts all out of order, and they cannot safely stay where they are.

18th. Up and to the office, where all the morning, and so to my house
and eat a bit of victuals, and so to the 'Change, where a little
business and a very thin Exchange; and so walked through London to the
Temple, where I took water for Westminster to the Duke of Albemarle,
to wait on him, and so to Westminster Hall, and there paid for my
newes-books, and did give Mrs. Michell, who is going out of towne
because of the sicknesse, and her husband, a pint of wine, and so Sir
W. Warren coming to me by appointment we away by water home, by the way
discoursing about the project I have of getting some money and doing
the King good service too about the mast docke at Woolwich, which I fear
will never be done if I do not go about it. After dispatching letters at
the office, I by water down to Deptford, where I staid a little while,
and by water to my wife, whom I have not seen 6 or 5 days, and there
supped with her, and mighty pleasant, and saw with content her drawings,
and so to bed mighty merry. I was much troubled this day to hear at
Westminster how the officers do bury the dead in the open Tuttle-fields,
pretending want of room elsewhere; whereas the New Chappell churchyard
was walled-in at the publick charge in the last plague time, merely for
want of room and now none, but such as are able to pay dear for it, can
be buried there.

19th. Up and to the office, and thence presently to the Exchequer, and
there with much trouble got my tallys, and afterwards took Mr. Falconer,
Spicer, and another or two to the Leg and there give them a dinner, and
so with my tallys and about 30 dozen of bags, which it seems are my due,
having paid the fees as if I had received the money I away home, and
after a little stay down by water to Deptford, where I find all full of
joy, and preparing to go to Dagenhams to-morrow. To supper, and after
supper to talk without end. Very late I went away, it raining, but I had
a design 'pour aller a la femme de Bagwell' and did so.... So away about
12, and it raining hard I back to Sir G. Carteret and there called up
the page, and to bed there, being all in a most violent sweat.

20th. Up, in a boat among other people to the Tower, and there to the
office, where we sat all the morning. So down to Deptford and there
dined, and after dinner saw my Lady Sandwich and Mr. Carteret and his
two sisters over the water, going to Dagenhams, and my Lady Carteret
towards Cranburne.

     [The royal lodge of that name in Windsor Forest, occupied by Sir
     George Carteret as Vice-Chamberlain to the King.--B.]

So all the company broke up in most extraordinary joy, wherein I am
mighty contented that I have had the good fortune to be so instrumental,
and I think it will be of good use to me. So walked to Redriffe, where I
hear the sickness is, and indeed is scattered almost every where, there
dying 1089 of the plague this week. My Lady Carteret did this day give
me a bottle of plague-water home with me. So home to write letters
late, and then home to bed, where I have not lain these 3 or 4 nights. I
received yesterday a letter from my Lord Sandwich, giving me thanks for
my care about their marriage business, and desiring it to be dispatched,
that no disappointment may happen therein, which I will help on all I
can. This afternoon I waited on the Duke of Albemarle, and so to Mrs.
Croft's, where I found and saluted Mrs. Burrows, who is a very pretty
woman for a mother of so many children. But, Lord! to see how the plague
spreads. It being now all over King's Streete, at the Axe, and next door
to it, and in other places.

21st. Up and abroad to the goldsmiths, to see what money I could get
upon my present tallys upon the advance of the Excise, and I hope
I shall get L10,000. I went also and had them entered at the Excise
Office. Alderman Backewell is at sea. Sir R. Viner come to towne but
this morning. So Colvill was the only man I could yet speak withal to
get any money of. Met with Mr. Povy, and I with him and dined at
the Custom House Taverne, there to talk of our Tangier business, and
Stockedale and Hewet with us. So abroad to several places, among others
to Anthony Joyce's, and there broke to him my desire to have Pall
married to Harman, whose wife, poor woman, is lately dead, to my
trouble, I loving her very much, and he will consider it. So home and
late at my chamber, setting some papers in order; the plague growing
very raging, and my apprehensions of it great. So very late to bed.

22nd. As soon as up I among my goldsmiths, Sir Robert Viner and Colvill,
and there got L10,000 of my new tallys accepted, and so I made it my
work to find out Mr. Mervin and sent for others to come with their bills
of Exchange, as Captain Hewett, &c., and sent for Mr. Jackson, but he
was not in town. So all the morning at the office, and after dinner,
which was very late, I to Sir R. Viner's, by his invitation in the
morning, and got near L5000 more accepted, and so from this day the
whole, or near, L15,000, lies upon interest. Thence I by water to
Westminster, and the Duke of Albemarle being gone to dinner to my Lord
of Canterbury's, I thither, and there walked and viewed the new hall, a
new old-fashion hall as much as possible. Begun, and means left for the
ending of it, by Bishop Juxon. Not coming proper to speak with him, I to
Fox-hall, where to the Spring garden; but I do not see one guest there,
the town being so empty of any body to come thither. Only, while I was
there, a poor woman come to scold with the master of the house that a
kinswoman, I think, of hers, that was newly dead of the plague, might be
buried in the church-yard; for, for her part, she should not be buried
in the commons, as they said she should. Back to White Hall, and by and
by comes the Duke of Albemarle, and there, after a little discourse, I
by coach home, not meeting with but two coaches, and but two carts from
White Hall to my own house, that I could observe; and the streets mighty
thin of people. I met this noon with Dr. Burnett, who told me, and I
find in the newsbook this week that he posted upon the 'Change, that
whoever did spread the report that, instead of the plague, his servant
was by him killed, it was forgery, and shewed me the acknowledgment of
the master of the pest-house, that his servant died of a bubo on his
right groine, and two spots on his right thigh, which is the plague. To
my office, where late writing letters, and getting myself prepared with
business for Hampton Court to-morrow, and so having caused a good pullet
to be got for my supper, all alone, I very late to bed. All the news is
great: that we must of necessity fall out with France, for He will side
with the Dutch against us. That Alderman Backewell is gone over (which
indeed he is) with money, and that Ostend is in our present possession.
But it is strange to see how poor Alderman Backewell is like to be
put to it in his absence, Mr. Shaw his right hand being ill. And the
Alderman's absence gives doubts to people, and I perceive they are in
great straits for money, besides what Sir G. Carteret told me about
fourteen days ago. Our fleet under my Lord Sandwich being about the
latitude 55 (which is a great secret) to the Northward of the Texell.
So to bed very late. In my way I called upon Sir W. Turner, and at Mr.
Shelcrosse's (but he was not at home, having left his bill with Sir W.
Turner), that so I may prove I did what I could as soon as I had money
to answer all bills.

23rd (Lord's day). Up very betimes, called by Mr. Cutler, by
appointment, and with him in his coach and four horses over London
Bridge to Kingston, a very pleasant journey, and at Hampton Court by
nine o'clock, and in our way very good and various discourse, as he is
a man, that though I think he be a knave, as the world thinks him, yet
a man of great experience and worthy to be heard discourse. When we come
there, we to Sir W. Coventry's chamber, and there discoursed long with
him, he and I alone, the others being gone away, and so walked together
through the garden to the house, where we parted, I observing with a
little trouble that he is too great now to expect too much familiarity
with, and I find he do not mind me as he used to do, but when I reflect
upon him and his business I cannot think much of it, for I do not
observe anything but the same great kindness from him. I followed the
King to chappell, and there hear a good sermon; and after sermon with
my Lord Arlington, Sir Thomas Ingram and others, spoke to the Duke
about Tangier, but not to much purpose. I was not invited any whither
to dinner, though a stranger, which did also trouble me; but yet I
must remember it is a Court, and indeed where most are strangers; but,
however, Cutler carried me to Mr. Marriott's the house-keeper, and there
we had a very good dinner and good company, among others Lilly, the
painter. Thence to the councill-chamber, where in a back room I sat all
the afternoon, but the councill begun late to sit, and spent most of
the time upon Morisco's Tarr businesse. They sat long, and I forced to
follow Sir Thomas Ingram, the Duke, and others, so that when I got free
and come to look for Cutler, he was gone with his coach, without leaving
any word with any body to tell me so; so that I was forced with great
trouble to walk up and down looking of him, and at last forced to get
a boat to carry me to Kingston, and there, after eating a bit at a neat
inne, which pleased me well, I took boat, and slept all the way, without
intermission, from thence to Queenhive, where, it being about two
o'clock, too late and too soon to go home to bed, I lay and slept till
about four,

24th. And then up and home, and there dressed myself, and by appointment
to Deptford, to Sir G. Carteret's, between six and seven o'clock, where
I found him and my Lady almost ready, and by and by went over to the
ferry, and took coach and six horses nobly for Dagenhams, himself and
lady and their little daughter, Louisonne, and myself in the coach;
where, when we come, we were bravely entertained and spent the day most
pleasantly with the young ladies, and I so merry as never more. Only
for want of sleep, and drinking of strong beer had a rheum in one of my
eyes, which troubled me much. Here with great content all the day, as I
think I ever passed a day in my life, because of the contentfulnesse of
our errand, and the noblenesse of the company and our manner of going.
But I find Mr. Carteret yet as backward almost in his caresses, as he
was the first day. At night, about seven o'clock, took coach again; but,
Lord! to see in what a pleasant humour Sir G. Carteret hath been both
coming and going; so light, so fond, so merry, so boyish (so much
content he takes in this business), it is one of the greatest wonders I
ever saw in my mind. But once in serious discourse he did say that,
if he knew his son to be a debauchee, as many and, most are now-a-days
about the Court, he would tell it, and my Lady Jem. should not have him;
and so enlarged both he and she about the baseness and looseness of the
Court, and told several stories of the Duke of Monmouth, and Richmond,
and some great person, my Lord of Ormond's second son, married to a lady
of extraordinary quality (fit and that might have been made a wife for
the King himself), about six months since, that this great person hath
given the pox to------; and discoursed how much this would oblige the
Kingdom if the King would banish some of these great persons publiquely
from the Court, and wished it with all their hearts. We set out so late
that it grew dark, so as we doubted the losing of our way; and a long
time it was, or seemed, before we could get to the water-side, and
that about eleven at night, where, when we come, all merry (only my eye
troubled me, as I said), we found no ferryboat was there, nor no oares
to carry us to Deptford. However, afterwards oares was called from the
other side at Greenwich; but, when it come, a frolique, being mighty
merry, took us, and there we would sleep all night in the coach in the
Isle of Doggs. So we did, there being now with us my Lady Scott, and
with great pleasure drew up the glasses, and slept till daylight, and
then some victuals and wine being brought us, we ate a bit, and so up
and took boat, merry as might be; and when come to Sir G. Carteret's,
there all to bed.

25th. Our good humour in every body continuing, and there I slept till
seven o'clock. Then up and to the office, well refreshed, my eye only
troubling me, which by keeping a little covered with my handkercher and
washing now and then with cold water grew better by night. At noon to
the 'Change, which was very thin, and thence homeward, and was called
in by Mr. Rawlinson, with whom I dined and some good company very
harmlessly merry. But sad the story of the plague in the City, it
growing mightily. This day my Lord Brunker did give me Mr. Grant's'
book upon the Bills of Mortality, new printed and enlarged. Thence to
my office awhile, full of business, and thence by coach to the Duke
of Albemarle's, not meeting one coach going nor coming from my house
thither and back again, which is very strange. One of my chief errands
was to speak to Sir W. Clerke about my wife's brother, who importunes
me, and I doubt he do want mightily, but I can do little for him there
as to employment in the army, and out of my purse I dare not for fear
of a precedent, and letting him come often to me is troublesome and
dangerous too, he living in the dangerous part of the town, but I will
do what I can possibly for him and as soon as I can. Mightily troubled
all this afternoon with masters coming to me about Bills of Exchange and
my signing them upon my Goldsmiths, but I did send for them all and hope
to ease myself this weeke of all the clamour. These two or three days
Mr. Shaw at Alderman Backewell's hath lain sick, like to die, and is
feared will not live a day to an end. At night home and to bed, my head
full of business, and among others, this day come a letter to me from
Paris from my Lord Hinchingbroke, about his coming over; and I have sent
this night an order from the Duke of Albemarle for a ship of 36 guns to
[go] to Calais to fetch him.

26th. Up, and after doing a little business, down to Deptford with Sir
W. Batten, and there left him, and I to Greenwich to the Park, where I
hear the King and Duke are come by water this morn from Hampton Court.
They asked me several questions. The King mightily pleased with his
new buildings there. I followed them to Castle's ship in building, and
there, met Sir W. Batten, and thence to Sir G. Carteret's, where all the
morning with them; they not having any but the Duke of Monmouth, and Sir
W. Killigrew, and one gentleman, and a page more. Great variety of
talk, and was often led to speak to the King and Duke. By and by they to
dinner, and all to dinner and sat down to the King saving myself, which,
though I could not in modesty expect, yet, God forgive my pride! I was
sorry I was there, that Sir W. Batten should say that he could sit down
where I could not, though he had twenty times more reason than I, but
this was my pride and folly. I down and walked with Mr. Castle, who told
me the design of Ford and Rider to oppose and do all the hurt they can
to Captain Taylor in his new ship "The London," and how it comes, and
that they are a couple of false persons, which I believe, and withal
that he himself is a knave too. He and I by and by to dinner mighty
nobly, and the King having dined, he come down, and I went in the barge
with him, I sitting at the door. Down to Woolwich (and there I just saw
and kissed my wife, and saw some of her painting, which is very curious;
and away again to the King) and back again with him in the barge,
hearing him and the Duke talk, and seeing and observing their manner of
discourse. And God forgive me! though I admire them with all the duty
possible, yet the more a man considers and observes them, the less he
finds of difference between them and other men, though (blessed be God!)
they are both princes of great nobleness and spirits. The barge put me
into another boat that come to our side, Mr. Holder with a bag of gold
to the Duke, and so they away and I home to the office. The Duke of
Monmouth is the most skittish leaping gallant that ever I saw, always
in action, vaulting or leaping, or clambering. Thence mighty full of
the honour of this day, I took coach and to Kate Joyce's, but she
not within, but spoke with Anthony, who tells me he likes well of my
proposal for Pall to Harman, but I fear that less than L500 will not be
taken, and that I shall not be able to give, though I did not say so to
him. After a little other discourse and the sad news of the death of
so many in the parish of the plague, forty last night, the bell always
going, I back to the Exchange, where I went up and sat talking with my
beauty, Mrs. Batelier, a great while, who is indeed one of the finest
women I ever saw in my life. After buying some small matter, I home, and
there to the office and saw Sir J. Minnes now come from Portsmouth, I
home to set my Journall for these four days in order, they being four
days of as great content and honour and pleasure to me as ever I hope to
live or desire, or think any body else can live. For methinks if a man
would but reflect upon this, and think that all these things are ordered
by God Almighty to make me contented, and even this very marriage now on
foot is one of the things intended to find me content in, in my life and
matter of mirth, methinks it should make one mightily more satisfied in
the world than he is. This day poor Robin Shaw at Backewell's died, and
Backewell himself now in Flanders. The King himself asked about Shaw,
and being told he was dead, said he was very sorry for it. The sicknesse
is got into our parish this week, and is got, indeed, every where;
so that I begin to think of setting things in order, which I pray God
enable me to put both as to soul and body.

27th. Called up at 4 o'clock. Up and to my preparing some papers for
Hampton Court, and so by water to Fox Hall, and there Mr. Gauden's coach
took me up, and by and by I took up him, and so both thither, a brave
morning to ride in and good discourse with him. Among others he begun
with me to speak of the Tangier Victuallers resigning their employment,
and his willingness to come on. Of which I was glad, and took the
opportunity to answer him with all kindness and promise of assistance.
He told me a while since my Lord Berkeley did speak of it to him, and
yesterday a message from Sir Thomas Ingram. When I come to Hampton Court
I find Sir T. Ingram and Creed ready with papers signed for the putting
of Mr. Gawden in, upon a resignation signed to by Lanyon and sent to Sir
Thos. Ingram. At this I was surprized but yet was glad, and so it passed
but with respect enough to those that are in, at least without any thing
ill taken from it. I got another order signed about the boats, which I
think I shall get something by. So dispatched all my business, having
assurance of continuance of all hearty love from Sir W. Coventry, and so
we staid and saw the King and Queene set out toward Salisbury, and after
them the Duke and Duchesse, whose hands I did kiss. And it was the first
time I did ever, or did see any body else, kiss her hand, and it was a
most fine white and fat hand. But it was pretty to see the young pretty
ladies dressed like men, in velvet coats, caps with ribbands, and with
laced bands, just like men. Only the Duchesse herself it did not become.
They gone, we with great content took coach again, and hungry come to
Clapham about one o'clock, and Creed there too before us, where a
good dinner, the house having dined, and so to walk up and down in
the gardens, mighty pleasant. By and by comes by promise to me Sir G.
Carteret, and viewed the house above and below, and sat and drank there,
and I had a little opportunity to kiss and spend some time with the
ladies above, his daughter, a buxom lass, and his sister Fissant,
a serious lady, and a little daughter of hers, that begins to sing
prettily. Thence, with mighty pleasure, with Sir G. Carteret by coach,
with great discourse of kindnesse with him to my Lord Sandwich, and
to me also; and I every day see more good by the alliance. Almost at
Deptford I 'light and walked over to Half-way House, and so home, in my
way being shown my cozen Patience's house, which seems, at distance, a
pretty house. At home met the weekly Bill, where above 1000 encreased in
the Bill, and of them, in all about 1,700 of the plague, which hath made
the officers this day resolve of sitting at Deptford, which puts me to
some consideration what to do. Therefore home to think and consider of
every thing about it, and without determining any thing eat a little
supper and to bed, full of the pleasure of these 6 or 7 last days.

28th. Up betimes, and down to Deptford, where, after a little discourse
with Sir G. Carteret, who is much displeased with the order of our
officers yesterday to remove the office to Deptford, pretending other
things, but to be sure it is with regard to his own house (which is
much because his family is going away). I am glad I was not at the order
making, and so I will endeavour to alter it. Set out with my Lady all
alone with her with six horses to Dagenhams; going by water to the
Ferry. And a pleasant going, and good discourse; and when there, very
merry, and the young couple now well acquainted. But, Lord! to see
in what fear all the people here do live would make one mad, they are
afeard of us that come to them, insomuch that I am troubled at it, and
wish myself away. But some cause they have; for the chaplin, with whom
but a week or two ago we were here mighty high disputing, is since
fallen into a fever and dead, being gone hence to a friend's a good
way off. A sober and a healthful man. These considerations make us all
hasten the marriage, and resolve it upon Monday next, which is three
days before we intended it. Mighty merry all of us, and in the evening
with full content took coach again and home by daylight with great
pleasure, and thence I down to Woolwich, where find my wife well, and
after drinking and talking a little we to bed.

29th. Up betimes, and after viewing some of my wife's pictures, which
now she is come to do very finely to my great satisfaction beyond what
I could ever look for, I went away and by water to the office, where
nobody to meet me, but busy all the morning. At noon to dinner, where I
hear that my Will is come in thither and laid down upon my bed, ill of
the headake, which put me into extraordinary fear; and I studied all I
could to get him out of the house, and set my people to work to do it
without discouraging him, and myself went forth to the Old Exchange
to pay my fair Batelier for some linnen, and took leave of her, they
breaking up shop for a while; and so by coach to Kate Joyce's, and there
used all the vehemence and rhetorique I could to get her husband to let
her go down to Brampton, but I could not prevail with him; he urging
some simple reasons, but most that of profit, minding the house, and the
distance, if either of them should be ill. However, I did my best, and
more than I had a mind to do, but that I saw him so resolved against it,
while she was mightily troubled at it. At last he yielded she should go
to Windsor, to some friends there. So I took my leave of them, believing
that it is great odds that we ever all see one another again; for I dare
not go any more to that end of the towne. So home, and to writing of
letters--hard, and then at night home, and fell to my Tangier papers
till late, and then to bed, in some ease of mind that Will is gone
to his lodging, and that he is likely to do well, it being only the
headake.

30th (Lord's day). Up, and in my night gowne, cap and neckcloth,
undressed all day long, lost not a minute, but in my chamber, setting
my Tangier accounts to rights. Which I did by night to my very heart's
content, not only that it is done, but I find every thing right, and
even beyond what, after so long neglecting them, I did hope for. The
Lord of Heaven be praised for it! Will was with me to-day, and is very
well again. It was a sad noise to hear our bell to toll and ring so
often to-day, either for deaths or burials; I think five or six times.
At night weary with my day's work, but full of joy at my having done
it, I to bed, being to rise betimes tomorrow to go to the wedding at
Dagenhams. So to bed, fearing I have got some cold sitting in my loose
garments all this day.

31st. Up, and very betimes by six o'clock at Deptford, and there find
Sir G. Carteret, and my Lady ready to go: I being in my new coloured
silk suit, and coat trimmed with gold buttons and gold broad lace round
my hands, very rich and fine. By water to the Ferry, where, when we
come, no coach there; and tide of ebb so far spent as the horse-boat
could not get off on the other side the river to bring away the coach.
So we were fain to stay there in the unlucky Isle of Doggs, in a chill
place, the morning cool, and wind fresh, above two if not three hours to
our great discontent. Yet being upon a pleasant errand, and seeing that
it could not be helped, we did bear it very patiently; and it was worth
my observing, I thought, as ever any thing, to see how upon these two
scores, Sir G. Carteret, the most passionate man in the world, and that
was in greatest haste to be gone, did bear with it, and very pleasant
all the while, at least not troubled much so as to fret and storm at it.
Anon the coach comes: in the mean time there coming a News thither
with his horse to go over, that told us he did come from Islington this
morning; and that Proctor the vintner of the Miter in Wood-street, and
his son, are dead this morning there, of the plague; he having laid out
abundance of money there, and was the greatest vintner for some time in
London for great entertainments. We, fearing the canonicall hour would
be past before we got thither, did with a great deal of unwillingness
send away the license and wedding ring. So that when we come, though we
drove hard with six horses, yet we found them gone from home; and going
towards the church, met them coming from church, which troubled us.
But, however, that trouble was soon over; hearing it was well done: they
being both in their old cloaths; my Lord Crew giving her, there being
three coach fulls of them. The young lady mighty sad, which troubled me;
but yet I think it was only her gravity in a little greater degree than
usual. All saluted her, but I did not till my Lady Sandwich did ask me
whether I had saluted her or no. So to dinner, and very merry we were;
but yet in such a sober way as never almost any wedding was in so great
families: but it was much better. After dinner company divided, some to
cards, others to talk. My Lady Sandwich and I up to settle accounts, and
pay her some money. And mighty kind she is to me, and would fain have
had me gone down for company with her to Hinchingbroke; but for my life
I cannot. At night to supper, and so to talk; and which, methought, was
the most extraordinary thing, all of us to prayers as usual, and the
young bride and bridegroom too and so after prayers, soberly to bed;
only I got into the bridegroom's chamber while he undressed himself,
and there was very merry, till he was called to the bride's chamber,
and into bed they went. I kissed the bride in bed, and so the curtaines
drawne with the greatest gravity that could be, and so good night. But
the modesty and gravity of this business was so decent, that it was to
me indeed ten times more delightfull than if it had been twenty times
more merry and joviall. Whereas I feared I must have sat up all night,
we did here all get good beds, and I lay in the same I did before with
Mr. Brisband, who is a good scholler and sober man; and we lay in bed,
getting him to give me an account of home, which is the most delightfull
talke a man can have of any traveller: and so to sleep. My eyes much
troubled already with the change of my drink. Thus I ended this month
with the greatest joy that ever I did any in my life, because I have
spent the greatest part of it with abundance of joy, and honour, and
pleasant journeys, and brave entertainments, and without cost of money;
and at last live to see the business ended with great content on all
sides. This evening with Mr. Brisband, speaking of enchantments and
spells; I telling him some of my charms; he told me this of his owne
knowledge, at Bourdeaux, in France. The words these:

                         Voyci un Corps mort,
                         Royde come un Baston,
                         Froid comme Marbre,
                         Leger come un esprit,
                         Levons to au nom de Jesus Christ.

He saw four little girles, very young ones, all kneeling, each of them,
upon one knee; and one begun the first line, whispering in the eare of
the next, and the second to the third, and the third to the fourth, and
she to the first. Then the first begun the second line, and so round
quite through, and, putting each one finger only to a boy that lay flat
upon his back on the ground, as if he was dead; at the end of the words,
they did with their four fingers raise this boy as high as they could
reach, and he [Mr. Brisband] being there, and wondering at it, as also
being afeard to see it, for they would have had him to have bore a part
in saying the words, in the roome of one of the little girles that was
so young that they could hardly make her learn to repeat the words, did,
for feare there might be some sleight used in it by the boy, or that the
boy might be light, call the cook of the house, a very lusty fellow, as
Sir G. Carteret's cook, who is very big, and they did raise him in just
the same manner. This is one of the strangest things I ever heard, but
he tells it me of his owne knowledge, and I do heartily believe it to
be true. I enquired of him whether they were Protestant or Catholique
girles; and he told me they were Protestant, which made it the more
strange to me. Thus we end this month, as I said, after the greatest
glut of content that ever I had; only under some difficulty because of
the plague, which grows mightily upon us, the last week being about 1700
or 1800 of the plague. My Lord Sandwich at sea with a fleet of about
100 sail, to the Northward, expecting De Ruyter, or the Dutch East India
fleet. My Lord Hinchingbroke coming over from France, and will meet his
sister at Scott's-hall. Myself having obliged both these families in
this business very much; as both my Lady, and Sir G. Carteret and his
Lady do confess exceedingly, and the latter do also now call me cozen,
which I am glad of. So God preserve us all friends long, and continue
health among us.




AUGUST 1665

August 1st. Slept, and lay long; then up and my Lord [Crew] and Sir G.
Carteret being gone abroad, I first to see the bridegroom and bride, and
found them both up, and he gone to dress himself. Both red in the face,
and well enough pleased this morning with their night's lodging. Thence
down and Mr. Brisband and I to billiards: anon come my Lord and Sir G.
Carteret in, who have been looking abroad and visiting some farms that
Sir G. Carteret hath thereabouts, and, among other things, report the
greatest stories of the bigness of the calfes they find there, ready to
sell to the butchers, as big, they say, as little Cowes, and that they
do give them a piece of chalke to licke, which they hold makes them
white in the flesh within. Very merry at dinner, and so to talk and
laugh after dinner, and up and down, some to [one] place, some to
another, full of content on all sides. Anon about five o'clock, Sir
G. Carteret and his lady and I took coach with the greatest joy and
kindnesse that could be from the two familys or that ever I saw with
so much appearance, and, I believe, reality in all my life. Drove
hard home, and it was night ere we got to Deptford, where, with much
kindnesse from them to me, I left them, and home to the office, where I
find all well, and being weary and sleepy, it being very late, I to bed.

2nd. Up, it being a publique fast, as being the first Wednesday of
the month, for the plague; I within doors all day, and upon my monthly
accounts late, and there to my great joy settled almost all my private
matters of money in my books clearly, and allowing myself several sums
which I had hitherto not reckoned myself sure of, because I would not
be over sure of any thing, though with reason I might do it, I did find
myself really worth L1900, for which the great God of Heaven and Earth
be praised! At night to the office to write a few letters, and so home
to bed, after fitting myself for tomorrow's journey.

3rd. Up, and betimes to Deptford to Sir G. Carteret's, where, not liking
the horse that had been hired by Mr. Uthwayt for me, I did desire Sir G.
Carteret to let me ride his new L40 horse, which he did, and so I
left my 'hacquenee'--[Haquenee = an ambling nag fitted for ladies'
riding.]--behind, and so after staying a good while in their bedchamber
while they were dressing themselves, discoursing merrily, I parted and
to the ferry, where I was forced to stay a great while before I could
get my horse brought over, and then mounted and rode very finely to
Dagenhams; all the way people, citizens, walking to and again to enquire
how the plague is in the City this week by the Bill; which by chance, at
Greenwich, I had heard was 2,020 of the plague, and 3,000 and odd of all
diseases; but methought it was a sad question to be so often asked me.
Coming to Dagenhams, I there met our company coming out of the house,
having staid as long as they could for me; so I let them go a little
before, and went and took leave of my Lady Sandwich, good woman, who
seems very sensible of my service in this late business, and having her
directions in some things, among others, to get Sir G. Carteret and my
Lord to settle the portion, and what Sir G. Carteret is to settle, into
land, soon as may be, she not liking that it should lie long undone, for
fear of death on either side. So took leave of her, and then down to the
buttery, and eat a piece of cold venison pie, and drank and took some
bread and cheese in my hand; and so mounted after them, Mr. Marr very
kindly staying to lead me the way. By and by met my Lord Crew returning,
after having accompanied them a little way, and so after them, Mr. Marr
telling me by the way how a mayde servant of Mr. John Wright's (who
lives thereabouts) falling sick of the plague, she was removed to an
out-house, and a nurse appointed to look to her; who, being once absent,
the mayde got out of the house at the window, and run away. The nurse
coming and knocking, and having no answer, believed she was dead, and
went and told Mr. Wright so; who and his lady were in great strait what
to do to get her buried. At last resolved to go to Burntwood hard by,
being in the parish, and there get people to do it. But they would not;
so he went home full of trouble, and in the way met the wench walking
over the common, which frighted him worse than before; and was forced
to send people to take her, which he did; and they got one of the pest
coaches and put her into it to carry her to a pest house. And passing in
a narrow lane, Sir Anthony Browne, with his brother and some friends
in the coach, met this coach with the curtains drawn close. The brother
being a young man, and believing there might be some lady in it that
would not be seen, and the way being narrow, he thrust his head out of
his own into her coach, and to look, and there saw somebody look very
ill, and in a sick dress, and stunk mightily; which the coachman also
cried out upon. And presently they come up to some people that stood
looking after it, and told our gallants that it was a mayde of Mr.
Wright's carried away sick of the plague; which put the young gentleman
into a fright had almost cost him his life, but is now well again. I,
overtaking our young people, 'light, and into the coach to them, where
mighty merry all the way; and anon come to the Blockehouse, over against
Gravesend, where we staid a great while, in a little drinking-house.
Sent back our coaches to Dagenhams. I, by and by, by boat to Gravesend,
where no newes of Sir G. Carteret come yet; so back again, and fetched
them all over, but the two saddle-horses that were to go with us, which
could not be brought over in the horseboat, the wind and tide being
against us, without towing; so we had some difference with some
watermen, who would not tow them over under 20s., whereupon I swore to
send one of them to sea and will do it. Anon some others come to me and
did it for 10s. By and by comes Sir G. Carteret, and so we set out for
Chatham: in my way overtaking some company, wherein was a lady, very
pretty, riding singly, her husband in company with her. We fell into
talke, and I read a copy of verses which her husband showed me, and he
discommended, but the lady commended: and I read them, so as to make the
husband turn to commend them. By and by he and I fell into acquaintance,
having known me formerly at the Exchequer. His name is Nokes, over
against Bow Church. He was servant to Alderman Dashwood. We promised
to meet, if ever we come both to London again; and, at parting, I had
a fair salute on horseback, in Rochester streets, of the lady, and so
parted. Come to Chatham mighty merry, and anon to supper, it being near
9 o'clock ere we come thither. My Lady Carteret come thither in a coach,
by herself, before us. Great mind they have to buy a little 'hacquenee'
that I rode on from Greenwich, for a woman's horse. Mighty merry,
and after supper, all being withdrawn, Sir G. Carteret did take an
opportunity to speak with much value and kindness to me, which is of
great joy to me. So anon to bed. Mr. Brisband and I together to my
content.

4th. Up at five o'clock, and by six walked out alone, with my Lady
Slanning, to the Docke Yard, where walked up and down, and so to
Mr. Pett's, who led us into his garden, and there the lady, the best
humoured woman in the world, and a devout woman (I having spied her on
her knees half an houre this morning in her chamber), clambered up to
the top of the banquetting-house to gather nuts, and mighty merry, and
so walked back again through the new rope house, which is very usefull;
and so to the Hill-house to breakfast and mighty merry. Then they took
coach, and Sir G. Carteret kissed me himself heartily, and my Lady
several times, with great kindnesse, and then the young ladies, and so
with much joy, bade "God be with you!" and an end I think it will be to
my mirthe for a great while, it having been the passage of my whole life
the most pleasing for the time, considering the quality and nature of
the business, and my noble usage in the doing of it, and very many fine
journys, entertainments and great company. I returned into the house for
a while to do business there with Commissioner Pett, and there with the
officers of the Chest, where I saw more of Sir W. Batten's business than
ever I did before, for whereas he did own once under his hand to them
that he was accountable for L2200, of which he had yet paid but L1600,
he writes them a letter lately that he hath but about L50 left that is
due to the Chest, but I will do something in it and that speedily.
That being done I took horse, and Mr. Barrow with me bore me company to
Gravesend, discoursing of his business, wherein I vexed him, and he me,
I seeing his frowardness, but yet that he is in my conscience a very
honest man, and some good things he told me, which I shall remember
to the King's advantage. There I took boat alone, and, the tide being
against me, landed at Blackwall and walked to Wapping, Captain Bowd whom
I met with talking with me all the way, who is a sober man. So home, and
found all things well, and letters from Dover that my Lord Hinchingbroke
is arrived at Dover, and would be at Scott's hall this night, where the
whole company will meet. I wish myself with them. After writing a few
letters I took boat and down to Woolwich very late, and there found my
wife and her woman upon the key hearing a fellow in a barge, that lay
by, fiddle. So I to them and in, very merry, and to bed, I sleepy and
weary.

5th. In the morning up, and my wife showed me several things of her
doing, especially one fine woman's Persian head mighty finely done,
beyond what I could expect of her; and so away by water, having ordered
in the yarde six or eight bargemen to be whipped, who had last night
stolen some of the King's cordage from out of the yarde. I to Deptford,
and there by agreement met with my Lord Bruncker, and there we kept our
office, he and I, and did what there was to do, and at noon parted
to meet at the office next week. Sir W. Warren and I thence did walk
through the rain to Half-Way House, and there I eat a piece of boiled
beef and he and I talked over several businesses, among others our
design upon the mast docke, which I hope to compass and get 2 or L300
by. Thence to Redriffe, where we parted, and I home, where busy all the
afternoon. Stepped to Colvill's to set right a business of money, where
he told me that for certain De Ruyter is come home, with all his fleete,
which is very ill newes, considering the charge we have been at in
keeping a fleete to the northward so long, besides the great expectation
of snapping him, wherein my Lord Sandwich will I doubt suffer some
dishonour. I am told also of a great ryott upon Thursday last in
Cheapside; Colonell Danvers, a delinquent, having been taken, and in his
way to the Tower was rescued from the captain of the guard, and carried
away; only one of the rescuers being taken. I am told also that the Duke
of Buckingham is dead, but I know not of a certainty. So home and very
late at letters, and then home to supper and to bed.

6th (Lord's day). Dressed and had my head combed by my little girle, to
whom I confess 'que je sum demasiado kind, nuper ponendo mes mains in su
des choses de son breast, mais il faut que je' leave it lest it bring
me to 'alcun major inconvenience'. So to my business in my chamber, look
over and settling more of my papers than I could the two last days
I have spent about them. In the evening, it raining hard, down to
Woolwich, where after some little talk to bed.

7th. Up, and with great pleasure looking over my wife's pictures, and
then to see my Lady Pen, whom I have not seen since her coming hither,
and after being a little merry with her, she went forth and I staid
there talking with Mrs. Pegg and looking over her pictures, and
commended them; but, Lord! so far short of my wife's, as no comparison.
Thence to my wife, and there spent, talking, till noon, when by
appointment Mr. Andrews come out of the country to speake with me about
their Tangier business, and so having done with him and dined, I home by
water, where by appointment I met Dr. Twisden, Mr. Povy, Mr. Lawson, and
Stockdale about settling their business of money; but such confusion
I never met with, nor could anything be agreed on, but parted like a
company of fools, I vexed to lose so much time and pains to no purpose.
They gone, comes Rayner, the boatmaker, about some business, and brings
a piece of plate with him, which I refused to take of him, thinking
indeed that the poor man hath no reason nor encouragement from our
dealings with him to give any of us any presents. He gone, there comes
Luellin, about Mr. Deering's business of planke, to have the contract
perfected, and offers me twenty pieces in gold, as Deering had done some
time since himself, but I both then and now refused it, resolving not
to be bribed to dispatch business, but will have it done however out of
hand forthwith. So he gone, I to supper and to bed.

8th. Up and to the office, where all the morning we sat. At noon I home
to dinner alone, and after dinner Bagwell's wife waited at the door, and
went with me to my office.... So parted, and I to Sir W. Batten's, and
there sat the most of the afternoon talking and drinking too much with
my Lord Bruncker, Sir G. Smith, G. Cocke and others very merry. I drunk
a little mixed, but yet more than I should do. So to my office a little,
and then to the Duke of Albemarle's about some business. The streets
mighty empty all the way, now even in London, which is a sad sight. And
to Westminster Hall, where talking, hearing very sad stories from Mrs.
Mumford; among others, of Mrs. Michell's son's family. And poor Will,
that used to sell us ale at the Hall-door, his wife and three children
died, all, I think, in a day. So home through the City again, wishing I
may have taken no ill in going; but I will go, I think, no more thither.
Late at the office, and then home to supper, having taken a pullet
home with me, and then to bed. The news of De Kuyter's coming home
is certain; and told to the great disadvantage of our fleete, and the
praise of De Kuyter; but it cannot be helped, nor do I know what to say
to it.

9th. Up betimes to my office, where Tom Hater to the writing of letters
with me, which have for a good while been in arreare, and we close at it
all day till night, only made a little step out for half an houre in
the morning to the Exchequer about striking of tallys, but no good done
therein, people being most out of towne. At noon T. Hater dined with
me, and so at it all the afternoon. At night home and supped, and
after reading a little in Cowley's poems, my head being disturbed with
overmuch business to-day, I to bed.

10th. Up betimes, and called upon early by my she-cozen Porter, the
turner's wife, to tell me that her husband was carried to the Tower,
for buying of some of the King's powder, and would have my helpe, but
I could give her none, not daring any more to appear in the business,
having too much trouble lately therein. By and by to the office, where
we sat all the morning; in great trouble to see the Bill this week rise
so high, to above 4,000 in all, and of them above 3,000 of the plague.
And an odd story of Alderman Bence's stumbling at night over a dead
corps in the streete, and going home and telling his wife, she at the
fright, being with child, fell sicke and died of the plague. We sat
late, and then by invitation my Lord Brunker, Sir J. Minnes, Sir W.
Batten and I to Sir G. Smith's to dinner, where very good company and
good cheer. Captain Cocke was there and Jacke Fenn, but to our great
wonder Alderman Bence, and tells us that not a word of all this is true,
and others said so too, but by his owne story his wife hath been ill,
and he fain to leave his house and comes not to her, which continuing a
trouble to me all the time I was there. Thence to the office and, after
writing letters, home, to draw-over anew my will, which I had bound
myself by oath to dispatch by to-morrow night; the town growing so
unhealthy, that a man cannot depend upon living two days to an end. So
having done something of it, I to bed.

11th. Up, and all day long finishing and writing over my will twice, for
my father and my wife, only in the morning a pleasant rencontre happened
in having a young married woman brought me by her father, old Delkes,
that carries pins always in his mouth, to get her husband off that he
should not go to sea, 'une contre pouvait avoir done any cose cum else,
but I did nothing, si ni baisser her'. After they were gone my mind run
upon having them called back again, and I sent a messenger to Blackwall,
but he failed. So I lost my expectation. I to the Exchequer, about
striking new tallys, and I find the Exchequer, by proclamation, removing
to Nonesuch.--[Nonsuch Palace, near Epsom, where the Exchequer money was
kept during the time of the plague.]--Back again and at my papers, and
putting up my books into chests, and settling my house and all things in
the best and speediest order I can, lest it should please God to take me
away, or force me to leave my house. Late up at it, and weary and full
of wind, finding perfectly that so long as I keepe myself in company at
meals and do there eat lustily (which I cannot do alone, having no love
to eating, but my mind runs upon my business), I am as well as can be,
but when I come to be alone, I do not eat in time, nor enough, nor with
any good heart, and I immediately begin to be full of wind, which brings
my pain, till I come to fill my belly a-days again, then am presently
well.

12th. The office now not sitting, but only hereafter on Thursdays at
the office, I within all the morning about my papers and setting things
still in order, and also much time in settling matters with Dr.
Twisden. At noon am sent for by Sir G. Carteret, to meet him and my Lord
Hinchingbroke at Deptford, but my Lord did not come thither, he having
crossed the river at Gravesend to Dagenhams, whither I dare not follow
him, they being afeard of me; but Sir G. Carteret says, he is a most
sweet youth in every circumstance. Sir G. Carteret being in haste of
going to the Duke of Albemarle and the Archbishop, he was pettish, and
so I could not fasten any discourse, but take another time. So he gone,
I down to Greenwich and sent away the Bezan, thinking to go with my wife
to-night to come back again to-morrow night to the Soveraigne at the
buoy off the Nore. Coming back to Deptford, old Bagwell walked a little
way with me, and would have me in to his daughter's, and there he being
gone 'dehors, ego had my volunte de su hiza'. Eat and drank and away
home, and after a little at the office to my chamber to put more things
still in order, and late to bed. The people die so, that now it seems
they are fain to carry the dead to be buried by day-light, the nights
not sufficing to do it in. And my Lord Mayor commands people to be
within at nine at night all, as they say, that the sick may have liberty
to go abroad for ayre. There is one also dead out of one of our ships
at Deptford, which troubles us mightily; the Providence fire-ship, which
was just fitted to go to sea. But they tell me to-day no more sick on
board. And this day W. Bodham tells me that one is dead at Woolwich,
not far from the Rope-yard. I am told, too, that a wife of one of the
groomes at Court is dead at Salsbury; so that the King and Queene are
speedily to be all gone to Milton. God preserve us!

13th (Lord's day). Up betimes and to my chamber, it being a very wet
day all day, and glad am I that we did not go by water to see "The
Soveraigne"

     ["The Sovereign of the Seas" was built at Woolwich in 1637 of timber
     which had been stripped of its bark while growing in the spring, and
     not felled till the second autumn afterwards; and it is observed by
     Dr. Plot ("Phil.  Trans."  for 1691), in his discourse on the most
     seasonable time for felling timber, written by the advice of Pepys,
     that after forty-seven years, "all the ancient timber then remaining
     in her, it was no easy matter to drive a nail into it" ("Quarterly
     Review," vol. viii., p. 35).--B.]

to-day, as I intended, clearing all matters in packing up my papers
and books, and giving instructions in writing to my executors, thereby
perfecting the whole business of my will, to my very great joy; so that
I shall be in much better state of soul, I hope, if it should please
the Lord to call me away this sickly time. At night to read, being
weary with this day's great work, and then after supper to bed, to rise
betimes to-morrow, and to bed with a mind as free as to the business of
the world as if I were not worth L100 in the whole world, every thing
being evened under my hand in my books and papers, and upon the whole I
find myself worth, besides Brampton estate, the sum of L2164, for which
the Lord be praised!

14th. Up, and my mind being at mighty ease from the dispatch of my
business so much yesterday, I down to Deptford to Sir G. Carteret, where
with him a great while, and a great deale of private talke concerning my
Lord Sandwich's and his matters, and chiefly of the latter, I giving
him great deale of advice about the necessity of his having caution
concerning Fenn, and the many ways there are of his being abused by any
man in his place, and why he should not bring his son in to look after
his business, and more, to be a Commissioner of the Navy, which he
listened to and liked, and told me how much the King was his good
Master, and was sure not to deny him that or any thing else greater
than that, and I find him a very cunning man, whatever at other times
he seems to be, and among other things he told me he was not for the
fanfaroone

     [Fanfaron, French, from fanfare, a sounding of trumpets; hence, a
     swaggerer, or empty boaster.]

to make a show with a great title, as he might have had long since, but
the main thing to get an estate; and another thing, speaking of minding
of business, "By God," says he, "I will and have already almost brought
it to that pass, that the King shall not be able to whip a cat, but I
must be at the tayle of it." Meaning so necessary he is, and the King
and my Lord Treasurer and all do confess it; which, while I mind my
business, is my own case in this office of the Navy, and I hope shall
be more, if God give me life and health. Thence by agreement to Sir J.
Minnes's lodgings, where I found my Lord Bruncker, and so by water to
the ferry, and there took Sir W. Batten's coach that was sent for us,
and to Sir W. Batten's, where very merry, good cheer, and up and down
the garden with great content to me, and, after dinner, beat Captain
Cocke at billiards, won about 8s. of him and my Lord Bruncker. So in
the evening after, much pleasure back again and I by water to Woolwich,
where supped with my wife, and then to bed betimes, because of rising
to-morrow at four of the clock in order to the going out with Sir G.
Carteret toward Cranborne to my Lord Hinchingbrooke in his way to Court.
This night I did present my wife with the dyamond ring, awhile since
given me by Mr. Dicke Vines's brother, for helping him to be a purser,
valued at about L10, the first thing of that nature I did ever give her.
Great fears we have that the plague will be a great Bill this weeke.

15th. Up by 4 o'clock and walked to Greenwich, where called at Captain
Cocke's and to his chamber, he being in bed, where something put my
last night's dream into my head, which I think is the best that ever
was dreamt, which was that I had my Lady Castlemayne in my armes and was
admitted to use all the dalliance I desired with her, and then dreamt
that this could not be awake, but that it was only a dream; but that
since it was a dream, and that I took so much real pleasure in it, what
a happy thing it would be if when we are in our graves (as Shakespeere
resembles it) we could dream, and dream but such dreams as this, that
then we should not need to be so fearful of death, as we are this plague
time. Here I hear that news is brought Sir G. Carteret that my Lord
Hinchingbrooke is not well, and so cannot meet us at Cranborne to-night.
So I to Sir G. Carteret's; and there was sorry with him for our
disappointment. So we have put off our meeting there till Saturday next.
Here I staid talking with Sir G. Carteret, he being mighty free with me
in his business, and among other things hath ordered Rider and Cutler to
put into my hands copper to the value of L5,000 (which Sir G. Carteret's
share it seems come to in it), which is to raise part of the money he is
to layout for a purchase for my Lady Jemimah. Thence he and I to Sir
J. Minnes's by invitation, where Sir W. Batten and my Lady, and my Lord
Bruncker, and all of us dined upon a venison pasty and other good meat,
but nothing well dressed. But my pleasure lay in getting some bills
signed by Sir G. Carteret, and promise of present payment from Mr. Fenn,
which do rejoice my heart, it being one of the heaviest things I had
upon me, that so much of the little I have should lie (viz. near L1000)
in the King's hands. Here very merry and (Sir G. Carteret being gone
presently after dinner) to Captain Cocke's, and there merry, and so
broke up and I by water to the Duke of Albemarle, with whom I spoke a
great deale in private, they being designed to send a fleete of ships
privately to the Streights. No news yet from our fleete, which is much
wondered at, but the Duke says for certain guns have been heard to the
northward very much. It was dark before I could get home, and so land
at Church-yard stairs, where, to my great trouble, I met a dead corps
of the plague, in the narrow ally just bringing down a little pair of
stairs. But I thank God I was not much disturbed at it. However, I shall
beware of being late abroad again.

16th. Up, and after doing some necessary business about my accounts at
home, to the office, and there with Mr. Hater wrote letters, and I did
deliver to him my last will, one part of it to deliver to my wife when
I am dead. Thence to the Exchange, where I have not been a great while.
But, Lord! how sad a sight it is to see the streets empty of people, and
very few upon the 'Change. Jealous of every door that one sees shut up,
lest it should be the plague; and about us two shops in three, if not
more, generally shut up. From the 'Change to Sir G. Smith's' with Mr.
Fenn, to whom I am nowadays very complaisant, he being under payment of
my bills to me, and some other sums at my desire, which he readily do.
Mighty merry with Captain Cocke and Fenn at Sir G. Smith's, and a brave
dinner, but I think Cocke is the greatest epicure that is, eats and
drinks with the greatest pleasure and liberty that ever man did. Very
contrary newes to-day upon the 'Change, some that our fleete hath taken
some of the Dutch East India ships, others that we did attaque it at
Bergen and were repulsed, others that our fleete is in great danger
after this attaque by meeting with the great body now gone out of
Holland, almost 100 sayle of men of warr. Every body is at a great losse
and nobody can tell. Thence among the goldsmiths to get some money, and
so home, settling some new money matters, and to my great joy have got
home L500 more of the money due to me, and got some more money to help
Andrews first advanced. This day I had the ill news from Dagenhams,
that my poor lord of Hinchingbroke his indisposition is turned to the
small-pox. Poor gentleman! that he should be come from France so soon to
fall sick, and of that disease too, when he should be gone to see a fine
lady, his mistresse. I am most heartily sorry for it. So late setting
papers to rights, and so home to bed.

17th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon
dined together upon some victuals I had prepared at Sir W. Batten's upon
the King's charge, and after dinner, I having dispatched some business
and set things in order at home, we down to the water and by boat to
Greenwich to the Bezan yacht, where Sir W. Batten, Sir J. Minnes, my
Lord Bruncker and myself, with some servants (among others Mr. Carcasse,
my Lord's clerk, a very civil gentleman), embarked in the yacht and
down we went most pleasantly, and noble discourse I had with my Lord
Bruneker, who is a most excellent person. Short of Gravesend it grew
calme, and so we come to an anchor, and to supper mighty merry, and
after it, being moonshine, we out of the cabbin to laugh and talk, and
then, as we grew sleepy, went in and upon velvet cushions of the King's
that belong to the yacht fell to sleep, which we all did pretty well
till 3 or 4 of the clock, having risen in the night to look for a new
comet which is said to have lately shone, but we could see no such
thing.

18th. Up about 5 o'clock and dressed ourselves, and to sayle again down
to the Soveraigne at the buoy of the Nore, a noble ship, now rigged
and fitted and manned; we did not stay long, but to enquire after her
readinesse and thence to Sheernesse, where we walked up and down, laying
out the ground to be taken in for a yard to lay provisions for cleaning
and repairing of ships, and a most proper place it is for the purpose.
Thence with great pleasure up the Meadeway, our yacht contending with
Commissioner Pett's, wherein he met us from Chatham, and he had the best
of it. Here I come by, but had not tide enough to stop at Quinbrough, a
with mighty pleasure spent the day in doing all and seeing these places,
which I had never done before. So to the Hill house at Chatham and there
dined, and after dinner spent some time discoursing of business. Among
others arguing with the Commissioner about his proposing the laying out
so much money upon Sheerenesse, unless it be to the slighting of Chatham
yarde, for it is much a better place than Chatham, which however the
King is not at present in purse to do, though it were to be wished he
were. Thence in Commissioner Pett's coach (leaving them there). I late
in the darke to Gravesend, where great is the plague, and I troubled to
stay there so long for the tide. At 10 at night, having supped, I took
boat alone, and slept well all the way to the Tower docke about three
o'clock in the morning. So knocked up my people, and to bed.

19th. Slept till 8 o'clock, and then up and met with letters from the
King and Lord Arlington, for the removal of our office to Greenwich. I
also wrote letters, and made myself ready to go to Sir G. Carteret, at
Windsor; and having borrowed a horse of Mr. Blackbrough, sent him to
wait for me at the Duke of Albemarle's door: when, on a sudden, a letter
comes to us from the Duke of Albemarle, to tell us that the fleete is
all come back to Solebay, and are presently to be dispatched back again.
Whereupon I presently by water to the Duke of Albemarle to know what
news; and there I saw a letter from my Lord Sandwich to the Duke of
Albemarle, and also from Sir W. Coventry and Captain Teddiman; how my
Lord having commanded Teddiman with twenty-two ships

     [A news letter of August 19th (Salisbury), gives the following
     account of this affair:--"The Earl of Sandwich being on the Norway
     coast, ordered Sir Thomas Teddeman with 20 ships to attack 50 Dutch
     merchant ships in Bergen harbour; six convoyers had so placed
     themselves that only four or five of the ships could be reached at
     once.  The Governor of Bergen fired on our ships, and placed 100
     pieces of ordnance and two regiments of foot on the rocks to attack
     them, but they got clear without the loss of a ship, only 500 men
     killed or wounded, five or six captains among them. The fleet has
     gone to Sole Bay to repair losses and be ready to encounter the
     Dutch fleet, which is gone northward" ("Calendar of State Papers,"
     1664-65, pp. 526, 527).  Medals were struck in Holland, the
     inscription in Dutch on one of these is thus translated: "Thus we
     arrest the pride of the English, who extend their piracy even
     against their friends, and who insulting the forts of Norway,
     violate the rights of the harbours of King Frederick; but, for the
     reward of their audacity, see their vessels destroyed by the balls
     of the Dutch" (Hawkins's "Medallic Illustrations of the History of
     Great Britain and Ireland," ed.  Franks and Grueber, 1885, vol. i.,
     p. 508).  Sir Gilbert Talbot's "True Narrative of the Earl of
     Sandwich's Attempt upon Bergen with the English Fleet on the 3rd of
     August, 1665, and the Cause of his Miscarriage thereupon," is in the
     British Museum (Harl. MS., No. 6859).  It is printed in
     "Archaeologia," vol.  xxii., p. 33.  The Earl of Rochester also gave
     an account of the action in a letter to his mother (Wordsworth's
     "Ecclesiastical Biography," fourth edition, vol. iv., p. 611).  Sir
     John Denham, in his "Advice to a Painter," gives a long satirical
     account of the affair.  A coloured drawing of the attack upon
     Bergen, on vellum, showing the range of the ships engaged, is in the
     British Museum.  Shortly after the Bergen affair forty of the Dutch
     merchant vessels, on their way to Holland, fell into the hands of
     the English, and in Penn's "Memorials of Sir William Penn," vol.
     ii., p. 364, is a list of the prizes taken on the 3rd and 4th
     September.  The troubles connected with these prizes and the
     disgrace into which Lord Sandwich fell are fully set forth in
     subsequent pages of the Diary.  Evelyn writes in his Diary (November
     27th, 1665): "There was no small suspicion of my Lord Sandwich
     having permitted divers commanders who were at ye taking of ye East
     India prizes to break bulk and take to themselves jewels, silkes,
     &c., tho' I believe some whom I could name fill'd their pockets, my
     Lo. Sandwich himself had the least share.  However, he underwent the
     blame, and it created him enemies, and prepossess'd ye Lo. Generall
     [Duke of Albemarle], for he spake to me of it with much zeale and
     concerne, and I believe laid load enough on Lo.  Sandwich at
     Oxford."]

(of which but fifteen could get thither, and of those fifteen but eight
or nine could come up to play) to go to Bergen; where, after several
messages to and fro from the Governor of the Castle, urging that
Teddiman ought not to come thither with more than five ships, and
desiring time to think of it, all the while he suffering the Dutch
ships to land their guns to their best advantage; Teddiman on the second
pretence, began to play at the Dutch ships, (wherof ten East India-men,)
and in three hours' time (the town and castle, without any provocation,
playing on our ships,) they did cut all our cables, so as the wind
being off the land, did force us to go out, and rendered our fire-ships
useless; without doing any thing, but what hurt of course our guns
must have done them: we having lost five commanders, besides Mr. Edward
Montagu, and Mr. Windham.

     [This Mr. Windham had entered into a formal engagement with the Earl
     of Rochester, "not without ceremonies of religion, that if either of
     them died, he should appear, and give the other notice of the future
     state, if there was any."  He was probably one of the brothers of
     Sir William Wyndham, Bart.  See Wordsworth's "Ecclesiastical
     Biography," fourth.  edition, vol. iv., p. 615.--B.]

Our fleete is come home to our great grief with not above five weeks'
dry, and six days' wet provisions: however, must out again; and the Duke
hath ordered the Soveraigne, and all other ships ready, to go out to
the fleete to strengthen them. This news troubles us all, but cannot
be helped. Having read all this news, and received commands of the Duke
with great content, he giving me the words which to my great joy he hath
several times said to me, that his greatest reliance is upon me. And my
Lord Craven also did come out to talk with me, and told me that I am
in mighty esteem with the Duke, for which I bless God. Home, and having
given my fellow-officers an account hereof, to Chatham, and wrote other
letters, I by water to Charing-Cross, to the post-house, and there the
people tell me they are shut up; and so I went to the new post-house,
and there got a guide and horses to Hounslow, where I was mightily taken
with a little girle, the daughter of the master of the house (Betty
Gysby), which, if she lives, will make a great beauty. Here I met with
a fine fellow who, while I staid for my horses, did enquire newes, but
I could not make him remember Bergen in Norway, in 6 or 7 times telling,
so ignorant he was. So to Stanes, and there by this time it was dark
night, and got a guide who lost his way in the forest, till by help
of the moone (which recompenses me for all the pains I ever took about
studying of her motions,) I led my guide into the way back again; and so
we made a man rise that kept a gate, and so he carried us to Cranborne.
Where in the dark I perceive an old house new building with a great deal
of rubbish, and was fain to go up a ladder to Sir G. Carteret's chamber.
And there in his bed I sat down, and told him all my bad newes, which
troubled him mightily; but yet we were very merry, and made the best of
it; and being myself weary did take leave, and after having spoken with
Mr. Fenn in bed, I to bed in my Lady's chamber that she uses to lie
in, and where the Duchesse of York, that now is, was born. So to sleep;
being very well, but weary, and the better by having carried with me a
bottle of strong water; whereof now and then a sip did me good.

20th (Lord's day). Sir G. Carteret come and walked by my bedside half an
houre, talking and telling me how my Lord is in this unblameable in all
this ill-successe, he having followed orders; and that all ought to be
imputed to the falsenesse of the King of Denmarke, who, he told me as
a secret, had promised to deliver up the Dutch ships to us, and we
expected no less; and swears it will, and will easily, be the ruine of
him and his kingdom, if we fall out with him, as we must in honour
do; but that all that can be, must be to get the fleete out again to
intercept De Witt, who certainly will be coming home with the East India
ships, he being gone thither. He being gone, I up and with Fenn, being
ready to walk forth to see the place; and I find it to be a very noble
seat in a noble forest, with the noblest prospect towards Windsor, and
round about over many countys, that can be desired; but otherwise a very
melancholy place, and little variety save only trees. I had thoughts
of going home by water, and of seeing Windsor Chappell and Castle, but
finding at my coming in that Sir G. Carteret did prevent me in speaking
for my sudden return to look after business, I did presently eat a bit
off the spit about 10 o'clock, and so took horse for Stanes, and thence
to Brainford to Mr. Povy's, the weather being very pleasant to ride in.
Mr. Povy not being at home I lost my labour, only eat and drank there
with his lady, and told my bad newes, and hear the plague is round about
them there. So away to Brainford; and there at the inn that goes down to
the water-side, I 'light and paid off my post-horses, and so slipped on
my shoes, and laid my things by, the tide not serving, and to church,
where a dull sermon, and many Londoners. After church to my inn, and eat
and drank, and so about seven o'clock by water, and got between nine
and ten to Queenhive, very dark. And I could not get my waterman to go
elsewhere for fear of the plague. Thence with a lanthorn, in great fear
of meeting of dead corpses, carried to be buried; but, blessed be God,
met none, but did see now and then a linke (which is the mark of them)
at a distance. So got safe home about 10 o'clock, my people not all
abed, and after supper I weary to bed.

21st. Called up, by message from Lord Bruncker and the rest of my
fellows, that they will meet me at the Duke of Albemarle's this morning;
so I up, and weary, however, got thither before them, and spoke with my
Lord, and with him and other gentlemen to walk in the Parke, where, I
perceive, he spends much of his time, having no whither else to go; and
here I hear him speake of some Presbyter people that he caused to be
apprehended yesterday, at a private meeting in Covent Garden, which
he would have released upon paying L5 per man to the poor, but it was
answered, they would not pay anything; so he ordered them to another
prison from the guard. By and by comes my fellow-officers, and the Duke
walked in, and to counsel with us; and that being done we departed,
and Sir W. Batten and I to the office, where, after I had done a little
business, I to his house to dinner, whither comes Captain Cocke, for
whose epicurisme a dish of partriges was sent for, and still gives me
reason to think is the greatest epicure in the world. Thence, after
dinner, I by water to Sir W. Warren's and with him two hours, talking of
things to his and my profit, and particularly good advice from him what
use to make of Sir G. Carteret's kindnesse to me and my interest in him,
with exceeding good cautions for me not using it too much nor obliging
him to fear by prying into his secrets, which it were easy for me to
do. Thence to my Lord Bruncker, at Greenwich, and Sir J. Minnes by
appointment, to looke after the lodgings appointed for us there for our
office, which do by no means please me, they being in the heart of all
the labourers and workmen there, which makes it as unsafe as to be, I
think, at London. Mr. Hugh May, who is a most ingenuous man, did show us
the lodgings, and his acquaintance I am desirous of. Thence walked, it
being now dark, to Sir J. Minnes's, and there staid at the door talking
with him an hour while messengers went to get a boat for me, to carry
me to Woolwich, but all to no purpose; so I was forced to walk it in
the darke, at ten o'clock at night, with Sir J. Minnes's George with me,
being mightily troubled for fear of the doggs at Coome farme, and more
for fear of rogues by the way, and yet more because of the plague which
is there, which is very strange, it being a single house, all alone
from the towne, but it seems they use to admit beggars, for their owne
safety, to lie in their barns, and they brought it to them; but I bless
God I got about eleven of the clock well to my wife, and giving 4s. in
recompence to George, I to my wife, and having first viewed her last
piece of drawing since I saw her, which is seven or eight days, which
pleases me beyond any thing in the world, to bed with great content but
weary.

22nd. Up, and after much pleasant talke and being importuned by my wife
and her two mayds, which are both good wenches, for me to buy a necklace
of pearle for her, and I promising to give her one of L60 in two years
at furthest, and in less if she pleases me in her painting, I went away
and walked to Greenwich, in my way seeing a coffin with a dead body
therein, dead of the plague, lying in an open close belonging to
Coome farme, which was carried out last night, and the parish have not
appointed any body to bury it; but only set a watch there day and night,
that nobody should go thither or come thence, which is a most cruel
thing: this disease making us more cruel to one another than if we are
doggs. So to the King's House, and there met my Lord Bruncker and Sir
J. Minnes, and to our lodgings again that are appointed for us, which do
please me better to day than last night, and are set a doing. Thence I
to Deptford, where by appointment I find Mr. Andrews come, and to the
Globe, where we dined together and did much business as to our Plymouth
gentlemen; and after a good dinner and good discourse, he being a very
good man, I think verily, we parted and I to the King's yard, walked
up and down, and by and by out at the back gate, and there saw the
Bagwell's wife's mother and daughter, and went to them, and went in
to the daughter's house with the mother, and 'faciebam le cose que ego
tenebam a mind to con elle', and drinking and talking, by and by away,
and so walked to Redriffe, troubled to go through the little lane, where
the plague is, but did and took water and home, where all well; but Mr.
Andrews not coming to even accounts, as I expected, with relation to
something of my own profit, I was vexed that I could not settle to
business, but home to my viall, though in the evening he did come to
my satisfaction. So after supper (he being gone first) I to settle my
journall and to bed.

23rd. Up, and whereas I had appointed Mr. Hater and Will to come betimes
to the office to meet me about business there, I was called upon as soon
as ready by Mr. Andrews to my great content, and he and I to our Tangier
accounts, where I settled, to my great joy, all my accounts with him,
and, which is more, cleared for my service to the contractors since the
last sum I received of them, L222 13s. profit to myself, and received
the money actually in the afternoon. After he was gone comes by a
pretence of mine yesterday old Delks the waterman, with his daughter
Robins, and several times to and again, he leaving her with me, about
the getting of his son Robins off, who was pressed yesterday again....
All the afternoon at my office mighty busy writing letters, and received
a very kind and good one from my Lord Sandwich of his arrival with the
fleete at Solebay, and the joy he has at my last newes he met with, of
the marriage of my Lady Jemimah; and he tells me more, the good newes
that all our ships, which were in such danger that nobody would insure
upon them, from the Eastland,

     [Eastland was a name given to the eastern countries of Europe.  The
     Eastland Company, or Company of Merchants trading to the East
     Country, was incorporated in Queen Elizabeth's reign (anno 21), and
     the charter was confirmed 13 Car. II. They were also called "The
     Merchants of Elbing."]

were all safe arrived, which I am sure is a great piece of good luck,
being in much more danger than those of Hambrough which were lost,
and their value much greater at this time to us. At night home, much
contented with this day's work, and being at home alone looking over
my papers, comes a neighbour of ours hard by to speak with me about
business of the office, one Mr. Fuller, a great merchant, but not my
acquaintance, but he come drunk, and would have had me gone and drunk
with him at home, or have let him send for wine hither, but I would do
neither, nor offered him any, but after some sorry discourse parted, and
I up to [my] chamber and to bed.

24th. Up betimes to my office, where my clerks with me, and very busy
all the morning writing letters. At noon down to Sir J. Minnes and Lord
Bruncker to Greenwich to sign some of the Treasurer's books, and there
dined very well; and thence to look upon our rooms again at the King's
house, which are not yet ready for us. So home and late writing letters,
and so, weary with business, home to supper and to bed.

25th. Up betimes to the office, and there, as well as all the afternoon,
saving a little dinner time, all alone till late at night writing
letters and doing business, that I may get beforehand with my business
again, which hath run behind a great while, and then home to supper
and to bed. This day I am told that Dr. Burnett, my physician, is this
morning dead of the plague; which is strange, his man dying so long ago,
and his house this month open again. Now himself dead. Poor unfortunate
man!

26th. Up betimes, and prepared to my great satisfaction an account for
the board of my office disbursements, which I had suffered to run on to
almost L120. That done I down by water to Greenwich, where we met the
first day my Lord Bruncker, Sir J. Minnes, and I, and I think we shall
do well there, and begin very auspiciously to me by having my account
abovesaid passed, and put into a way of having it presently paid.
When we rose I find Mr. Andrews and Mr. Yeabsly, who is just come from
Plymouth, at the door, and we walked together toward my Lord Brunker's,
talking about their business, Yeabsly being come up on purpose to
discourse with me about it, and finished all in a quarter of an hour,
and is gone again. I perceive they have some inclination to be going on
with their victualling-business for a while longer before they resign
it to Mr. Gauden, and I am well contented, for it brings me very good
profit with certainty, yet with much care and some pains. We parted
at my Lord Bruncker's doore, where I went in, having never been there
before, and there he made a noble entertainment for Sir J. Minnes,
myself, and Captain Cocke, none else saving some painted lady that dined
there, I know not who she is. But very merry we were, and after dinner
into the garden, and to see his and her chamber, where some good
pictures, and a very handsome young woman for my lady's woman. Thence I
by water home, in my way seeing a man taken up dead, out of the hold
of a small catch that lay at Deptford. I doubt it might be the plague,
which, with the thought of Dr. Burnett, did something disturb me, so
that I did not what I intended and should have done at the office, as
to business, but home sooner than ordinary, and after supper, to read
melancholy alone, and then to bed.

27th (Lord's day). Very well in the morning, and up and to my chamber
all the morning to put my things and papers yet more in order, and so
to dinner. Thence all the afternoon at my office till late making up my
papers and letters there into a good condition of order, and so home to
supper, and after reading a good while in the King's works,--[Charles
I.'s Works, now in the Pepysian Library]--which is a noble book, to bed.

28th. Up, and being ready I out to Mr. Colvill, the goldsmith's, having
not for some days been in the streets; but now how few people I see, and
those looking like people that had taken leave of the world. I there,
and made even all accounts in the world between him and I, in a very
good condition, and I would have done the like with Sir Robert Viner,
but he is out of towne, the sicknesse being every where thereabouts. I
to the Exchange, and I think there was not fifty people upon it, and
but few more like to be as they told me, Sir G. Smith and others. Thus
I think to take adieu to-day of the London streets, unless it be to go
again to Viner's. Home to dinner, and there W. Hewer brings me L119 he
hath received for my office disbursements, so that I think I have L1800
and more in the house, and, blessed be God! no money out but what I
can very well command and that but very little, which is much the
best posture I ever was in in my life, both as to the quantity and the
certainty I have of the money I am worth; having most of it in my own
hand. But then this is a trouble to me what to do with it, being myself
this day going to be wholly at Woolwich; but for the present I am
resolved to venture it in an iron chest, at least for a while. In the
afternoon I sent down my boy to Woolwich with some things before me, in
order to my lying there for good and all, and so I followed him. Just
now comes newes that the fleete is gone, or going this day, out again,
for which God be praised! and my Lord Sandwich hath done himself great
right in it, in getting so soon out again. I pray God, he may meet the
enemy. Towards the evening, just as I was fitting myself, comes W. Hewer
and shows me a letter which Mercer had wrote to her mother about a great
difference between my wife and her yesterday, and that my wife will have
her go away presently. This, together with my natural jealousy that some
bad thing or other may be in the way, did trouble me exceedingly, so as
I was in a doubt whether to go thither or no, but having fitted myself
and my things I did go, and by night got thither, where I met my wife
walking to the waterside with her paynter, Mr. Browne, and her mayds.
There I met Commissioner Pett, and my Lord Brunker, and the lady at his
house had been thereto-day, to see her. Commissioner Pett staid a very
little while, and so I to supper with my wife and Mr. Shelden, and so to
bed with great pleasure.

29th. In the morning waking, among other discourse my wife begun to
tell me the difference between her and Mercer, and that it was only from
restraining her to gad abroad to some Frenchmen that were in the town,
which I do not wholly yet in part believe, and for my quiet would not
enquire into it. So rose and dressed myself, and away by land walking
a good way, then remembered that I had promised Commissioner Pett to go
with him in his coach, and therefore I went back again to him, and so
by his coach to Greenwich, and called at Sir Theophilus Biddulph's, a
sober, discreet man, to discourse of the preventing of the plague in
Greenwich, and Woolwich, and Deptford, where in every place it begins to
grow very great. We appointed another meeting, and so walked together to
Greenwich and there parted, and Pett and I to the office, where all the
morning, and after office done I to Sir J. Minnes and dined with him,
and thence to Deptford thinking to have seen Bagwell, but did not, and
so straight to Redriffe, and home, and late at my business to dispatch
away letters, and then home to bed, which I did not intend, but to have
staid for altogether at Woolwich, but I made a shift for a bed for Tom,
whose bed is gone to Woolwich, and so to bed.

30th. Up betimes and to my business of settling my house and papers, and
then abroad and met with Hadley, our clerke, who, upon my asking how the
plague goes, he told me it encreases much, and much in our parish; for,
says he, there died nine this week, though I have returned but six:
which is a very ill practice, and makes me think it is so in other
places; and therefore the plague much greater than people take it to be.
Thence, as I intended, to Sir R. Viner's, and there found not Mr. Lewes
ready for me, so I went forth and walked towards Moorefields to see (God
forbid my presumption!) whether I could see any dead corps going to the
grave; but, as God would have it, did not. But, Lord! how every body's
looks, and discourse in the street is of death, and nothing else, and
few people going up and down, that the towne is like a place distressed
and forsaken. After one turne there back to Viner's, and there found my
business ready for me, and evened all reckonings with them to this
day to my great content. So home, and all day till very late at night
setting my Tangier and private accounts in order, which I did in both,
and in the latter to my great joy do find myself yet in the much best
condition that ever I was in, finding myself worth L2180 and odd,
besides plate and goods, which I value at L250 more, which is a very
great blessing to me. The Lord make me thankfull! and of this at this
day above L1800 in cash in my house, which speaks but little out of my
hands in desperate condition, but this is very troublesome to have in my
house at this time. So late to bed, well pleased with my accounts, but
weary of being so long at them.

31st. Up and, after putting several things in order to my removal,
to Woolwich; the plague having a great encrease this week, beyond all
expectation of almost 2,000, making the general Bill 7,000, odd 100;
and the plague above 6,000. I down by appointment to Greenwich, to our
office, where I did some business, and there dined with our company and
Sir W. Boreman, and Sir The. Biddulph, at Mr. Boreman's, where a good
venison pasty, and after a good merry dinner I to my office, and there
late writing letters, and then to Woolwich by water, where pleasant with
my wife and people, and after supper to bed. Thus this month ends with
great sadness upon the publick, through the greatness of the plague
every where through the kingdom almost. Every day sadder and sadder news
of its encrease. In the City died this week 7,496 and of them 6,102 of
the plague. But it is feared that the true number of the dead, this week
is near 10,000; partly from the poor that cannot be taken notice of,
through the greatness of the number, and partly from the Quakers and
others that will not have any bell ring for them. Our fleete gone out to
find the Dutch, we having about 100 sail in our fleete, and in them the
Soveraigne one; so that it is a better fleete than the former with the
Duke was. All our fear is that the Dutch should be got in before
them; which would be a very great sorrow to the publick, and to me
particularly, for my Lord Sandwich's sake. A great deal of money being
spent, and the kingdom not in a condition to spare, nor a parliament
without much difficulty to meet to give more. And to that; to have it
said, what hath been done by our late fleetes? As to myself I am very
well, only in fear of the plague, and as much of an ague by being
forced to go early and late to Woolwich, and my family to lie there
continually. My late gettings have been very great to my great content,
and am likely to have yet a few more profitable jobbs in a little while;
for which Tangier, and Sir W. Warren I am wholly obliged to.




SEPTEMBER 1665

September 1st. Up, and to visit my Lady Pen and her daughter at the
Ropeyarde where I did breakfast with them and sat chatting a good while.
Then to my lodging at Mr. Shelden's, where I met Captain Cocke and eat
a little bit of dinner, and with him to Greenwich by water, having good
discourse with him by the way. After being at Greenwich a little while,
I to London, to my house, there put many more things in order for my
totall remove, sending away my girle Susan and other goods down to
Woolwich, and I by water to the Duke of Albemarle, and thence home late
by water. At the Duke of Albemarle's I overheard some examinations of
the late plot that is discoursed of and a great deale of do there is
about it. Among other discourses, I heard read, in the presence of the
Duke, an examination and discourse of Sir Philip Howard's, with one of
the plotting party. In many places these words being, "Then," said Sir
P. Howard, "if you so come over to the King, and be faithfull to him,
you shall be maintained, and be set up with a horse and armes," and I
know not what. And then said such a one, "Yes, I will be true to the
King." "But, damn me," said Sir Philip, "will you so and so?" And thus I
believe twelve times Sir P. Howard answered him a "damn me," which was
a fine way of rhetorique to persuade a Quaker or Anabaptist from his
persuasion. And this was read in the hearing of Sir P. Howard, before
the Duke and twenty more officers, and they make sport of it, only
without any reproach, or he being anything ashamed of it!

     [This republican plot was described by the Lord Chancellor in a
     speech delivered on October 9th, when parliament met at Oxford.]

But it ended, I remember, at last, "But such a one (the plotter) did at
last bid them remember that he had not told them what King he would be
faithfull to."

2nd. This morning I wrote letters to Mr. Hill and Andrews to come to
dine with me to-morrow, and then I to the office, where busy, and thence
to dine with Sir J. Minnes, where merry, but only that Sir J. Minnes who
hath lately lost two coach horses, dead in the stable, has a third now a
dying. After dinner I to Deptford, and there took occasion to 'entrar a
la casa de la gunaica de ma Minusier', and did what I had a mind... To
Greenwich, where wrote some letters, and home in pretty good time.

3rd (Lord's day). Up; and put on my coloured silk suit very fine, and my
new periwigg, bought a good while since, but durst not wear, because the
plague was in Westminster when I bought it; and it is a wonder what will
be the fashion after the plague is done, as to periwiggs, for nobody
will dare to buy any haire, for fear of the infection, that it had been
cut off of the heads of people dead of the plague. Before church time
comes Mr. Hill (Mr. Andrews failing because he was to receive the
Sacrament), and to church, where a sorry dull parson, and so home and
most excellent company with Mr. Hill and discourse of musique. I took
my Lady Pen home, and her daughter Pegg, and merry we were; and after
dinner I made my wife show them her pictures, which did mad Pegg Pen,
who learns of the same man and cannot do so well. After dinner left them
and I by water to Greenwich, where much ado to be suffered to come into
the towne because of the sicknesse, for fear I should come from London,
till I told them who I was. So up to the church, where at the door
I find Captain Cocke in my Lord Brunker's coach, and he come out and
walked with me in the church-yarde till the church was done, talking of
the ill government of our Kingdom, nobody setting to heart the business
of the Kingdom, but every body minding their particular profit or
pleasures, the King himself minding nothing but his ease, and so we let
things go to wracke. This arose upon considering what we shall do for
money when the fleete comes in, and more if the fleete should not meet
with the Dutch, which will put a disgrace upon the King's actions, so as
the Parliament and Kingdom will have the less mind to give more money,
besides so bad an account of the last money, we fear, will be given, not
half of it being spent, as it ought to be, upon the Navy. Besides, it is
said that at this day our Lord Treasurer cannot tell what the profit of
Chimney money is, what it comes to per annum, nor looks whether that
or any other part of the revenue be duly gathered as it ought; the very
money that should pay the City the L200,000 they lent the King, being
all gathered and in the hands of the Receiver and hath been long and
yet not brought up to pay the City, whereas we are coming to borrow 4 or
L500,000 more of the City, which will never be lent as is to be feared.
Church being done, my Lord Bruncker, Sir J. Minnes, and I up to the
Vestry at the desire of the justices of the Peace, Sir Theo. Biddulph
and Sir W. Boreman and Alderman Hooker, in order to the doing something
for the keeping of the plague from growing; but Lord! to consider the
madness of the people of the town, who will (because they are forbid)
come in crowds along with the dead corps to see them buried; but we
agreed on some orders for the prevention thereof. Among other stories,
one was very passionate, methought, of a complaint brought against a
man in the towne for taking a child from London from an infected house.
Alderman Hooker told us it was the child of a very able citizen in
Gracious Street, a saddler, who had buried all the rest of his children
of the plague, and himself and wife now being shut up and in despair of
escaping, did desire only to save the life of this little child; and so
prevailed to have it received stark-naked into the arms of a friend, who
brought it (having put it into new fresh clothes) to Greenwich; where
upon hearing the story, we did agree it should be permitted to be
received and kept in the towne. Thence with my Lord Bruncker to Captain
Cocke's, where we mighty merry and supped, and very late I by water to
Woolwich, in great apprehensions of an ague. Here was my Lord Bruncker's
lady of pleasure, who, I perceive, goes every where with him; and he,
I find, is obliged to carry her, and make all the courtship to her that
can be.

4th. Writing letters all the morning, among others to my Lady Carteret,
the first I have wrote to her, telling her the state of the city as
to health and other sorrowfull stories, and thence after dinner to
Greenwich, to Sir J. Minnes, where I found my Lord Bruncker, and having
staid our hour for the justices by agreement, the time being past we to
walk in the Park with Mr. Hammond and Turner, and there eat some fruit
out of the King's garden and walked in the Parke, and so back to Sir J.
Minnes, and thence walked home, my Lord Bruncker giving me a very neat
cane to walk with; but it troubled me to pass by Coome farme where about
twenty-one people have died of the plague, and three or four days since
I saw a dead corps in a coffin lie in the Close unburied, and a watch
is constantly kept there night and day to keep the people in, the plague
making us cruel, as doggs, one to another.

5th. Up, and walked with some Captains and others talking to me to
Greenwich, they crying out upon Captain Teddiman's management of the
business of Bergen, that he staid treating too long while he saw the
Dutch fitting themselves, and that at first he might have taken every
ship, and done what he would with them. How true I cannot tell. Here
we sat very late and for want of money, which lies heavy upon us, did
nothing of business almost. Thence home with my Lord Bruncker to dinner
where very merry with him and his doxy. After dinner comes Colonell
Blunt in his new chariot made with springs; as that was of wicker,
wherein a while since we rode at his house. And he hath rode, he says,
now this journey, many miles in it with one horse, and out-drives any
coach, and out-goes any horse, and so easy, he says. So for curiosity
I went into it to try it, and up the hill to the heath, and over the
cart-rutts and found it pretty well, but not so easy as he pretends, and
so back again, and took leave of my Lord and drove myself in the chariot
to the office, and there ended my letters and home pretty betimes and
there found W. Pen, and he staid supper with us and mighty merry talking
of his travells and the French humours, etc., and so parted and to bed.

6th. Busy all the morning writing letters to several, so to dinner,
to London, to pack up more things thence; and there I looked into the
street and saw fires burning in the street, as it is through the
whole City, by the Lord Mayor's order. Thence by water to the Duke of
Albemarle's: all the way fires on each side of the Thames, and strange
to see in broad daylight two or three burials upon the Bankeside, one at
the very heels of another: doubtless all of the plague; and yet at
least forty or fifty people going along with every one of them. The Duke
mighty pleasant with me; telling me that he is certainly informed that
the Dutch were not come home upon the 1st instant, and so he hopes our
fleete may meet with them, and here to my great joy I got him to sign
bills for the several sums I have paid on Tangier business by his single
letter, and so now I can get more hands to them. This was a great joy to
me: Home to Woolwich late by water, found wife in bed, and yet late as
[it] was to write letters in order to my rising betimes to go to Povy
to-morrow. So to bed, my wife asking me to-night about a letter of hers
I should find, which indeed Mary did the other day give me as if she had
found it in my bed, thinking it had been mine, brought to her from a
man without name owning great kindness to her and I know not what. But
looking it over seriously, and seeing it bad sense and ill writ, I did
believe it to be her brother's and so had flung it away, but finding her
now concerned at it and vexed with Mary about it, it did trouble me, but
I would take no notice of it to-night, but fell to sleep as if angry.

7th. Up by 5 of the clock, mighty full of fear of an ague, but was
obliged to go, and so by water, wrapping myself up warm, to the Tower,
and there sent for the Weekely Bill, and find 8,252 dead in all, and of
them 6,878 of the plague; which is a most dreadfull number, and shows
reason to fear that the plague hath got that hold that it will yet
continue among us. Thence to Brainford, reading "The Villaine," a pretty
good play, all the way. There a coach of Mr. Povy's stood ready for
me, and he at his house ready to come in, and so we together merrily
to Swakely, Sir R. Viner's. A very pleasant place, bought by him of Sir
James Harrington's lady. He took us up and down with great respect, and
showed us all his house and grounds; and it is a place not very moderne
in the garden nor house, but the most uniforme in all that ever I saw;
and some things to excess. Pretty to see over the screene of the hall
(put up by Sir J. Harrington, a Long Parliamentman) the King's head,
and my Lord of Essex on one side, and Fairfax on the other; and upon the
other side of the screene, the parson of the parish, and the lord of the
manor and his sisters. The window-cases, door-cases, and chimnys of all
the house are marble. He showed me a black boy that he had, that died of
a consumption, and being dead, he caused him to be dried in an oven, and
lies there entire in a box. By and by to dinner, where his lady I find
yet handsome, but hath been a very handsome woman; now is old. Hath
brought him near L100,000 and now he lives, no man in England in greater
plenty, and commands both King and Council with his credit he gives
them. Here was a fine lady a merchant's wife at dinner with us, and who
should be here in the quality of a woman but Mrs. Worship's daughter,
Dr. Clerke's niece, and after dinner Sir Robert led us up to his long
gallery, very fine, above stairs (and better, or such, furniture I never
did see), and there Mrs. Worship did give us three or four very good
songs, and sings very neatly, to my great delight. After all this, and
ending the chief business to my content about getting a promise of some
money of him, we took leave, being exceedingly well treated here, and
a most pleasant journey we had back, Povy and I, and his company most
excellent in anything but business, he here giving me an account of as
many persons at Court as I had a mind or thought of enquiring after. He
tells me by a letter he showed me, that the King is not, nor hath been
of late, very well, but quite out of humour; and, as some think, in a
consumption, and weary of every thing. He showed me my Lord Arlington's
house that he was born in, in a towne called Harlington: and so carried
me through a most pleasant country to Brainford, and there put me into
my boat, and good night. So I wrapt myself warm, and by water got to
Woolwich about one in the morning, my wife and all in bed.

8th. Waked, and fell in talk with my wife about the letter, and she
satisfied me that she did not know from whence it come, but believed
it might be from her cozen Franke Moore lately come out of France. The
truth is the thing I think cannot have much in it, and being unwilling
(being in other things so much at ease) to vex myself in a strange place
at a melancholy time, passed all by and were presently friends. Up,
and several with me about business. Anon comes my Lord Bruncker, as
I expected, and we to the enquiring into the business of the late
desertion of the Shipwrights from worke, who had left us for three days
together for want of money, and upon this all the morning, and brought
it to a pretty good issue, that they, we believe, will come to-morrow to
work. To dinner, having but a mean one, yet sufficient for him, and he
well enough pleased, besides that I do not desire to vye entertainments
with him or any else. Here was Captain Cocke also, and Mr. Wayth. We
staid together talking upon one business or other all the afternoon. In
the evening my Lord Bruncker hearing that Mr. Ackeworth's clerke, the
Dutchman who writes and draws so well, was transcribing a book of Rates
and our ships for Captain Millet a gallant of his mistress's, we sent
for him for it. He would not deliver it, but said it was his mistress's
and had delivered it to her. At last we were forced to send to her for
it; she would come herself, and indeed the book was a very neat one and
worth keeping as a rarity, but we did think fit, and though much against
my will, to cancell all that he had finished of it, and did give her
the rest, which vexed her, and she bore it discreetly enough, but with
a cruel deal of malicious rancour in her looks. I must confess I would
have persuaded her to have let us have it to the office, and it may be
the board would not have censured too hardly of it, but my intent was
to have had it as a Record for the office, but she foresaw what would be
the end of it and so desired it might rather be cancelled, which was a
plaguy deal of spite. My Lord Bruncker being gone and company, and she
also, afterwards I took my wife and people and walked into the fields
about a while till night, and then home, and so to sing a little and
then to bed. I was in great trouble all this day for my boy Tom who went
to Greenwich yesterday by my order and come not home till to-night for
fear of the plague, but he did come home to-night, saying he staid last
night by Mr. Hater's advice hoping to have me called as I come home with
my boat to come along with me.

9th. Up and walked to Greenwich, and there we sat and dispatched a good
deal of business I had a mind to. At noon, by invitation, to my Lord
Bruncker's, all of us, to dinner, where a good venison pasty, and mighty
merry. Here was Sir W. Doyly, lately come from Ipswich about the sicke
and wounded, and Mr. Evelyn and Captain Cocke. My wife also was sent for
by my Lord Bruncker, by Cocke, and was here. After dinner, my Lord and
his mistress would see her home again, it being a most cursed rainy
afternoon, having had none a great while before, and I, forced to go to
the office on foot through all the rain, was almost wet to my skin, and
spoiled my silke breeches almost. Rained all the afternoon and evening,
so as my letters being done, I was forced to get a bed at Captain
Cocke's, where I find Sir W. Doyly, and he, and Evelyn at supper; and
I with them full of discourse of the neglect of our masters, the great
officers of State, about all business, and especially that of money:
having now some thousands prisoners, kept to no purpose at a great
charge, and no money provided almost for the doing of it. We fell to
talk largely of the want of some persons understanding to look after
businesses, but all goes to rack. "For," says Captain Cocke, "my Lord
Treasurer, he minds his ease, and lets things go how they will: if he
can have his L8000 per annum, and a game at l'ombre,--[Spanish card
game]--he is well. My Lord Chancellor he minds getting of money and
nothing else; and my Lord Ashly will rob the Devil and the Alter, but he
will get money if it be to be got." But that that put us into this great
melancholy, was newes brought to-day, which Captain Cocke reports as a
certain truth, that all the Dutch fleete, men-of-war and merchant East
India ships, are got every one in from Bergen the 3d of this month,
Sunday last; which will make us all ridiculous. The fleete come home
with shame to require a great deale of money, which is not to be had, to
discharge many men that must get the plague then or continue at greater
charge on shipboard, nothing done by them to encourage the Parliament to
give money, nor the Kingdom able to spare any money, if they would, at
this time of the plague, so that, as things look at present, the whole
state must come to ruine. Full of these melancholy thoughts, to bed;
where, though I lay the softest I ever did in my life, with a downe bed,
after the Danish manner, upon me, yet I slept very ill, chiefly through
the thoughts of my Lord Sandwich's concernment in all this ill successe
at sea.

10th (Lord's day). Walked home; being forced thereto by one of my
watermen falling sick yesterday, and it was God's great mercy I did not
go by water with them yesterday, for he fell sick on Saturday night, and
it is to be feared of the plague. So I sent him away to London with
his fellow; but another boat come to me this morning, whom I sent to
Blackewall for Mr. Andrews. I walked to Woolwich, and there find Mr.
Hill, and he and I all the morning at musique and a song he hath set of
three parts, methinks, very good. Anon comes Mr. Andrews, though it be a
very ill day, and so after dinner we to musique and sang till about 4 or
5 o'clock, it blowing very hard, and now and then raining, and wind and
tide being against us, Andrews and I took leave and walked to Greenwich.
My wife before I come out telling me the ill news that she hears that
her father is very ill, and then I told her I feared of the plague, for
that the house is shut up. And so she much troubled she did desire me
to send them something; and I said I would, and will do so. But before
I come out there happened newes to come to the by an expresse from Mr.
Coventry, telling me the most happy news of my Lord Sandwich's meeting
with part of the Dutch; his taking two of their East India ships, and
six or seven others, and very good prizes and that he is in search of
the rest of the fleet, which he hopes to find upon the Wellbancke,
with the loss only of the Hector, poor Captain Cuttle. This newes do
so overjoy me that I know not what to say enough to express it, but
the better to do it I did walk to Greenwich, and there sending away Mr.
Andrews, I to Captain Cocke's, where I find my Lord Bruncker and his
mistress, and Sir J. Minnes. Where we supped (there was also Sir W.
Doyly and Mr. Evelyn); but the receipt of this newes did put us all
into such an extacy of joy, that it inspired into Sir J. Minnes and Mr.
Evelyn such a spirit of mirth, that in all my life I never met with so
merry a two hours as our company this night was. Among other humours,
Mr. Evelyn's repeating of some verses made up of nothing but the various
acceptations of may and can, and doing it so aptly upon occasion of
something of that nature, and so fast, did make us all die almost with
laughing, and did so stop the mouth of Sir J. Minnes in the middle of
all his mirth (and in a thing agreeing with his own manner of genius),
that I never saw any man so out-done in all my life; and Sir J. Minnes's
mirth too to see himself out-done, was the crown of all our mirth.
In this humour we sat till about ten at night, and so my Lord and his
mistress home, and we to bed, it being one of the times of my life
wherein I was the fullest of true sense of joy.

11th. Up and walked to the office, there to do some business till ten of
the clock, and then by agreement my Lord, Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Doyly,
and I took boat and over to the ferry, where Sir W. Batten's coach
was ready for us, and to Walthamstow drove merrily, excellent merry
discourse in the way, and most upon our last night's revells; there come
we were very merry, and a good plain venison dinner. After dinner to
billiards, where I won an angel,

     [A gold coin, so called because it bore the image of an angel,
     varying in value from six shillings and eightpence to ten
     shillings.]

and among other sports we were merry with my pretending to have a
warrant to Sir W. Hickes (who was there, and was out of humour with Sir
W. Doyly's having lately got a warrant for a leash of buckes, of which
we were now eating one) which vexed him, and at last would compound with
me to give my Lord Bruncker half a buck now, and me a Doe for it a while
hence when the season comes in, which we agreed to and had held, but
that we fear Sir W. Doyly did betray our design, which spoiled all;
however, my Lady Batten invited herself to dine with him this week, and
she invited us all to dine with her there, which we agreed to, only to
vex him, he being the most niggardly fellow, it seems, in the world.
Full of good victuals and mirth we set homeward in the evening, and
very merry all the way. So to Greenwich, where when come I find my
Lord Rutherford and Creed come from Court, and among other things have
brought me several orders for money to pay for Tangier; and, among
the rest L7000 and more, to this Lord, which is an excellent thing to
consider, that, though they can do nothing else, they can give away
the King's money upon their progresse. I did give him the best answer I
could to pay him with tallys, and that is all they could get from me.
I was not in humour to spend much time with them, but walked a little
before Sir J. Minnes's door and then took leave, and I by water to
Woolwich, where with my wife to a game at tables,

     [The old name for backgammon, used by Shakespeare and others.  The
     following lines are from an epitaph entirely made up of puns on
     backgammon

              "Man's life's a game at tables, and he may
               Mend his bad fortune by his wiser play."

                              Wit's Recre., i. 250, reprint, 1817.]

and to bed.

12th. Up, and walked to the office, where we sat late, and thence to
dinner home with Sir J. Minnes, and so to the office, where writing
letters, and home in the evening, where my wife shews me a letter from
her brother speaking of their father's being ill, like to die, which,
God forgive me! did not trouble me so much as it should, though I was
indeed sorry for it. I did presently resolve to send him something in a
letter from my wife, viz. 20s. So to bed.

13th. Up, and walked to Greenwich, taking pleasure to walk with my
minute watch in my hand, by which I am come now to see the distances of
my way from Woolwich to Greenwich, and do find myself to come within two
minutes constantly to the same place at the end of each quarter of an
houre. Here we rendezvoused at Captain Cocke's, and there eat oysters,
and so my Lord Bruncker, Sir J. Minnes, and I took boat, and in my
Lord's coach to Sir W. Hickes's, whither by and by my Lady Batten and
Sir William comes. It is a good seat, with a fair grove of trees by it,
and the remains of a good garden; but so let to run to ruine, both house
and every thing in and about it, so ill furnished and miserably looked
after, I never did see in all my life. Not so much as a latch to his
dining-room door; which saved him nothing, for the wind blowing into the
room for want thereof, flung down a great bow pott that stood upon
the side-table, and that fell upon some Venice glasses, and did him
a crown's worth of hurt. He did give us the meanest dinner (of beef,
shoulder and umbles of venison

     [Dr. Johnson was puzzled by the following passage in "The Merry
     Wives of Windsor," act v., sc. 3: "Divide me like a bribe-buck, each
     a haunch.  I will keep the sides to myself; my shoulders for the
     fellow of this walk."  If he could have read the account of Sir
     William Hickes's dinner, he would at once have understood the
     allusion to the keeper's perquisites of the shoulders of all deer
     killed in his walk.--B.]

which he takes away from the keeper of the Forest, and a few pigeons,
and all in the meanest manner) that ever I did see, to the basest
degree. After dinner we officers of the Navy stepped aside to read some
letters and consider some business, and so in again. I was only pleased
at a very fine picture of the Queene-Mother, when she was young, by
Van-Dike; a very good picture, and a lovely sweet face. Thence in the
afternoon home, and landing at Greenwich I saw Mr. Pen walking my way,
so we walked together, and for discourse I put him into talk of France,
when he took delight to tell me of his observations, some good, some
impertinent, and all ill told, but it served for want of better, and so
to my house, where I find my wife abroad, and hath been all this day,
nobody knows where, which troubled me, it being late and a cold evening.
So being invited to his mother's to supper, we took Mrs. Barbara, who
was mighty finely dressed, and in my Lady's coach, which we met going
for my wife, we thither, and there after some discourse went to supper.
By and by comes my wife and Mercer, and had been with Captain Cocke all
day, he coming and taking her out to go see his boy at school at Brumly
[Bromley], and brought her home again with great respect. Here pretty
merry, only I had no stomach, having dined late, to eat. After supper
Mr. Pen and I fell to discourse about some words in a French song my
wife was saying, "D'un air tout interdict," wherein I laid twenty to one
against him which he would not agree with me, though I know myself in
the right as to the sense of the word, and almost angry we were, and
were an houre and more upon the dispute, till at last broke up not
satisfied, and so home in their coach and so to bed. H. Russell did this
day deliver my 20s. to my wife's father or mother, but has not yet told
us how they do.

14th. Up, and walked to Greenwich, and there fitted myself in several
businesses to go to London, where I have not been now a pretty while.
But before I went from the office newes is brought by word of mouth that
letters are now just now brought from the fleete of our taking a great
many more of the Dutch fleete, in which I did never more plainly see my
command of my temper in my not admitting myself to receive any kind of
joy from it till I had heard the certainty of it, and therefore went by
water directly to the Duke of Albemarle, where I find a letter of the
Lath from Solebay, from my Lord Sandwich, of the fleete's meeting with
about eighteen more of the Dutch fleete, and his taking of most of them;
and the messenger says, they had taken three after the letter was wrote
and sealed; which being twenty-one, and the fourteen took the other day,
is forty-five sail; some of which are good, and others rich ships,
which is so great a cause of joy in us all that my Lord and everybody
is highly joyed thereat. And having taken a copy of my Lord's letter, I
away back again to the Beare at the Bridge foot, being full of wind and
out of order, and there called for a biscuit and a piece of cheese and
gill of sacke, being forced to walk over the Bridge, toward the 'Change,
and the plague being all thereabouts. Here my news was highly welcome,
and I did wonder to see the 'Change so full, I believe 200 people; but
not a man or merchant of any fashion, but plain men all. And Lord! to
see how I did endeavour all I could to talk with as few as I could,
there being now no observation of shutting up of houses infected, that
to be sure we do converse and meet with people that have the plague upon
them. I to Sir Robert Viner's, where my main business was about settling
the business of Debusty's L5000 tallys, which I did for the present to
enable me to have some money, and so home, buying some things for
my wife in the way. So home, and put up several things to carry to
Woolwich, and upon serious thoughts I am advised by W. Griffin to let
my money and plate rest there, as being as safe as any place, nobody
imagining that people would leave money in their houses now, when all
their families are gone. So for the present that being my opinion, I did
leave them there still. But, Lord! to see the trouble that it puts a man
to, to keep safe what with pain a man hath been getting together, and
there is good reason for it. Down to the office, and there wrote letters
to and again about this good newes of our victory, and so by water home
late. Where, when I come home I spent some thoughts upon the occurrences
of this day, giving matter for as much content on one hand and
melancholy on another, as any day in all my life. For the first; the
finding of my money and plate, and all safe at London, and speeding in
my business of money this day. The hearing of this good news to such
excess, after so great a despair of my Lord's doing anything this
year; adding to that, the decrease of 500 and more, which is the first
decrease we have yet had in the sickness since it begun: and great
hopes that the next week it will be greater. Then, on the other side, my
finding that though the Bill in general is abated, yet the City within
the walls is encreased, and likely to continue so, and is close to our
house there. My meeting dead corpses of the plague, carried to be buried
close to me at noon-day through the City in Fanchurch-street. To see
a person sick of the sores, carried close by me by Gracechurch in
a hackney-coach. My finding the Angell tavern, at the lower end
of Tower-hill, shut up, and more than that, the alehouse at the
Tower-stairs, and more than that, the person was then dying of the
plague when I was last there, a little while ago, at night, to write
a short letter there, and I overheard the mistresse of the house sadly
saying to her husband somebody was very ill, but did not think it was of
the plague. To hear that poor Payne, my waiter, hath buried a child, and
is dying himself. To hear that a labourer I sent but the other day to
Dagenhams, to know how they did there, is dead of the plague; and that
one of my own watermen, that carried me daily, fell sick as soon as he
had landed me on Friday morning last, when I had been all night upon the
water (and I believe he did get his infection that day at Brainford),
and is now dead of the plague. To hear that Captain Lambert and Cuttle
are killed in the taking these ships; and that Mr. Sidney Montague is
sick of a desperate fever at my Lady Carteret's, at Scott's-hall. To
hear that Mr. Lewes hath another daughter sick. And, lastly, that both
my servants, W. Hewer and Tom Edwards, have lost their fathers, both in
St. Sepulchre's parish, of the plague this week, do put me into great
apprehensions of melancholy, and with good reason. But I put off the
thoughts of sadness as much as I can, and the rather to keep my wife in
good heart and family also. After supper (having eat nothing all this
day) upon a fine tench of Mr. Shelden's taking, we to bed.

15th. Up, it being a cold misting morning, and so by water to the
office, where very busy upon several businesses. At noon got the
messenger, Marlow, to get me a piece of bread and butter and cheese and
a bottle of beer and ale, and so I went not out of the office but dined
off that, and my boy Tom, but the rest of my clerks went home to dinner.
Then to my business again, and by and by sent my waterman to see how
Sir W. Warren do, who is sicke, and for which I have reason to be very
sorry, he being the friend I have got most by of most friends in England
but the King: who returns me that he is pretty well again, his disease
being an ague. I by water to Deptford, thinking to have seen my
valentine, but I could not, and so come back again, and to the office,
where a little business, and thence with Captain Cocke, and there drank
a cup of good drink, which I am fain to allow myself during this plague
time, by advice of all, and not contrary to my oathe, my physician being
dead, and chyrurgeon out of the way, whose advice I am obliged to take,
and so by water home and eat my supper, and to bed, being in much pain
to think what I shall do this winter time; for go every day to Woolwich
I cannot, without endangering my life; and staying from my wife at
Greenwich is not handsome.

16th. Up, and walked to Greenwich reading a play, and to the office,
where I find Sir J. Minnes gone to the fleete, like a doating foole,
to do no good, but proclaim himself an asse; for no service he can do
there, nor inform my Lord, who is come in thither to the buoy of the
Nore, in anything worth his knowledge. At noon to dinner to my Lord
Bruncker, where Sir W. Batten and his Lady come, by invitation, and very
merry we were, only that the discourse of the likelihood of the increase
of the plague this weeke makes us a little sad, but then again the
thoughts of the late prizes make us glad. After dinner, by appointment,
comes Mr. Andrews, and he and I walking alone in the garden talking
of our Tangier business, and I endeavoured by the by to offer some
encouragements for their continuing in the business, which he seemed
to take hold of, and the truth is my profit is so much concerned that I
could wish they would, and would take pains to ease them in the business
of money as much as was possible. He being gone (after I had ordered him
L2000, and he paid me my quantum out of it) I also walked to the office,
and there to my business; but find myself, through the unfitness of my
place to write in, and my coming from great dinners, and drinking wine,
that I am not in the good temper of doing business now a days that I
used to be and ought still to be. At night to Captain Cocke's, meaning
to lie there, it being late, and he not being at home, I walked to him
to my Lord Bruncker's, and there staid a while, they being at tables;
and so by and by parted, and walked to his house; and, after a mess of
good broth, to bed, in great pleasure, his company being most excellent.

17th (Lord's day). Up, and before I went out of my chamber did draw a
musique scale, in order to my having it at any time ready in my hand
to turn to for exercise, for I have a great mind in this Vacation to
perfect myself in my scale, in order to my practising of composition,
and so that being done I down stairs, and there find Captain Cocke under
the barber's hands, the barber that did heretofore trim Commissioner
Pett, and with whom I have been. He offered to come this day after
dinner with his violin to play me a set of Lyra-ayres upon it, which I
was glad of, hoping to be merry thereby. Being ready we to church, where
a company of fine people to church, and a fine Church, and very good
sermon, Mr. Plume' being a very excellent scholler and preacher. Coming
out of the church I met Mrs. Pierce, whom I was ashamed to see, having
not been with her since my coming to town, but promised to visit her.
Thence with Captain Cocke, in his coach, home to dinner, whither comes
by invitation my Lord Bruncker and his mistresse and very good company
we were, but in dinner time comes Sir J. Minnes from the fleete, like a
simple weak man, having nothing to say of what he hath done there,
but tells of what value he imagines the prizes to be, and that my Lord
Sandwich is well, and mightily concerned to hear that I was well. But
this did put me upon a desire of going thither; and, moving of it to
my Lord, we presently agreed upon it to go this very tide, we two and
Captain Cocke. So every body prepared to fit himself for his journey,
and I walked to Woolwich to trim and shift myself, and by the time I was
ready they come down in the Bezan yacht, and so I aboard and my boy Tom,
and there very merrily we sailed to below Gravesend, and there come to
anchor for all night, and supped and talked, and with much pleasure at
last settled ourselves to sleep having very good lodging upon cushions
in the cabbin.

18th. By break of day we come to within sight of the fleete, which was a
very fine thing to behold, being above 100 ships, great and small; with
the flag-ships of each squadron, distinguished by their several flags on
their main, fore, or mizen masts. Among others, the Soveraigne, Charles,
and Prince; in the last of which my Lord Sandwich was. When we called by
her side his Lordshipp was not stirring, so we come to anchor a little
below his ship, thinking to have rowed on board him, but the wind and
tide was so strong against us that we could not get up to him, no,
though rowed by a boat of the Prince's that come to us to tow us up; at
last however he brought us within a little way, and then they flung
out a rope to us from the Prince and so come on board, but with great
trouble and tune and patience, it being very cold; we find my Lord newly
up in his night-gown very well. He received us kindly; telling us the
state of the fleet, lacking provisions, having no beer at all, nor
have had most of them these three weeks or month, and but few days' dry
provisions. And indeed he tells us that he believes no fleete was ever
set to sea in so ill condition of provision, as this was when it went
out last. He did inform us in the business of Bergen,

     [Lord Sandwich was not so successful in convincing other people as
     to the propriety of his conduct at Bergen as he was with Pepys.]

so as to let us see how the judgment of the world is not to be depended
on in things they know not; it being a place just wide enough, and not
so much hardly, for ships to go through to it, the yardarmes sticking in
the very rocks. He do not, upon his best enquiry, find reason to except
against any part of the management of the business by Teddiman; he
having staid treating no longer than during the night, whiles he was
fitting himself to fight, bringing his ship a-breast, and not a quarter
of an hour longer (as is said); nor could more ships have been brought
to play, as is thought. Nor could men be landed, there being 10,000 men
effectively always in armes of the Danes; nor, says he, could we expect
more from the Dane than he did, it being impossible to set fire on the
ships but it must burn the towne. But that wherein the Dane did amisse
is, that he did assist them, the Dutch, all the while, while he was
treating with us, while he should have been neutrall to us both. But,
however, he did demand but the treaty of us; which is, that we should
not come with more than five ships. A flag of truce is said, and
confessed by my Lord, that he believes it was hung out; but while they
did hang it out, they did shoot at us; so that it was not either seen
perhaps, or fit to cease upon sight of it, while they continued actually
in action against us. But the main thing my Lord wonders at, and
condemns the Dane for, is, that the blockhead, who is so much in debt
to the Hollander, having now a treasure more by much than all his Crowne
was worth, and that which would for ever have beggared the Hollanders,
should not take this time to break with the Hollander, and, thereby
paid his debt which must have been forgiven him, and got the greatest
treasure into his hands that ever was together in the world. By and by
my Lord took me aside to discourse of his private matters, who was very
free with me touching the ill condition of the fleete that it hath been
in, and the good fortune that he hath had, and nothing else that these
prizes are to be imputed to. He also talked with me about Mr. Coventry's
dealing with him in sending Sir W. Pen away before him, which was not
fair nor kind; but that he hath mastered and cajoled Sir W. Pen, that he
hath been able to do, nothing in the fleete, but been obedient to him;
but withal tells me he is a man that is but of very mean parts, and a
fellow not to be lived with, so false and base he is; which I know well
enough to be very true, and did, as I had formerly done, give my Lord my
knowledge of him. By and by was called a Council of Warr on board, when
come Sir W. Pen there, and Sir Christopher Mings, Sir Edward Spragg,
Sir Jos. Jordan, Sir Thomas Teddiman, and Sir Roger Cuttance, and so the
necessity of the fleete for victuals, clothes, and money was discoursed,
but by the discourse there of all but my Lord, that is to say, the
counterfeit grave nonsense of Sir W. Pen and the poor mean discourse
of the rest, methinks I saw how the government and management of the
greatest business of the three nations is committed to very ordinary
heads, saving my Lord, and in effect is only upon him, who is able to do
what he pleases with them, they not having the meanest degree of reason
to be able to oppose anything that he says, and so I fear it is ordered
but like all the rest of the King's publique affayres. The council being
up they most of them went away, only Sir W. Pen who staid to dine there
and did so, but the wind being high the ship (though the motion of it
was hardly discernible to the eye) did make me sick, so as I could not
eat any thing almost. After dinner Cocke did pray me to helpe him to
L500 of W. How, who is deputy Treasurer, wherein my Lord Bruncker and I
am to be concerned and I did aske it my Lord, and he did consent to have
us furnished with L500, and I did get it paid to Sir Roger Cuttance
and Mr. Pierce in part for above L1000 worth of goods, Mace, Nutmegs,
Cynamon, and Cloves, and he tells us we may hope to get L1500 by it,
which God send! Great spoil, I hear, there hath been of the two East
India ships, and that yet they will come in to the King very rich: so
that I hope this journey will be worth L100 to me.

     [There is a shorthand journal of proceedings relating to Pepys's
     purchase of some East India prize goods among the Rawlinson MSS. in
     the Bodleian Library.]

After having paid this money, we took leave of my Lord and so to our
Yacht again, having seen many of my friends there. Among others I hear
that W. Howe will grow very rich by this last business and grows very
proud and insolent by it; but it is what I ever expected. I hear by
every body how much my poor Lord of Sandwich was concerned for me during
my silence a while, lest I had been dead of the plague in this sickly
time. No sooner come into the yacht, though overjoyed with the good
work we have done to-day, but I was overcome with sea sickness so that
I begun to spue soundly, and so continued a good while, till at last I
went into the cabbin and shutting my eyes my trouble did cease that I
fell asleep, which continued till we come into Chatham river where the
water was smooth, and then I rose and was very well, and the tide coming
to be against us we did land before we come to Chatham and walked
a mile, having very good discourse by the way, it being dark and it
beginning to rain just as we got thither. At Commissioner Pett's we did
eat and drink very well and very merry we were, and about 10 at night,
it being moonshine and very cold, we set out, his coach carrying us, and
so all night travelled to Greenwich, we sometimes sleeping a little and
then talking and laughing by the way, and with much pleasure, but
that it was very horrible cold, that I was afeard of an ague. A pretty
passage was that the coach stood of a sudden and the coachman come
down and the horses stirring, he cried, Hold! which waked me, and the
coach[man] standing at the boote to [do] something or other and crying,
Hold! I did wake of a sudden and not knowing who he was, nor thinking of
the coachman between sleeping and waking I did take up the heart to take
him by the shoulder, thinking verily he had been a thief. But when I
waked I found my cowardly heart to discover a fear within me and that I
should never have done it if I had been awake.

19th. About 4 or 5 of the clock we come to Greenwich, and, having first
set down my Lord Bruncker, Cocke and I went to his house, it being
light, and there to our great trouble, we being sleepy and cold, we met
with the ill newes that his boy Jacke was gone to bed sicke, which put
Captain Cocke and me also into much trouble, the boy, as they told us,
complaining of his head most, which is a bad sign it seems. So they
presently betook themselves to consult whither and how to remove him.
However I thought it not fit for me to discover too much fear to go
away, nor had I any place to go to. So to bed I went and slept till 10
of the clock and then comes Captain Cocke to wake me and tell me that
his boy was well again. With great joy I heard the newes and he told
it, so I up and to the office where we did a little, and but a little
business. At noon by invitation to my Lord Bruncker's where we staid
till four of the clock for my Lady Batten and she not then coming we to
dinner and pretty merry but disordered by her making us stay so long.
After dinner I to the office, and there wrote letters and did business
till night and then to Sir J. Minnes's, where I find my Lady Batten
come, and she and my Lord Bruncker and his mistresse, and the whole
house-full there at cards. But by and by my Lord Bruncker goes away and
others of the company, and when I expected Sir J. Minnes and his sister
should have staid to have made Sir W. Batten and Lady sup, I find they
go up in snuffe to bed without taking any manner of leave of them, but
left them with Mr. Boreman. The reason of this I could not presently
learn, but anon I hear it is that Sir J. Minnes did expect and
intend them a supper, but they without respect to him did first apply
themselves to Boreman, which makes all this great feude. However I staid
and there supped, all of us being in great disorder from this, and more
from Cocke's boy's being ill, where my Lady Batten and Sir W. Batten
did come to town with an intent to lodge, and I was forced to go seek
a lodging which my W. Hewer did get me, viz., his own chamber in the
towne, whither I went and found it a very fine room, and there lay most
excellently.

20th. Called up by Captain Cocke (who was last night put into great
trouble upon his boy's being rather worse than better, upon which he
removed him out of his house to his stable), who told me that to my
comfort his boy was now as well as ever he was in his life. So I up,
and after being trimmed, the first time I have been touched by a barber
these twelvemonths, I think, and more, went to Sir J. Minnes's, where
I find all out of order still, they having not seen one another till
by and by Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten met, to go into my Lord
Bruncker's coach, and so we four to Lambeth, and thence to the Duke of
Albemarle, to inform him what we have done as to the fleete, which is
very little, and to receive his direction. But, Lord! what a sad time it
is to see no boats upon the River; and grass grows all up and down White
Hall court, and nobody but poor wretches in the streets! And, which is
worst of all, the Duke showed us the number of the plague this week,
brought in the last night from the Lord Mayor; that it is encreased
about 600 more than the last, which is quite contrary to all our hopes
and expectations, from the coldness of the late season. For the whole
general number is 8,297, and of them the plague 7,165; which is more in
the whole by above 50, than the biggest Bill yet; which is very grievous
to us all. I find here a design in my Lord Bruncker and Captain Cocke to
have had my Lord Bruncker chosen as one of us to have been sent aboard
one of the East Indiamen, and Captain Cocke as a merchant to be joined
with him, and Sir J. Minnes for the other, and Sir G. Smith to be joined
with him. But I did order it so that my Lord Bruncker and Sir J. Minnes
were ordered, but I did stop the merchants to be added, which would have
been a most pernicious thing to the King I am sure. In this I did, I
think, a very good office, though I cannot acquit myself from some envy
of mine in the business to have the profitable business done by another
hand while I lay wholly imployed in the trouble of the office. Thence
back again by my Lord's coach to my Lord Bruncker's house, where I find
my Lady Batten, who is become very great with Mrs. Williams (my Lord
Bruncker's whore), and there we dined and were mighty merry. After
dinner I to the office there to write letters, to fit myself for a
journey to-morrow to Nonsuch to the Exchequer by appointment. That being
done I to Sir J. Minnes where I find Sir W. Batten and his Lady gone
home to Walthamstow in great snuffe as to Sir J. Minnes, but yet with
some necessity, hearing that a mayde-servant of theirs is taken ill.
Here I staid and resolved of my going in my Lord Bruncker's coach
which he would have me to take, though himself cannot go with me as he
intended, and so to my last night's lodging to bed very weary.

21st. Up between five and six o'clock; and by the time I was ready, my
Lord's coach comes for me; and taking Will Hewer with me, who is all
in mourning for his father, who is lately dead of the plague, as my boy
Tom's is also, I set out, and took about L100 with me to pay the fees
there, and so rode in some fear of robbing. When I come thither, I
find only Mr. Ward, who led me to Burgess's bedside, and Spicer's, who,
watching of the house, as it is their turns every night, did lie long in
bed to-day, and I find nothing at all done in my business, which vexed
me. But not seeing how to helpe it I did walk up and down with Mr. Ward
to see the house; and by and by Spicer and Mr. Falconbrige come to
me and he and I to a towne near by, Yowell, there drink and set up my
horses and also bespoke a dinner, and while that is dressing went with
Spicer and walked up and down the house and park; and a fine place it
hath heretofore been, and a fine prospect about the house. A great walk
of an elme and a walnutt set one after another in order. And all the
house on the outside filled with figures of stories, and good painting
of Rubens' or Holben's doing. And one great thing is, that most of the
house is covered, I mean the posts, and quarters in the walls; covered
with lead, and gilded. I walked into the ruined garden, and there found
a plain little girle, kinswoman of Mr. Falconbridge, to sing very finely
by the eare only, but a fine way of singing, and if I come ever to lacke
a girle again I shall think of getting her. Thence to the towne, and
there Spicer, Woodruffe, and W. Bowyer and I dined together and a
friend of Spicer's; and a good dinner I had for them. Falconbrige dined
somewhere else, by appointment. Strange to see how young W. Bowyer looks
at 41 years; one would not take him for 24 or more, and is one of the
greatest wonders I ever did see. After dinner, about 4 of the clock we
broke up, and I took coach and home (in fear for the money I had with
me, but that this friend of Spicer's, one of the Duke's guard did ride
along the best part of the way with us). I got to my Lord Bruncker's
before night, and there I sat and supped with him and his mistresse,
and Cocke whose boy is yet ill. Thence, after losing a crowne betting at
Tables--[Cribbage]--, we walked home, Cocke seeing me at my new lodging,
where I went to bed. All my worke this day in the coach going and coming
was to refresh myself in my musique scale, which I would fain have
perfecter than ever I had yet.

22nd. Up betimes and to the office, meaning to have entered my last 5
or 6 days' Journall, but was called away by my Lord Bruncker and Sir J.
Minnes, and to Blackwall, there to look after the storehouses in order
to the laying of goods out of the East India ships when they shall be
unloaden. That being done, we into Johnson's house, and were much made
of, eating and drinking. But here it is observable what he tells us,
that in digging his late Docke, he did 12 foot under ground find perfect
trees over-covered with earth. Nut trees, with the branches and the very
nuts upon them; some of whose nuts he showed us. Their shells black with
age, and their kernell, upon opening, decayed, but their shell perfectly
hard as ever. And a yew tree he showed us (upon which, he says, the
very ivy was taken up whole about it), which upon cutting with an addes
[adze], we found to be rather harder than the living tree usually is.
They say, very much, but I do not know how hard a yew tree naturally is.

     [The same discovery was made in 1789, in digging the Brunswick Dock,
     also at Blackwall, and elsewhere in the neighbourhood.]

The armes, they say, were taken up at first whole, about the body,
which is very strange. Thence away by water, and I walked with my Lord
Bruncker home, and there at dinner comes a letter from my Lord Sandwich
to tell me that he would this day be at Woolwich, and desired me to meet
him. Which fearing might have lain in Sir J. Minnes' pocket a while, he
sending it me, did give my Lord Bruncker, his mistress, and I occasion
to talk of him as the most unfit man for business in the world. Though
at last afterwards I found that he was not in this faulty, but hereby I
have got a clear evidence of my Lord Bruncker's opinion of him. My Lord
Bruncker presently ordered his coach to be ready and we to Woolwich, and
my Lord Sandwich not being come, we took a boat and about a mile off
met him in his Catch, and boarded him, and come up with him; and, after
making a little halt at my house, which I ordered, to have my wife see
him, we all together by coach to Mr. Boreman's, where Sir J. Minnes did
receive him very handsomely, and there he is to lie; and Sir J. Minnes
did give him on the sudden, a very handsome supper and brave discourse,
my Lord Bruncker, and Captain Cocke, and Captain Herbert being there,
with myself. Here my Lord did witness great respect to me, and very kind
expressions, and by other occasions, from one thing to another did take
notice how I was overjoyed at first to see the King's letter to his
Lordship, and told them how I did kiss it, and that, whatever he was,
I did always love the King. This my Lord Bruncker did take such notice
[of] as that he could not forbear kissing me before my Lord, professing
his finding occasion every day more and more to love me, and Captain
Cocke has since of himself taken notice of that speech of my Lord then
concerning me, and may be of good use to me. Among other discourse
concerning long life, Sir J. Minnes saying that his great-grandfather
was alive in Edward the Vth's time; my Lord Sandwich did tell us how few
there have been of his family since King Harry the VIIIth; that is to
say, the then Chiefe Justice, and his son the Lord Montagu, who was
father to Sir Sidney,

     [These are the words in the MS., and not "his son and the Lord
     Montagu," as in some former editions.  Pepys seems to have written
     Lord Montagu by mistake for Sir Edward Montagu.]

who was his father. And yet, what is more wonderfull, he did assure us
from the mouth of my Lord Montagu himself, that in King James's time
([when he] had a mind to get the King to cut off the entayle of some
land which was given in Harry the VIIIth's time to the family, with the
remainder in the Crowne); he did answer the King in showing how unlikely
it was that ever it could revert to the Crown, but that it would be a
present convenience to him; and did show that at that time there were
4,000 persons derived from the very body of the Chiefe Justice. It seems
the number of daughters in the family having been very great, and
they too had most of them many children, and grandchildren, and
great-grandchildren. This he tells as a most known and certain truth.
After supper, my Lord Bruncker took his leave, and I also did mine,
taking Captain Herbert home to my lodging to lie with me, who did mighty
seriously inquire after who was that in the black dress with my wife
yesterday, and would not believe that it was my wife's mayde, Mercer,
but it was she.

23rd. Up, and to my Lord Sandwich, who did advise alone with me how far
he might trust Captain Cocke in the business of the prize-goods, my Lord
telling me that he hath taken into his hands 2 or L3000 value of them:
it being a good way, he says, to get money, and afterwards to get the
King's allowance thereof, it being easier, he observes, to keepe money
when got of the King than to get it when it is too late. I advised him
not to trust Cocke too far, and did therefore offer him ready money for
a L1000 or two, which he listens to and do agree to, which is great joy
to me, hoping thereby to get something! Thence by coach to Lambeth, his
Lordship, and all our office, and Mr. Evelyn, to the Duke of Albemarle,
where, after the compliment with my Lord very kind, we sat down to
consult of the disposing and supporting of the fleete with victuals and
money, and for the sicke men and prisoners; and I did propose the taking
out some goods out of the prizes, to the value of L10,000, which was
accorded to, and an order, drawn up and signed by the Duke and my Lord,
done in the best manner I can, and referred to my Lord Bruncker and Sir
J. Minnes, but what inconveniences may arise from it I do not yet see,
but fear there may be many. Here we dined, and I did hear my Lord Craven
whisper, as he is mightily possessed with a good opinion of me, much to
my advantage, which my good Lord did second, and anon my Lord Craven did
speak publiquely of me to the Duke, in the hearing of all the rest; and
the Duke did say something of the like advantage to me; I believe, not
much to the satisfaction of my brethren; but I was mightily joyed at it.
Thence took leave, leaving my Lord Sandwich to go visit the Bishop of
Canterbury, and I and Sir W. Batten down to the Tower, where he went
further by water, and I home, and among other things took out all my
gold to carry along with me to-night with Captain Cocke downe to the
fleete, being L180 and more, hoping to lay out that and a great deal
more to good advantage. Thence down to Greenwich to the office, and
there wrote several letters, and so to my Lord Sandwich, and mighty
merry and he mighty kind to me in the face of all, saying much in my
favour, and after supper I took leave and with Captain Cocke set out
in the yacht about ten o'clock at night, and after some discourse, and
drinking a little, my mind full of what we are going about and jealous
of Cocke's outdoing me. So to sleep upon beds brought by Cocke on board
mighty handsome, and never slept better than upon this bed upon the
floor in the Cabbin.

24th (Lord's day). Waked, and up and drank, and then to discourse; and
then being about Grayes, and a very calme, curious morning, we took our
wherry, and to the fishermen, and bought a great deal of fine fish,
and to Gravesend to White's, and had part of it dressed; and, in the
meantime, we to walk about a mile from the towne, and so back again; and
there, after breakfast, one of our watermen told us he had heard of a
bargain of cloves for us, and we went to a blind alehouse at the
further end wretched dirty seamen, who, of the towne to a couple of poor
wretches, had got together about 37 lb. of cloves and to 10 of nutmeggs,
and we bought them of them, the first at 5s. 6d. per lb. and the latter
at 4s.; and paid them in gold; but, Lord! to see how silly these men
are in the selling of it, and easily to be persuaded almost to anything,
offering a bag to us to pass as 20 lbs. of cloves, which upon weighing
proved 25 lbs. But it would never have been allowed by my conscience to
have wronged the poor wretches, who told us how dangerously they had got
some, and dearly paid for the rest of these goods. This being done we
with great content herein on board again and there Captain Cocke and I
to discourse of our business, but he will not yet be open to me, nor am
I to him till I hear what he will say and do with Sir Roger Cuttance.
However, this discourse did do me good, and got me a copy of the
agreement made the other day on board for the parcel of Mr. Pierce and
Sir Roger Cuttance, but this great parcel is of my Lord Sandwich's. By
and by to dinner about 3 o'clock and then I in the cabbin to writing
down my journall for these last seven days to my great content, it
having pleased God that in this sad time of the plague every thing else
has conspired to my happiness and pleasure more for these last three
months than in all my life before in so little time. God long preserve
it and make me thankful) for it! After finishing my Journal), then to
discourse and to read, and then to supper and to bed, my mind not being
at full ease, having not fully satisfied myself how Captain Cocke will
deal with me as to the share of the profits.

25th. Found ourselves come to the fleete, and so aboard the Prince; and
there, after a good while in discourse, we did agree a bargain of
L5,000 with Sir Roger Cuttance for my Lord Sandwich for silk, cinnamon,
nutmeggs, and indigo. And I was near signing to an undertaking for the
payment of the whole sum; but I did by chance escape it; having since,
upon second thoughts, great cause to be glad of it, reflecting upon the
craft and not good condition, it may be, of Captain Cocke. I could get
no trifles for my wife. Anon to dinner and thence in great haste to
make a short visit to Sir W. Pen, where I found them and his lady and
daughter and many commanders at dinner. Among others Sir G. Askue, of
whom whatever the matter is, the world is silent altogether. But a very
pretty dinner there was, and after dinner Sir W. Pen made a bargain with
Cocke for ten bales of silke, at 16s. per lb., which, as Cocke says,
will be a good pennyworth, and so away to the Prince and presently comes
my Lord on board from Greenwich, with whom, after a little discourse
about his trusting of Cocke, we parted and to our yacht; but it being
calme, we to make haste, took our wherry toward Chatham; but, it growing
darke, we were put to great difficultys, our simple, yet confident
waterman, not knowing a step of the way; and we found ourselves to go
backward and forward, which, in the darke night and a wild place, did
vex us mightily. At last we got a fisher boy by chance, and took him
into the boat, and being an odde kind of boy, did vex us too; for he
would not answer us aloud when we spoke to him, but did carry us safe
thither, though with a mistake or two; but I wonder they were not more.
In our way I was [surprised] and so were we all, at the strange nature
of the sea-water in a darke night, that it seemed like fire upon every
stroke of the oare, and, they say, is a sign of winde. We went to the
Crowne Inne, at Rochester, and there to supper, and made ourselves merry
with our poor fisher-boy, who told us he had not been in a bed in the
whole seven years since he came to 'prentice, and hath two or three more
years to serve. After eating something, we in our clothes to bed.

26th. Up by five o'clock and got post horses and so set out for
Greenwich, calling and drinking at Dartford. Being come to Greenwich and
shifting myself I to the office, from whence by and by my Lord Bruncker
and Sir J. Minnes set out toward Erith to take charge of the two East
India shipps, which I had a hand in contriving for the King's service
and may do myself a good office too thereby. I to dinner with Mr. Wright
to his father-in-law in Greenwich, one of the most silly, harmless,
prating old men that ever I heard in my life. Creed dined with me, and
among other discourses got of me a promise of half that he could get my
Lord Rutherford to give me upon clearing his business, which should not
be less, he says, than L50 for my half, which is a good thing, though
cunningly got of him. By and by Luellin comes, and I hope to get
something of Deering shortly. They being gone, Mr. Wright and I went
into the garden to discourse with much trouble for fear of losing all
the profit and principal of what we have laid out in buying of prize
goods, and therefore puts me upon thoughts of flinging up my interest,
but yet I shall take good advice first. Thence to the office, and after
some letters down to Woolwich, where I have not lain with my wife these
eight days I think, or more. After supper, and telling her my mind in my
trouble in what I have done as to buying' of these goods, we to bed.

27th. Up, and saw and admired my wife's picture of our Saviour,

     [This picture by Mrs. Pepys may have given trouble when Pepys was
     unjustifiably attacked for having Popish pictures in his house.]

now finished, which is very pretty. So by water to Greenwich, where with
Creed and Lord Rutherford, and there my Lord told me that he would
give me L100 for my pains, which pleased me well, though Creed, like
a cunning rogue, hath got a promise of half of it from me. We to the
King's Head, the great musique house, the first time I was ever there,
and had a good breakfast, and thence parted, I being much troubled to
hear from Creed, that he was told at Salsbury that I am come to be a
great swearer and drinker, though I know the contrary; but, Lord! to see
how my late little drinking of wine is taken notice of by envious men
to my disadvantage. I thence to Captain Cocke's, [and] (he not yet come
from town) to Mr. Evelyn's, where much company; and thence in his
coach with him to the Duke of Albemarle by Lambeth, who was in a mighty
pleasant humour; there the Duke tells us that the Dutch do stay abroad,
and our fleet must go out again, or to be ready to do so. Here we got
several things ordered as we desired for the relief of the prisoners,
and sick and wounded men. Here I saw this week's Bill of Mortality,
wherein, blessed be God! there is above 1800 decrease, being the first
considerable decrease we have had. Back again the same way and had
most excellent discourse of Mr. Evelyn touching all manner of learning;
wherein I find him a very fine gentleman, and particularly of paynting,
in which he tells me the beautifull Mrs. Middleton is rare, and his
own wife do brave things. He brought me to the office, whither comes
unexpectedly Captain Cocke, who hath brought one parcel of our goods by
waggons, and at first resolved to have lodged them at our office; but
then the thoughts of its being the King's house altered our resolution,
and so put them at his friend's, Mr. Glanvill's, and there they are
safe. Would the rest of them were so too! In discourse, we come to
mention my profit, and he offers me L500 clear, and I demand L600 for
my certain profit. We part to-night, and I lie there at Mr. Glanvill's
house, there being none there but a maydeservant and a young man; being
in some pain, partly from not knowing what to do in this business,
having a mind to be at a certainty in my profit, and partly through his
having Jacke sicke still, and his blackemore now also fallen sicke. So
he being gone, I to bed.

28th. Up, and being mightily pleased with my night's lodging, drank a
cup of beer, and went out to my office, and there did some business, and
so took boat and down to Woolwich (having first made a visit to Madam
Williams, who is going down to my Lord Bruncker) and there dined, and
then fitted my papers and money and every thing else for a journey to
Nonsuch to-morrow. That being done I walked to Greenwich, and there to
the office pretty late expecting Captain Cocke's coming, which he
did, and so with me to my new lodging (and there I chose rather to lie
because of my interest in the goods that we have brought there to lie),
but the people were abed, so we knocked them up, and so I to bed, and
in the night was mightily troubled with a looseness (I suppose from
some fresh damp linen that I put on this night), and feeling for a
chamber-pott, there was none, I having called the mayde up out of her
bed, she had forgot I suppose to put one there; so I was forced in this
strange house to rise and shit in the chimney twice; and so to bed and
was very well again, and

29th. To sleep till 5 o'clock, when it is now very dark, and then rose,
being called up by order by Mr. Marlow, and so up and dressed myself,
and by and by comes Mr. Lashmore on horseback, and I had my horse I
borrowed of Mr. Gillthropp, Sir W. Batten's clerke, brought to me, and
so we set out and rode hard and was at Nonsuch by about eight o'clock, a
very fine journey and a fine day. There I come just about chappell time
and so I went to chappell with them and thence to the several offices
about my tallys, which I find done, but strung for sums not to my
purpose, and so was forced to get them to promise me to have them cut
into other sums. But, Lord! what ado I had to persuade the dull fellows
to it, especially Mr. Warder, Master of the Pells, and yet without any
manner of reason for their scruple. But at last I did, and so left my
tallies there against another day, and so walked to Yowell, and there
did spend a peece upon them, having a whole house full, and much mirth
by a sister of the mistresse of the house, an old mayde lately married
to a lieutenant of a company that quarters there, and much pleasant
discourse we had and, dinner being done, we to horse again and come to
Greenwich before night, and so to my lodging, and there being a little
weary sat down and fell to order some of my pocket papers, and then
comes Captain Cocke, and after a great deal of discourse with him
seriously upon the disorders of our state through lack of men to mind
the public business and to understand it, we broke up, sitting up
talking very late. We spoke a little of my late business propounded of
taking profit for my money laid out for these goods, but he finds I rise
in my demand, he offering me still L500 certain. So we did give it
over, and I to bed. I hear for certain this night upon the road that
Sir Martin Noell is this day dead of the plague in London, where he hath
lain sick of it these eight days.

30th. Up and to the office, where busy all the morning, and at noon with
Sir W. Batten to Coll. Cleggat to dinner, being invited, where a very
pretty dinner to my full content and very merry. The great burden we
have upon us at this time at the office, is the providing for prisoners
and sicke men that are recovered, they lying before our office doors
all night and all day, poor wretches. Having been on shore, the captains
won't receive them on board, and other ships we have not to put them
on, nor money to pay them off, or provide for them. God remove this
difficulty! This made us followed all the way to this gentleman's
house and there are waited for our coming out after dinner. Hither come
Luellin to me and would force me to take Mr. Deering's 20 pieces in
gold he did offer me a good while since, which I did, yet really and
sincerely against my will and content, I seeing him a man not likely to
do well in his business, nor I to reap any comfort in having to do with,
and be beholden to, a man that minds more his pleasure and company than
his business. Thence mighty merry and much pleased with the dinner and
company and they with me I parted and there was set upon by the poor
wretches, whom I did give good words and some little money to, and the
poor people went away like lambs, and in good earnest are not to be
censured if their necessities drive them to bad courses of stealing or
the like, while they lacke wherewith to live. Thence to the office, and
there wrote a letter or two and dispatched a little business, and then
to Captain Cocke's, where I find Mr. Temple, the fat blade, Sir Robert.
Viner's chief man. And we three and two companions of his in the evening
by agreement took ship in the Bezan and the tide carried us no further
than Woolwich about 8 at night, and so I on shore to my wife, and
there to my great trouble find my wife out of order, and she took me
downstairs and there alone did tell me her falling out with both her
mayds and particularly Mary, and how Mary had to her teeth told her she
would tell me of something that should stop her mouth and words of that
sense. Which I suspect may be about Brown, but my wife prays me to
call it to examination, and this, I being of myself jealous, do make me
mightily out of temper, and seeing it not fit to enter into the dispute
did passionately go away, thinking to go on board again. But when I come
to the stairs I considered the Bezan would not go till the next ebb,
and it was best to lie in a good bed and, it may be, get myself into
a better humour by being with my wife. So I back again and to bed and
having otherwise so many reasons to rejoice and hopes of good profit,
besides considering the ill that trouble of mind and melancholly may in
this sickly time bring a family into, and that if the difference were
never so great, it is not a time to put away servants, I was resolved
to salve up the business rather than stir in it, and so become pleasant
with my wife and to bed, minding nothing of this difference. So to sleep
with a good deal of content, and saving only this night and a day or two
about the same business a month or six weeks ago, I do end this month
with the greatest content, and may say that these last three months,
for joy, health, and profit, have been much the greatest that ever I
received in all my life in any twelve months almost in my life, having
nothing upon me but the consideration of the sicklinesse of the season
during this great plague to mortify mee. For all which the Lord God be
praised!




OCTOBER 1665

October 1st (Lord's day). Called up about 4 of the clock and so dressed
myself and so on board the Bezan, and there finding all my company
asleep I would not wake them, but it beginning to be break of day I
did stay upon the decke walking, and then into the Maister's cabbin
and there laid and slept a little, and so at last was waked by Captain
Cocke's calling of me, and so I turned out, and then to chat and talk
and laugh, and mighty merry. We spent most of the morning talking and
reading of "The Siege of Rhodes," which is certainly (the more I read it
the more I think so) the best poem that ever was wrote. We breakfasted
betimes and come to the fleete about two of the clock in the afternoon,
having a fine day and a fine winde. My Lord received us mighty kindly,
and after discourse with us in general left us to our business, and he
to his officers, having called a council of wary, we in the meantime
settling of papers with Mr. Pierce and everybody else, and by and by
with Captain Cuttance. Anon called down to my Lord, and there with him
till supper talking and discourse; among other things, to my great joy,
he did assure me that he had wrote to the King and Duke about these
prize-goods, and told me that they did approve of what he had done, and
that he would owne what he had done, and would have me to tell all the
world so, and did, under his hand, give Cocke and me his certificate of
our bargains, and giving us full power of disposal of what we have so
bought. This do ease my mind of all my fear, and makes my heart lighter
by L100 than it was before. He did discourse to us of the Dutch fleete
being abroad, eighty-five of them still, and are now at the Texell, he
believes, in expectation of our Eastland ships coming home with masts
and hempe, and our loaden Hambrough ships going to Hambrough. He
discoursed against them that would have us yield to no conditions but
conquest over the Dutch, and seems to believe that the Dutch will call
for the protection of the King of France and come under his power, which
were to be wished they might be brought to do under ours by fair means,
and to that end would have all Dutch men and familys, that would come
hither and settled, to be declared denizens; and my Lord did whisper
to me alone that things here must break in pieces, nobody minding any
thing, but every man his owne business of profit or pleasure, and the
King some little designs of his owne, and that certainly the kingdom
could not stand in this condition long, which I fear and believe is very
true. So to supper and there my Lord the kindest man to me, before all
the table talking of me to my advantage and with tenderness too that it
overjoyed me. So after supper Captain Cocke and I and Temple on board
the Bezan, and there to cards for a while and then to read again in
"Rhodes" and so to sleep. But, Lord! the mirth which it caused me to be
waked in the night by their snoaring round about me; I did laugh till I
was ready to burst, and waked one of the two companions of Temple, who
could not a good while tell where he was that he heard one laugh so,
till he recollected himself, and I told him what it was at, and so to
sleep again, they still snoaring.

2nd. We having sailed all night (and I do wonder how they in the dark
could find the way) we got by morning to Gillingham, and thence all
walked to Chatham; and there with Commissioner Pett viewed the Yard; and
among other things, a teame of four horses come close by us, he being
with me, drawing a piece of timber that I am confident one man could
easily have carried upon his back. I made the horses be taken away,
and a man or two to take the timber away with their hands. This the
Commissioner did see, but said nothing, but I think had cause to be
ashamed of. We walked, he and I and Cocke, to the Hill-house, where
we find Sir W. Pen in bed and there much talke and much dissembling of
kindnesse from him, but he is a false rogue, and I shall not trust him,
but my being there did procure his consent to have his silk carried away
before the money received, which he would not have done for Cocke I am
sure. Thence to Rochester, walked to the Crowne, and while dinner was
getting ready, I did there walk to visit the old Castle ruines, which
hath been a noble place, and there going up I did upon the stairs
overtake three pretty mayds or women and took them up with me, and I
did 'baiser sur mouches et toucher leur mains' and necks to my great
pleasure: but, Lord! to see what a dreadfull thing it is to look down
the precipices, for it did fright me mightily, and hinder me of much
pleasure which I would have made to myself in the company of these
three, if it had not been for that. The place hath been very noble and
great and strong in former ages. So to walk up and down the Cathedral,
and thence to the Crowne, whither Mr. Fowler, the Mayor of the towne,
was come in his gowne, and is a very reverend magistrate. After I had
eat a bit, not staying to eat with them, I went away, and so took horses
and to Gravesend, and there staid not, but got a boat, the sicknesse
being very much in the towne still, and so called on board my Lord
Bruncker and Sir John Minnes, on board one of the East Indiamen at
Erith, and there do find them full of envious complaints for the
pillageing of the ships, but I did pacify them, and discoursed about
making money of some of the goods, and do hope to be the better by it
honestly. So took leave (Madam Williams being here also with my Lord),
and about 8 o'clock got to Woolwich and there supped and mighty pleasant
with my wife, who is, for ought I see, all friends with her mayds, and
so in great joy and content to bed.

3rd. Up, and to my great content visited betimes by Mr. Woolly, my uncle
Wight's cozen, who comes to see what work I have for him about these
East India goods, and I do find that this fellow might have been of
great use, and hereafter may be of very great use to me, in this trade
of prize goods, and glad I am fully of his coming hither. While I
dressed myself, and afterwards in walking to Greenwich we did discourse
over all the business of the prize goods, and he puts me in hopes I may
get some money in what I have done, but not so much as I expected, but
that I may hereafter do more. We have laid a design of getting more, and
are to talk again of it a few days hence. To the office, where nobody to
meet me, Sir W. Batten being the only man and he gone this day to meet
to adjourne the Parliament to Oxford. Anon by appointment comes one
to tell me my Lord Rutherford is come; so I to the King's Head to him,
where I find his lady, a fine young Scotch lady, pretty handsome and
plain. My wife also, and Mercer, by and by comes, Creed bringing
them; and so presently to dinner and very merry; and after to even our
accounts, and I to give him tallys, where he do allow me L100, of
which to my grief the rogue Creed has trepanned me out of L50. But I do
foresee a way how it may be I may get a greater sum of my Lord to his
content by getting him allowance of interest upon his tallys. That being
done, and some musique and other diversions, at last away goes my
Lord and Lady, and I sent my wife to visit Mrs. Pierce, and so I to my
office, where wrote important letters to the Court, and at night (Creed
having clownishly left my wife), I to Mrs. Pierces and brought her and
Mrs. Pierce to the King's Head and there spent a piece upon a supper for
her and mighty merry and pretty discourse, she being as pretty as ever,
most of our mirth being upon "my Cozen" (meaning my Lord Bruncker's ugly
mistress, whom he calls cozen), and to my trouble she tells me that the
fine Mrs. Middleton is noted for carrying about her body a continued
sour base smell, that is very offensive, especially if she be a little
hot. Here some bad musique to close the night and so away and all of us
saw Mrs. Belle Pierce (as pretty as ever she was almost) home, and so
walked to Will's lodging where I used to lie, and there made shift for a
bed for Mercer, and mighty pleasantly to bed. This night I hear that
of our two watermen that use to carry our letters, and were well on
Saturday last, one is dead, and the other dying sick of the plague. The
plague, though decreasing elsewhere, yet being greater about the Tower
and thereabouts.

4th. Up and to my office, where Mr. Andrews comes, and reckoning with
him I get L64 of him. By and by comes Mr. Gawden, and reckoning with him
he gives me L60 in his account, which is a great mercy to me. Then both
of them met and discoursed the business of the first man's resigning and
the other's taking up the business of the victualling of Tangier, and
I do not think that I shall be able to do as well under Mr. Gawden as
under these men, or within a little as to profit and less care upon me.
Thence to the King's Head to dinner, where we three and Creed and my
wife and her woman dined mighty merry and sat long talking, and so in
the afternoon broke up, and I led my wife to our lodging again, and I to
the office where did much business, and so to my wife. This night comes
Sir George Smith to see me at the office, and tells me how the plague is
decreased this week 740, for which God be praised! but that it encreases
at our end of the town still, and says how all the towne is full of
Captain Cocke's being in some ill condition about prize-goods, his goods
being taken from him, and I know not what. But though this troubles me
to have it said, and that it is likely to be a business in Parliament,
yet I am not much concerned at it, because yet I believe this newes is
all false, for he would have wrote to me sure about it. Being come to my
wife, at our lodging, I did go to bed, and left my wife with her people
to laugh and dance and I to sleep.

5th. Lay long in bed talking among other things of my sister Pall, and
my wife of herself is very willing that I should give her L400 to her
portion, and would have her married soon as we could; but this great
sicknesse time do make it unfit to send for her up. I abroad to the
office and thence to the Duke of Albemarle, all my way reading a book of
Mr. Evelyn's translating and sending me as a present, about directions
for gathering a Library;

     [Instructions concerning erecting of a Library, presented to my
     Lord the President De Mesme by Gilbert Naudeus, and now interpreted
     by Jo.  Evelyn, Esquire.  London, 1661: This little book was
     dedicated to Lord Clarendon by the translator.  It was printed while
     Evelyn was abroad, and is full of typographical errors; these are
     corrected in a copy mentioned in Evelyn's "Miscellaneous Writings,"
     1825, p.  xii, where a letter to Dr. Godolphin on the subject is
     printed.]

but the book is above my reach, but his epistle to my Lord Chancellor is
a very fine piece. When I come to the Duke it was about the victuallers'
business, to put it into other hands, or more hands, which I do advise
in, but I hope to do myself a jobb of work in it. So I walked through
Westminster to my old house the Swan, and there did pass some time with
Sarah, and so down by water to Deptford and there to my Valentine.

          [A Mrs. Bagwell.  See ante, February 14th, 1664-65]

Round about and next door on every side is the plague, but I did not
value it, but there did what I would 'con elle', and so away to Mr.
Evelyn's to discourse of our confounded business of prisoners, and sick
and wounded seamen, wherein he and we are so much put out of order.

     [Each of the Commissioners for the Sick and Wounded was appointed to
     a particular district, and Evelyn's district was Kent and Sussex.
     On September 25th, 1665, Evelyn wrote in his Diary: "My Lord Admiral
     being come from ye fleete to Greenewich, I went thence with him to
     ye Cockpit to consult with the Duke of Albemarle.  I was peremptory
     that unlesse we had L10,000 immediately, the prisoners would starve,
     and 'twas proposed it should be rais'd out of the E. India prizes
     now taken by Lord Sandwich.  They being but two of ye Commission,
     and so not impower'd to determine, sent an expresse to his Majesty
     and Council to know what they should do."]

And here he showed me his gardens, which are for variety of evergreens,
and hedge of holly, the finest things I ever saw in my life.

     [Evelyn purchased Sayes Court, Deptford, in 1653, and laid out his
     gardens, walks, groves, enclosures, and plantations, which
     afterwards became famous for their beauty.  When he took the place
     in hand it was nothing but an open field of one hundred acres, with
     scarcely a hedge in it.]

Thence in his coach to Greenwich, and there to my office, all the way
having fine discourse of trees and the nature of vegetables. And so to
write letters, I very late to Sir W. Coventry of great concernment, and
so to my last night's lodging, but my wife is gone home to Woolwich. The
Bill, blessed be God! is less this week by 740 of what it was the last
week. Being come to my lodging I got something to eat, having eat little
all the day, and so to bed, having this night renewed my promises of
observing my vowes as I used to do; for I find that, since I left them
off, my mind is run a'wool-gathering and my business neglected.

6th. Up, and having sent for Mr. Gawden he come to me, and he and I
largely discoursed the business of his Victualling, in order to the
adding of partners to him or other ways of altering it, wherein I find
him ready to do anything the King would have him do. So he and I took
his coach and to Lambeth and to the Duke of Albemarle about it, and so
back again, where he left me. In our way discoursing of the business
and contracting a great friendship with him, and I find he is a man most
worthy to be made a friend, being very honest and gratefull, and in the
freedom of our discourse he did tell me his opinion and knowledge of Sir
W. Pen to be, what I know him to be, as false a man as ever was born,
for so, it seems, he hath been to him. He did also tell me, discoursing
how things are governed as to the King's treasure, that, having occasion
for money in the country, he did offer Alderman Maynell to pay him down
money here, to be paid by the Receiver in some county in the country,
upon whom Maynell had assignments, in whose hands the money also lay
ready. But Maynell refused it, saying that he could have his money when
he would, and had rather it should lie where it do than receive it here
in towne this sickly time, where he hath no occasion for it. But now
the evil is that he hath lent this money upon tallys which are become
payable, but he finds that nobody looks after it, how long the money is
unpaid, and whether it lies dead in the Receiver's hands or no, so the
King he pays Maynell 10 per cent. while the money lies in his Receiver's
hands to no purpose but the benefit of the Receiver. I to dinner to the
King's Head with Mr. Woolly, who is come to instruct me in the business
of my goods, but gives me not so good comfort as I thought I should have
had. But, however, it will be well worth my time though not above 2 or
L300. He gone I to my office, where very busy drawing up a letter by
way of discourse to the Duke of Albemarle about my conception how the
business of the Victualling should be ordered, wherein I have taken
great pains, and I think have hitt the right if they will but follow it.
At this very late and so home to our lodgings to bed.

7th. Up and to the office along with Mr. Childe, whom I sent for
to discourse about the victualling business, who will not come into
partnership (no more will Captain Beckford ), but I do find him a mighty
understanding man, and one I will keep a knowledge of. Did business,
though not much, at the office; because of the horrible crowd and
lamentable moan of the poor seamen that lie starving in the streets for
lack of money. Which do trouble and perplex me to the heart; and more at
noon when we were to go through them, for then a whole hundred of them
followed us; some cursing, some swearing, and some praying to us. And
that that made me more troubled was a letter come this afternoon from
the Duke of Albemarle, signifying the Dutch to be in sight, with 80
sayle, yesterday morning, off of Solebay, coming right into the bay. God
knows what they will and may do to us, we having no force abroad able to
oppose them, but to be sacrificed to them. Here come Sir W. Rider to me,
whom I sent for about the victualling business also, but he neither will
not come into partnership, but desires to be of the Commission if there
be one. Thence back the back way to my office, where very late, very
busy. But most of all when at night come two waggons from Rochester
with more goods from Captain Cocke; and in houseing them at Mr. Tooker's
lodgings come two of the Custome-house to seize them, and did seize
them but I showed them my 'Transire'. However, after some hot and angry
words, we locked them up, and sealed up the key, and did give it to the
constable to keep till Monday, and so parted. But, Lord! to think how
the poor constable come to me in the dark going home; "Sir," says he, "I
have the key, and if you would have me do any service for you, send for
me betimes to-morrow morning, and I will do what you would have me."
Whether the fellow do this out of kindness or knavery, I cannot tell;
but it is pretty to observe. Talking with him in the high way, come
close by the bearers with a dead corpse of the plague; but, Lord! to see
what custom is, that I am come almost to think nothing of it. So to my
lodging, and there, with Mr. Hater and Will, ending a business of the
state of the last six months' charge of the Navy, which we bring to
L1,000,000 and above, and I think we do not enlarge much in it if
anything. So to bed.

8th (Lord's day). Up and, after being trimmed, to the office, whither I
upon a letter from the Duke of Albemarle to me, to order as many ships
forth out of the river as I can presently, to joyne to meet the Dutch;
having ordered all the Captains of the ships in the river to come to me,
I did some business with them, and so to Captain Cocke's to dinner, he
being in the country. But here his brother Solomon was, and, for guests,
myself, Sir G. Smith, and a very fine lady, one Mrs. Penington, and
two more gentlemen. But, both [before] and after dinner, most witty
discourse with this lady, who is a very fine witty lady, one of the best
I ever heard speake, and indifferent handsome. There after dinner an
houre or two, and so to the office, where ended my business with the
Captains; and I think of twenty-two ships we shall make shift to get out
seven. (God helpe us! men being sick, or provisions lacking.) And so to
write letters to Sir Ph. Warwicke, Sir W. Coventry, and Sir G. Carteret
to Court about the last six months' accounts, and sent away by
an express to-night. This day I hear the Pope is dead;--[a false
report]--and one said, that the newes is, that the King of France is
stabbed, but that the former is very true, which will do great things
sure, as to the troubling of that part of the world, the King of Spayne

     [Philip IV., King of Spain, who succeeded to the throne in 1621,
     died in 1665.  He was succeeded by his son Charles II.]

being so lately dead. And one thing more, Sir Martin Noell's lady is
dead with griefe for the death of her husband and nothing else, as they
say, in the world; but it seems nobody can make anything of his estate,
whether he be dead worth anything or no, he having dealt in so many
things, publique and private, as nobody can understand whereabouts his
estate is, which is the fate of these great dealers at everything. So
after my business being done I home to my lodging and to bed,

9th. Up, my head full of business, and called upon also by Sir John
Shaw, to whom I did give a civil answer about our prize goods, that all
his dues as one of the Farmers of the Customes are paid, and showed
him our Transire; with which he was satisfied, and parted, ordering his
servants to see the weight of them. I to the office, and there found an
order for my coming presently to the Duke of Albemarle, and what should
it be, but to tell me, that, if my Lord Sandwich do not come to towne,
he do resolve to go with the fleete to sea himself, the Dutch, as he
thinks, being in the Downes, and so desired me to get a pleasure boat
for to take him in to-morrow morning, and do many other things, and with
a great liking of me, and my management especially, as that coxcombe
my Lord Craven do tell me, and I perceive it, and I am sure take pains
enough to deserve it. Thence away and to the office at London, where I
did some business about my money and private accounts, and there eat
a bit of goose of Mr. Griffin's, and so by water, it raining most
miserably, to Greenwich, calling on several vessels in my passage. Being
come there I hear another seizure hath been made of our goods by one
Captain Fisher that hath been at Chatham by warrant of the Duke of
Albemarle, and is come in my absence to Tooker's and viewed them,
demanding the key of the constable, and so sealed up the door. I to the
house, but there being no officers nor constable could do nothing,
but back to my office full of trouble about this, and there late about
business, vexed to see myself fall into this trouble and concernment in
a thing that I want instruction from my Lord Sandwich whether I should
appear in it or no, and so home to bed, having spent two hours, I and
my boy, at Mr. Glanvill's removing of faggots to make room to remove our
goods to, but when done I thought it not fit to use it. The newes of the
killing of the [King of] France is wholly untrue, and they say that of
the Pope too.

10th. Up, and receive a stop from the Duke of Albemarle of setting out
any more ships, or providing a pleasure boat for himself, which I am
glad of, and do see, what I thought yesterday, that this resolution of
his was a sudden one and silly. By and by comes Captain Cocke's Jacob
to tell me that he is come from Chatham this morning, and that there
are four waggons of goods at hand coming to towne, which troubles me.
I directed him to bring them to his master's house. But before I could
send him away to bring them thither, newes is brought me that they are
seized on in the towne by this Captain Fisher and they will carry them
to another place. So I to them and found our four waggons in the streete
stopped by the church by this Fisher and company and 100 or 200 people
in the streetes gazing. I did give them good words, and made modest
desires of carrying the goods to Captain Cocke's, but they would have
them to a house of their hiring, where in a barne the goods were laid. I
had transires to show for all, and the tale was right, and there I spent
all the morning seeing this done. At which Fisher was vexed that I would
not let it be done by any body else for the merchant, and that I must
needs be concerned therein, which I did not think fit to owne. So that
being done, I left the goods to be watched by men on their part and
ours, and so to the office by noon, whither by and by comes Captain
Cocke, whom I had with great care sent for by expresse the last night,
and so I with him to his house and there eat a bit, and so by coach to
Lambeth, and I took occasion first to go to the Duke of Albemarle to
acquaint him with some thing of what had been done this morning in
behalf of a friend absent, which did give a good entrance and prevented
their possessing the Duke with anything of evil of me by their report,
and by and by in comes. Captain Cocke and tells his whole story. So an
order was made for the putting him in possession upon giving security
to, be accountable for the goods, which for the present did satisfy us,
and so away, giving Locke that drew the order a piece. (Lord! to see how
unhappily a man may fall into a necessity of bribing people to do him
right in a thing, wherein he hath done nothing but fair, and bought
dear.) So to the office, there to write my letters, and Cocke comes to
tell me that Fisher is come to him, and that he doubts not to cajole
Fisher and his companion and make them friends with drink and a bribe.
This night comes Sir Christopher Mings to towne, and I went to see him,
and by and by he being then out of the town comes to see me. He is newly
come from Court, and carries direction for the making a show of getting
out the fleete again to go fight the Dutch, but that it will end in a
fleete of 20 good sayling frigates to go to the Northward or Southward,
and that will be all. I enquired, but he would not be to know that he
had heard any thing at Oxford about the business of the prize goods,
which I did suspect, but he being gone, anon comes Cocke and tells me
that he hath been with him a great while, and that he finds him sullen
and speaking very high what disrespect he had received of my Lord,
saying that he hath walked 3 or 4 hours together at that Earle's cabbin
door for audience and could not be received, which, if true, I am sorry
for. He tells me that Sir G. Ascue says, that he did from the beginning
declare against these [prize] goods, and would not receive his dividend;
and that he and Sir W. Pen are at odds about it, and that he fears Mings
hath been doing ill offices to my Lord. I did to-night give my Lord an
account of all this, and so home and to bed.

11th. Up, and so in my chamber staid all the morning doing something
toward my Tangier accounts, for the stating of them, and also comes up
my landlady, Mrs. Clerke, to make an agreement for the time to come; and
I, for the having room enough, and to keepe out strangers, and to have
a place to retreat to for my wife, if the sicknesse should come
to Woolwich, am contented to pay dear; so for three rooms and a
dining-room, and for linen and bread and beer and butter, at nights and
mornings, I am to give her L5 10s. per month, and I wrote and we signed
to an agreement. By and by comes Cocke to tell me that Fisher and his
fellow were last night mightily satisfied and promised all friendship,
but this morning he finds them to have new tricks and shall be troubled
with them. So he being to go down to Erith with them this afternoon
about giving security, I advised him to let them go by land, and so he
and I (having eat something at his house) by water to Erith, but
they got thither before us, and there we met Mr. Seymour, one of the
Commissioners for Prizes, and a Parliament-man, and he was mighty high,
and had now seized our goods on their behalf; and he mighty imperiously
would have all forfeited, and I know not what. I thought I was in the
right in a thing I said and spoke somewhat earnestly, so we took up one
another very smartly, for which I was sorry afterwards, shewing thereby
myself too much concerned, but nothing passed that I valued at all.
But I could not but think [it odd] that a Parliament-man, in a serious
discourse before such persons as we and my Lord Bruncker, and Sir John
Minnes, should quote Hudibras, as being the book I doubt he hath read
most. They I doubt will stand hard for high security, and Cocke would
have had me bound with him for his appearing, but I did stagger at it,
besides Seymour do stop the doing it at all till he has been with the
Duke of Albemarle. So there will be another demurre. It growing late,
and I having something to do at home, took my leave alone, leaving Cocke
there for all night, and so against tide and in the darke and very cold
weather to Woolwich, where we had appointed to keepe the night merrily;
and so, by Captain Cocke's coach, had brought a very pretty child, a
daughter of one Mrs. Tooker's, next door to my lodging, and so she,
and a daughter and kinsman of Mrs. Pett's made up a fine company at my
lodgings at Woolwich, where my wife and Mercer, and Mrs. Barbara danced,
and mighty merry we were, but especially at Mercer's dancing a jigg,
which she does the best I ever did see, having the most natural way of
it, and keeps time the most perfectly I ever did see. This night is kept
in lieu of yesterday, for my wedding day of ten years; for which God be
praised! being now in an extreme good condition of health and estate and
honour, and a way of getting more money, though at this houre under some
discomposure, rather than damage, about some prize goods that I have
bought off the fleete, in partnership with Captain Cocke; and for the
discourse about the world concerning my Lord Sandwich, that he hath done
a thing so bad; and indeed it must needs have been a very rash act; and
the rather because of a Parliament now newly met to give money, and will
have some account of what hath already been spent, besides the precedent
for a General to take what prizes he pleases, and the giving a pretence
to take away much more than he intended, and all will lie upon him; and
not giving to all the Commanders, as well as the Flaggs, he displeases
all them, and offends even some of them, thinking others to be better
served than themselves; and lastly, puts himself out of a power of
begging anything again a great while of the King. Having danced with my
people as long as I saw fit to sit up, I to bed and left them to do what
they would. I forgot that we had W. Hewer there, and Tom, and Golding,
my barber at Greenwich, for our fiddler, to whom I did give 10s.

12th. Called up before day, and so I dressed myself and down, it being
horrid cold, by water to my Lord Bruncker's ship, who advised me to do
so, and it was civilly to show me what the King had commanded about
the prize-goods, to examine most severely all that had been done in
the taking out any with or without order, without respect to my
Lord Sandwich at all, and that he had been doing of it, and find him
examining one man, and I do find that extreme ill use was made of my
Lord's order. For they did toss and tumble and spoil, and breake things
in hold to a great losse and shame to come at the fine goods, and did
take a man that knows where the fine goods were, and did this over and
over again for many days, Sir W. Berkeley being the chief hand that did
it, but others did the like at other times, and they did say in doing it
that my Lord Sandwich's back was broad enough to bear it. Having learned
as much as I could, which was, that the King and Duke were very
severe in this point, whatever order they before had given my Lord in
approbation of what he had done, and that all will come out and the King
see, by the entries at the Custome House, what all do amount to that
had been taken, and so I took leave, and by water, very cold, and to
Woolwich where it was now noon, and so I staid dinner and talking part
of the afternoon, and then by coach, Captain Cocke's, to Greenwich,
taking the young lady home, and so to Cocke, and he tells me that he
hath cajolled with Seymour, who will be our friend; but that, above all,
Seymour tells him, that my Lord Duke did shew him to-day an order from
Court, for having all respect paid to the Earle of Sandwich, and what
goods had been delivered by his order, which do overjoy us, and that
to-morrow our goods shall be weighed, and he doubts not possession
to-morrow or next day. Being overjoyed at this I to write my letters,
and at it very late. Good newes this week that there are about 600 less
dead of the plague than the last. So home to bed.

13th. Lay long, and this morning comes Sir Jer. Smith

     [Captain Jeremiah Smith (or Smyth), knighted June, 1665; Admiral of
     the Blue in 1666.  He succeeded Sir William Penn as Comptroller of
     the Victualling Accounts in 1669, and held the office until 1675.]

to see me in his way to Court, and a good man he is, and one that I
must keep fair with, and will, it being I perceive my interest to have
kindnesse with the Commanders. So to the office, and there very busy
till about noon comes Sir W. Warren, and he goes and gets a bit of meat
ready at the King's Head for us, and I by and by thither, and we dined
together, and I am not pleased with him about a little business of
Tangier that I put to him to do for me, but however, the hurt is not
much, and his other matters of profit to me continue very likely to be
good. Here we spent till 2 o'clock, and so I set him on shore, and I by
water to the Duke of Albemarle, where I find him with Lord Craven and
Lieutenant of the Tower about him; among other things, talking of ships
to get of the King to fetch coles for the poore of the city, which is a
good worke. But, Lord! to hear the silly talke between these three great
people! Yet I have no reason to find fault, the Duke and Lord Craven
being my very great friends. Here did the business I come about, and so
back home by water, and there Cocke comes to me and tells me that he is
come to an understanding with Fisher, and that he must give him L100,
and that he shall have his goods in possession to-morrow, they being all
weighed to-day, which pleases me very well. This day the Duke tells me
that there is no news heard of the Dutch, what they do or where they
are, but believes that they are all gone home, for none of our spyes can
give us any tideings of them. Cocke is fain to keep these people, Fisher
and his fellow, company night and day to keep them friends almost and
great troubles withal. My head is full of settling the victualling
business also, that I may make some profit out of it, which I hope
justly to do to the King's advantage. To-night come Sir J. Bankes to me
upon my letter to discourse it with him, and he did give me the advice
I have taken almost as fully as if I had been directed by him what to
write. The business also of my Tangier accounts to be sent to Court is
upon my hands in great haste; besides, all my owne proper accounts
are in great disorder, having been neglected now above a month, which
grieves me, but it could not be settled sooner. These together and the
feare of the sicknesse and providing for my family do fill my head very
full, besides the infinite business of the office, and nobody here to
look after it but myself. So late from my office to my lodgings, and to
bed.

14th. Up, and to the office, where mighty busy, especially with Mr.
Gawden, with whom I shall, I think, have much to do, and by and by comes
the Lieutenant of the Tower by my invitation yesterday, but I had got
nothing for him, it is to discourse about the Cole shipps. So he went
away to Sheriffe Hooker's, and I staid at the office till he sent for me
at noon to dinner, I very hungry. When I come to the Sheriffe's he was
not there, nor in many other places, nor could find him at all, so was
forced to come to the office and get a bit of meat from the taverne, and
so to my business. By and by comes the Lieutenant and reproaches me with
my not treating him as I ought, but all in jest, he it seemed dined
with Mr. Adrian May. Very late writing letters at the office, and much
satisfied to hear from Captain Cocke that he had got possession of some
of his goods to his own house, and expected to have all to-night. The
towne, I hear, is full of talke that there are great differences in the
fleete among the great Commanders, and that Mings at Oxford did impeach
my Lord of something, I think about these goods, but this is but talke.
But my heart and head to-night is full of the Victualling business,
being overjoyed and proud at my success in my proposal about it, it
being read before the King, Duke, and the Caball with complete applause
and satisfaction. This Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Coventry both writ me,
besides Sir W. Coventry's letter to the Duke of Albemarle, which I read
yesterday, and I hope to find my profit in it also. So late home to bed.

15th (Lord's day). Up, and while I staid for the barber, tried to
compose a duo of counterpoint, and I think it will do very well, it
being by Mr. Berckenshaw's rule. By and by by appointment comes Mr.
Povy's coach, and, more than I expected, him himself, to fetch me to
Brainford: so he and I immediately set out, having drunk a draft of
mulled sacke; and so rode most nobly, in his most pretty and best
contrived charriott in the world, with many new conveniences, his never
having till now, within a day or two, been yet finished; our discourse
upon Tangier business, want of money, and then of publique miscarriages,
nobody minding the publique, but every body himself and his lusts. Anon
we come to his house, and there I eat a bit, and so with fresh horses,
his noble fine horses, the best confessedly in England, the King having
none such, he sent me to Sir Robert Viner's, whom I met coming just from
church, and so after having spent half-an-hour almost looking upon
the horses with some gentlemen that were in company, he and I into
his garden to discourse of money, but none is to be had, he confessing
himself in great straits, and I believe it. Having this answer, and that
I could not get better, we fell to publique talke, and to think how the
fleete and seamen will be paid, which he protests he do not think it
possible to compass, as the world is now: no money got by trade, nor the
persons that have it by them in the City to be come at. The Parliament,
it seems, have voted the King L1,250,000 at L50,000 per month, tax for
the war; and voted to assist the King against the Dutch, and all that
shall adhere to them; and thanks to be given him for his care of the
Duke of Yorke, which last is a very popular vote on the Duke's behalf.
He tells me how the taxes of the last assessment, which should have been
in good part gathered, are not yet laid, and that even in part of the
City of London; and the Chimny-money comes almost to nothing, nor any
thing else looked after. Having done this I parted, my mind not eased by
any money, but only that I had done my part to the King's service. And
so in a very pleasant evening back to Mr. Povy's, and there supped, and
after supper to talke and to sing, his man Dutton's wife singing very
pleasantly (a mighty fat woman), and I wrote out one song from her and
pricked the tune, both very pretty. But I did never heare one sing with
so much pleasure to herself as this lady do, relishing it to her very
heart, which was mighty pleasant.

16th. Up about seven o'clock; and, after drinking, and I observing Mr.
Povy's being mightily mortifyed in his eating and drinking, and coaches
and horses, he desiring to sell his best, and every thing else, his
furniture of his house, he walked with me to Syon,

     [Sion House, granted by Edward VI. to his uncle, the Duke of
     Somerset.  After his execution, 1552, it was forfeited, and given to
     John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland.  The duke being beheaded in
     1553, it reverted to the Crown, and was granted in 1604 to Henry
     Percy, Earl of Northumberland.  It still belongs to the Duke of
     Northumberland.]

and there I took water, in our way he discoursing of the wantonnesse of
the Court, and how it minds nothing else, and I saying that that would
leave the King shortly if he did not leave it, he told me "No," for the
King do spend most of his time in feeling and kissing them naked... But
this lechery will never leave him. Here I took boat (leaving him there)
and down to the Tower, where I hear the Duke of Albemarle is, and I to
Lumbard Streete, but can get no money. So upon the Exchange, which is
very empty, God knows! and but mean people there. The newes for certain
that the Dutch are come with their fleete before Margett, and some men
were endeavouring to come on shore when the post come away, perhaps
to steal some sheep. But, Lord! how Colvill talks of the businesse of
publique revenue like a madman, and yet I doubt all true; that nobody
minds it, but that the King and Kingdom must speedily be undone, and
rails at my Lord about the prizes, but I think knows not my relation to
him. Here I endeavoured to satisfy all I could, people about Bills of
Exchange from Tangier, but it is only with good words, for money I have
not, nor can get. God knows what will become of all the King's matters
in a little time, for he runs in debt every day, and nothing to pay them
looked after. Thence I walked to the Tower; but, Lord! how empty the
streets are and melancholy, so many poor sick people in the streets
full of sores; and so many sad stories overheard as I walk, every body
talking of this dead, and that man sick, and so many in this place, and
so many in that. And they tell me that, in Westminster, there is never
a physician and but one apothecary left, all being dead; but that there
are great hopes of a great decrease this week: God send it! At the Tower
found my Lord Duke and Duchesse at dinner; so I sat down. And much good
cheer, the Lieutenant and his lady, and several officers with the Duke.
But, Lord! to hear the silly talk that was there, would make one mad;
the Duke having none almost but fools about him. Much of their talke
about the Dutch coming on shore, which they believe they may some of
them have been and steal sheep, and speak all in reproach of them in
whose hands the fleete is; but, Lord helpe him, there is something will
hinder him and all the world in going to sea, which is want of victuals;
for we have not wherewith to answer our service; and how much better it
would have been if the Duke's advice had been taken for the fleete
to have gone presently out; but, God helpe the King! while no better
counsels are given, and what is given no better taken. Thence after
dinner receiving many commands from the Duke, I to our office on the
Hill, and there did a little business and to Colvill's again, and so
took water at the Tower, and there met with Captain Cocke, and he down
with me to Greenwich, I having received letters from my Lord Sandwich
to-day, speaking very high about the prize goods, that he would have us
to fear nobody, but be very confident in what we have done, and not
to confess any fault or doubt of what he hath done; for the King hath
allowed it, and do now confirm it, and sent orders, as he says, for
nothing to be disturbed that his Lordshipp hath ordered therein as to
the division of the goods to the fleete; which do comfort us, but my
Lord writes to me that both he and I may hence learn by what we see in
this business. But that which pleases me best is that Cocke tells me
that he now understands that Fisher was set on in this business by the
design of some of the Duke of Albemarle's people, Warcupp and others,
who lent him money to set him out in it, and he has spent high. Who
now curse him for a rogue to take L100 when he might have had as well
L1,500, and they are mightily fallen out about it. Which in due time
shall be discovered, but that now that troubles me afresh is, after I
am got to the office at Greenwich that some new troubles are come, and
Captain Cocke's house is beset before and behind with guards, and more,
I do fear they may come to my office here to search for Cocke's goods
and find some small things of my clerk's. So I assisted them in helping
to remove their small trade, but by and by I am told that it is only
the Custome House men who came to seize the things that did lie at Mr.
Glanville's, for which they did never yet see our Transire, nor did
know of them till to-day. So that my fear is now over, for a transire
is ready for them. Cocke did get a great many of his goods to London
to-day. To the Still Yarde, which place, however, is now shut up of
the plague; but I was there, and we now make no bones of it. Much talke
there is of the Chancellor's speech and the King's at the Parliament's
meeting, which are very well liked; and that we shall certainly, by
their speeches, fall out with France at this time, together with the
Dutch, which will find us work. Late at the office entering my Journall
for 8 days past, the greatness of my business hindering me of late to
put it down daily, but I have done it now very true and particularly,
and hereafter will, I hope, be able to fall into my old way of doing it
daily. So to my lodging, and there had a good pullet to my supper, and
so to bed, it being very cold again, God be thanked for it!

17th. Up, and all day long busy at the office, mighty busy, only stepped
to my lodging and had a fowl for my dinner, and at night my wife and
Mercer comes to me, which troubled me a little because I am to be mighty
busy to-morrow all day seriously about my accounts. So late from my
office to her, and supped, and so to bed.

18th. Up, and after some pleasant discourse with my wife (though my
head full of business) I out and left her to go home, and myself to
the office, and thence by water to the Duke of Albemarle's, and so back
again and find my wife gone. So to my chamber at my lodgings, and to the
making of my accounts up of Tangier, which I did with great difficulty,
finding the difference between short and long reckonings where I
have had occasion to mix my moneys, as I have of late done my Tangier
treasure upon other occasions, and other moneys upon that. However,
I was at it late and did it pretty perfectly, and so, after eating
something, to bed, my mind eased of a great deal of figures and
castings.

19th. Up, and to my accounts again, and stated them very clear and fair,
and at noon dined at my lodgings with Mr. Hater and W. Hewer at table
with me, I being come to an agreement yesterday with my landlady for L6
per month, for so many rooms for myself, them, and my wife and mayde,
when she shall come, and to pay besides for my dyett. After dinner I did
give them my accounts and letters to write against I went to the Duke of
Albemarle's this evening, which I did; and among other things, spoke to
him for my wife's brother, Balty, to be of his guard, which he kindly
answered that he should. My business of the Victualling goes on as I
would have it; and now my head is full how to make some profit of it to
myself or people. To that end, when I came home, I wrote a letter to
Mr. Coventry, offering myself to be the Surveyor Generall, and am apt
to think he will assist me in it, but I do not set my heart much on it,
though it would be a good helpe. So back to my office, and there till
past one before I could get all these letters and papers copied out,
which vexed me, but so sent them away without hopes of saving the post,
and so to my lodging to bed.

20th. Up, and had my last night's letters brought back to me, which
troubles me, because of my accounts, lest they should be asked for
before they come, which I abhorr, being more ready to give than they can
be to demand them: so I sent away an expresse to Oxford with them, and
another to Portsmouth, with a copy of my letter to Mr. Coventry about
my victualling business, for fear he should be gone from Oxford, as he
intended, thither. So busy all the morning and at noon to Cocke, and
dined there. He and I alone, vexed that we are not rid of all our
trouble about our goods, but it is almost over, and in the afternoon
to my lodging, and there spent the whole afternoon and evening with Mr.
Hater, discoursing of the business of the office, where he tells me that
among others Thomas Willson do now and then seem to hint that I do take
too much business upon me, more than I can do, and that therefore some
do lie undone. This I confess to my trouble is true, but it arises from
my being forced to take so much on me, more than is my proper task to
undertake. But for this at last I did advise to him to take another
clerk if he thinks fit, I will take care to have him paid. I discoursed
also much with him about persons fit to be put into the victualling
business, and such as I could spare something out of their salaries for
them, but without trouble I cannot, I see, well do it, because Thomas
Willson must have the refusal of the best place which is London of L200
per annum, which I did intend for Tooker, and to get L50 out of it as
a help to Mr. Hater. How[ever], I will try to do something of this kind
for them. Having done discourse with him late, I to enter my Tangier
accounts fair, and so to supper and to bed.

21 st. Up, and to my office, where busy all the morning, and then with
my two clerks home to dinner, and so back again to the office, and there
very late very busy, and so home to supper and to bed.

22nd (Lord's day). Up, and after ready and going to Captain Cocke's,
where I find we are a little further safe in some part of our goods,
I to Church, in my way was meeting with some letters, which made me
resolve to go after church to my Lord Duke of Albemarle's, so, after
sermon, I took Cocke's chariott, and to Lambeth; but, in going and
getting over the water, and through White Hall, I spent so much time,
the Duke had almost dined. However, fresh meat was brought for me to his
table, and there I dined, and full of discourse and very kind. Here they
are again talking of the prizes, and my Lord Duke did speake very broad
that my Lord Sandwich and Pen should do what they would, and answer
for themselves. For his part, he would lay all before the King. Here he
tells me the Dutch Embassador at Oxford is clapped up, but since I hear
it is not true. Thence back again, it being evening before I could
get home, and there Cocke not being within, I and Mr. Salomon to Mr.
Glanville's, and there we found Cocke and sat and supped, and was mighty
merry with only Madam Penington, who is a fine, witty lady. Here we
spent the evening late with great mirth, and so home and to bed.

23rd. Up, and after doing some business I down by water, calling to see
my wife, with whom very merry for ten minutes, and so to Erith, where
my Lord Bruncker and I kept the office, and dispatched some business by
appointment on the Bezan. Among other things about the slopsellers, who
have trusted us so long, they are not able, nor can be expected to trust
us further, and I fear this winter the fleete will be undone by that
particular. Thence on board the East India ship, where my Lord Bruncker
had provided a great dinner, and thither comes by and by Sir John Minnes
and before him Sir W. Warren and anon a Perspective glasse maker, of
whom we, every one, bought a pocket glasse. But I am troubled with the
much talke and conceitedness of Mrs. Williams and her impudence, in
case she be not married to my Lord. They are getting themselves ready to
deliver the goods all out to the East India Company, who are to have
the goods in their possession and to advance two thirds of the moderate
value thereof and sell them as well as they can and the King to give
them 6 per cent. for the use of the money they shall so advance. By this
means the company will not suffer by the King's goods bringing down the
price of their own. Thence in the evening back again with Sir W. Warren
and Captain Taylor in my boat, and the latter went with me to the
office, and there he and I reckoned; and I perceive I shall get L100
profit by my services of late to him, which is a very good thing. Thence
to my lodging, where I find my Lord Rutherford, of which I was glad.
We supped together and sat up late, he being a mighty wanton man with
a daughter in law of my landlady's, a pretty conceited woman big with
child, and he would be handling her breasts, which she coyly refused.
But they gone, my Lord and I to business, and he would have me forbear
paying Alderman Backewell the money ordered him, which I, in hopes to
advantage myself, shall forbear, but do not think that my Lord will do
any thing gratefully more to me than he hath done, not that I shall get
any thing as I pretended by helping him to interest for his last L7700,
which I could do, and do him a courtesy too. Discourse being done, he to
bed in my chamber and I to another in the house.

24th. Lay long, having a cold. Then to my Lord and sent him going to
Oxford, and I to my office, whither comes Sir William Batten now newly
from Oxford. I can gather nothing from him about my Lord Sandwich about
the business of the prizes, he being close, but he shewed me a bill
which hath been read in the House making all breaking of bulke for
the time to come felony, but it is a foolish Act, and will do no great
matter, only is calculated to my Lord Sandwich's case. He shewed me
also a good letter printed from the Bishopp of Munster to the States of
Holland shewing the state of their case. Here we did some business and
so broke up and I to Cocke, where Mr. Evelyn was, to dinner, and there
merry, yet vexed again at publique matters, and to see how little heed
is had to the prisoners and sicke and wounded. Thence to my office, and
no sooner there but to my great surprise am told that my Lord Sandwich
is come to towne; so I presently to Boreman's, where he is and there
found him: he mighty kind to me, but no opportunity of discourse private
yet, which he tells me he must have with me; only his business is sudden
to go to the fleece, to get out a few ships to drive away the Dutch. I
left him in discourse with Sir W. Batten and others, and myself to the
office till about 10 at night and so, letters being done, I to him again
to Captain Cocke's, where he supped, and lies, and never saw him more
merry, and here is Charles Herbert, who the King hath lately knighted.

     [This person, erroneously called by Pepys Sir C. Herbert, will be
     best defined by subjoining the inscription on his monument in
     Westminster Abbey: "Sir Charles Harbord, Knight, third son of Sir
     Charles Harbord, Knight, Surveyor-General, and First Lieutenant of
     the Royall James, under the most noble and illustrious Captaine,
     Edward, Earle of Sandwich, Vice-Admirall of England, which, after a
     terrible fight, maintained to admiration against a squadron of the
     Holland fleet, above six hours, neere the Suffolk coast, having put
     off two fireships; at last, being utterly disabled, and few of her
     men remaining unhurt, was, by a third, unfortunately set on fire.
     But he (though he swome well) neglected to save himselfe, as some
     did, and out of perfect love to that worthy Lord, whom, for many
     yeares, he had constantly accompanyed, in all his honourable
     employments, and in all the engagements of the former warre, dyed
     with him, at the age of xxxii., much bewailed by his father, whom he
     never offended; and much beloved by all for his knowne piety,
     vertue, loyalty, fortitude, and fidelity."--B.]

My Lord, to my great content, did tell me before them, that never
anything was read to the King and Council, all the chief Ministers of
State being there, as my letter about the Victualling was, and no more
said upon it than a most thorough consent to every word was said, and
directed, that it be pursued and practised. After much mirth, and
my Lord having travelled all night last night, he to bed, and we all
parted, I home.

25th. Up and to my Lord Sandwich's, where several Commanders, of whom I
took the state of all their ships, and of all could find not above four
capable of going out. The truth is, the want of victuals being the
whole overthrow of this yeare both at sea, and now at the Nore here and
Portsmouth, where all the fleete lies. By and by comes down my Lord, and
then he and I an houre together alone upon private discourse. He tells
me that Mr. Coventry and he are not reconciled, but declared enemies:
the only occasion of it being, he tells me, his ill usage from him about
the first fight, wherein he had no right done him, which, methinks, is a
poor occasion, for, in my conscience, that was no design of Coventry's.
But, however, when I asked my Lord whether it were not best, though
with some condescension, to be friends with him, he told me it was not
possible, and so I stopped. He tells me, as very private, that there
are great factions at the Court between the King's party and the Duke of
Yorke's, and that the King, which is a strange difficulty, do favour my
Lord in opposition to the Duke's party; that my Lord Chancellor, being,
to be sure, the patron of the Duke's, it is a mystery whence it should
be that Mr. Coventry is looked upon by him [Clarendon] as an enemy to
him; that if he had a mind himself to be out of this employment, as Mr.
Coventry, he believes, wishes, and himself and I do incline to wish it
also, in many respects, yet he believes he shall not be able, because of
the King, who will keepe him in on purpose, in opposition to the other
party; that Prince Rupert and he are all possible friends in the world;
that Coventry hath aggravated this business of the prizes, though never
so great plundering in the world as while the Duke and he were at sea;
and in Sir John Lawson's time he could take and pillage, and then sink
a whole ship in the Streights, and Coventry say nothing to it; that my
Lord Arlington is his fast friend; that the Chancellor is cold to him,
and though I told him that I and the world do take my Lord Chancellor,
in his speech the other day, to have said as much as could be wished,
yet he thinks he did not. That my Lord Chancellor do from hence begin to
be cold to him, because of his seeing him and Arlington so great:
that nothing at Court is minded but faction and pleasure, and nothing
intended of general good to the kingdom by anybody heartily; so that he
believes with me, in a little time confusion will certainly come over
all the nation. He told me how a design was carried on a while ago, for
the Duke of Yorke to raise an army in the North, and to be the Generall
of it, and all this without the knowledge or advice of the Duke of
Albemarle, which when he come to know, he was so vexed, they were fain
to let it fall to content him: that his matching with the family of Sir
G. Carteret do make the difference greater between Coventry and him,
they being enemies; that the Chancellor did, as every body else, speak
well of me the other day, but yet was, at the Committee for Tangier,
angry that I should offer to suffer a bill of exchange to be protested.
So my Lord did bid me take heed, for that I might easily suppose I
could not want enemies, no more than others. In all he speaks with the
greatest trust and love and confidence in what I say or do, that a man
can do. After this discourse ended we sat down to dinner and mighty
merry, among other things, at the Bill brought into the House to make
it felony to break bulke, which, as my Lord says well, will make that
no prizes shall be taken, or, if taken, shall be sunke after plundering;
and the Act for the method of gathering this last L1,250,000 now voted,
and how paid wherein are several strange imperfections. After dinner
my Lord by a ketch down to Erith, where the Bezan was, it blowing these
last two days and now both night and day very hard southwardly, so that
it has certainly drove the Dutch off the coast. My Lord being gone I
to the office, and there find Captain Ferrers, who tells me his wife is
come to town to see him, having not seen him since 15 weeks ago at his
first going to sea last. She is now at a Taverne and stays all night, so
I was obliged to give him my house and chamber to lie in, which he with
great modesty and after much force took, and so I got Mr. Evelyn's coach
to carry her thither, and the coach coming back, I with Mr. Evelyn to
Deptford, where a little while with him doing a little business, and so
in his coach back again to my lodgings, and there sat with Mrs. Ferrers
two hours, and with my little girle, Mistress Frances Tooker, and very
pleasant. Anon the Captain comes, and then to supper very merry, and so
I led them to bed. And so to bed myself, having seen my pretty little
girle home first at the next door.

26th. Up, and, leaving my guests to make themselves ready, I to the
office, and thither comes Sir Jer. Smith and Sir Christopher Mings to
see me, being just come from Portsmouth and going down to the Fleete.
Here I sat and talked with them a good while and then parted, only Sir
Christopher Mings and I together by water to the Tower; and I find him
a very witty well-spoken fellow, and mighty free to tell his parentage,
being a shoemaker's son, to whom he is now going, and I to the
'Change, where I hear how the French have taken two and sunk one of our
merchant-men in the Streights, and carried the ships to Toulon; so that
there is no expectation but we must fall out with them. The 'Change
pretty full, and the town begins to be lively again, though the streets
very empty, and most shops shut. So back again I and took boat and
called for Sir Christopher Mings at St. Katharine's, who was followed
with some ordinary friends, of which, he says, he is proud, and so down
to Greenwich, the wind furious high, and we with our sail up till I made
it be taken down. I took him, it being 3 o'clock, to my lodgings and did
give him a good dinner and so parted, he being pretty close to me as
to any business of the fleete, knowing me to be a servant of my Lord
Sandwich's. He gone I to the office till night, and then they come and
tell me my wife is come to towne, so I to her vexed at her coming,
but it was upon innocent business, so I was pleased and made her stay,
Captain Ferrers and his lady being yet there, and so I left them to
dance, and I to the office till past nine at night, and so to them and
there saw them dance very prettily, the Captain and his wife, my wife
and Mrs. Barbary, and Mercer and my landlady's daughter, and then little
Mistress Frances Tooker and her mother, a pretty woman come to see
my wife. Anon to supper, and then to dance again (Golding being our
fiddler, who plays very well and all tunes) till past twelve at night,
and then we broke up and every one to bed, we make shift for all our
company, Mrs. Tooker being gone.

27th. Up, and after some pleasant discourse with my wife, I out, leaving
her and Mrs. Ferrers there, and I to Captain Cocke's, there to do some
business, and then away with Cocke in his coach through Kent Streete,
a miserable, wretched, poor place, people sitting sicke and muffled up
with plasters at every 4 or 5 doors. So to the 'Change, and thence I by
water to the Duke of Albemarle's, and there much company, but I staid
and dined, and he makes mighty much of me; and here he tells us the
Dutch are gone, and have lost above 160 cables and anchors, through the
last foule weather. Here he proposed to me from Mr. Coventry, as I
had desired of Mr. Coventry, that I should be Surveyor-Generall of the
Victualling business, which I accepted. But, indeed, the terms in which
Mr. Coventry proposes it for me are the most obliging that ever I could
expect from any man, and more; it saying me to be the fittest man in
England, and that he is sure, if I will undertake, I will perform it;
and that it will be also a very desirable thing that I might have this
encouragement, my encouragement in the Navy alone being in no wise
proportionable to my pains or deserts. This, added to the letter I had
three days since from Mr. Southerne, signifying that the Duke of Yorke
had in his master's absence opened my letter, and commanded him to tell
me that he did approve of my being the Surveyor-General, do make me
joyful beyond myself that I cannot express it, to see that as I do take
pains, so God blesses me, and hath sent me masters that do observe that
I take pains. After having done here, I back by water and to London,
and there met with Captain Cocke's coach again, and I went in it to
Greenwich and thence sent my wife in it to Woolwich, and I to the
office, and thence home late with Captain Taylor, and he and I settled
all accounts between us, and I do find that I do get above L129 of him
for my services for him within these six months. At it till almost
one in the morning, and after supper he away and I to bed, mightily
satisfied in all this, and in a resolution I have taken to-night with
Mr. Hater to propose the port of London for the victualling business for
Thomas Willson, by which it will be better done and I at more ease, in
case he should grumble.

     [The Duke of York's letter appointing Thomas Wilson Surveyor of the
     Victualling of His Majesty's Navy in the Port of London, and
     referring to Pepys as Surveyor-General of the Victualling Affairs,
     is printed in "Memoirs of the English Affairs, chiefly Naval, 1660-
     73," by James, Duke of York, 1729, p. 131.]

So to bed.

28th. Up, and sent for Thomas Willson, and broke the victualling
business to him and he is mightily contented, and so am I that I have
bestowed it on him, and so I to Mr. Boreman's, where Sir W. Batten is,
to tell him what I had proposed to Thomas Willson, and the newes also I
have this morning from Sir W. Clerke, which is, that notwithstanding
all the care the Duke of Albemarle hath taken about the putting the
East India prize goods into the East India Company's hands, and my Lord
Bruncker and Sir J. Minnes having laden out a great part of the goods,
an order is come from Court to stop all, and to have the goods delivered
to the Sub-Commissioners of prizes. At which I am glad, because it do
vex this simple weake man, and we shall have a little reparation for
the disgrace my Lord Sandwich has had in it. He tells me also that the
Parliament hath given the Duke of Yorke L120,000, to be paid him after
the L1,250,000 is gathered upon the tax which they have now given the
King.

     [This sum was granted by the Commons to Charles, with a request that
     he would bestow it on his brother.--B.]

He tells me that the Dutch have lately launched sixteen new ships; all
which is great news. Thence by horsebacke with Mr. Deane to Erith, and
so aboard my Lord Bruncker and dined, and very merry with him and good
discourse between them about ship building, and, after dinner and a
little pleasant discourse, we away and by horse back again to Greenwich,
and there I to the office very late, offering my persons for all the
victualling posts much to my satisfaction. Also much other business I
did to my mind, and so weary home to my lodging, and there after eating
and drinking a little I to bed. The King and Court, they say, have
now finally resolved to spend nothing upon clothes, but what is of the
growth of England; which, if observed, will be very pleasing to the
people, and very good for them.

29th (Lord's day). Up, and being ready set out with Captain Cocke in his
coach toward Erith, Mr. Deane riding along with us, where we dined and
were very merry. After dinner we fell to discourse about the Dutch,
Cocke undertaking to prove that they were able to wage warr with us
three years together, which, though it may be true, yet, not being
satisfied with his arguments, my Lord and I did oppose the strength of
his arguments, which brought us to a great heate, he being a conceited
man, but of no Logique in his head at all, which made my Lord and I
mirth. Anon we parted, and back again, we hardly having a word all the
way, he being so vexed at our not yielding to his persuasion. I was set
down at Woolwich towne end, and walked through the towne in the darke,
it being now night. But in the streete did overtake and almost run upon
two women crying and carrying a man's coffin between them. I suppose the
husband of one of them, which, methinks, is a sad thing. Being come to
Shelden's, I find my people in the darke in the dining room, merry and
laughing, and, I thought, sporting one with another, which, God helpe
me! raised my jealousy presently. Come in the darke, and one of them
touching me (which afterward I found was Susan) made them shreeke, and
so went out up stairs, leaving them to light a candle and to run out. I
went out and was very vexed till I found my wife was gone with Mr. Hill
and Mercer this day to see me at Greenwich, and these people were at
supper, and the candle on a sudden falling out of the candlesticke
(which I saw as I come through the yarde) and Mrs. Barbary being there
I was well at ease again, and so bethought myself what to do, whether
to go to Greenwich or stay there; at last go I would, and so with a
lanthorne, and 3 or 4 people with me, among others Mr. Browne, who was
there, would go, I walked with a lanthorne and discoursed with him about
paynting and the several sorts of it. I came in good time to Greenwich,
where I found Mr. Hill with my wife, and very glad I was to see him. To
supper and discourse of musique and so to bed, I lying with him talking
till midnight about Berckenshaw's musique rules, which I did to his
great satisfaction inform him in, and so to sleep.

30th. Up, and to my office about business. At noon to dinner, and after
some discourse of musique, he and I to the office awhile, and he to get
Mr. Coleman, if he can, against night. By and by I back again home, and
there find him returned with Mr. Coleman (his wife being ill) and Mr.
Laneare, with whom with their Lute we had excellent company and good
singing till midnight, and a good supper I did give them, but Coleman's
voice is quite spoiled, and when he begins to be drunk he is excellent
company, but afterward troublesome and impertinent. Laneare sings in a
melancholy method very well, and a sober man he seems to be. They being
gone, we to bed. Captain Ferrers coming this day from my Lord is forced
to lodge here, and I put him to Mr. Hill.

31st. Up, and to the office, Captain Ferrers going back betimes to my
Lord. I to the office, where Sir W. Batten met me, and did tell me
that Captain Cocke's black was dead of the plague, which I had heard of
before, but took no notice. By and by Captain Cocke come to the office,
and Sir W. Batten and I did send to him that he would either forbear the
office, or forbear going to his owne office. However, meeting yesterday
the Searchers with their rods in their hands coming from Captain Cocke's
house, I did overhear them say that the fellow did not die of the
plague, but he had I know been ill a good while, and I am told that his
boy Jack is also ill. At noon home to dinner, and then to the office
again, leaving Mr. Hill if he can to get Mrs. Coleman at night. About
nine at night I come home, and there find Mrs. Pierce come and little
Fran. Tooker, and Mr. Hill, and other people, a great many dancing, and
anon comes Mrs. Coleman with her husband and Laneare. The dancing ended
and to sing, which Mrs. Coleman do very finely, though her voice is
decayed as to strength but mighty sweet though soft, and a pleasant
jolly woman, and in mighty good humour was to-night. Among other things
Laneare did, at the request of Mr. Hill, bring two or three the finest
prints for my wife to see that ever I did see in all my life. But for
singing, among other things, we got Mrs. Coleman to sing part of the
Opera, though she won't owne that ever she did get any of it without
book in order to the stage; but, above all, her counterfeiting of
Captain Cooke's part, in his reproaching his man with cowardice, "Base
slave," &c., she do it most excellently. At it till past midnight, and
then broke up and to bed. Hill and I together again, and being very
sleepy we had little discourse as we had the other night. Thus we end
the month merrily; and the more for that, after some fears that the
plague would have increased again this week, I hear for certain that
there is above 400 [less], the whole number being 1,388, and of them
of the plague, 1,031. Want of money in the Navy puts everything out of
order. Men grow mutinous; and nobody here to mind the business of the
Navy but myself. At least Sir W. Batten for the few days he has been
here do nothing. I in great hopes of my place of Surveyor-Generall of
the Victualling, which will bring me L300 per annum.




NOVEMBER 1665

November 1st. Lay very long in bed discoursing with Mr. Hill of most
things of a man's life, and how little merit do prevail in the world,
but only favour; and that, for myself, chance without merit brought me
in; and that diligence only keeps me so, and will, living as I do among
so many lazy people that the diligent man becomes necessary, that they
cannot do anything without him, and so told him of my late business of
the victualling, and what cares I am in to keepe myself having to do
with people of so different factions at Court, and yet must be fair with
them all, which was very pleasant discourse for me to tell, as well as
he seemed to take it, for him to hear. At last up, and it being a very
foule day for raine and a hideous wind, yet having promised I would go
by water to Erith, and bearing sayle was in danger of oversetting, but
ordered them take down their sayle, and so cold and wet got thither, as
they had ended their dinner. How[ever], I dined well, and after dinner
all on shore, my Lord Bruncker with us to Mrs. Williams's lodgings,
and Sir W. Batten, Sir Edmund Pooly, and others; and there, it being
my Lord's birth-day, had every one a green riband tied in our hats very
foolishly; and methinks mighty disgracefully for my Lord to have his
folly so open to all the world with this woman. But by and by Sir W.
Batten and I took coach, and home to Boreman, and so going home by the
backside I saw Captain Cocke 'lighting out of his coach (having been at
Erith also with her but not on board) and so he would come along with me
to my lodging, and there sat and supped and talked with us, but we were
angry a little a while about our message to him the other day about
bidding him keepe from the office or his owne office, because of his
black dying. I owned it and the reason of it, and would have been glad
he had been out of the house, but I could not bid him go, and so supped,
and after much other talke of the sad condition and state of the King's
matters we broke up, and my friend and I to bed. This night coming with
Sir W. Batten into Greenwich we called upon Coll. Cleggatt, who tells
us for certaine that the King of Denmark hath declared to stand for the
King of England, but since I hear it is wholly false.

2nd. Up, left my wife and to the office, and there to my great content
Sir W. Warren come to me to settle the business of the Tangier boates,
wherein I shall get above L100, besides L100 which he gives me in the
paying for them out of his owne purse. He gone, I home to my lodgings
to dinner, and there comes Captain Wagers newly returned from the
Streights, who puts me in great fear for our last ships that went to
Tangier with provisions, that they will be taken. A brave, stout fellow
this Captain is, and I think very honest. To the office again after
dinner and there late writing letters, and then about 8 at night set out
from my office and fitting myself at my lodgings intended to have gone
this night in a Ketch down to the Fleete, but calling in my way at Sir
J. Minnes's, who is come up from Erith about something about the prizes,
they persuaded me not to go till the morning, it being a horrible darke
and a windy night. So I back to my lodging and to bed.

3rd. Was called up about four o'clock and in the darke by lanthorne took
boat and to the Ketch and set sayle, sleeping a little in the Cabbin
till day and then up and fell to reading of Mr. Evelyn's book about
Paynting,

     [This must surely have been Evelyn's "Sculptura, or the History and
     Art of Chalcography and Engraving in Copper," published in 1662.
     The translation of Freart's "Idea of the Perfection of Painting
     demonstrated" was not published until 1668.]

which is a very pretty book. Carrying good victuals and Tom with me I to
breakfast about 9 o'clock, and then to read again and come to the Fleete
about twelve, where I found my Lord (the Prince being gone in) on board
the Royall James, Sir Thomas Allen commander, and with my Lord an houre
alone discoursing what was my chief and only errand about what was
adviseable for his Lordship to do in this state of things, himself being
under the Duke of Yorke's and Mr. Coventry's envy, and a great many more
and likely never to do anything honourably but he shall be envied and
the honour taken as much as can be from it. His absence lessens his
interest at Court, and what is worst we never able to set out a fleete
fit for him to command, or, if out, to keepe them out or fit them to do
any great thing, or if that were so yet nobody at home minds him or
his condition when he is abroad, and lastly the whole affairs of state
looking as if they would all on a sudden break in pieces, and then what
a sad thing it would be for him to be out of the way. My Lord did concur
in every thing and thanked me infinitely for my visit and counsel,
telling me that in every thing he concurs, but puts a query, what if the
King will not think himself safe, if any man should go but him. How he
should go off then? To that I had no answer ready, but the making the
King see that he may be of as good use to him here while another goes
forth. But for that I am not able to say much. We after this talked of
some other little things and so to dinner, where my Lord infinitely kind
to me, and after dinner I rose and left him with some Commanders at the
table taking tobacco and I took the Bezan back with me, and with a brave
gale and tide reached up that night to the Hope, taking great pleasure
in learning the seamen's manner of singing when they sound the depths,
and then to supper and to sleep, which I did most excellently all night,
it being a horrible foule night for wind and raine.

4th. They sayled from midnight, and come to Greenwich about 5 o'clock
in the morning. I however lay till about 7 or 8, and so to my office, my
head a little akeing, partly for want of natural rest, partly having so
much business to do to-day, and partly from the newes I hear that one
of the little boys at my lodging is not well; and they suspect, by their
sending for plaister and fume, that it may be the plague; so I sent Mr.
Hater and W. Hewer to speake with the mother; but they returned to me,
satisfied that there is no hurt nor danger, but the boy is well, and
offers to be searched, however, I was resolved myself to abstain coming
thither for a while. Sir W. Batten and myself at the office all the
morning. At noon with him to dinner at Boreman's, where Mr. Seymour with
us, who is a most conceited fellow and not over much in him. Here Sir W.
Batten told us (which I had not heard before) that the last sitting day
his cloake was taken from Mingo he going home to dinner, and that he was
beaten by the seamen and swears he will come to Greenwich, but no more
to the office till he can sit safe. After dinner I to the office and
there late, and much troubled to have 100 seamen all the afternoon
there, swearing below and cursing us, and breaking the glasse windows,
and swear they will pull the house down on Tuesday next. I sent word of
this to Court, but nothing will helpe it but money and a rope. Late at
night to Mr. Glanville's there to lie for a night or two, and to bed.

5th (Lord's day). Up, and after being trimmed, by boat to the Cockpitt,
where I heard the Duke of Albemarle's chaplin make a simple sermon:
among other things, reproaching the imperfection of humane learning,
he cried: "All our physicians cannot tell what an ague is, and all our
arithmetique is not able to number the days of a man;" which, God knows,
is not the fault of arithmetique, but that our understandings reach not
the thing. To dinner, where a great deale of silly discourse, but the
worst is I hear that the plague increases much at Lambeth, St. Martin's
and Westminster, and fear it will all over the city. Thence I to the
Swan, thinking to have seen Sarah but she was at church, and so I by
water to Deptford, and there made a visit to Mr. Evelyn, who, among
other things, showed me most excellent painting in little; in distemper,
Indian incke, water colours: graveing; and, above all, the whole secret
of mezzo-tinto, and the manner of it, which is very pretty, and good
things done with it. He read to me very much also of his discourse, he
hath been many years and now is about, about Guardenage; which will be
a most noble and pleasant piece. He read me part of a play or two of
his making, very good, but not as he conceits them, I think, to be.
He showed me his Hortus Hyemalis; leaves laid up in a book of several
plants kept dry, which preserve colour, however, and look very finely,
better than any Herball. In fine, a most excellent person he is, and
must be allowed a little for a little conceitedness; but he may well be
so, being a man so much above others. He read me, though with too much
gusto, some little poems of his own, that were not transcendant, yet
one or two very pretty epigrams; among others, of a lady looking in at a
grate, and being pecked at by an eagle that was there. Here comes in, in
the middle of our discourse Captain Cocke, as drunk as a dogg, but could
stand, and talk and laugh. He did so joy himself in a brave woman that
he had been with all the afternoon, and who should it be but my Lady
Robinson, but very troublesome he is with his noise and talke,
and laughing, though very pleasant. With him in his coach to Mr.
Glanville's, where he sat with Mrs. Penington and myself a good while
talking of this fine woman again and then went away. Then the lady and I
to very serious discourse and, among other things, of what a bonny lasse
my Lady Robinson is, who is reported to be kind to the prisoners, and
has said to Sir G. Smith, who is her great crony, "Look! there is a
pretty man, I would be content to break a commandment with him," and
such loose expressions she will have often. After an houre's talke we
to bed, the lady mightily troubled about a pretty little bitch she hath,
which is very sicke, and will eat nothing, and the worst was, I could
hear her in her chamber bemoaning the bitch, and by and by taking her
into bed with her. The bitch pissed and shit a bed, and she was fain to
rise and had coals out of my chamber to dry the bed again. This night I
had a letter that Sir G. Carteret would be in towne to-morrow, which did
much surprize me.

6th. Up, and to my office, where busy all the morning and then to dinner
to Captain Cocke's with Mr. Evelyn, where very merry, only vexed after
dinner to stay too long for our coach. At last, however, to Lambeth and
thence the Cockpitt, where we found Sir G. Carteret come, and in with
the Duke and the East India Company about settling the business of the
prizes, and they have gone through with it. Then they broke up, and Sir
G. Carteret come out, and thence through the garden to the water side
and by water I with him in his boat down with Captain Cocke to his house
at Greenwich, and while supper was getting ready Sir G. Carteret and
I did walk an houre in the garden before the house, talking of my Lord
Sandwich's business; what enemies he hath, and how they have endeavoured
to bespatter him: and particularly about his leaving of 30 ships of
the enemy, when Pen would have gone, and my Lord called him back again:
which is most false. However, he says, it was purposed by some hot-heads
in the House of Commons, at the same time when they voted a present
to the Duke of Yorke, to have voted L10,000 to the Prince, and
half-a-crowne to my Lord of Sandwich; but nothing come of it.

     [The tide of popular indignation ran high against Lord Sandwich, and
     he was sent to Spain as ambassador to get him honourably out of the
     way (see post, December 6th).]

But, for all this, the King is most firme to my Lord, and so is my Lord
Chancellor, and my Lord Arlington. The Prince, in appearance, kind; the
Duke of Yorke silent, says no hurt; but admits others to say it in his
hearing. Sir W. Pen, the falsest rascal that ever was in the world; and
that this afternoon the Duke of Albemarle did tell him that Pen was
a very cowardly rogue, and one that hath brought all these rogueish
fanatick Captains into the fleete, and swears he should never go out
with the fleete again. That Sir W. Coventry is most kind to Pen still;
and says nothing nor do any thing openly to the prejudice of my Lord. He
agrees with me, that it is impossible for the King [to] set out a fleete
again the next year; and that he fears all will come to ruine, there
being no money in prospect but these prizes, which will bring, it may
be, L20,000, but that will signify nothing in the world for it. That
this late Act of Parliament for bringing the money into the Exchequer,
and making of it payable out there, intended as a prejudice to him and
will be his convenience hereafter and ruine the King's business, and
so I fear it will and do wonder Sir W. Coventry would be led by Sir G.
Downing to persuade the King and Duke to have it so, before they had
thoroughly weighed all circumstances; that for my Lord, the King has
said to him lately that I was an excellent officer, and that my Lord
Chancellor do, he thinks, love and esteem of me as well as he do of any
man in England that he hath no more acquaintance with. So having done
and received from me the sad newes that we are like to have no money
here a great while, not even of the very prizes, I set up my rest

     [The phrase "set up my rest" is a metaphor from the once fashionable
     game of Primero, meaning, to stand upon the cards you have in your
     hand, in hopes they may prove better than those of your adversary.
     Hence, to make up your mind, to be determined (see Nares's
     "Glossary").]

in giving up the King's service to be ruined and so in to supper, where
pretty merry, and after supper late to Mr. Glanville's, and Sir G.
Carteret to bed. I also to bed, it being very late.

7th. Up, and to Sir G. Carteret, and with him, he being very passionate
to be gone, without staying a minute for breakfast, to the Duke of
Albemarle's and I with him by water and with Fen: but, among other
things, Lord! to see how he wondered to see the river so empty of boats,
nobody working at the Custome-house keys; and how fearful he is, and
vexed that his man, holding a wine-glasse in his hand for him to drinke
out of, did cover his hands, it being a cold, windy, rainy morning,
under the waterman's coate, though he brought the waterman from six or
seven miles up the river, too. Nay, he carried this glasse with him for
his man to let him drink out of at the Duke of Albemarle's, where he
intended to dine, though this he did to prevent sluttery, for, for the
same reason he carried a napkin with him to Captain Cocke's, making
him believe that he should eat with foule linnen. Here he with the Duke
walked a good while in the Parke, and I with Fen, but cannot gather that
he intends to stay with us, nor thinks any thing at all of ever paying
one farthing of money more to us here, let what will come of it. Thence
in, and Sir W. Batten comes in by and by, and so staying till noon,
and there being a great deal of company there, Sir W. Batten and I took
leave of the Duke and Sir G. Carteret, there being no good to be done
more for money, and so over the River and by coach to Greenwich, where
at Boreman's we dined, it being late. Thence my head being full of
business and mind out of order for thinking of the effects which will
arise from the want of money, I made an end of my letters by eight
o'clock, and so to my lodging and there spent the evening till midnight
talking with Mrs. Penington, who is a very discreet, understanding lady
and very pretty discourse we had and great variety, and she tells me
with great sorrow her bitch is dead this morning, died in her bed. So
broke up and to bed.

8th. Up, and to the office, where busy among other things to looke my
warrants for the settling of the Victualling business, the warrants
being come to me for the Surveyors of the ports and that for me also to
be Surveyor-Generall. I did discourse largely with Tom Willson about it
and doubt not to make it a good service to the King as well, as the
King gives us very good salarys. It being a fast day, all people were
at church and the office quiett; so I did much business, and at noon
adventured to my old lodging, and there eat, but am not yet well
satisfied, not seeing of Christopher, though they say he is abroad.
Thence after dinner to the office again, and thence am sent for to the
King's Head by my Lord Rutherford, who, since I can hope for no more
convenience from him, his business is troublesome to me, and therefore I
did leave him as soon as I could and by water to Deptford, and there
did order my matters so, walking up and down the fields till it was
dark night, that 'je allais a la maison of my valentine,--[Bagwell's
wife]--and there 'je faisais whatever je voudrais avec' her, and, about
eight at night, did take water, being glad I was out of the towne; for
the plague, it seems, rages there more than ever, and so to my lodgings,
where my Lord had got a supper and the mistresse of the house, and
her daughters, and here staid Mrs. Pierce to speake with me about her
husband's business, and I made her sup with us, and then at night my
Lord and I walked with her home, and so back again. My Lord and I ended
all we had to say as to his business overnight, and so I took leave, and
went again to Mr. Glanville's and so to bed, it being very late.

9th. Up, and did give the servants something at Mr. Glanville's and so
took leave, meaning to lie to-night at my owne lodging. To my office,
where busy with Mr. Gawden running over the Victualling business, and he
is mightily pleased that this course is taking and seems sensible of
my favour and promises kindnesse to me. At noon by water, to the King's
Head at Deptford, where Captain Taylor invites Sir W: Batten, Sir John
Robinson (who come in with a great deale of company from hunting, and
brought in a hare alive and a great many silly stories they tell of
their sport, which pleases them mightily, and me not at all, such is the
different sense of pleasure in mankind), and others upon the score of
a survey of his new ship; and strange to see how a good dinner and
feasting reconciles everybody, Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Robinson being
now as kind to him, and report well of his ship and proceedings, and
promise money, and Sir W. Batten is a solicitor for him, but it is a
strange thing to observe, they being the greatest enemys he had, and
yet, I believe, hath in the world in their hearts. Thence after dinner
stole away and to my office, where did a great deale of business till
midnight, and then to Mrs. Clerk's, to lodge again, and going home W.
Hewer did tell me my wife will be here to-morrow, and hath put away
Mary, which vexes me to the heart, I cannot helpe it, though it may be a
folly in me, and when I think seriously on it, I think my wife means
no ill design in it, or, if she do, I am a foole to be troubled at it,
since I cannot helpe it. The Bill of Mortality, to all our griefs, is
encreased 399 this week, and the encrease generally through the whole
City and suburbs, which makes us all sad.

10th. Up, and entered all my Journall since the 28th of October, having
every day's passages well in my head, though it troubles me to remember
it, and which I was forced to, being kept from my lodging, where my
books and papers are, for several days. So to my office, where till two
or three o'clock busy before I could go to my lodging to dinner, then
did it and to my office again. In the evening newes is brought me my
wife is come: so I to her, and with her spent the evening, but with
no great pleasure, I being vexed about her putting away of Mary in my
absence, but yet I took no notice of it at all, but fell into other
discourse, and she told me, having herself been this day at my house
at London, which was boldly done, to see Mary have her things, that Mr.
Harrington, our neighbour, an East country merchant, is dead at Epsum of
the plague, and that another neighbour of ours, Mr. Hollworthy, a very
able man, is also dead by a fall in the country from his horse, his foot
hanging in the stirrup, and his brains beat out. Here we sat talking,
and after supper to bed.

11th. I up and to the office (leaving my wife in bed) and there till
noon, then to dinner and back again to the office, my wife going to
Woolwich again, and I staying very late at my office, and so home to
bed.

12th (Lord's day). Up, and invited by Captain Cocke to dinner. So after
being ready I went to him, and there he and I and Mr. Yard (one of the
Guinny Company) dined together and very merry. After dinner I by water
to the Duke of Albemarle, and there had a little discourse and business
with him, chiefly to receive his commands about pilotts to be got for
our Hambro' ships, going now at this time of the year convoy to the
merchant ships, that have lain at great pain and charge, some three,
some four months at Harwich for a convoy. They hope here the plague will
be less this weeke. Thence back by water to Captain Cocke's, and there
he and I spent a great deale of the evening as we had done of the day
reading and discoursing over part of Mr. Stillingfleet's "Origines
Sacrae," wherein many things are very good and some frivolous. Thence by
and by he and I to Mrs. Penington's, but she was gone to bed. So we back
and walked a while, and then to his house and to supper, and then broke
up, and I home to my lodging to bed.

13th. Up, and to my office, where busy all the morning, and at noon to
Captain Cocke's to dinner as we had appointed in order to settle our
business of accounts. But here came in an Alderman, a merchant, a very
merry man, and we dined, and, he being gone, after dinner Cocke and
I walked into the garden, and there after a little discourse he did
undertake under his hand to secure me in L500 profit, for my share of
the profit of what we have bought of the prize goods. We agreed upon
the terms, which were easier on my side than I expected, and so with
extraordinary inward joy we parted till the evening. So I to the office
and among other business prepared a deed for him to sign and seale to
me about our agreement, which at night I got him to come and sign and
seale, and so he and I to Glanville's, and there he and I sat talking
and playing with Mrs. Penington, whom we found undrest in her smocke
and petticoats by the fireside, and there we drank and laughed, and she
willingly suffered me to put my hand in her bosom very wantonly, and
keep it there long. Which methought was very strange, and I looked
upon myself as a man mightily deceived in a lady, for I could not have
thought she could have suffered it, by her former discourse with me; so
modest she seemed and I know not what. We staid here late, and so home
after he and I had walked till past midnight, a bright moonshine, clear,
cool night, before his door by the water, and so I home after one of the
clock.

14th. Called up by break of day by Captain Cocke, by agreement, and he
and I in his coach through Kent-streete (a sad place through the
plague, people sitting sicke and with plaisters about them in the street
begging) to Viner's and Colvill's about money business, and so to my
house, and there I took L300 in order to the carrying it down to my
Lord Sandwich in part of the money I am to pay for Captain Cocke by our
agreement. So I took it down, and down I went to Greenwich to my office,
and there sat busy till noon, and so home to dinner, and thence to the
office again, and by and by to the Duke of Albemarle's by water late,
where I find he had remembered that I had appointed to come to him this
day about money, which I excused not doing sooner; but I see, a dull
fellow, as he is, do sometimes remember what another thinks he mindeth
not. My business was about getting money of the East India Company; but,
Lord! to see how the Duke himself magnifies himself in what he had
done with the Company; and my Lord Craven what the King could have done
without my Lord Duke, and a deale of stir, but most mightily what a
brave fellow I am. Back by water, it raining hard, and so to the office,
and stopped my going, as I intended, to the buoy of the Nore, and great
reason I had to rejoice at it, for it proved the night of as great a
storme as was almost ever remembered. Late at the office, and so home to
bed. This day, calling at Mr. Rawlinson's to know how all did there, I
hear that my pretty grocer's wife, Mrs. Beversham, over the way there,
her husband is lately dead of the plague at Bow, which I am sorry for,
for fear of losing her neighbourhood.

15th. Up and all the morning at the office, busy, and at noon to the
King's Head taverne, where all the Trinity House dined to-day, to choose
a new Master in the room of Hurlestone, that is dead, and Captain Crispe
is chosen. But, Lord! to see how Sir W. Batten governs all and tramples
upon Hurlestone, but I am confident the Company will grow the worse for
that man's death, for now Batten, and in him a lazy, corrupt, doating
rogue, will have all the sway there. After dinner who comes in but my
Lady Batten, and a troop of a dozen women almost, and expected, as I
found afterward, to be made mighty much of, but nobody minded them;
but the best jest was, that when they saw themselves not regarded, they
would go away, and it was horrible foule weather; and my Lady Batten
walking through the dirty lane with new spicke and span white shoes, she
dropped one of her galoshes in the dirt, where it stuck, and she forced
to go home without one, at which she was horribly vexed, and I led
her; and after vexing her a little more in mirth, I parted, and to
Glanville's, where I knew Sir John Robinson, Sir G. Smith, and Captain
Cocke were gone, and there, with the company of Mrs. Penington, whose
father, I hear, was one of the Court of justice, and died prisoner, of
the stone, in the Tower, I made them, against their resolutions, to stay
from houre to houre till it was almost midnight, and a furious, darke
and rainy, and windy, stormy night, and, which was best, I, with
drinking small beer, made them all drunk drinking wine, at which Sir
John Robinson made great sport. But, they being gone, the lady and I
very civilly sat an houre by the fireside observing the folly of this
Robinson, that makes it his worke to praise himself, and all he say
and do, like a heavy-headed coxcombe. The plague, blessed be God! is
decreased 400; making the whole this week but 1300 and odd; for which
the Lord be praised!

16th. Up, and fitted myself for my journey down to the fleete, and
sending my money and boy down by water to Eriffe,--[Erith]--I borrowed a
horse of Mr. Boreman's son, and after having sat an houre laughing with
my Lady Batten and Mrs. Turner, and eat and drank with them, I took
horse and rode to Eriffe, where, after making a little visit to Madam
Williams, who did give me information of W. Howe's having bought eight
bags of precious stones taken from about the Dutch Vice-Admirall's neck,
of which there were eight dyamonds which cost him L60,000 sterling, in
India, and hoped to have made L2000 here for them. And that this is told
by one that sold him one of the bags, which hath nothing but rubys in
it, which he had for 35s.; and that it will be proved he hath made L125
of one stone that he bought. This she desired, and I resolved I would
give my Lord Sandwich notice of. So I on board my Lord Bruncker; and
there he and Sir Edmund Pooly carried me down into the hold of the India
shipp, and there did show me the greatest wealth lie in confusion that a
man can see in the world. Pepper scattered through every chink, you
trod upon it; and in cloves and nutmegs, I walked above the knees; whole
rooms full. And silk in bales, and boxes of copper-plate, one of which
I saw opened. Having seen this, which was as noble a sight as ever I
saw in my life, I away on board the other ship in despair to get the
pleasure-boat of the gentlemen there to carry me to the fleet. They were
Mr. Ashburnham and Colonell Wyndham; but pleading the King's business,
they did presently agree I should have it. So I presently on board, and
got under sail, and had a good bedd by the shift, of Wyndham's; and so,

17th. Sailed all night, and got down to Quinbrough water, where all
the great ships are now come, and there on board my Lord, and was soon
received with great content. And after some little discourse, he and I
on board Sir W. Pen; and there held a council of Warr about many wants
of the fleete, but chiefly how to get slopps and victuals for the
fleete now going out to convoy our Hambro' ships, that have been so
long detained for four or five months for want of convoy, which we did
accommodate one way or other, and so, after much chatt, Sir W. Pen did
give us a very good and neat dinner, and better, I think, than ever I
did see at his owne house at home in my life, and so was the other I
eat with him. After dinner much talke, and about other things, he and
I about his money for his prize goods, wherein I did give him a cool
answer, but so as we did not disagree in words much, and so let that
fall, and so followed my Lord Sandwich, who was gone a little before
me on board the Royall James. And there spent an houre, my Lord playing
upon the gittarr, which he now commends above all musique in the world,
because it is base enough for a single voice, and is so portable and
manageable without much trouble. That being done, I got my Lord to be
alone, and so I fell to acquaint him with W. Howe's business, which
he had before heard a little of from Captain Cocke, but made no great
matter of it, but now he do, and resolves nothing less than to lay him
by the heels, and seize on all he hath, saying that for this yeare or
two he hath observed him so proud and conceited he could not endure
him. But though I was not at all displeased with it, yet I prayed him to
forbear doing anything therein till he heard from me again about it, and
I had made more enquiry into the truth of it, which he agreed to. Then
we fell to publique discourse, wherein was principally this: he cleared
it to me beyond all doubt that Coventry is his enemy, and has been long
so. So that I am over that, and my Lord told it me upon my proposal of a
friendship between them, which he says is impossible, and methinks that
my Lord's displeasure about the report in print of the first fight was
not of his making, but I perceive my Lord cannot forget it, nor the
other think he can. I shewed him how advisable it were upon almost any
terms for him to get quite off the sea employment. He answers me again
that he agrees to it, but thinks the King will not let him go off: He
tells me he lacks now my Lord Orrery to solicit it for him, who is
very great with the King. As an infinite secret, my Lord tells me, the
factions are high between the King and the Duke, and all the Court are
in an uproare with their loose amours; the Duke of Yorke being in love
desperately with Mrs. Stewart. Nay, that the Duchesse herself is fallen
in love with her new Master of the Horse, one Harry Sidney, and another,
Harry Savill. So that God knows what will be the end of it. And that the
Duke is not so obsequious as he used to be, but very high of late; and
would be glad to be in the head of an army as Generall; and that it is
said that he do propose to go and command under the King of Spayne, in
Flanders. That his amours to Mrs. Stewart are told the King. So that all
is like to be nought among them. That he knows that the Duke of Yorke do
give leave to have him spoken slightly of in his owne hearing, and
doth not oppose it, and told me from what time he hath observed this
to begin. So that upon the whole my Lord do concur to wish with all his
heart that he could with any honour get from off the imployment. After
he had given thanks to me for my kind visit and good counsel, on which
he seems to set much by, I left him, and so away to my Bezan againe, and
there to read in a pretty French book, "La Nouvelle Allegorique," upon
the strife between rhetorique and its enemies, very pleasant. So, after
supper, to sleepe, and sayled all night, and came to Erith before break
of day.

18th. About nine of the clock, I went on shore, there (calling by the
way only to look upon my Lord Bruncker) to give Mrs. Williams an
account of her matters, and so hired an ill-favoured horse, and away to
Greenwich to my lodgings, where I hear how rude the souldiers have been
in my absence, swearing what they would do with me, which troubled me,
but, however, after eating a bit I to the office and there very late
writing letters, and so home and to bed.

19th (Lord's day). Up, and after being trimmed, alone by water to Erith,
all the way with my song book singing of Mr. Lawes's long recitative
song in the beginning of his book. Being come there, on board my Lord
Bruncker, I find Captain Cocke and other company, the lady not well,
and mighty merry we were; Sir Edmund Pooly being very merry, and a right
English gentleman, and one of the discontented Cavaliers, that think
their loyalty is not considered. After dinner, all on shore to my Lady
Williams, and there drank and talked; but, Lord! the most impertinent
bold woman with my Lord that ever I did see. I did give her an account
again of my business with my Lord touching W. Howe, and she did give me
some more information about it, and examination taken about it, and so
we parted and I took boat, and to Woolwich, where we found my wife not
well of them, and I out of humour begun to dislike her paynting, the
last things not pleasing me so well as the former, but I blame myself
for my being so little complaisant. So without eating or drinking,
there being no wine (which vexed me too), we walked with a lanthorne to
Greenwich and eat something at his house, and so home to bed.

20th. Up before day, and wrote some letters to go to my Lord, among
others that about W. Howe, which I believe will turn him out, and so
took horse for Nonesuch, with two men with me, and the ways very bad,
and the weather worse, for wind and rayne. But we got in good time
thither, and I did get my tallys got ready, and thence, with as many as
could go, to Yowell, and there dined very well, and I saw my Besse, a
very well-favoured country lass there, and after being very merry and
having spent a piece I took horse, and by another way met with a very
good road, but it rained hard and blew, but got home very well. Here
I find Mr. Deering come to trouble me about business, which I soon
dispatched and parted, he telling me that Luellin hath been dead this
fortnight, of the plague, in St. Martin's Lane, which much surprised me.

21st. Up, and to the office, where all the morning doing business, and
at noon home to dinner and quickly back again to the office, where very
busy all the evening and late sent a long discourse to Mr. Coventry by
his desire about the regulating of the method of our payment of bills
in the Navy, which will be very good, though, it may be, he did ayme
principally at striking at Sir G. Carteret. So weary but pleased with
this business being over I home to supper and to bed.

22nd. Up, and by water to the Duke of Albemarle, and there did some
little business, but most to shew myself, and mightily I am yet in his
and Lord Craven's books, and thence to the Swan and there drank and so
down to the bridge, and so to the 'Change, where spoke with many people,
and about a great deale of business, which kept me late. I heard this
day that Mr. Harrington is not dead of the plague, as we believed, at
which I was very glad, but most of all, to hear that the plague is come
very low; that is, the whole under 1,000, and the plague 600 and odd:
and great hopes of a further decrease, because of this day's being a
very exceeding hard frost, and continues freezing. This day the first of
the Oxford Gazettes come out, which is very pretty, full of newes, and
no folly in it. Wrote by Williamson. Fear that our Hambro' ships at last
cannot go, because of the great frost, which we believe it is there,
nor are our ships cleared at the Pillow [Pillau], which will keepe them
there too all this winter, I fear. From the 'Change, which is pretty
full again, I to my office and there took some things, and so by water
to my lodging at Greenwich and dined, and then to the office awhile and
at night home to my lodgings, and took T. Willson and T. Hater with me,
and there spent the evening till midnight discoursing and settling of
our Victualling business, that thereby I might draw up instructions for
the Surveyours and that we might be doing something to earne our money.
This done I late to bed. Among other things it pleased me to have it
demonstrated, that a Purser without professed cheating is a professed
loser, twice as much as he gets.

23rd. Up betimes, and so, being trimmed, I to get papers ready against
Sir H. Cholmly come to me by appointment, he being newly come over from
Tangier. He did by and by come, and we settled all matters about
his money, and he is a most satisfied man in me, and do declare his
resolution to give me 200 per annum. It continuing to be a great frost,
which gives us hope for a perfect cure of the plague, he and I to walk
in the parke, and there discoursed with grief of the calamity of the
times; how the King's service is performed, and how Tangier is governed
by a man, who, though honourable, yet do mind his ways of getting
and little else compared, which will never make the place flourish.
I brought him and had a good dinner for him, and there come by chance
Captain Cuttance, who tells me how W. Howe is laid by the heels, and
confined to the Royall Katharine, and his things all seized and how,
also, for a quarrel, which indeed the other night my Lord told me,
Captain Ferrers, having cut all over the back of another of my Lord's
servants, is parted from my Lord. I sent for little Mrs. Frances Tooker,
and after they were gone I sat dallying with her an hour, doing what I
would with my hands about her. And a very pretty creature it is. So in
the evening to the office, where late writing letters, and at my lodging
later writing for the last twelve days my Journall and so to bed. Great
expectation what mischief more the French will do us, for we must fall
out. We in extraordinary lacke of money and everything else to go to
sea next year. My Lord Sandwich is gone from the fleete yesterday toward
Oxford.

24th. Up, and after doing some business at the office, I to London, and
there, in my way, at my old oyster shop in Gracious Streete, bought two
barrels of my fine woman of the shop, who is alive after all the
plague, which now is the first observation or inquiry we make at London
concerning everybody we knew before it. So to the 'Change, where very
busy with several people, and mightily glad to see the 'Change so full,
and hopes of another abatement still the next week. Off the 'Change I
went home with Sir G. Smith to dinner, sending for one of my barrels of
oysters, which were good, though come from Colchester, where the plague
hath been so much. Here a very brave dinner, though no invitation; and,
Lord! to see how I am treated, that come from so mean a beginning,
is matter of wonder to me. But it is God's great mercy to me, and His
blessing upon my taking pains, and being punctual in my dealings. After
dinner Captain Cocke and I about some business, and then with my
other barrel of oysters home to Greenwich, sent them by water to Mrs.
Penington, while he and I landed, and visited Mr. Evelyn, where most
excellent discourse with him; among other things he showed me a ledger
of a Treasurer of the Navy, his great grandfather, just 100 years old;
which I seemed mighty fond of, and he did present me with it, which I
take as a great rarity; and he hopes to find me more, older than it. He
also shewed us several letters of the old Lord of Leicester's, in Queen
Elizabeth's time, under the very hand-writing of Queen Elizabeth, and
Queen Mary, Queen of Scotts; and others, very venerable names. But,
Lord! how poorly, methinks, they wrote in those days, and in what
plain uncut paper. Thence, Cocke having sent for his coach, we to Mrs.
Penington, and there sat and talked and eat our oysters with great
pleasure, and so home to my lodging late and to bed.

25th. Up, and busy at the office all day long, saving dinner time, and
in the afternoon also very late at my office, and so home to bed. All
our business is now about our Hambro fleete, whether it can go or no
this yeare, the weather being set in frosty, and the whole stay being
for want of Pilotts now, which I have wrote to the Trinity House about,
but have so poor an account from them, that I did acquaint Sir W.
Coventry with it this post.

26th (Lord's day). Up, though very late abed, yet before day to dress
myself to go toward Erith, which I would do by land, it being a horrible
cold frost to go by water: so borrowed two horses of Mr. Howell and his
friend, and with much ado set out, after my horses being frosted

     [Frosting means, having the horses' shoes turned up by the smith.]

(which I know not what it means to this day), and my boy having lost one
of my spurs and stockings, carrying them to the smith's; but I borrowed
a stocking, and so got up, and Mr. Tooker with me, and rode to Erith,
and there on board my Lord Bruncker, met Sir W. Warren upon his
business, among others, and did a great deale, Sir J. Minnes, as God
would have it, not being there to hinder us with his impertinences.
Business done, we to dinner very merry, there being there Sir Edmund
Pooly, a very worthy gentleman. They are now come to the copper boxes
in the prizes, and hope to have ended all this weeke. After dinner took
leave, and on shore to Madam Williams, to give her an account of my
Lord's letter to me about Howe, who he has clapped by the heels on
suspicion of having the jewells, and she did give me my Lord Bruncker's
examination of the fellow, that declares his having them; and so away,
Sir W. Warren riding with me, and the way being very bad, that is,
hard and slippery by reason of the frost, so we could not come to past
Woolwich till night. However, having a great mind to have gone to the
Duke of Albemarle, I endeavoured to have gone farther, but the night
come on and no going, so I 'light and sent my horse by Tooker, and
returned on foot to my wife at Woolwich, where I found, as I had
directed, a good dinner to be made against to-morrow, and invited guests
in the yarde, meaning to be merry, in order to her taking leave, for
she intends to come in a day or two to me for altogether. But here, they
tell me, one of the houses behind them is infected, and I was fain to
stand there a great while, to have their back-door opened, but they
could not, having locked them fast, against any passing through, so was
forced to pass by them again, close to their sicke beds, which they were
removing out of the house, which troubled me; so I made them uninvite
their guests, and to resolve of coming all away to me to-morrow, and I
walked with a lanthorne, weary as I was, to Greenwich; but it was a fine
walke, it being a hard frost, and so to Captain Cocke's, but he I found
had sent for me to come to him to Mrs. Penington's, and there I went,
and we were very merry, and supped, and Cocke being sleepy he went away
betimes. I stayed alone talking and playing with her till past midnight,
she suffering me whatever 'ego voulais avec ses mamilles.... Much
pleased with her company we parted, and I home to bed at past one, all
people being in bed thinking I would have staid out of town all night.

27th. Up, and being to go to wait on the Duke of Albemarle, who is to go
out of towne to Oxford to-morrow, and I being unwilling to go by
water, it being bitter cold, walked it with my landlady's little boy
Christopher to Lambeth, it being a very fine walke and calling at half
the way and drank, and so to the Duke of Albemarle, who is visited
by every body against his going; and mighty kind to me: and upon my
desiring his grace to give me his kind word to the Duke of Yorke, if any
occasion there were of speaking of me, he told me he had reason to do
so; for there had been nothing done in the Navy without me. His going, I
hear, is upon putting the sea business into order, and, as some say, and
people of his owne family, that he is agog to go to sea himself the
next year. Here I met with a letter from Sir G. Carteret, who is come to
Cranborne, that he will be here this afternoon and desires me to be with
him. So the Duke would have me dine with him. So it being not dinner
time, I to the Swan, and there found Sarah all alone in the house....
So away to the Duke of Albemarle again, and there to dinner, he most
exceeding kind to me to the observation of all that are there. At dinner
comes Sir G. Carteret and dines with us. After dinner a great deal alone
with Sir G. Carteret, who tells me that my Lord hath received still
worse and worse usage from some base people about the Court. But the
King is very kind, and the Duke do not appear the contrary; and my Lord
Chancellor swore to him "by---I will not forsake my Lord of Sandwich."
Our next discourse is upon this Act for money, about which Sir G.
Carteret comes to see what money can be got upon it. But none can be
got, which pleases him the thoughts of, for, if the Exchequer should
succeede in this, his office would faile. But I am apt to think at this
time of hurry and plague and want of trade, no money will be got upon a
new way which few understand. We walked, Cocke and I, through the Parke
with him, and so we being to meet the Vice-Chamberlayne to-morrow at
Nonesuch, to treat with Sir Robert Long about the same business, I into
London, it being dark night, by a hackney coach; the first I have durst
to go in many a day, and with great pain now for fear. But it being
unsafe to go by water in the dark and frosty cold, and unable being
weary with my morning walke to go on foot, this was my only way. Few
people yet in the streets, nor shops open, here and there twenty in
a place almost; though not above five or sixe o'clock at night. So to
Viner's, and there heard of Cocke, and found him at the Pope's Head,
drinking with Temple. I to them, where the Goldsmiths do decry the
new Act, for money to be all brought into the Exchequer, and paid out
thence, saying they will not advance one farthing upon it; and indeed
it is their interest to say and do so. Thence Cocke and I to Sir
G. Smith's, it being now night, and there up to his chamber and sat
talking, and I barbing--[shaving]--against to-morrow; and anon, at nine
at night, comes to us Sir G. Smith and the Lieutenant of the Tower, and
there they sat talking and drinking till past midnight, and mighty merry
we were, the Lieutenant of the Tower being in a mighty vein of singing,
and he hath a very good eare and strong voice, but no manner of skill.
Sir G. Smith shewed me his lady's closett, which was very fine; and,
after being very merry, here I lay in a noble chamber, and mighty highly
treated, the first time I have lain in London a long time.

28th. Up before day, and Cocke and I took a hackney coach appointed with
four horses to take us up, and so carried us over London Bridge. But
there, thinking of some business, I did 'light at the foot of the
bridge, and by helpe of a candle at a stall, where some payers were at
work, I wrote a letter to Mr. Hater, and never knew so great an instance
of the usefulness of carrying pen and ink and wax about one: so we, the
way being very bad, to Nonesuch, and thence to Sir Robert Longs house; a
fine place, and dinner time ere we got thither; but we had breakfasted a
little at Mr. Gawden's, he being out of towne though, and there borrowed
Dr. Taylor's sermons, and is a most excellent booke and worth my buying,
where had a very good dinner, and curiously dressed, and here a couple
of ladies, kinswomen of his, not handsome though, but rich, that knew me
by report of The. Turner, and mighty merry we were. After dinner to talk
of our business, the Act of Parliament, where in short I see Sir R. Long
mighty fierce in the great good qualities of it. But in that and many
other things he was stiff in, I think without much judgement, or
the judgement I expected from him, and already they have evaded the
necessity of bringing people into the Exchequer with their bills to be
paid there. Sir G. Carteret is titched--[fretful, tetchy]--at this, yet
resolves with me to make the best use we can of this Act for the King,
but all our care, we think, will not render it as it should be. He
did again here alone discourse with me about my Lord, and is himself
strongly for my Lord's not going to sea, which I am glad to hear and did
confirm him in it. He tells me too that he talked last night with the
Duke of Albemarle about my Lord Sandwich, by the by making him sensible
that it is his interest to preserve his old friends, which he confessed
he had reason to do, for he knows that ill offices were doing of him,
and that he honoured my Lord Sandwich with all his heart. After this
discourse we parted, and all of us broke up and we parted. Captain Cocke
and I through Wandsworth. Drank at Sir Allen Broderick's, a great friend
and comrade of Cocke's, whom he values above the world for a witty
companion, and I believe he is so. So to Fox-Hall and there took boat,
and down to the Old Swan, and thence to Lumbard Streete, it being darke
night, and thence to the Tower. Took boat and down to Greenwich, Cocke
and I, he home and I to the office, where did a little business, and
then to my lodgings, where my wife is come, and I am well pleased with
it, only much trouble in those lodgings we have, the mistresse of the
house being so deadly dear in everything we have; so that we do resolve
to remove home soon as we know how the plague goes this weeke, which we
hope will be a good decrease. So to bed.

29th. Up, my wife and I talking how to dispose of our goods, and
resolved upon sending our two mayds Alce (who has been a day or two at
Woolwich with my wife, thinking to have had a feast there) and Susan
home. So my wife after dinner did take them to London with some goods,
and I in the afternoon after doing other business did go also by
agreement to meet Captain Cocke and from him to Sir Roger Cuttance,
about the money due from Cocke to him for the late prize goods, wherein
Sir Roger is troubled that he hath not payment as agreed, and the other,
that he must pay without being secured in the quiett possession of them,
but some accommodation to both, I think, will be found. But Cocke do
tell me that several have begged so much of the King to be discovered
out of stolen prize goods and so I am afeard we shall hereafter have
trouble, therefore I will get myself free of them as soon as I can and
my money paid. Thence home to my house, calling my wife, where the poor
wretch is putting things in a way to be ready for our coming home, and
so by water together to Greenwich, and so spent the night together.

30th. Up, and at the office all the morning. At noon comes Sir Thomas
Allen, and I made him dine with me, and very friendly he is, and a good
man, I think, but one that professes he loves to get and to save. He
dined with my wife and me and Mrs. Barbary, whom my wife brings along
with her from Woolwich for as long as she stays here. In the afternoon
to the office, and there very late writing letters and then home, my
wife and people sitting up for me, and after supper to bed. Great joy we
have this week in the weekly Bill, it being come to 544 in all, and but
333 of the plague; so that we are encouraged to get to London soon as
we can. And my father writes as great news of joy to them, that he saw
Yorke's waggon go again this week to London, and was full of passengers;
and tells me that my aunt Bell hath been dead of the plague these seven
weeks.




DECEMBER 1665

December 1st. This morning to the office, full of resolution to spend
the whole day at business, and there, among other things, I did agree
with Poynter to be my clerke for my Victualling business, and so all
alone all the day long shut up in my little closett at my office,
drawing up instructions, which I should long since have done for my
Surveyours of the Ports, Sir W. Coventry desiring much to have them, and
he might well have expected them long since. After dinner to it again,
and at night had long discourse with Gibson, who is for Yarmouth, who
makes me understand so much of the victualling business and the pursers'
trade, that I am ashamed I should go about the concerning myself in a
business which I understand so very very little of, and made me distrust
all I had been doing to-day. So I did lay it by till to-morrow morning
to think of it afresh, and so home by promise to my wife, to have mirth
there. So we had our neighbours, little Miss Tooker and Mrs. Daniels, to
dance, and after supper I to bed, and left them merry below, which they
did not part from till two or three in the morning.

2nd. Up, and discoursing with my wife, who is resolved to go to London
for good and all this day, we did agree upon giving Mr. Sheldon L10, and
Mrs. Barbary two pieces, and so I left her to go down thither to fetch
away the rest of the things and pay him the money, and so I to the
office, where very busy setting Mr. Poynter to write out my last night's
worke, which pleases me this day, but yet it is pretty to reflect how
much I am out of confidence with what I had done upon Gibson's discourse
with me, for fear I should have done it sillily, but Poynter likes them,
and Mr. Hater also, but yet I am afeard lest they should do it out of
flattery, so conscious I am of my ignorance. Dined with my wife at
noon and took leave of her, she being to go to London, as I said, for
altogether, and I to the office, busy till past one in the morning.

3rd. It being Lord's day, up and dressed and to church, thinking to have
sat with Sir James Bunce to hear his daughter and her husband sing, that
are so much commended, but was prevented by being invited into Coll.
Cleggatt's pew. However, there I sat, near Mr. Laneare, with whom I
spoke, and in sight, by chance, and very near my fat brown beauty of our
Parish, the rich merchant's lady, a very noble woman, and Madame Pierce.
A good sermon of Mr. Plume's, and so to Captain Cocke's, and there dined
with him, and Colonell Wyndham, a worthy gentleman, whose wife was nurse
to the present King, and one that while she lived governed him and every
thing else, as Cocke says, as a minister of state; the old King putting
mighty weight and trust upon her. They talked much of matters of State
and persons, and particularly how my Lord Barkeley hath all along been
a fortunate, though a passionate and but weak man as to policy; but as a
kinsman brought in and promoted by my Lord of St. Alban's, and one that
is the greatest vapourer in the world, this Colonell Wyndham says; and
one to whom only, with Jacke Asheburnel and Colonel Legg, the King's
removal to the Isle of Wight from Hampton Court was communicated;
and (though betrayed by their knavery, or at best by their ignorance,
insomuch that they have all solemnly charged one another with their
failures therein, and have been at daggers-drawing publickly about it),
yet now none greater friends in the world. We dined, and in comes Mrs.
Owen, a kinswoman of my Lord Bruncker's, about getting a man discharged,
which I did for her, and by and by Mrs. Pierce to speake with me (and
Mary my wife's late maid, now gone to her) about her husband's business
of money, and she tells us how she prevented Captain Fisher the other
day in his purchase of all her husband's fine goods, as pearls and
silks, that he had seized in an Apothecary's house, a friend of theirs,
but she got in and broke them open and removed all before Captain Fisher
came the next day to fetch them away, at which he is starke mad. She
went home, and I to my lodgings. At night by agreement I fetched her
again with Cocke's coach, and he come and we sat and talked together,
thinking to have had Mrs. Coleman and my songsters, her husband and
Laneare, but they failed me. So we to supper, and as merry as was
sufficient, and my pretty little Miss with me; and so after supper
walked [with] Pierce home, and so back and to bed. But, Lord! I stand
admiring of the wittinesse of her little boy, which is one of the
wittiest boys, but most confident that ever I did see of a child of 9
years old or under in all my life, or indeed one twice his age almost,
but all for roguish wit. So to bed.

4th. Several people to me about business, among others Captain Taylor,
intended Storekeeper for Harwich, whom I did give some assistance in his
dispatch by lending him money. So out and by water to London and to
the 'Change, and up and down about several businesses, and after the
observing (God forgive me!) one or two of my neighbour Jason's women
come to towne, which did please me very well, home to my house at the
office, where my wife had got a dinner for me: and it was a joyfull
thing for us to meet here, for which God be praised! Here was her
brother come to see her, and speake with me about business. It seems my
recommending of him hath not only obtained his presently being admitted
into the Duke of Albemarle's guards, and present pay, but also by the
Duke's and Sir Philip Howard's direction, to be put as a right-hand man,
and other marks of special respect, at which I am very glad, partly
for him, and partly to see that I am reckoned something in my
recommendations, but wish he may carry himself that I may receive no
disgrace by him. So to the 'Change. Up and down again in the evening
about business and to meet Captain Cocke, who waited for Mrs. Pierce
(with whom he is mightily stricken), to receive and hide for her her
rich goods she saved the other day from seizure. Upon the 'Change to-day
Colvill tells me, from Oxford, that the King in person hath justified my
Lord Sandwich to the highest degree; and is right in his favour to the
uttermost. So late by water home, taking a barrel of oysters with me,
and at Greenwich went and sat with Madam Penington .... and made her
undress her head and sit dishevilled all night sporting till two in the
morning, and so away to my lodging and so to bed. Over-fasting all the
morning hath filled me mightily with wind, and nothing else hath done
it, that I fear a fit of the cholique.

5th. Up and to the office, where very busy about several businesses
all the morning. At noon empty, yet without stomach to dinner, having
spoiled myself with fasting yesterday, and so filled with wind. In
the afternoon by water, calling Mr. Stevens (who is with great trouble
paying of seamen of their tickets at Deptford) and to London, to look
for Captain Kingdom whom we found at home about 5 o'clock. I tried him,
and he promised to follow us presently to the East India House to sign
papers to-night in order to the settling the business of my receiving
money for Tangier. We went and stopt the officer there to shut up. He
made us stay above an houre. I sent for him; he comes, but was not found
at home, but abroad on other business, and brings a paper saying that he
had been this houre looking for the Lord Ashley's order. When he looks
for it, that is not the paper. He would go again to look; kept us
waiting till almost 8 at night. Then was I to go home by water this
weather and darke, and to write letters by the post, besides keeping
the East India officers there so late. I sent for him again; at last he
comes, and says he cannot find the paper (which is a pretty thing to lay
orders for L100,000 no better). I was angry; he told me I ought to give
people ease at night, and all business was to be done by day. I answered
him sharply, that I did [not] make, nor any honest man, any difference
between night and day in the King's business, and this was such, and
my Lord Ashley should know. He answered me short. I told him I knew the
time (meaning the Rump's time) when he did other men's business with
more diligence. He cried, "Nay, say not so," and stopped his mouth, not
one word after. We then did our business without the order in less than
eight minutes, which he made me to no purpose stay above two hours for
the doing. This made him mad, and so we exchanged notes, and I had notes
for L14,000 of the Treasurer of the Company, and so away and by water to
Greenwich and wrote my letters, and so home late to bed.

6th. Up betimes, it being fast-day; and by water to the Duke of
Albemarle, who come to towne from Oxford last night. He is mighty brisk,
and very kind to me, and asks my advice principally in every thing.
He surprises me with the news that my Lord Sandwich goes Embassador to
Spayne speedily; though I know not whence this arises, yet I am heartily
glad of it. He did give me several directions what to do, and so I home
by water again and to church a little, thinking to have met Mrs. Pierce
in order to our meeting at night; but she not there, I home and dined,
and comes presently by appointment my wife. I spent the afternoon upon a
song of Solyman's words to Roxalana that I have set, and so with my wife
walked and Mercer to Mrs. Pierce's, where Captain Rolt and Mrs. Knipp,
Mr. Coleman and his wife, and Laneare, Mrs. Worshipp and her singing
daughter, met; and by and by unexpectedly comes Mr. Pierce from Oxford.
Here the best company for musique I ever was in, in my life, and wish I
could live and die in it, both for musique and the face of Mrs. Pierce,
and my wife and Knipp, who is pretty enough; but the most excellent,
mad-humoured thing, and sings the noblest that ever I heard in my life,
and Rolt, with her, some things together most excellently. I spent the
night in extasy almost; and, having invited them to my house a day or
two hence, we broke up, Pierce having told me that he is told how the
King hath done my Lord Sandwich all the right imaginable, by shewing
him his countenance before all the world on every occasion, to remove
thoughts of discontent; and that he is to go Embassador, and that the
Duke of Yorke is made generall of all forces by land and sea, and
the Duke of Albemarle, lieutenant-generall. Whether the two latter
alterations be so, true or no, he knows not, but he is told so; but my
Lord is in full favour with the King. So all home and to bed.

7th. Up and to the office, where very busy all day. Sir G. Carteret's
letter tells me my Lord Sandwich is, as I was told, declared Embassador
Extraordinary to Spayne, and to go with all speed away, and that his
enemies have done him as much good as he could wish. At noon late to
dinner, and after dinner spent till night with Mr. Gibson and Hater
discoursing and making myself more fully [know] the trade of pursers,
and what fittest to be done in their business, and so to the office till
midnight writing letters, and so home, and after supper with my wife
about one o'clock to bed.

8th. Up, well pleased in my mind about my Lord Sandwich, about whom I
shall know more anon from Sir G. Carteret, who will be in towne, and
also that the Hambrough [ships] after all difficulties are got out. God
send them good speed! So, after being trimmed, I by water to London, to
the Navy office, there to give order to my mayde to buy things to send
down to Greenwich for supper to-night; and I also to buy other things,
as oysters, and lemons, 6d. per piece, and oranges, 3d. That done I to
the 'Change, and among many other things, especially for getting of
my Tangier money, I by appointment met Mr. Gawden, and he and I to
the Pope's Head Taverne, and there he did give me alone a very pretty
dinner. Our business to talk of his matters and his supply of money,
which was necessary for us to talk on before the Duke of Albemarle this
afternoon and Sir G. Carteret. After that I offered now to pay him
the L4000 remaining of his L8000 for Tangier, which he took with great
kindnesse, and prayed me most frankly to give him a note for L3500 and
accept the other L500 for myself, which in good earnest was against my
judgement to do, for [I] expected about L100 and no more, but however he
would have me do it, and ownes very great obligations to me, and the man
indeed I love, and he deserves it. This put me into great joy, though
with a little stay to it till we have time to settle it, for for so
great a sum I was fearfull any accident might by death or otherwise
defeate me, having not now time to change papers. So we rose, and by
water to White Hall, where we found Sir G. Carteret with the Duke,
and also Sir G. Downing, whom I had not seen in many years before. He
greeted me very kindly, and I him; though methinks I am touched, that it
should be said that he was my master heretofore, as doubtless he will.
So to talk of our Navy business, and particularly money business, of
which there is little hopes of any present supply upon this new Act, the
goldsmiths being here (and Alderman Backewell newly come from Flanders),
and none offering any. So we rose without doing more than my stating
the case of the Victualler, that whereas there is due to him on the last
year's declaration L80,000, and the charge of this year's amounts
to L420,000 and odd, he must be supplied between this and the end of
January with L150,000, and the remainder in 40 weeks by weekly payments,
or else he cannot go through his business. Thence after some discourse
with Sir G. Carteret, who, though he tells me that he is glad of my
Lord's being made Embassador, and that it is the greatest courtesy his
enemies could do him; yet I find he is not heartily merry upon it, and
that it was no design of my Lord's friends, but the prevalence of his
enemies, and that the Duke of Albemarle and Prince Rupert are like to go
to sea together the next year. I pray God, when my Lord is gone, they do
not fall hard upon the Vice-Chamberlain, being alone, and in so envious
a place, though by this late Act and the instructions now a brewing for
our office as to method of payments will destroy the profit of his place
of itself without more trouble. Thence by water down to Greenwich,
and there found all my company come; that is, Mrs. Knipp, and an ill,
melancholy, jealous-looking fellow, her husband, that spoke not a word
to us all the night, Pierce and his wife, and Rolt, Mrs. Worshipp
and her daughter, Coleman and his wife, and Laneare, and, to make us
perfectly happy, there comes by chance to towne Mr. Hill to see us. Most
excellent musique we had in abundance, and a good supper, dancing, and a
pleasant scene of Mrs. Knipp's rising sicke from table, but whispered
me it was for some hard word or other her husband gave her just now when
she laughed and was more merry than ordinary. But we got her in humour
again, and mighty merry; spending the night, till two in the morning,
with most complete content as ever in my life, it being increased by my
day's work with Gawden. Then broke up, and we to bed, Mr. Hill and I,
whom I love more and more, and he us.

9th. Called up betimes by my Lord Bruncker, who is come to towne from
his long water worke at Erith last night, to go with him to the Duke of
Albemarle, which by his coach I did. Our discourse upon the ill posture
of the times through lacke of money. At the Duke's did some business,
and I believe he was not pleased to see all the Duke's discourse and
applications to me and everybody else. Discoursed also with Sir G.
Carteret about office business, but no money in view. Here my Lord and
I staid and dined, the Vice-Chamberlain taking his leave. At table the
Duchesse, a damned ill-looked woman, complaining of her Lord's going
to sea the next year, said these cursed words: "If my Lord had been a
coward he had gone to sea no more: it may be then he might have been
excused, and made an Embassador" (meaning my Lord Sandwich).

     [When Lord Sandwich was away a new commander had to be chosen, and
     rank and long service pointed out Prince Rupert for the office, it
     having been decided that the heir presumptive should be kept at
     home.  It was thought, however, that the same confidence could not
     be placed in the prince's discretion as in his courage, and
     therefore the Duke of Albemarle was induced to take a joint command
     with him, "and so make one admiral of two persons" (see Lister's
     "Life of Clarendon," vol. ii., pp. 360,361).]

This made me mad, and I believed she perceived my countenance change,
and blushed herself very much. I was in hopes others had not minded it,
but my Lord Bruncker, after we were come away, took notice of the words
to me with displeasure. Thence after dinner away by water, calling and
taking leave of Sir G. Carteret, whom we found going through at White
Hall, and so over to Lambeth and took coach and home, and so to the
office, where late writing letters, and then home to Mr. Hill, and sang,
among other things, my song of "Beauty retire," which he likes, only
excepts against two notes in the base, but likes the whole very well. So
late to bed.

10th (Lord's day). Lay long talking, Hill and I, with great pleasure,
and then up, and being ready walked to Cocke's for some newes, but heard
none, only they would have us stay their dinner, and sent for my wife,
who come, and very merry we were, there being Sir Edmund Pooly and Mr.
Evelyn. Before we had dined comes Mr. Andrews, whom we had sent for to
Bow, and so after dinner home, and there we sang some things, but not
with much pleasure, Mr. Andrews being in so great haste to go home, his
wife looking every hour to be brought to bed. He gone Mr. Hill and I
continued our musique, one thing after another, late till supper, and so
to bed with great pleasure.

11th. Lay long with great pleasure talking. So I left him and to London
to the 'Change, and after discoursed with several people about business;
met Mr. Gawden at the Pope's Head, where he brought Mr. Lewes and T.
Willson to discourse about the Victualling business, and the alterations
of the pursers' trade, for something must be done to secure the King
a little better, and yet that they may have wherewith to live. After
dinner I took him aside, and perfected to my great joy my business with
him, wherein he deals most nobly in giving me his hand for the L4,000,
and would take my note but for L3500. This is a great blessing, and God
make me thankfull truly for it. With him till it was darke putting
in writing our discourse about victualling, and so parted, and I to
Viner's, and there evened all accounts, and took up my notes setting all
straight between us to this day. The like to Colvill, and paying several
bills due from me on the Tangier account. Then late met Cocke and Temple
at the Pope's Head, and there had good discourse with Temple, who tells
me that of the L80,000 advanced already by the East India Company, they
have had L5000 out of their hands. He discoursed largely of the quantity
of money coyned, and what may be thought the real sum of money in the
kingdom. He told me, too, as an instance of the thrift used in the
King's business, that the tools and the interest of the money-using to
the King for the money he borrowed while the new invention of the mill
money was perfected, cost him L35,000, and in mirthe tells me that the
new fashion money is good for nothing but to help the Prince if he
can secretly get copper plates shut up in silver it shall never be
discovered, at least not in his age. Thence Cocke and I by water,
he home and I home, and there sat with Mr. Hill and my wife supping,
talking and singing till midnight, and then to bed. [That I may remember
it the more particularly, I thought fit to insert this additional
memorandum of Temple's discourse this night with me, which I took in
writing from his mouth. Before the Harp and Crosse money was cried
down, he and his fellow goldsmiths did make some particular trials what
proportion that money bore to the old King's money, and they found that
generally it come to, one with another, about L25 in every L100. Of this
money there was, upon the calling of it in, L650,000 at least brought
into the Tower; and from thence he computes that the whole money of
England must be full L6,250,000. But for all this believes that there is
above L30,000,000; he supposing that about the King's coming in (when
he begun to observe the quantity of the new money) people begun to be
fearfull of this money's being cried down, and so picked it out and
set it a-going as fast as they could, to be rid of it; and he thinks
L30,000,000 the rather, because if there were but L16,250,000 the King
having L2,000,000 every year, would have the whole money of the kingdom
in his hands in eight years. He tells me about L350,000 sterling was
coined out of the French money, the proceeds of Dunkirke; so that,
with what was coined of the Crosse money, there is new coined about
L1,000,000 besides the gold, which is guessed at L500,000. He tells me,
that, though the King did deposit the French money in pawn all the while
for the L350,000 he was forced to borrow thereupon till the tools could
be made for the new Minting in the present form, yet the interest
he paid for that time came to L35,000, Viner having to his knowledge
L10,000 for the use of L100,000 of it.]--(The passage between brackets
is from a piece of paper inserted in this place.)

12th. Up, and to the office, where my Lord Bruncker met, and among other
things did finish a contract with Cocke for hemp, by which I hope to
get my money due from him paid presently. At noon home to dinner, only
eating a bit, and with much kindness taking leave of Mr. Hill who goes
away to-day, and so I by water saving the tide through Bridge and to Sir
G. Downing by appointment at Charing Crosse, who did at first mightily
please me with informing me thoroughly the virtue and force of this Act,
and indeed it is ten times better than ever I thought could have been
said of it, but when he come to impose upon me that without more ado I
must get by my credit people to serve in goods and lend money upon it
and none could do it better than I, and the King should give me thanks
particularly in it, and I could not get him to excuse me, but I must
come to him though to no purpose on Saturday, and that he is sure I will
bring him some bargains or other made upon this Act, it vexed me more
than all the pleasure I took before, for I find he will be troublesome
to me in it, if I will let him have as much of my time as he would have.
So late I took leave and in the cold (the weather setting in cold) home
to the office and, after my letters being wrote, home to supper and to
bed, my wife being also gone to London.

13th. Up betimes and finished my journall for five days back, and then
after being ready to my Lord Bruncker by appointment, there to order the
disposing of some money that we have come into the office, and here to
my great content I did get a bill of imprest to Captain Cocke to pay
myself in part of what is coming to me from him for my Lord Sandwich's
satisfaction and my owne, and also another payment or two wherein I am
concerned, and having done that did go to Mr. Pierce's, where he and
his wife made me drink some tea, and so he and I by water together
to London. Here at a taverne in Cornhill he and I did agree upon my
delivering up to him a bill of Captain Cocke's, put into my hand for
Pierce's use upon evening of reckonings about the prize goods, and so
away to the 'Change, and there hear the ill news, to my great and
all our great trouble, that the plague is encreased again this week,
notwithstanding there hath been a day or two great frosts; but we hope
it is only the effects of the late close warm weather, and if the frosts
continue the next week, may fall again; but the town do thicken so much
with people, that it is much if the plague do not grow again upon us.
Off the 'Change invited by Sheriff Hooker, who keeps the poorest, mean,
dirty table in a dirty house that ever I did see any Sheriff of London;
and a plain, ordinary, silly man I think he is, but rich; only his son,
Mr. Lethulier, I like, for a pretty, civil, understanding merchant; and
the more by much, because he happens to be husband to our noble, fat,
brave lady in our parish, that I and my wife admire so. Thence away to
the Pope's Head Taverne, and there met first with Captain Cocke, and
dispatched my business with him to my content, he being ready to sign
his bill of imprest of L2,000, and gives it me in part of his payment
to me, which glads my heart. He being gone, comes Sir W. Warren, who
advised with me about several things about getting money, and L100 I
shall presently have of him. We advised about a business of insurance,
wherein something may be saved to him and got to me, and to that end he
and I did take a coach at night and to the Cockepitt, there to get the
Duke of Albemarle's advice for our insuring some of our Sounde goods
coming home under Harman's convoy, but he proved shy of doing it without
knowledge of the Duke of Yorke, so we back again and calling at my house
to see my wife, who is well; though my great trouble is that our poor
little parish is the greatest number this weeke in all the city within
the walls, having six, from one the last weeke; and so by water to
Greenwich leaving Sir W. Warren at home, and I straight to my Lord
Bruncker, it being late, and concluded upon insuring something and to
send to that purpose to Sir W. Warren to come to us to-morrow morning.
So I home and, my mind in great rest, to bed.

14th. Up, and to the office a while with my Lord Bruncker, where we
directed Sir W. Warren in the business of the insurance as I desired,
and ended some other businesses of his, and so at noon I to London,
but the 'Change was done before I got thither, so I to the Pope's Head
Taverne, and there find Mr. Gawden and Captain Beckford and Nick Osborne
going to dinner, and I dined with them and very exceeding merry we were
as I had [not] been a great while, and dinner being done I to the East
India House and there had an assignment on Mr. Temple for the L2,000
of Cocke's, which joyed my heart; so, having seen my wife in the way, I
home by water and to write my letters and then home to bed.

15th. Up, and spent all the morning with my Surveyors of the Ports for
the Victualling, and there read to them what instructions I had provided
for them and discoursed largely much of our business and the business
of the pursers. I left them to dine with my people, and to my Lord
Bruncker's where I met with a great good dinner and Sir T. Teddiman,
with whom my Lord and I were to discourse about the bringing of W. Howe
to a tryall for his jewells, and there till almost night, and so away
toward the office and in my way met with Sir James Bunce; and after
asking what newes, he cried "Ah!" says he (I know [not] whether in
earnest or jest), "this is the time for you," says he, "that were for
Oliver heretofore; you are full of employment, and we poor Cavaliers sit
still and can get nothing;" which was a pretty reproach, I thought, but
answered nothing to it, for fear of making it worse. So away and I to
see Mrs. Penington, but company being to come to her, I staid not, but
to the office a little and so home, and after supper to bed.

16th. Up, and met at the office; Sir W. Batten with us, who come from
Portsmouth on Monday last, and hath not been with us to see or discourse
with us about any business till this day. At noon to dinner, Sir W.
Warren with me on boat, and thence I by water, it being a fearfull cold,
snowing day to Westminster to White Hall stairs and thence to Sir G.
Downing, to whom I brought the happy newes of my having contracted, as
we did this day with Sir W. Warren, for a ship's lading of Norway goods
here and another at Harwich to the value of above L3,000, which is the
first that hath been got upon the New Act, and he is overjoyed with it
and tells me he will do me all the right to Court about it in the world,
and I am glad I have it to write to Sir W. Coventry to-night. He would
fain have me come in L200 to lend upon the Act, but I desire to be
excused in doing that, it being to little purpose for us that relate to
the King to do it, for the sum gets the King no courtesy nor credit. So
I parted from him and walked to Westminster Hall, where Sir W. Warren,
who come along with me, staid for me, and there I did see Betty Howlet
come after the sicknesse to the Hall. Had not opportunity to salute her,
as I desired, but was glad to see her and a very pretty wench she
is. Thence back, landing at the Old Swan and taking boat again at
Billingsgate, and setting ashore we home and I to the office.... and
there wrote my letters, and so home to supper and to bed, it being a
great frost. Newes is come to-day of our Sounde fleete being come, but I
do not know what Sir W. Warren hath insured.

17th (Lord's day). After being trimmed word brought me that Cutler's
coach is, by appointment, come to the Isle of Doggs for me, and so I
over the water; and in his coach to Hackney, a very fine, cold, clear,
frosty day. At his house I find him with a plain little dinner, good
wine, and welcome. He is still a prating man; and the more I know him,
the less I find in him. A pretty house he hath here indeed, of his owne
building. His old mother was an object at dinner that made me not like
it; and, after dinner, to visit his sicke wife I did not also take much
joy in, but very friendly he is to me, not for any kindnesse I think he
hath to any man, but thinking me, I perceive, a man whose friendship
is to be looked after. After dinner back again and to Deptford to Mr.
Evelyn's, who was not within, but I had appointed my cozen Thos. Pepys
of Hatcham to meet me there, to discourse about getting his L1000 of my
Lord Sandwich, having now an opportunity of my having above that sum in
my hands of his. I found this a dull fellow still in all his discourse,
but in this he is ready enough to embrace what I counsel him to, which
is, to write importunately to my Lord and me about it and I will look
after it. I do again and again declare myself a man unfit to be security
for such a sum. He walked with me as far as Deptford upper towne, being
mighty respectfull to me, and there parted, he telling me that this
towne is still very bad of the plague. I walked to Greenwich first, to
make a short visit to my Lord Bruncker, and next to Mrs. Penington and
spent all the evening with her with the same freedom I used to have and
very pleasant company. With her till one of the clock in the morning and
past, and so to my lodging to bed, and

18th. Betimes, up, it being a fine frost, and walked it to Redriffe,
calling and drinking at Half-way house, thinking, indeed, to have
overtaken some of the people of our house, the women, who were to walk
the same walke, but I could not. So to London, and there visited my
wife, and was a little displeased to find she is so forward all of a
spurt to make much of her brother and sister since my last kindnesse to
him in getting him a place, but all ended well presently, and I to
the 'Change and up and down to Kingdon and the goldsmith's to meet Mr.
Stephens, and did get all my money matters most excellently cleared
to my complete satisfaction. Passing over Cornhill I spied young Mrs.
Daniel and Sarah, my landlady's daughter, who are come, as I expected,
to towne, and did say they spied me and I dogged them to St. Martin's,
where I passed by them being shy, and walked down as low as Ducke Lane
and enquired for some Spanish books, and so back again and they were
gone. So to the 'Change, hoping to see them in the streete, and missing
them, went back again thither and back to the 'Change, but no sight of
them, so went after my business again, and, though late, was sent to by
Sir W. Warren (who heard where I was) to intreat me to come dine with
him, hearing that I lacked a dinner, at the Pope's Head; and there with
Mr. Hinton, the goldsmith, and others, very merry; but, Lord! to see
how Dr. Hinton come in with a gallant or two from Court, and do so call
"Cozen" Mr. Hinton, the goldsmith, but I that know him to be a beggar
and a knave, did make great sport in my mind at it.

     [John Hinton, M.D., a strong royalist, who attended Henrietta Maria
     in her confinement at Exeter when she gave birth to the Princess
     Henrietta.  He was knighted by Charles II., and appointed physician
     in ordinary to the king and queen.  His knighthood was a reward for
     having procured a private advance of money from his kinsman, the
     goldsmith, to enable the Duke of Albemarle to pay the army (see
     "Memorial to King Charles II. from Sir John Hinton, A.D. 1679,"
     printed in Ellis's "Original Letters," 3rd series, vol. iv.,
     p  296).]

After dinner Sir W. Warren and I alone in another room a little while
talking about business, and so parted, and I hence, my mind full
of content in my day's worke, home by water to Greenwich, the river
beginning to be very full of ice, so as I was a little frighted, but got
home well, it being darke. So having no mind to do any business, went
home to my lodgings, and there got little Mrs. Tooker, and Mrs. Daniel,
the daughter, and Sarah to my chamber to cards and sup with me, when
in comes Mr. Pierce to me, who tells me how W. Howe has been examined
on shipboard by my Lord Bruncker to-day, and others, and that he has
charged him out of envy with sending goods under my Lord's seale and
in my Lord Bruncker's name, thereby to get them safe passage, which,
he tells me, is false, but that he did use my name to that purpose, and
hath acknowledged it to my Lord Bruncker, but do also confess to me that
one parcel he thinks he did use my Lord Bruncker's name, which do
vexe me mightily that my name should be brought in question about such
things, though I did not say much to him of my discontent till I have
spoke with my Lord Bruncker about it. So he being gone, being to go
to Oxford to-morrow, we to cards again late, and so broke up, I having
great pleasure with my little girle, Mrs. Tooker.

19th. Up, and to the office, where all the morning. At noon by agreement
comes Hatcham Pepys to dine with me. I thought to have had him to Sir
J. Minnes to a good venison pasty with the rest of my fellows, being
invited, but seeing much company I went away with him and had a good
dinner at home. He did give me letters he hath wrote to my Lord and
Moore about my Lord's money to get it paid to my cozen, which I will
make good use of. I made mighty much of him, but a sorry dull fellow he
is, fit for nothing that is ingenious, nor is there a turd of kindnesse
or service to be had from him. So I shall neglect him if I could get but
him satisfied about this money that I may be out of bonds for my Lord
to him. To see that this fellow could desire me to helpe him to some
employment, if it were but of L100 per annum: when he is not worth less
than, I believe, L20,000. He gone, I to Sir J. Minnes, and thence with
my Lord Bruncker on board the Bezan to examine W. Howe again, who I find
upon this tryall one of much more wit and ingenuity in his answers than
ever I expected, he being very cunning and discreet and well spoken in
them. I said little to him or concerning him; but, Lord! to see how
he writes to me a-days, and styles me "My Honour." So much is a man
subjected and dejected under afflictions as to flatter me in that manner
on this occasion. Back with my Lord to Sir J. Minnes, where I left him
and the rest of a great deale of company, and so I to my office, where
late writing letters and then home to bed.

20th. Up, and was trimmed, but not time enough to save my Lord
Bruncker's coach or Sir J. Minnes's, and so was fain to walk to Lambeth
on foot, but it was a very fine frosty walke, and great pleasure in
it, but troublesome getting over the River for ice. I to the Duke of
Albemarle, whither my brethren were all come, but I was not too late.
There we sat in discourse upon our Navy business an houre, and thence in
my Lord Bruncker's coach alone, he walking before (while I staid
awhile talking with Sir G. Downing about the Act, in which he is horrid
troublesome) to the Old Exchange. Thence I took Sir Ellis Layton to
Captain Cocke's, where my Lord Bruncker and Lady Williams dine, and we
all mighty merry; but Sir Ellis Layton one of the best companions at
a meale in the world. After dinner I to the Exchange to see whether my
pretty seamstress be come again or no, and I find she is, so I to her,
saluted her over her counter in the open Exchange above, and mightily
joyed to see her, poor pretty woman! I must confess I think her a great
beauty. After laying out a little money there for two pair of thread
stockings, cost 8s., I to Lumbard Streete to see some business to-night
there at the goldsmith's, among others paying in L1258 to Viner for
my Lord Sandwich's use upon Cocke's account. I was called by my Lord
Bruncker in his coach with his mistresse, and Mr. Cottle the lawyer,
our acquaintance at Greenwich, and so home to Greenwich, and thence I to
Mrs. Penington, and had a supper from the King's Head for her, and there
mighty merry and free as I used to be with her, and at last, late, I did
pray her to undress herself into her nightgowne, that I might see how
to have her picture drawne carelessly (for she is mighty proud of that
conceit), and I would walk without in the streete till she had done. So
I did walk forth, and whether I made too many turns or no in the darke
cold frosty night between the two walls up to the Parke gate I know not,
but she was gone to bed when I come again to the house, upon pretence of
leaving some papers there, which I did on purpose by her consent. So
I away home, and was there sat up for to be spoken with my young Mrs.
Daniel, to pray me to speake for her husband to be a Lieutenant. I had
the opportunity here of kissing her again and again, and did answer that
I would be very willing to do him any kindnesse, and so parted, and I to
bed, exceedingly pleased in all my matters of money this month or two,
it having pleased God to bless me with several opportunities of good
sums, and that I have them in effect all very well paid, or in my power
to have. But two things trouble me; one, the sicknesse is increased
above 80 this weeke (though in my owne parish not one has died, though
six the last weeke); the other, most of all, which is, that I have so
complexed an account for these last two months for variety of layings
out upon Tangier, occasions and variety of gettings that I have not made
even with myself now these 3 or 4 months, which do trouble me mightily,
finding that I shall hardly ever come to understand them thoroughly
again, as I used to do my accounts when I was at home.

21st. At the office all the morning. At noon all of us dined at Captain
Cocke's at a good chine of beef, and other good meat; but, being all
frost-bitten, was most of it unroast; but very merry, and a good dish of
fowle we dressed ourselves. Mr. Evelyn there, in very good humour. All
the afternoon till night pleasant, and then I took my leave of them and
to the office, where I wrote my letters, and away home, my head full of
business and some trouble for my letting my accounts go so far that I
have made an oathe this night for the drinking no wine, &c., on such
penalties till I have passed my accounts and cleared all. Coming home
and going to bed, the boy tells me his sister Daniel has provided me a
supper of little birds killed by her husband, and I made her sup with
me, and after supper were alone a great while, and I had the pleasure of
her lips, she being a pretty woman, and one whom a great belly becomes
as well as ever I saw any. She gone, I to bed. This day I was come to by
Mrs. Burrows, of Westminster, Lieutenant Burrows (lately dead) his wife,
a most pretty woman and my old acquaintance; I had a kiss or two of her,
and a most modest woman she is.

22nd. Up betimes and to my Lord Bruncker to consider the late
instructions sent us for the method of our signing bills hereafter and
paying them. By and by, by agreement, comes Sir J. Minnes and Sir W.
Batten, and then to read them publicly and consider of putting them in
execution. About this all the morning, and, it appearing necessary for
the Controller to have another Clerke, I recommended Poynter to him,
which he accepts, and I by that means rid of one that I fear would not
have been fit for my turne, though he writes very well. At noon comes
Mr. Hill to towne, and finds me out here, and brings Mr. Houbland, who
met him here. So I was compelled to leave my Lord and his dinner and
company, and with them to the Beare, and dined with them and their
brothers, of which Hill had his and the other two of his, and mighty
merry and very fine company they are, and I glad to see them. After
dinner I forced to take leave of them by being called upon by Mr.
Andrews, I having sent for him, and by a fine glosse did bring him to
desire tallys for what orders I have to pay him and his company for
Tangier victualls, and I by that means cleared to myself L210 coming
to me upon their two orders, which is also a noble addition to my late
profits, which have been very considerable of late, but how great I know
not till I come to cast up my accounts, which burdens my mind that it
should be so backward, but I am resolved to settle to nothing till I
have done it. He gone, I to my Lord Bruncker's, and there spent the
evening by my desire in seeing his Lordship open to pieces and make up
again his watch, thereby being taught what I never knew before; and it
is a thing very well worth my having seen, and am mightily pleased
and satisfied with it. So I sat talking with him till late at night,
somewhat vexed at a snappish answer Madam Williams did give me to
herself, upon my speaking a free word to her in mirthe, calling her a
mad jade. She answered, we were not so well acquainted yet. But I was
more at a letter from my Lord Duke of Albemarle to-day, pressing us
to continue our meetings for all Christmas, which, though every body
intended not to have done, yet I am concluded in it, who intended
nothing else. But I see it is necessary that I do make often visits
to my Lord Duke, which nothing shall hinder after I have evened my
accounts, and now the river is frozen I know not how to get to him.
Thence to my lodging, making up my Journall for 8 or 9 days, and so my
mind being eased of it, I to supper and to bed. The weather hath been
frosty these eight or nine days, and so we hope for an abatement of the
plague the next weeke, or else God have mercy upon us! for the plague
will certainly continue the next year if it do not.

23rd. At my office all the morning and home to dinner, my head full of
business, and there my wife finds me unexpectedly. But I not being at
leisure to stay or talk with her, she went down by coach to Woolwich,
thinking to fetch Mrs. Barbary to carry her to London to keep her
Christmas with her, and I to the office. This day one come to me with
four great turkies, as a present from Mr. Deane, at Harwich, three of
which my wife carried in the evening home with her to London in her
coach (Mrs. Barbary not being to be got so suddenly, but will come to
her the next week), and I at my office late, and then to my lodgings to
bed.

24th (Sunday). Up betimes, to my Lord Duke of Albemarle by water,
and after some talke with him about business of the office with great
content, and so back again and to dinner, my landlady and her daughters
with me, and had mince-pies, and very merry at a mischance her young son
had in tearing of his new coate quite down the outside of his sleeve
in the whole cloth, one of the strangest mishaps that ever I saw in my
life. Then to church, and placed myself in the Parson's pew under the
pulpit, to hear Mrs. Chamberlain in the next pew sing, who is daughter
to Sir James Bunch, of whom I have heard much, and indeed she sings
very finely, and from church met with Sir W. Warren and he and I walked
together talking about his and my businesses, getting of money as fairly
as we can, and, having set him part of his way home, I walked to my
Lord Bruncker, whom I heard was at Alderman Hooker's, hoping to see and
salute Mrs. Lethulier, whom I did see in passing, but no opportunity of
beginning acquaintance, but a very noble lady she is, however the silly
alderman got her. Here we sat talking a great while, Sir The. Biddulph
and Mr. Vaughan, a son-in-law of Alderman Hooker's. Hence with my Lord
Bruncker home and sat a little with him and so home to bed.

25th (Christmas-day). To church in the morning, and there saw a wedding
in the church, which I have not seen many a day; and the young people
so merry one with another, and strange to see what delight we married
people have to see these poor fools decoyed into our condition, every
man and woman gazing and smiling at them. Here I saw again my beauty
Lethulier. Thence to my Lord Bruncker's by invitation and dined there,
and so home to look over and settle my papers, both of my accounts
private, and those of Tangier, which I have let go so long that it were
impossible for any soul, had I died, to understand them, or ever come
to any good end in them. I hope God will never suffer me to come to that
disorder again.

26th. Up, and to the office, where Sir J. Minnes and my Lord Bruncker
and I met, to give our directions to the Commanders of all the ships
in the river to bring in lists of their ships' companies, with entries,
discharges, &c., all the last voyage, where young Seymour, among 20 that
stood bare, stood with his hat on, a proud, saucy young man. Thence with
them to Mr. Cuttle's, being invited, and dined nobly and neatly; with a
very pretty house and a fine turret at top, with winding stairs and the
finest prospect I know about all Greenwich, save the top of the hill,
and yet in some respects better than that. Here I also saw some fine
writing worke and flourishing of Mr. Hore, he one that I knew long
ago, an acquaintance of Mr. Tomson's at Westminster, that is this
man's clerk. It is the story of the several Archbishops of Canterbury,
engrossed in vellum, to hang up in Canterbury Cathedrall in tables, in
lieu of the old ones, which are almost worn out. Thence to the office a
while, and so to Captain Cocke's and there talked, and home to look over
my papers, and so to bed.

27th. Up, and with Cocke, by coach to London, there home to my wife, and
angry about her desiring a mayde yet, before the plague is quite over.
It seems Mercer is troubled that she hath not one under her, but I will
not venture my family by increasing it before it be safe. Thence about
many businesses, particularly with Sir W. Warren on the 'Change, and
he and I dined together and settled our Tangier matters, wherein I get
above L200 presently. We dined together at the Pope's Head to do this,
and thence to the goldsmiths, I to examine the state of my matters there
too, and so with him to my house, but my wife was gone abroad to Mrs.
Mercer's, so we took boat, and it being darke and the thaw having broke
the ice, but not carried it quite away, the boat did pass through so
much of it all along, and that with the crackling and noise that it
made me fearfull indeed. So I forced the watermen to land us on Redriffe
side, and so walked together till Sir W. Warren and I parted near his
house and thence I walked quite over the fields home by light of linke,
one of my watermen carrying it, and I reading by the light of it, it
being a very fine, clear, dry night. So to Captain Cocke's, and there
sat and talked, especially with his Counsellor, about his prize goods,
that hath done him good turne, being of the company with Captain Fisher,
his name Godderson; here I supped and so home to bed, with great content
that the plague is decreased to 152, the whole being but 330.

28th. Up and to the office, and thence with a great deal of business
in my head, dined alone with Cocke. So home alone strictly about my
accounts, wherein I made a good beginning, and so, after letters wrote
by the post, to bed.

29th. Up betimes, and all day long within doors upon my accounts,
publique and private, and find the ill effect of letting them go so
long without evening, that no soul could have ever understood them but
myself, and I with much ado. But, however, my regularity in all I did
and spent do helpe me, and I hope to find them well. Late at them and to
bed.

30th. Up and to the office, at noon home to dinner, and all the
afternoon to my accounts again, and there find myself, to my great joy,
a great deal worth above L4000, for which the Lord be praised! and is
principally occasioned by my getting L500 of Cocke, for my profit in his
bargains of prize goods, and from Mr. Gawden's making me a present of
L500 more, when I paid him 8000 for Tangier. So to my office to write
letters, then to my accounts again, and so to bed, being in great ease
of mind.

31st (Lord's day). All the morning in my chamber, writing fair the state
of my Tangier accounts, and so dined at home. In the afternoon to the
Duke of Albemarle and thence back again by water, and so to my chamber
to finish the entry of my accounts and to think of the business I am
next to do, which is the stating my thoughts and putting in order my
collections about the business of pursers, to see where the fault of our
present constitution relating to them lies and what to propose to mend
it, and upon this late and with my head full of this business to bed.
Thus ends this year, to my great joy, in this manner. I have raised
my estate from L1300 in this year to L4400. I have got myself greater
interest, I think, by my diligence, and my employments encreased by that
of Treasurer for Tangier, and Surveyour of the Victualls. It is true we
have gone through great melancholy because of the great plague, and I
put to great charges by it, by keeping my family long at Woolwich,
and myself and another part of my family, my clerks, at my charge at
Greenwich, and a mayde at London; but I hope the King will give us some
satisfaction for that. But now the plague is abated almost to nothing,
and I intending to get to London as fast as I can. My family, that is
my wife and maids, having been there these two or three weeks. The Dutch
war goes on very ill, by reason of lack of money; having none to
hope for, all being put into disorder by a new Act that is made as an
experiment to bring credit to the Exchequer, for goods and money to
be advanced upon the credit of that Act. I have never lived so merrily
(besides that I never got so much) as I have done this plague time,
by my Lord Bruncker's and Captain Cocke's good company, and the
acquaintance of Mrs. Knipp, Coleman and her husband, and Mr. Laneare,
and great store of dancings we have had at my cost (which I was willing
to indulge myself and wife) at my lodgings. The great evil of this
year, and the only one indeed, is the fall of my Lord of Sandwich, whose
mistake about the prizes hath undone him, I believe, as to interest at
Court; though sent (for a little palliating it) Embassador into Spayne,
which he is now fitting himself for. But the Duke of Albemarle goes with
the Prince to sea this next year, and my Lord very meanly spoken of;
and, indeed, his miscarriage about the prize goods is not to be excused,
to suffer a company of rogues to go away with ten times as much as
himself, and the blame of all to be deservedly laid upon him.

     [According to Granville Penn ("Memorials of Sir W. Penn," ii. 488 n.)
     L2000 went to Lord Sandwich and L8000 among eight others.]

My whole family hath been well all this while, and all my friends I
know of, saving my aunt Bell, who is dead, and some children of my cozen
Sarah's, of the plague. But many of such as I know very well, dead;
yet, to our great joy, the town fills apace, and shops begin to be open
again. Pray God continue the plague's decrease! for that keeps the Court
away from the place of business, and so all goes to rack as to publick
matters, they at this distance not thinking of it.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS, PEPY'S DIARY,1965 N.S.,COMPLETE:

     A fair salute on horseback, in Rochester streets, of the lady
     A most conceited fellow and not over much in him
     A conceited man, but of no Logique in his head at all
     A vineyard, the first that ever I did see
     A pretty man, I would be content to break a commandment with him
     About two o'clock, too late and too soon to go home to bed
     Accounts I never did see, or hope again to see in my days
     All the towne almost going out of towne (Plague panic)
     Among  many lazy people that the diligent man becomes necessary
     And feeling for a chamber-pott, there was none
     And all to dinner and sat down to the King saving myself
     At a loss whether it will be better for me to have him die
     Bagwell's wife waited at the door, and went with me to my office
     Baseness and looseness of the Court
     Because I would not be over sure of any thing
     Being able to do little business (but the less the better)
     Being the first Wednesday of the month
     Best poem that ever was wrote (Siege of Rhodes)
     Bottle of strong water; whereof now and then a sip did me good
     Buy some roll-tobacco to smell to and chaw
     By his many words and no understanding, confound himself
     Castlemayne is sicke again, people think, slipping her filly
     Church, where a most insipid young coxcomb preached
     Clean myself with warm water; my wife will have me
     Consult my pillow upon that and every great thing of my life
     Contracted for her as if he had been buying a horse
     Convenience of periwiggs is so great
     Copper to the value of L5,000
     Costs me 12d. a kiss after the first
     Delight to see these poor fools decoyed into our condition
     Desired me that I would baste his coate
     Did bear with it, and very pleasant all the while
     Did put evil thoughts in me, but proceeded no further
     Discourse of Mr. Evelyn touching all manner of learning
     Disease making us more cruel to one another than if we are doggs
     Doubtfull whether her daughter will like of it or no
     Dying this last week of the plague 112, from 43 the week before
     Endeavouring to strike tallys for money for Tangier
     Every body is at a great losse and nobody can tell
     Every body's looks, and discourse in the street is of death
     Fell to sleep as if angry
     Find that now and then a little difference do no hurte
     First thing of that nature I did ever give her (L10 ring)
     For my quiet would not enquire into it
     For, for her part, she should not be buried in the commons
     France, which is accounted the best place for bread
     French have taken two and sunk one of our merchant-men
     Give the other notice of the future state, if there was any
     Going with her woman to a hot-house to bathe herself
     Good discourse and counsel from him, which I hope I shall take
     Great many silly stories they tell of their sport
     Great thaw it is not for a man to walk the streets
     Had what pleasure almost I would with her
     Hath sent me masters that do observe that I take pains
     Hath a good heart to bear, or a cunning one to conceal his evil
     Hear that the plague is come into the City
     Heard noises over their head upon the leads
     His wife and three children died, all, I think, in a day
     His disease was the pox and that he must be fluxed (Rupert)
     His enemies have done him as much good as he could wish
     Houses marked with a red cross upon the doors
     How sad a sight it is to see the streets empty of people
     How little merit do prevail in the world, but only favour
     How little heed is had to the prisoners and sicke and wounded
     How Povy overdoes every thing in commending it
     How unhppily a man may fall into a necessity of bribing people
     I kissed the bride in bed, and so the curtaines drawne
     I have promised, but know not when I shall perform
     I know not how their fortunes may agree
     I met a dead corps of the plague, in the narrow ally
     I am a foole to be troubled at it, since I cannot helpe it
     If the exportations exceed importations
     In our graves (as Shakespeere resembles it) we could dream
     It is a strange thing how fancy works
     King shall not be able to whip a cat
     King himself minding nothing but his ease
     King is not at present in purse to do
     L10,000 to the Prince, and half-a-crowne to my Lord of Sandwich
     Law against it signifies nothing in the world
     Law and severity were used against drunkennesse
     Lechery will never leave him
     Left him with some Commanders at the table taking tobacco
     Less he finds of difference between them and other men
     Lord! in the dullest insipid manner that ever lover did
     Luxury and looseness of the times
     Money I have not, nor can get
     Mr. Evelyn's translating and sending me as a present
     Must be forced to confess it to my wife, which troubles me
     My wife after her bathing lying alone in another bed
     My old folly and childishnesse hangs upon me still
     Nan at Moreclacke, very much pleased and merry with her
     Never could man say worse himself nor have worse said
     No man is wise at all times
     Not had the confidence to take his lady once by the hand
     Not liking that it should lie long undone, for fear of death
     Not to be censured if their necessities drive them to bad
     Offer to give me a piece to receive of me 20
     One whom a great belly becomes as well as ever I saw any
     Ordered him L2000, and he paid me my quantum out of it
     Ordered in the yarde six or eight bargemen to be whipped
     Out of my purse I dare not for fear of a precedent
     Pest coaches and put her into it to carry her to a pest house
     Plague claimed 68,596 victims (in 1665)
     Plague, forty last night, the bell always going
     Pleases them mightily, and me not at all
     Poor seamen that lie starving in the streets
     Pretends to a resolution of being hereafter very clean
     Pretty to see the young pretty ladies dressed like men
     Pride of some persons and vice of most was but a sad story
     Quakers and others that will not have any bell ring for them
     Resolving not to be bribed to dispatch business
     Sat an hour or two talking and discoursing....
     Saying me to be the fittest man in England
     Searchers with their rods in their hands
     See how a good dinner and feasting reconciles everybody
     Sicke men that are recovered, they lying before our office doors
     So to bed, to be up betimes by the helpe of a larum watch
     So great a trouble is fear
     The coachman that carried [us] cannot know me again
     The boy is well, and offers to be searched
     This absence makes us a little strange instead of more fond
     Those bred in the North among the colliers are good for labour
     Though neither of us care 2d. one for another
     Tied our men back to back, and thrown them all into the sea
     Told us he had not been in a bed in the whole seven years
     Too much of it will make her know her force too much
     Two shops in three, if not more, generally shut up
     Up, leaving my wife in bed, being sick of her months
     Wanton as ever she was, with much I made myself merry and away
     Well enough pleased this morning with their night's lodging
     What silly discourse we had by the way as to love-matters
     When she least shews it hath her wit at work
     Where money is free, there is great plenty
     Which may teach me how I make others wait
     Who is the most, and promises the least, of any man
     Wife that brings me nothing almost (besides a comely person)







End of Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, 1665, by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, 1665 ***

***** This file should be named 4162.txt or 4162.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/6/4162/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
