The Project Gutenberg EBook of Records of The Spanish Inquisition, by
Andrew Dickson White

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Records of The Spanish Inquisition
       Translated from the Original Manuscripts

Author: Andrew Dickson White

Release Date: December 29, 2012 [EBook #41733]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RECORDS OF THE SPANISH INQUISITION ***




Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)Attn: Chuck








[Every attempt has been made to replicate the original book as printed.
Some typographical errors have been corrected. {A list follows the text}
No attempt has been made to correct or normalize the printed accentuation
or spelling of spanish names or words. (etext transcriber's note)




RECORDS
OF THE
SPANISH INQUISITION,

TRANSLATED FROM THE
ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPTS.

BOSTON:
SAMUEL G. GOODRICH, 141 WASHINGTON STREET.

MDCCCXXVIII.




     DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS, _to wit_:

    _District Clerk's Office._

     BE IT REMEMBERED, That on the twentysixth day of May, A. D. 1828,
     in the fiftysecond year of the Independence of the UNITED STATES OF
     AMERICA, _Samuel G. Goodrich_, of the said district, has deposited
     in this office, the title of a book, the right whereof he claims as
     proprietor, in the words following, _to wit_;

     'Records of the Spanish Inquisition, translated from the Original
     Manuscripts.'

     In conformity to the act of the Congress of the United States,
     entitled 'An act for the encouragement of learning, by securing the
     copies of maps, charts, and books, to the authors and proprietors
     of such copies, during the time therein mentioned;' and also to an
     act entitled 'An act supplementary to an act, entitled, an act for
     the encouragement of learning, by securing the copies of maps,
     charts, and books to the authors and proprietors of such copies
     during the times therein mentioned; and extending the benefits
     thereof to the arts of designing, engraving and etching historical
     and other prints.'

JNO. W. DAVIS,
_Clerk of the District of Massachusetts_.

EXAMINER PRESS.
Hiram Tupper, Printer--Bromfield Lane.




PREFACE.


The manner in which the originals of the following work came into the
hands of the translator may be described in a few words. These papers
are a part of the Records of the Inquisition of Barcelona, and were
obtained during the revolution which broke out at Cadiz in 1819.

The province of Catalonia, of which Barcelona is the capital, was one of
the most forward and zealous to embrace the cause of freedom. Its
inhabitants have, in all times, been distinguished for their daring and
determined spirit, and their ardent love of liberty. The revolution
moved with rapid strides from the Isle of Leon to the Ebro. On the
twentyeighth of February, 1820, the governor of Tarragona received a
summons to repair immediately to Madrid, and in a few days the
insurrection burst out in the former place. On the fourteenth of March,
two days after this, it exploded at Barcelona.

The first movement of the revolutionary party was to depose the Captain
General of the province. This office was then held by Castanas, a
royalist. His predecessor was General Villacampa, an officer of some
distinction, who had been deprived of the captain-generalship, and
banished to Mataro, a small town on the coast, for his attachment to
liberal principles. Castanas was forced to resign, and Villacampa was
conducted in triumph from his place of banishment to Barcelona, and
reinstated in his dignity by the populace.

The government of the city being revolutionized, their next thoughts
were directed to the Inquisition, the great engine of priestly
oppression, and the object of dread and detestation to the friends of
liberty, both political and religious. The vast and gloomy piles of
this tribunal, which covered a spot of more than ten times the extent of
the Massachusetts State Prison, had been too long the terror of the
oppressed and restless Catalonians to escape distinguished notice on
this occasion. The populace demanded, with loud cries, of the Captain
General, that the Inquisitorial Palace should be thrown open. What
answer was given by Villacampa to this demand, does not appear. A body
of twenty thousand persons rushed to the Inquisition, stormed at the
gates, and demanded admittance. Those within told them to wait a few
minutes and the gates should be opened. This interval they improved to
make their escape, and in a short time the populace, growing impatient,
burst the gates and rushed in.

Every part of the premises was immediately filled. The dungeons were
broken open; the prisoners released, and the papers cast out at the
windows. For several days these were thrown in great numbers about the
streets of the city, and a small portion of them, after passing through
various hands, came into the possession of a gentleman of this city, who
at that period was travelling in Spain. These papers were forwarded to
Boston in 1820.

It was thought that a publication of these documents would be received
with much interest and satisfaction by the community, as nothing of the
kind has ever before seen the light. There are indeed some authentic and
well written compilations relating to this subject, as well as a few
narratives given by persons who have been imprisoned in the dungeons of
the Holy Office; but a copious and minute detail of the forms and
proceedings observed in the trials and investigations of the
Inquisitorial Tribunal, such as is afforded in the following pages, has
never, till this moment, existed in print. Should the Holy Office again
rear its head in Spain, perhaps the Fiscal and Calificadores might do
the publisher and Translator of this work the honor to take some notice
of their labors. It is to be hoped, however, that these most illustrious
and apostolical Senores may not very soon have occasion to obtain for
either of us any such notoriety.

Boston, June, 1828.




HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE INQUISITION.


This establishment had its origin in the endeavours of the Roman
pontiffs for the suppression of heresy. In the year 1184, Pope Lucius
II., alarmed at the appearance of the new religious sects in Dauphiny
and Provence, called a great council at Verona, where a severe decree
was issued against them, and the power of the secular princes called to
aid in their discovery and punishment. In this decree we perceive the
embryo of the Inquisition, although its proper foundation is commonly
fixed some years later.[1]

It was in France, in the year 1208, that it was first established, and
took a distinct character under the direction of Pope Innocent III., who
despatched legates into that country, with a power independent of the
bishops, to persecute the heretics with the assistance of the secular
arm. The unfortunate Albigenses, the objects of this persecution, were
extirpated with fire and sword, and the death of thousands by massacres,
tortures, and the funeral pile, signalized the commencement of the
Inquisition.[2]

This was in the reign of Philip Augustus, during which the Inquisition
appears not to have been in exercise beyond the limits of Provence and
Languedoc; but in 1255, at the request of Louis IX., it was established
by the papal authority throughout the whole kingdom, with the exception
of the territories of the Count of Poitiers and Toulouse.[3] It did not
however, obtain any permanent footing here, although the exact period of
its discontinuance is not easy to ascertain. In 1560, the Cardinal of
Lorraine made an effectual attempt to introduce it into France against
the Protestants, which is the last time we find it mentioned in
connexion with the history of that country.[4]

In 1224, it was established by Pope Honorius II. in all the States of
Italy, except Venice and Naples. In 1289, it was established at
Venice.[5] It appears to have been in existence in the kingdom of Naples
as early as 1269.[6] There is no very frequent mention of it in the
histories of that period, and we may conclude that it did not assume
that sanguinary character in these countries, which marked its first
existence on the other side of the Alps. It disappeared from all these
parts, except the Papal States, before completing a long career.

It was in Spain that this terrible tribunal was destined to obtain the
firmest footing, and exercise the bloodiest sway. Its establishment in
this country may be dated at the year 1232, and it gradually made its
way into all the principalities of which this kingdom is composed,
though not without a bloody resistance on the part of the inhabitants,
who entertained the utmost horror of the Inquisition, and killed many of
the Dominican Friars, who were its chief ministers, and the instruments
of its establishment.[7] In 1481, upon the union, under Ferdinand and
Isabella, of the Kingdom of Castile and Arragon, the inquisitorial
constitution was reformed and modified, with respect to its various
limits of territorial jurisdiction, and also by the introduction of new
and severe statutes and rules. This was called the _modern_
Inquisition,[8] and the pretext for its establishment was the
persecution of the converted Jews, who were suspected of relapsing to
their former faith. It afterwards took under its cognizance other
heresies, and some civil offences. It is very clear that the people felt
a decided aversion to it, which they manifested in violent tumults.
Nevertheless force and terror overcame their resistance, and the
domineering spirit of the Pope, the avarice of Ferdinand, and the
fanaticism of the monks, succeeded in fastening the iron yoke of the
Inquisition upon the necks of the Spaniards. It ran an uninterrupted
career until abolished by Napoleon on the fourth of December, 1808.

The circumstances of its introduction into Portugal are too curious to
be omitted. About the year 1540, there was in Spain, a monk of the name
of Saavedra, who forged apostolic bulls, royal decrees, and bills of
exchange, with so much accuracy, that they passed with every one for
genuine. He succeeded so well as to pass himself off for a knight and
commander of the military order of St Jago, the income of which,
amounting to three thousand ducats, he received for the space of a year
and a half. In a short time he acquired, by means of the royal deeds
which he counterfeited, three hundred and sixty thousand ducats.

With a little prudence he might have remained undetected through life,
but his successes tempted him to undertakings which led to his
discovery. He fell in company with a Jesuit travelling to Portugal, with
an apostolic brief for the foundation there of a college of that order.
These two concerted measures for introducing the Inquisition as well as
the Jesuits into Portugal. Saavedra forged letters from Charles V. to
the King of Portugal, and a papal bull establishing the Inquisition in
that country. This bull appointed Saavedra legate _a latere_ for the
purpose.

This daring and brazenfaced impostor then took upon him the character
and costume of a Roman cardinal. He travelled with litters, silver
dishes, and a train of attendants, levying money on his course by
forging bonds. He sent his secretary to Lisbon with his bull and papers
to prepare for his reception. The king despatched to the frontiers a
distinguished nobleman to receive him, and he made his entry into
Lisbon, where he spent three months, and was treated with the highest
respect. He afterwards travelled through the kingdom, and completed the
business for which he had made his visit. He was at last detected by the
Inquisitor General of Spain and arrested. After a trial by the
Inquisition, he was sentenced to the gallies for ten years. The king
added nine years more to the period. Almost all the establishments made
by him in Portugal, were retained under the pretence that the Holy
Office was necessary to persecute the Jews.

It has been the endeavour of the Spanish monarchs to extend it to every
country under their dominion. The Emperor Charles V., whose zeal for the
Inquisition has procured him the title of the Don Quixote of the Faith,
established it in the Netherlands in 1522, and vast multitudes, who had
embraced the Reformed religion, perished on its funeral piles. This
bloody persecution was one of the means of exciting the revolt by which
Holland was freed from the Spanish yoke.[9] An attempt was also made by
him to introduce it into Naples, but it encountered the most determined
opposition. The Neapolitans rose in insurrection, massacred the
Spaniards, and obliged the emperor to give over the project. About the
time of its appearance in the Netherlands it was also established in the
Spanish dominions in America. The first _autos de fe_ were celebrated at
Lima in 1639.[10] The Portuguese carried it into their East Indian
Colonies, fixing it at Goa in 1559.[11] In Brazil, however, it has never
existed.

The modern history of the Inquisition must be familiar to every reader.
Its abolition by Napoleon in 1808, its reestablishment under Ferdinand
VII. and its second overthrow by the Spanish people in 1820, are events
too well known to need a recapitulation here.




RECORDS OF THE SPANISH INQUISITION.

     TRIAL OF PEDRO GINESTA, NATIVE OF THE VILLAGE OF ST QUINTI, IN THE
     DIOCESE OF ST FLOR, FOR EATING BACON ON A PROHIBITED DAY


In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the fourth day
of September, one thousand six hundred and thirtyfive, present, the
Inquisitor Dr Domingo Abbad y Huerta, officiating alone in his morning
audience; having examined the information received against Pedro
Ginesta, native of the village of St Quinti, diocese of St Flor, and
Joan Mella, of the village of St Maurion, parish of Xauvinar, diocese of
Clermont, in the kingdom of France, by occupation both braziers, the
same being in custody of the Commissioner of Salas in the prison of Agna
Villa,--ordered, that the abovementioned persons be transferred to the
secret prison of this palace of the Inquisition,[12] and that their
trial be instituted in form; also ordered, that the Commissioner
aforesaid be instructed to attest _ad perpetuam_ the evidence of the
witnesses, ascertain the identity of the persons whom they depose
against, and whether the said prisoners be the persons whom they charge
with having eaten bacon on St Bartholomew's eve, notwithstanding the
prohibition; also that the said prisoners, after the business of the
deposition is despatched, be conveyed with care by the hands of the
several Familiars, to the prison of this Inquisition.

For which purpose let the necessary measures be taken.

Before me--

MATTHEO MAGRE, _Sec'y_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the town of Tremp, bishopric of Urgel, on the twentyfifth day of
August, one thousand six hundred and thirtyfive, in the morning, before
the Licenciate Joan Torroella, Presbyter Commissary of the Holy Office
of the Inquisition in the town of Salas,--appeared according to summons
and swore formally to declare the truth, a man who asserted his name to
be Joan Compte, a native and resident of the town of Talarn, in the
abovementioned bishopric, of age as he stated, fiftyfive years or
thereabout.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear.

Answered, that he neither knew nor conjectured.

Questioned, if he knew or had heard that any person had spoken or done
anything which was, or appeared to be, contrary to our holy Catholic
Faith, and evangelical doctrine preached and taught by the holy Catholic
Roman Church, or against the just and free exercise of the Holy Office.

Answered, that he knew nothing of the matters respecting which he was
questioned, except that on the eve of St Bartholomew last, being in the
town of Timian in the abovementioned bishopric of Urgel, he went to the
tavern of Pitieu, and saw there a man, by occupation a brazier, with a
grey beard, which person was well known to the deponent, he having seen
and entertained him in the town of Calan, where he exercised his trade
and had labored for the deponent. The name of this person deponent did
not know, never having heard it mentioned. At the same place was a young
man whom the said brazier stated to be his journeyman. These two were
sitting at table and eating soup, which, being despatched, deponent saw
the said person empty an earthen dish of bacon and onions into a
frying-pan, and the said brazier asked deponent if he would eat with
him, to which he replied that it was the eve and fast of St Bartholomew,
at which time it was forbidden by the church to eat such food.
Notwithstanding this, the said brazier and his servant did, in the
presence of the deponent, eat the said bacon and onions, a small portion
of which was observed to remain in the dish. This remnant the said
persons placed on a piece of bread and presented it in a plate to the
hostess. This done, the brazier and his servant went away to the _plaza_
of the town, and deponent remained in the tavern with the hostess
abovementioned. This is the truth according to the oath of the witness,
and being read in his presence, is declared by him to be correctly
written. Witness declares that he does not make this statement out of
malice to any one. Secrecy being enjoined upon him, he promised to
observe it; and he being unable to write, I, the said Commissary, sign
in his name.

JOAN TORROELLA, _Commissary_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the town of Semiana, bishopric of Urgel, on the twentyeighth day of
August, one thousand six hundred and thirtyfive, in the morning, before
the Rev. Sr. Licentiate Joan Torroella, Presbyter Commissary of the Holy
Office in the town of Salas, appeared according to summons and swore
formally to declare the truth, a woman calling herself Geronima Aymara,
wife of Pedro Aymar y Piteu, husbandman, native and resident of the town
of Semiana, of age, as she stated, forty years or thereabout.

Questioned, if she knew or conjectured the cause of her being summoned
to appear.

Answered, that she supposed it to be in order to learn whether some
persons had eaten flesh in her house on the eve of St Bartholomew the
Apostle, respecting which she could state, that on the time specified,
two persons had been at her house, of whose names she was ignorant, but
remembered that one was an old man and the other a youth, both by
occupation braziers; the said youth asked witness to cook for them a
dish of salted bacon which sat upon a table. Witness demanded in reply
why they wanted to eat bacon on that day. The young man repeated his
demand to have the bacon cooked for they meant to eat it. Witness
answered that she was unwilling, as it was at such a time. The young man
again demanded to have the bacon cooked, and told her to put onions
along with it in the pot. Whereupon witness proceeded to cook the bacon,
adding one _dinero's_ worth of onions, which she bought for that
purpose. Having done this, she placed the victuals on the table before
the said persons, and at this moment entered Juan Compte of the town of
Talarn; as witness was baking on that day and was obliged to attend to
her oven, she did no more than set the victuals on the table before the
said persons, and being asked by Juan Compte for something to eat,
answered that he must wait till she returned from the oven, which he
did, and upon her return she found the above two persons at table, one
of whom ordered her to take away what remained of the meat, and witness
saw that there was left a bit of the bacon and a few mouthfuls of the
onions she had cooked, the bacon being thrust into a piece of bread.
After this the two persons aforesaid left the house, having been seen to
eat their meal by the abovementioned Joan Compte, who was present all
the time. Furthermore witness stated, that she believes she heard her
husband say, on the evening of the Wednesday before, that he heard the
above persons declare they meant to eat that piece of bacon, which they
had procured, the next day, which was St Bartholomew's, as aforesaid,
and that her husband replied, they could not, as it was a fast. This is
the truth according to the oath of the witness, and being read in her
presence is declared by her to be correctly written. Witness further
states that she does not make this declaration out of malice to any one.
Secrecy being enjoined upon her, she promised to observe it; and she,
not being able to write, I, the said Commissary, sign in her name.

The Licentiate
JOAN TORROELLA, _Commissary_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the village of Sanserin, parish of Semiana, in the morning, before
the abovementioned Licentiate Commissary Joan Torroella, appeared
according to summons and swore formally to declare the truth, a woman
calling herself Isabel Ramoneda, wife of Pedro Ramoneda, husbandman, a
resident of the said village of Sanserin, of age, as she stated, thirty
years or thereabout.

Questioned, if she knew or conjectured the cause of her being summoned
to appear.

Answered, that she supposed it to be for the purpose of ascertaining
whether certain Gascons had eaten flesh in Semiana, on last St
Bartholomew's eve, concerning which, she could state, that on Thursday
last, which was St Bartholomew's day, there came to her house in the
evening a Gascon, whom she believes to be named Pedro, an old man, and
by trade a brazier. He had come, as he stated, from the town of
Semiana; and standing at the door of the house of this witness, there
passed by the servants of Francisco Rocabruna, apothecary of Semiana,
when the said Gascon demanded of the lads whether they knew if the young
man who had been apprehended at Semiana, was released, to which they
replied, 'No,' and cried out 'Ha! Lutheran, eat meat on a fast day!' The
lads having passed, he said to witness that he had been eating, and that
he was sorry or not sorry, witness does not remember which of the two.
No other person was present. This is the truth according to the oath of
the witness, and being read in her presence is declared by her to be
correctly recorded. Witness declares that she does not make this
statement out of malice towards any one. Secrecy being enjoined upon
her, she promised to observe it. She being unable to write, I, the said
Commissary, sign in her name.

The Licentiate
JOAN TORROELLA, _Commissary_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the village of Sanserin, on the same morning, appeared according to
summons and swore formally to declare the truth, a man calling himself
Juan Monco, husbandman, native and resident of the village
abovementioned, of age, as he stated, twenty years or thereabout.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear.

Answered, that he supposed it to be for the purpose of learning whether
certain Gascons had eaten flesh in the town of Semiana on the eve of St
Bartholomew last, concerning which he could state, that on the evening
of the said day of St Bartholomew, being near the house of Pedro
Ramonera, where there was a Gascon, whose name was unknown to the
witness, which Gascon was an old man, corpulent, and by trade a brazier,
there passed by the servant of the apothecary Rocabruna, of Tremp, whose
name is unknown to witness. This servant of Rocabruna was heard by the
deponent to say to the said Gascon, 'Ha, Lutheran! eat flesh on a fast
day!' And deponent heard the said Gascon reply, 'Yes, I have
eaten,'--but does not know whether this was heard by the said servant of
Rocabruna. This is the truth according to the oath of the deponent; and,
being read in his presence, is declared by him to be correctly recorded.
Deponent further states that he does not make this declaration out of
malice to any one. Secrecy being enjoined upon him, he promised to
observe it; and being unable to write, I, the said Commissary, sign in
his name.

The Licentiate,
JOAN TORROELLA, _Commissary_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the town of Semiana, at the same time, before me the said Licentiate
and Commissary, Joan Torroella, appeared according to summons and swore
formally to declare the truth, a man calling himself Pedro Aymar y
Piteu, native and resident of the above town of Semiana, of age, as he
stated, fiftysix years or thereabout.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear.

Answered, that he supposed it to be for the purpose of learning whether
certain Gascons had eaten flesh in his house on the day of St
Bartholomew last, concerning which he had been informed by his wife that
the two Gascons referred to, had stopped at his house, and eaten meat on
that day. He furthermore stated that the said Gascons, whose names he
knew not, as he had never seen them before, being at supper at his house
the evening previous, which was Wednesday, one of the said Gascons being
an old, and the other a young man, both braziers,--the old man said to
the wife of the deponent that he meant to have some meat the next day,
which was St Bartholomew's, and wished her to cook some salted bacon.
Whereupon deponent replied, they could not, as it was a fast. The old
man answered that they meant to eat notwithstanding, which induced the
deponent to believe that he had a license to eat meat, or had some
infirmity; on which account he made no more remonstrances, and on the
evening of the same day, returning home from his work, his wife informed
him that the Gascons had eaten meat, and that the old man had gone away,
and the young man was taken and carried to prison. This is the truth
according to the oath of the witness, and being read in his presence is
declared by him to be correctly recorded. Witness further states, that
he does not make this declaration out of malice to any one; and secrecy
being enjoined upon him, he promised to observe it. From his inability
to write, I, the said Commissary, sign in his name.

The Licentiate,
JOAN TORROELLA, _Commissary_.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the seventeenth day of September, one thousand six hundred and
thirtyfive, at three o'clock in the afternoon, Pedro Ginesta, of
Auvergne, bishopric of St Flor, was by order of the Inquisitors put in
the secret prison of the Inquisition and intrusted to the care of P.
Fontanella, Alcayde of the said prison, who examined the prisoner and
allowed him nothing prohibited by his instructions. The articles found
upon him, were, two shirts, a pair of breeches, a purse, one _dinero_
and three _sueldos_, which have been given in charge to the Camara de
Pablo.

PEDRO FONTANELLA.

       *       *       *       *       *

FIRST AUDIENCE.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the eighteenth
day of September, one thousand six hundred and thirtyfive, the
Inquisitor, Doctor Domingo Abbad y Huerta being at his morning audience,
ordered the prisoner to be brought from his cell; who, being produced,
was sworn to declare the truth on the present as well as on all other
occasions till the decision of his trial. He was also sworn to observe
secrecy with respect to everything which he might see, hear, or learn,
and everything which should befall him.

Questioned, what was his name, age, occupation, birthplace, residence,
and the period of his arrestation by this Holy Office.

Answered, that his name was Pedro Ginesta, by occupation a brazier,
native of the village of Orliach, bishopric of St Flor, in the kingdom
of France, residing at Orcan, in Catalonia, having exercised the trade
of a brazier in that country more than fourteen years, of age eighty
years or thereabout, and that he was arrested by a Commissary of the
Holy Office, yesterday, in the town of Salas.

Questioned, who was his father, grandfather, paternal and maternal, and
wife; who were his uncles, brothers, and children; what were their
occupations, birthplaces, and residences. [_Here follows a long account
of the prisoner's relatives, in answer to the particulars specified._]

Questioned, what was the origin and descent of his ancestors and
collateral relatives, and whether any one of them had been punished or
put under penance by the Holy Office of the Inquisition.

Answered, that all his relatives were old Roman Catholic Christians,[13]
and that no one of them had ever been punished or sentenced by the Holy
Office up to the present day.

Questioned, if he was a baptized and confirmed Catholic, and made it a
practice to attend mass, go to confession, and receive the sacrament at
such times as are prescribed by the Holy Catholic Mother Church; at what
time he last attended mass, and from whom he received the holy
sacrament.

Answered, that he was a baptized and confirmed Christian, having by the
grace of God been baptized in the church of Santanti, metropolitan of
the suffragans of Caberna and other places, and that he knew himself to
have been confirmed by a bishop named Panlaza in the city of Huerca in
Arragon, or Poroteo, bishop of that kingdom, more than forty years
since, in the cathedral; that he remembered the fact of the
confirmation very well, being then of full age; that he hears mass every
Sunday and holiday, except when he is travelling; that he confesses and
communicates at every time fixed by the Holy Mother Church; that he has
certificates to this effect; that he believes the last time he confessed
was on Passion Week last, in the town of La Puente de Montania, to a
priest of that church; that he does not remember the name of the person
from whose hands he received the sacrament. The prisoner then made the
sign of the cross, invoking the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and
repeated the four prayers and general confession correctly in Latin, and
stated that he knew nothing more of the christian doctrine.

Questioned, if he could write, or read, or had studied any science or
faculty.

Answered, that he could neither write, nor read, nor had he studied any
science or art.

Questioned, if he had ever left the kingdoms of Spain since his first
arrival, or had any dealings with people of equivocal faith.

Answered, that he had exercised his trade of a brazier for more than
sixty years, in the kingdoms of Catalonia and Arragon, visiting at times
his home in France, where there are no Lutherans, nor any persons of
equivocal faith.

Questioned, what were the events of his life.

Answered, that he was born, as above stated, in the village of Orliach,
and remained with his father till twenty years of age assisting him in
his profession of a brazier; that he had passed his life in France,
Arragon, and Catalonia, his father having brought him while a boy into
this country, where he died, and left him, sixty years since, in the
town of Erla, near Gea, in Arragon, working all this time in various
places, where he became well known; that his wife had never been in
Spain at any time.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his imprisonment.

Answered, falling on his knees, weeping, and beating his breast, that he
had committed an offence against our Lord by eating bacon on the eve of
St Bartholomew in the village of Semiana, and that it was true he had
been told on the day previous, by the hostess of the house where it was
done, that the next day was a fast, but not remembering this intimation,
he had, while the hostess was gone out of the house to her oven, eaten
of the same in company with a certain youth of fourteen or fifteen years
of age, a native of the bishopric of Clermont in France, who had come to
work with him two days before; and that while they were eating, the
hostess returned and again reminded him that it was the fast of St
Bartholomew, and they ought not to eat it, upon which they immediately
abstained from eating; that they were both arrested and brought on the
road to Barcelona under guard of one man, the youth with his hands tied;
that on arriving near a wood he escaped notwithstanding the exertions
made by the guard, who raised the neighbourhood to search for him; and
if in this he had offended our Lord, he begged for pardon and mercy.

The prisoner was then informed, that, in this Holy Office, it was not
customary to apprehend any person without sufficient information that he
had said, done, or witnessed the commission of something really or
apparently offensive against God our Lord, or against his Holy Catholic
faith and evangelical law, taught and preached by the Holy Mother Roman
Church, or against the just and free exercise of the Holy Office;
consequently he was to understand that he was imprisoned on account of
some such information, and he was admonished on the part of God our
Lord, and the glorious and blessed Virgin Mary, to recollect himself and
confess his offences without concealing anything relating either to
himself or any other person, and without uttering false testimony
against any one; by doing all which, his trial should be dispatched with
all brevity, and decided with that mercy which is shown by the Holy
Office to all those who confess freely; otherwise, justice should be
executed.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say, and the above being read to
him, he declared it to be the truth according to the oath which he had
sworn, and that he had nothing to alter or diminish from what is therein
contained, and with this admonition, to bethink himself well, and
declare the truth, he was remanded to prison.

DR DOMINGO ABBAD Y HUERTA.

       *       *       *       *       *

SECOND AUDIENCE.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the nineteenth
day of September, one thousand six hundred and thirtyfive, the
Inquisitor, Doctor Domingo Abbad y Huerta being at his morning audience,
presiding upon affairs of justice, ordered the above Pedro Ginesta to be
brought out of prison, which being done, and the prisoner present, he
was

Questioned, if he remembered anything relating to his affair which he
was bound to divulge, with all truth, to discharge his conscience.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

The prisoner was then admonished on the part of God our Lord, &c. [_The
whole repeated as above._]

Answered, that he had nothing more to say; and being admonished to
bethink himself well, and declare the truth, he was remanded to prison.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.

       *       *       *       *       *

THIRD AUDIENCE.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the twentieth
day of September, one thousand six hundred and thirtyfive, the
Inquisitor, Dr Domingo Abbad y Huerta being at his morning audience,
ordered the above Pedro Ginesta to be brought from his prison, which
being done, and the prisoner present, he was

Questioned, if he remembered anything relating to his affair which he
was bound to divulge, in all truth, and to discharge his conscience.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

The prisoner was then informed that in the audiences which had already
been given, he had been admonished on the part of God our Lord, &c.
[_The whole repeated as before._]

Answered that he had nothing more to say.

The prisoner was then notified that the Promotor Fiscal[14] of this Holy
Office had an accusation to bring against him, before which he would do
well to declare the whole truth, as he had already been admonished, in
which case, he would experience more fully the mercy which the Holy
Office ever extends to those who confess freely; otherwise the Fiscal
would attend and proceed to the accusation.

Straightway appeared Doctor Francisco Gregorio, Promoter Fiscal of this
Holy Office, and presented the accusation, signed by himself, against
the said Pedro Ginesta, making oath that it was not done out of malice;
which accusation was as follows:--

     ACCUSATION.

     I, Doctor Francisco Gregorio, Fiscal of this Holy Office, appear
     before your Excellency, and accuse criminally, Pedro Ginesta,
     brazier, a native of the village of Orliach, bishopric of St Flor,
     in Ubernia, in the kingdom of France, resident in this
     principality, attached to the secret prison of the Inquisition, and
     now present,--stating that the said person, being a baptized and
     confirmed Christian, and enjoying the graces and benefits which
     such persons do and ought to enjoy, not having the fear of God
     before his eyes, but regardless of his own conscience and the
     justice administered by your Excellency, has committed offences
     against our Holy Faith, by saying and performing things which
     savour of the heretic Luther, in the manner following.

     The said prisoner being in a certain part of the village of Semiana
     in the bishopric of Urgel on the fast of St Bartholomew last, in
     company with another certain person, did cause to be cooked a dish
     of bacon and onions; and, being reminded to take heed, for it was a
     fast, and such food was forbidden, replied by ordering the meat to
     be cooked, and in fact when the said meat was cooked, did proceed
     to eat the same, in company with the other person mentioned, and
     notwithstanding he was informed by another person while eating,
     that it was St Bartholomew's day, and a fast, at which time it was
     not allowed to eat such food, the said prisoner continued to eat
     the remainder of the said bacon.

     Furthermore, the said prisoner being of a nation infected with
     heresy, it is presumed that he has on many other occasions eaten
     flesh on forbidden days, after the manner of the sect of Luther,
     and committed many other offences against our Holy Faith, besides
     knowing that others have committed the same offences, and the said
     prisoner having been admonished by your Excellency to declare the
     truth, has not done it, but has perjured himself.

     For which reasons I entreat your Excellency that full evidence
     being given to my accusation, or to such a part of the same as
     shall suffice for the ends of justice in the decision of the
     present case, your Excellency will declare my accusation proved,
     and the said Pedro Ginesta guilty of the above offences, imposing
     upon him the heaviest punishments fixed by statute upon the said
     offences, and ordering them to be executed upon his person and
     goods, as a penalty to himself and an example to others; and that
     the prisoner, if it be found necessary, be put to the torture, and
     that the same be repeated till he confess the whole truth both of
     himself and others.

     And I formally swear that I do not bring this accusation out of
     malice, but solely to accomplish the ends of justice, which I now
     request at your hands.

DR FRANCISCO GREGORIO.

This accusation having been presented and read, the said Pedro Ginesta
was formally sworn to declare the truth in answer to every interrogatory
relating thereto. The accusation being read over, article by article, he
answered as follows:--

To the head of the accusation, he answered that he was the same Pedro
Ginesta whom the Fiscal accuses, but had never committed any offence
against our Holy Catholic Faith, nor done, nor said anything which
pertained to the sect of Luther or any other heresy.

To the first article he answered, confessing that he had eaten bacon and
onions on the said eve of St Bartholomew, and that although it was true
he had been reminded that it was a fast, he had forgotten it, and on
being again told of it while at his meal he immediately left off eating;
that the person who ate with him was a young man, son to Borbon
Merchante; that he did not do the above act out of disrespect to the
Church or its precepts, well knowing that it was forbidden to eat flesh
on such days, which regulation he had observed throughout his life, and
remained in the determination to observe, believing in all the doctrines
taught by the holy Catholic Roman Church. Here the prisoner fell upon
his knees and declared that he had offended through forgetfulness.

To the second article he answered, that he had never at any other time
committed the same offence, nor had he concealed the truth as to this
point, either respecting himself or his companion, being an obedient son
of the Church.

To the conclusion of the accusation, he answered that even if he were
put to the torture, he could not declare anything further, and that he
had offended, not from any bad intention, but through forgetfulness,
occasioned by his great age.

The above is the truth according to the oath of the prisoner, and being
read in his presence, is declared by him to be correctly recorded.

The Inquisitor,
DR DOMINGO ABBAD Y HUERTA.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.

The Inquisitor then ordered him a copy of the accusation that he might,
within three days, make arrangements for his trial and defence by
conferring and agreeing with one of the lawyers who are counsel for
those persons tried by the Holy Office, namely, Doctor Magrina, priest,
and Micar Morato, giving the prisoner liberty to make choice of either.
The prisoner made choice of Dr Magrina, on which the Inquisitor ordered
him to be summoned. The audience then closed, and the prisoner being
admonished was remanded to prison.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.


AUDIENCE FOR COMMUNICATION OF THE ACCUSATION AND EVIDENCE.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the twentieth
day of September, one thousand six hundred and thirtyfive, the
Inquisitor, Dr Domingo Abbad y Huerta being at his morning audience,
ordered the above Pedro Ginesta to be brought from prison, which being
done, and the prisoner present, he was

Questioned, if he remembered anything which he was bound to declare,
according to the oath he had sworn.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

The prisoner was then informed that Dr Francisco Magrina, whom he had
selected for his counsel, was present, with whom he might confer, and
make arrangements for his defence.

Dr Francisco Magrina was then sworn _in verbo sacerdotis_, to defend
well and faithfully the said Pedro Ginesta, to inform him if his case
was not on the side of justice, to do everything which a good advocate
is bound to do, and to preserve secrecy throughout.

Then were produced and read, the several confessions of the said Pedro
Ginesta, made from the eighteenth of this month to the present time,
with the accusation, and the answers of the prisoner. These he examined,
and conferred with the prisoner respecting his case, counselling him, as
the best defence which could be made, to confess the whole truth, and if
he had been guilty of any offence, to beg for pardon; by which means, he
might obtain mercy.

The said Pedro Ginesta replied that he had declared the whole truth as
appeared by his confessions, that beyond this he denied everything
contained in the accusation, and in consequence begged to be acquitted
and set at liberty.

The Inquisitor then ordered a copy of the above to be given to the
Promoter Fiscal of the Holy Office, who declared, that, confining
himself to what he had stated in his accusation and to the matter
contained in the confession of the prisoner, he requested that they
might proceed to the proofs. The Inquisitor replied that the cause
should be judged definitively, and the proofs on both sides received
_salvo jure impertinentium et non admittendorum_, according to the style
of the Holy Office, and the same was notified to both parties.

The Promotor Fiscal then declared that he reproduced the testimony which
had been received and registered against the said Pedro Ginesta in this
Holy Office, which testimony he desired might be examined and ratified
in form; and also that all other necessary investigations might be made
and the testimony published; whereupon the audience closed, and the
prisoner being admonished to bethink himself well, and declare the
truth, was remanded to prison.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.


AUDIENCE FOR THE PUBLICATION OF THE TESTIMONY.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the sixth day of
October, one thousand six hundred and thirtyfive, the Inquisitor, Dr
Domingo Abbad y Huerta, being at his morning audience, ordered the above
Pedro Ginesta to be brought from the secret prison, which being done,
and the prisoner present, he was

Questioned, if he remembered anything which he was bound to declare
according to the oath he had sworn.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

The prisoner was then informed that the Promotor Fiscal of the Holy
Office had requested a publication of the testimony against him, before
which it would be well for him to declare the whole truth, as this would
cause him to experience more benignity and mercy.

Answered, that he had nothing to add to his former confessions; that it
was true that he had eaten bacon on St Bartholomew's eve, but had done
it through ignorance, not knowing it to be a fast; that he begged pardon
for his offence, having all the rest of his life conducted in a
different manner.

Straightway appeared the Promoter Fiscal and requested publication of
the testimony against the said Pedro Ginesta according to the style of
the Holy Office. The Inquisitor ordered the publication to be made,
concealing the names of the witnesses and other circumstances which
might cause their persons to be known, according to the orders and style
of the Holy Office, which was done in the manner following.

     _Publication of the testimony against Pedro Ginesta, native of the
     village of St Quinti, diocese of St Flor, in the kingdom of
     France._

A certain witness, sworn and qualified in the proper time and manner in
the town of Tremp, bishopric of Urgel, on a certain day of the month of
August, in the present year sixteen hundred and thirtyfive--declares,
&c. [_Here follows the testimony of Joan Compte as given before._]

Another witness sworn and qualified in the proper time and manner in the
town of Semiana, &c. [_Here follows the testimony of Geronima Aymar._]

Another witness &c. [_All the other testimony repeated._]

The above testimony having been published, an oath was exacted from the
prisoner to declare the truth in answer to the testimony aforesaid,
article by article, and the same having been read to him _de verbo ad
verbum_, he answered as follows;--

To the first article he replied that it was true he had eaten the bacon,
but had done it through ignorance, having forgotten that it was St
Bartholomew's eve, as he had already confessed, and that on being
apprised of the same, he had left off eating.

To the second article he answered that the hostess might possibly have
said what she states, but that he had no recollection of it.

To the third article he answered that he repeated his former declaration
that he was a Catholic Christian, and had he known it to be the fast of
St Bartholomew, should not have eaten upon any account.

To the fourth article he answered by referring to the confession which
he had already made, and declared that he did not remember having been
warned by any one.

To the fifth article he answered by referring to his confession, and
declared that beyond this he denied everything sworn to by the witness.

The above is the truth according to the oath of the prisoner, and the
same having been read in his hearing is declared by him to be faithfully
recorded,

DR DOMINGO ABBAD Y HUERTA.

Before me--

DAMIAN FONOLLEDA, _Sec'y_.

The Inquisitor then ordered the prisoner to be furnished with a copy of
the above publication, that he might, with the assistance of his
counsel, make arrangements for his defence, whereupon the prisoner was
admonished, and remanded to prison.


AUDIENCE TO COMMUNICATE THE PUBLICATION.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the ninth day of
October, one thousand six hundred and thirtyfive, the Inquisitor, Dr
Domingo Abbad y Huerta being at his morning audience, ordered the above
Pedro Ginesta to be brought from prison, which being done, and the
prisoner present, he was

Questioned, if he remembered anything which he was bound to declare in
discharge of his conscience, according to the oath he had sworn.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

The prisoner was then informed that Doctor Francisco Magrina, his
counsel, was present, with whom he might communicate and take measures
for his defence. The publication of the testimony against the prisoner,
with his answers to the same, were then read to the said Dr Francisco
Magrina, who proceeded to confer with the prisoner about his defence.
Having done this he received from the hands of the prisoner a sheet of
paper, upon which he drew up articles of defence which were then read to
the prisoner and he declared that he made a formal presentation of the
same. Here follows the defence.


DEFENCE.

'Although Pedro Ginesta, a native of France, and by trade a brazier, has
no necessity for any defence against the charges brought against him by
the Promotor Fiscal of this Holy Office, as may be clearly seen from the
testimony; nevertheless, for greater security, and with an express
declaration that his impeachment of the testimony of the witnesses
against him, is not occasioned by a desire to injure them, but solely to
defend himself, he states the following.

'1st. He confesses that he has committed an offence, but denies that he
ought to receive any ordinary or extraordinary punishment for the same,
which is the truth, because,

'2d. Although it be the fact that he ate meat on St Bartholomew's eve
last, yet it is not the fact that he did it through malice, or from the
intention to transgress the ordinances of the Church; which declaration
is the truth.

'3d. The said Pedro Ginesta has, in consequence of his occupation, spent
his life in travelling from one place to another, attending mass where
he happened to be on Sundays and holidays, not being able to give more
attention to the duties of religion; and in consequence has been
ignorant of the fast days, by not hearing them announced; which is the
truth.

'4th. For this reason, and being ignorant that a fast was prescribed on
St Bartholomew's day, he declares he should not have eaten, had he known
the same; which is the truth.

'5th. Although it be true he was informed that he ought not to eat flesh
at that time, as it was St Bartholomew's eve, yet those present suffered
him to eat, notwithstanding, and made no remonstrances; which is the
truth.

'6th. The said Pedro Ginesta, besides being a person of simple
understanding, is very aged, being more than eighty years old, at which
time the memory is apt to fail, as old age is a _species infirmitatis_;
which is the truth.

'7th. The said Pedro Ginesta did not offend through malice, but solely
from ignorance, _quod de jure excusari solet, et verum_.

'8th. The said Pedro Ginesta, although a Frenchman by birth, is a good
Christian, and, as such, has always punctually adhered to every
obligation by which a good Christian is bound; which is the truth.

'9th. On the above accounts, the said Pedro Ginesta ought to be
acquitted by your Excellency, and released from the prison in which he
is at present confined, experiencing mercy at your hands; _vel alias_,

'10th. Ponit quod omnia et singulos jure vero, super quibus jus diei et
justitiam ministrari postulat, et verum.

F. MAGRINYA.

'11th. The said Pedro Ginesta offers the above in his defence, and
concludes by asking for mercy.

F. MAGRINYA.'

       *       *       *       *       *

This being presented to the Inquisitor, was by him ordered to be put on
file. It was likewise ordered that the same be notified to the Promoter
Fiscal of this Holy Office; whereupon the audience closed, and the
prisoner was remanded to prison.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.


SENTENCE.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the sixteenth
day of October, one thousand six hundred and thirtyfive, at the morning
audience, present, the Inquisitor, Dr Domingo Abbad y Huerta presiding
on his own part, and on the part of the Ordinary of the bishopric of
Urgel, and Dr Augustin Fernandez Lopez, Vicar General of the bishopric
of Barcelona. Having examined a trial carried on in this Holy Office,
against Pedro Ginesta, a Frenchman by birth, native of St Quinti or
Orliach, bishopric of St Flor, in Ubernia, a resident in Catalonia, in
the district of Pallas, arrested in the town of Tremp, and now in the
secret prison of this Holy Office, ordered, that in virtue of this act,
the said prisoner be reprehended, and admonished, and forthwith
released from prison.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ, _Sec'y_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the same audience, the said Pedro Ginesta was ordered to be brought
from prison, which being done, and he present, the Inquisitor, Abbad y
Huerta reprehended and admonished him, in conformity to the above
sentence. The prisoner received the correction with humility, and
promised amendment; which I, the Secretary, hereby certify.

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.

       *       *       *       *       *

Straightway, in the same audience, the prisoner was sworn to declare the
truth; and he was

Questioned, &c.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say, either with respect to
himself or others, in discharge of his conscience, nor anything relating
to what had been said or done in the prison of this Holy Office against
the honor, dignity, or secrets of the same or its ministers, or with
respect to the custody of the prisoners therein contained; that he had
not witnessed any communication carried on among them, or knew that any
one had spoken to another; that he has no communication from them to
carry to any one, and that the Alcayde and Steward have faithfully
discharged their duties.

He was then commanded, by virtue of the oath he had sworn, and under
penalty of complete excommunication, to observe perfect secrecy with
respect to everything which had befallen him relating to his trial, and
with respect to all which he had seen, heard, or learned in any manner
while in prison, and not to reveal the same to any person, under any
shape whatever; all which he promised to observe, and being unable to
write, I, the Inquisitor, Abbad y Huerta, sign in his name; whereupon he
was dismissed.

DR DOMINGO ABBAD Y HUERTA.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the 19th day of the same month, the Secretary Rodriguez dispatched a
letter to the Commissary of Salas in the name of the Tribunal, ordering
him to restore to the prisoner, on account of his poverty, the
instruments of his trade and his other property. The letter was sent by
the prisoner.

RODRIGUEZ.




TRIAL OF JUAN DURAN,

FOR BLASPHEMY AND WITCHCRAFT.


I, the Fiscal of this Holy Office, state that from information received,
it is made manifest that Juan Duran, blacksmith, a native of Manresa,
and a resident of Villaredonda, in the bishopric of Barcelona, has
committed offences against our holy faith; on which account, I purpose
to bring a formal accusation against him. For which reasons I request
your Excellency to order the said person to be arrested and confined in
the secret prison of this Inquisition, for the purpose of accomplishing
fully the ends of justice.

DR FRANCISCO GREGORIO.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the tenth day of
December, one thousand, six hundred and thirtytwo, the Inquisitors, Dr
Bernardo Luis Cotoner and Dr Domingo Abbad y Huerta, being at their
evening audience,--having examined the testification against Juan Duran,
blacksmith, a resident of Villaredonda in the bishopric of Barcelona;
ordered that the above person be arrested and confined in the secret
prison of this Inquisition, and that his trial be instituted in form.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO FRANCISCO COLL, COMMISSARY.

On the receipt of this, you will proceed to take prisoner, on the part
of this Holy Office, Juan Duran, blacksmith, a resident of this town,
for some days past, and formerly of Villaredonda. He is a tall, thin
faced, person; pale, with a chestnut beard, and meanly dressed; having
secured him, you will dispatch him, under good attendance, to this Holy
Office, by the hands of the Familiars, in such a manner that he cannot
escape, taking measures in all the places through which he may pass, to
let it be known he is apprehended by this Inquisition.

Also, if occasion should offer, you will sieze so much of the prisoner's
property, if it be found in that town, as shall amount to eight ducats,
for the expense of his maintenance, which you will transmit by those who
have him in custody.

This letter is to be returned, with a statement of all that may be done
agreeably to the above orders, with respect to which we trust in the
guidance of our Lord.

Barcelona, December 14th. 1632.

       *       *       *       *       *

The prisoner being taken, you will inspect his person and his lodgings,
in order to secure a book, about the size of the hand, in which, it is
confidently believed, there are certain prayers and superstitious
matters. This book you will despatch to us.

DR BERNARDO LUIS COTONER,
DR DOMINGO ABBAD Y HUERTA.

By order of this Holy Office--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ, _Sec'y_.


TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS INQUISITORS OF THE PRINCIPALITY OF CATALONIA.

I received the orders of your Excellencies and put them in execution. I
learned that Juan Duran had left this town of Villaredonda a month
since, and that he labored at times in repairing the bridge of
Armentera, in the archbishopric of Tarragona, whither I sent after him
and had him siezed by a Familiar of that place. I have examined him, and
found his book and papers which, you will receive along with this. No
more cash was found upon him than three _reales_, which I also transmit
by the Familiar who has him in custody. This is all which could be
obtained of his property. The prisoner I despatch to your Excellencies
according to order, and remain at the service of your Excellencies, to
whom may our Lord grant many happy years.

Villaredonda, Dec. 24th, 1632.

FRANCISCO COLL, _Rector of Villaredonda,
and Commissary of the Holy Office_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the town of Valles Campo, in the archbishopric of Tarragona, on
Saturday, the twentyseventh day of November, one thousand six hundred
and thirty two, at evening, appeared, without summons, before Dr Pablo
Pasqual Marquez, Presbyter Commissary of the Holy Office, and swore to
declare the truth, a person calling himself Pedro Oriola, apothecary,
resident of the town of Valles, of age, as he stated, fortyfour years,
or thereabout; which person, in discharge of his conscience, declared
and denounced the following.

That about fifteen days since, there visited at his house, Juan
Bafforell, and one Marcal, a gardener, inhabitants of the said town; and
that among other things they told him they had heard a certain person
(whose name and birth place the deponent is ignorant of, but knows him
by sight, and that he is a blacksmith, working with Pablo Llaurador of
this town, and came hither in company with a Frenchman, who officiated
as a physician, and a short time since had been imprisoned by the Holy
Office), say, that he possessed a book, which, if it were thrown into a
fire, along with a crucifix, would remain unhurt, while the crucifix
would be consumed.

The above is the truth, according to the oath of the deponent, and being
read in his hearing, is declared by him to be correctly recorded.
Deponent further states that he does not make this declaration out of
malice to any one, but solely to discharge his conscience, and declares
that he will keep the whole secret.

Signed,

PERO ORROLA.

Before me--

GERONYMO JOAN ROSSELLON,
_Presbyter Notary of the Holy Office_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the town of Valles, on Sunday, the twentyeighth day of the said month
and year, in the evening, before the said Commissary, appeared,
according to summons, and made oath to declare the truth, Juan
Bafforell, a native and inhabitant of the town of Valles, of age, as he
stated, fortyeight years or thereabout.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear.

Answered, that he neither knew nor conjectured.

Questioned, if he knew, or had heard that any person had said or done
anything, which was, or appeared to be contrary to the Holy Catholic
Faith and Evangelical Law preached and taught by the Holy Mother
Catholic Roman Church, or against the proper and free jurisdiction of
the Holy Office.

Answered, that he knew nothing of the matter, but the following. About
fifteen days since, he was at the house of Mosen Pedro Oriola,
apothecary, in company with the said Oriola, Bernardo Serda, innkeeper,
and Salvador Marcal, gardener, and in the course of the conversation the
said Marcal observed that a certain man, whom the deponent knew by
sight, but not his name, or where he belongs, a blacksmith, working with
Pablo Llaurador, of this town, had said, in his presence, in the tavern
of the abovementioned Bernardo Serda, that he possessed a book or books
of such quality and power, that if the said book or books were thrown
into a fire along with an image of Christ crucified, the Christ would be
burnt, and not the book. Further the deponent knoweth not.

The above is the truth according to the oath of the deponent; and being
read in his presence, is declared by him to be correctly recorded.
Deponent further states that he has not made this declaration out of
malice, but solely to unburthen his conscience; and, moreover, promises
secrecy; being unable to write, I, the said Commissary sign in his name.

DR PABLO PASQUAL MARQUEZ, _Commissary_.

Before me--

GERONYMO JOAN ROSSELLON,
_Presbyter Notary of the Holy Office_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the town of Valles, on Tuesday the thirtieth of the same month and
year, before the said Commissary, appeared according to summons, and
swore formally to declare the truth, a person calling himself Bernardo
Serda, innkeeper, a native and inhabitant of the said town of Valles, of
age, as he stated, twentyfour years or thereabout.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear.

Answered, that he supposed it to be for the purpose of ascertaining the
substance of what he had stated on several occasions; in relation to
which, the facts were, that about fifteen or thirty days since on
returning to his house, he was informed by his wife and another woman
belonging to Vique, who lodged at his house, and who went about the
country curing diseases, that they had heard a certain stranger, (a
blacksmith, working with Pablo Llaurador, but whose name or birthplace
they did not know although they knew him by sight), declare, that he was
a doctor who cured all disorders, that he was the God of the land, and
that he had a book, which, being put into the fire along with a
crucifix, would remain unhurt, while the crucifix would be consumed. The
above was heard by the women, but not by the deponent. The said person
also stated that he was circumcised as Jesus Christ was, which being
heard of by the deponent he was greatly shocked, and declared that had
it been uttered in his hearing, he would have cudgelled him out of
doors.

The above is the truth according to the oath of the deponent, and being
read to him he declares it to be correctly recorded. He further states
that he does not make this declaration out of malice, and promises to
observe secrecy. Not being able to write, I, the said Commissary, sign
in his name.

DR PABLO PASQUAL MARQUEZ, _Commissary_.

Before me--

GERONYMO JOAN ROSSELLON, _Presbyter Not'y_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the town of Valles, on Thursday, the second day of December, one
thousand six hundred and thirtytwo, in the afternoon, before the said
Commissary, appeared according to summons, and swore formally to declare
the truth, a person calling himself Pablo Llaurador, blacksmith, an
inhabitant of the town of Valles, of age, as he stated, fiftyfive years
or thereabout.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear.

Answered, that he supposed it to be for the purpose of investigating the
following matter. There was a person living with him who assisted him in
his trade. This person called himself Juan Duran, and said he was a
native of Manresa. The said person declared a few days before the feast
of All Saints, in the presence of the deponent, Pablo Vicens, and others
whose names were forgotten, that he had a book containing a prayer of
such efficacy, that, if it were put into a fire along with a crucifix,
this last would be consumed before the book, which words being uttered
with much earnestness by him, deponent and the others reprehended him,
and advised him to abstain from such speeches, as they were scandalous,
and should they come to the knowledge of the Inquisition, would bring
some punishment upon him. The above person repeated his assertions
several times, but at length desisted and appeared somewhat alarmed at
the rebukes they gave him, turning pale. At other times this person had
declared to the deponent that he was very skilful in curing disorders,
and that the Holy Virgin del Rosario, had twice appeared to him, giving
him power to cure all diseases, and bestowed upon him her benediction,
all which deponent laughed at, and ascribed to the speaker's want of
understanding; but on hearing the assertion respecting the book, he
became offended, and dismissed him from his house. Whither he went on
his departure deponent did not know, only that he stated his intention
soon to return. The book abovementioned he had shown to the deponent
many times. It was a small thing, about the size of the hand, but thick,
and was read by the possessor in great secrecy, as if he were at prayer.
These, and other things, it was said, were known to Jayme Carbonell, a
young man, son to the widow Carbonell, who keeps an inn. The person in
question was a tall, thin, pale faced man, with a chestnut beard, and
meanly dressed.

The above is the truth according to the oath of the deponent; and being
read in his presence, is declared by him to be correctly recorded. He
further states that he does not make this declaration out of malice, and
promises to observe secrecy. Not being able to write, I, the said
Commissary, sign in his name.

DR PABLO PASQUAL MARQUEZ, _Commissary_.

Before me--

GERONYMO JUAN ROSSELLON, _Presbyter Not'y_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the town of Valles, on the same day, month, and year, before the said
commissary, appeared according to summons, and swore formally to declare
the truth, a person calling herself Esperanza Serdana, wife of Bernardo
Serdana, innkeeper, an inhabitant of the town of Valles, of age, as she
stated, thirty years or thereabout.

Questioned, if she knew or conjectured the cause of her being summoned
to appear.

Answered, that she neither knew or conjectured.

Questioned, if she knew or had heard that any person had said or done
any thing which was, or appeared to be, contrary to the Holy Catholic
Faith and Evangelical Doctrine taught and preached by the Holy Mother
Roman Catholic Church, or against the proper and free jurisdiction of
the Holy Office.

Answered, that all she knew relating to such matter was the following.
About six weeks since, while she was waiting upon the guests in her
tavern, and had just gone out of the kitchen into the room where the
guests were, she observed them crossing themselves and expressing great
wonder, crying 'Jesu!' 'Jesu!' Upon which she demanded what was the
matter, and they told her, (she could not tell which of them, as there
were so many present) that a man, then in the room, whose name she did
not know, but only that he was a blacksmith and one she had never seen
before, had said he had a book, which, thrown into a flaming fire along
with a crucifix, would be preserved rather than this last, which
expressions being heard by the deponent, she did not fail to express her
astonishment, by crying 'Jesu!' and then went out of the room. The
persons present also told her that the above person had said he was
circumcised and had shed his blood as well as Jesus Christ our Lord.

The above is the truth, according to the oath of the deponent, and being
read in her presence, is declared by her to be correctly recorded. She
further states that she does not make this declaration out of malice,
and promises secrecy. Being unable to write, I, the said Commissary,
sign in her name.

DR PABLO PASQUAL MARQUEZ, _Commissary_.

Before me--

GERONYMO JUAN ROSSELLON, _Presbyter Not'y_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the town of Valles, on Saturday, the fourth day of December, one
thousand six hundred and thirtytwo, in the afternoon, before the said
Commissary, appeared according to summons, and swore to declare the
truth, a person calling himself Pablo Vicens, peasant, a native and
inhabitant of the said town, of age, as he stated, thirty years or
thereabout.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear.

Answered, that he supposed it to be for the purpose of making inquiry
about the following matter. About fifteen days before the feast of All
Saints, he was informed by Bernardo Serda, innkeeper, an inhabitant of
this town, that a man working with Pablo Llaurador, blacksmith of this
town, had said before his wife and the guests in the inn, that he had in
a certain book, a prayer of such efficacy that, were the book thrown
into a blazing fire, along with a crucifix, the book would be preserved
and the crucifix burnt; at which the deponent was much shocked, and went
home. About six or eight days after this, the deponent went to the house
of Pablo Llaurador, and found there the man abovementioned, whom he
believes they called Juan Duran. Deponent spoke to this person, asking
him what he meant by making such a speech as the above, and advised him
to take care what he said, lest he got punished for it. The said Juan
Duran answered, that he had made the above assertion, and would repeat
it, which he did. The deponent told him he had been informed by Bernardo
Serda of his speech about the book, and other assertions of his; namely,
that the Holy Virgin del Rosario had appeared twice to him, and declared
that he possessed the power to cure all diseases, giving him her
benediction; for all which the deponent reprehended him in such a
manner, that they had nearly come to blows, he having seized a
blacksmith's sledge for the purpose of throwing at the deponent, but
desisted, as every one present exclaimed against him. Deponent was
presently called away, and left the house, and a day or two after, on
inquiring for the said person, of Pablo Llaurador, was informed that he
had left him the same day. Deponent thinks he has since seen him at
Villaredonda, where he believes he may be found at present.

The above is the truth, according to the oath of the deponent; and being
read in his presence, is declared by him to be correctly recorded. He
further states that he has not made this declaration out of malice, and
promises secrecy. Not being able to write, I, the said Commissary sign
in his name.

DR PABLO PASQUAL MARQUEZ, _Commissary_.

Before me--

GERONYMO ROSSELLON, _Presbyter Not'y_.

In the town of Valles, on Sunday, the fifth of December, one thousand
six hundred and thirtytwo, before the said Commissary appeared and swore
to declare the truth, a person calling himself Jayme Carbonell, native
and inhabitant of the town of Valles, of age, as he stated, sixteen
years or thereabout.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear.

Answered, that he neither knew nor conjectured.

Questioned, if he knew or had heard that any person had said or done
anything which was, or appeared to be contrary to the Holy Catholic
Faith and Evangelical Doctrine taught and professed by our Holy Mother
Roman church, or against the proper and free jurisdiction of the Holy
Office.

Answered, that all he knew respecting this matter, was the following.
About six weeks since, he met at his home, a man whom they called Juan,
(his other name he did not know) and being in conversation with him,
alone, by the fireside, the said person told him he had a book worth
fifty ducats; that he knew how to cure all diseases simply by looking at
the book, and that by the help of it he could even restore a dead person
to life; that if people knew his great powers he should get to be very
rich, and that he had been circumcised with wounds and blood like Jesus
Christ; at all which the deponent laughed, and said to himself, 'No
doubt this man is crazy.' The person referred to, worked at a
blacksmith's trade with Pablo Llaurador, and slept at the tavern of the
deponent's mother, while he was in town.

The deponent was then informed that besides what had already been
related, this tribunal had received intimation that the said Juan had
stated he had a book, which, being cast into a fire along with a
crucifix, would remain unhurt, while the crucifix would be consumed; and
that the Holy Virgin del Rosario had twice appeared to him, giving him
her benediction and granting him the power to cure all diseases. He was
admonished to bethink himself, and declare the whole truth.

Answered, that he never heard him utter such a thing, and knew of
nothing more which the above person had said.

This is the truth according to the oath of the deponent, and being read
in his presence, is declared by him to be correctly recorded. He further
states that he does not make this declaration out of malice, and
promises secrecy.

Signed-- JAUME CARBONELL FADRI.

Before me--

GERONYMO JUAN ROSSELLON, _Presbyter Not'y_.

       *       *       *       *       *

RATIFICATION OF THE PRECEDING TESTIMONY.

In the town of Valles Campo, archbishopric of Tarragona, on Friday, the
twentyfirst day of January, one thousand six hundred and thirtythree, in
the afternoon, before Dr Pablo Pasqual Marquez, Presbyter Commissary of
the Holy Office, in the said town of Valles, appeared Pedro Oriola,
apothecary, an inhabitant of the said town, of age, as he stated, forty
years or thereabout, and swore to declare the truth, in presence of the
honest and religious persons, the Reverend Jaume Busquers and Pablo
Fonolleda, Presbyter Benificiaries in the parochial church of the said
town; which persons swore to observe secrecy.

Questioned, if he remembered having gone before any justice, and given
his deposition against any person concerning religious matters.

Answered, that he remembered having deposed before the said Dr Pablo
Pasqual Marquez, Commissary of the Holy Office, against a certain
stranger, accompanied by a French doctor who had been imprisoned by the
Holy Office. The substance of this deposition he repeated, and requested
it to be read.

He was then informed that the Promotor Fiscal of the Holy Office
presented him as a witness in an action which he had commenced against
the above person, whose name it was ascertained was Juan Duran. He was
ordered to give attention while his deposition was read, and if he found
anything to alter or add, to do it in such a manner as to declare the
whole truth, for his present declaration might be of service to the said
Juan Duran. The deposition was then read _de verbo ad verbum_, which the
said Pedro Oriola having heard and understood, he declared it to be his
testimony, and that it was correctly recorded; that he had nothing to
add or amend, but was willing to repeat the whole anew. He was again,
under oath, enjoined secrecy, which he promised. The whole I sign for
him.

PEDRO ORIOLA, _Apothecary_.

Before me--

GERONYMO JUAN ROSSELLON, _Presbyter Notary
of the Holy Office_.

[_Here follows, in the original, the ratification in the same manner of
all the other testimony._]

       *       *       *       *       *

In the town of Valles, on the day, month, and year above specified,
before the said Commissary, appeared, according to summons, and swore
formally to declare the truth, a person calling himself Juan Llaurador,
blacksmith, an inhabitant of the said town, of age, as he stated,
twentyone years, or thereabout.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear.

Answered, that he neither knew nor conjectured.

Questioned, if he knew or had heard that any person had said aught which
was, or appeared to be contrary to our holy Catholic Faith, and
Evangelical Doctrine professed and taught by the holy Mother Roman
Catholic Church, or against the proper and free jurisdiction of the Holy
Office.

Answered, that on a certain day, shortly before the feast of All Saints,
Pablo Vicens came to his house, where his father, Pablo Llaurador,
himself, and an apprentice were at work, with another person, whose name
deponent did not know, but noticed that he spoke hardly a word. These
persons being together, the said Pablo Vicens observed that he was
astonished and grieved that there existed a man who could say he had a
book, which, being thrown into a fire with an image of Christ, the book
would be saved, and the Christ burnt. Upon which he was answered by the
person abovementioned, who called himself Juan Duran, and was a native
of the city of Manresa, that he was the man whom he meant, but that his
assertion was only that the Christ would be consumed before the prayer
contained in the book, if the Christ were not consecrated. At this they
all reprimanded him, and declared that a simple representation of Christ
crucified was more powerful than his book or prayer. The said Juan
Duran, being thus contradicted and reproved by every one, was silent,
and left the place. The deponent also heard the said Juan Duran say, in
conversation, that he knew more than the doctors; that the Virgin, Our
Lady del Rosario had appeared to him and given him her benediction, and
that by her assistance he could cure better than the doctors, and do
anything better than other persons. The deponent also heard Jayme
Carbonell say, that Juan Duran had declared, in his presence, that he
was next to God. He has also heard Juan Duran read or recite out of a
little book, as large as the hand, at which all the family laughed. The
said book the deponent has seen.

The above is the truth, according to the oath of the deponent, and being
read in his presence, is declared by him to be faithfully recorded. He
further states that he does not make this declaration out of malice, and
promises secrecy. Being unable to write, I, the said Commissary, sign in
his name.

DR PABLO PASQUAL MARQUEZ, _Commissary_.

Before me--

GERONYMO JUAN ROSSELLON, _Presbyter Not'y
of the Holy Office_.

       *       *       *       *       *

CALIFICACION.[15]

A certain person, native of this principality, has stated, in
conversation, two or three times, that he possessed a book containing a
prayer of such efficacy, that if the book were thrown into a fire along
with a crucifix, this last would be consumed before the book; which
assertion being repeated by him with great earnestness, he was reproved
for it, and told among other things, that if the Inquisition knew it, he
would be punished, which silenced him after some time. The
abovementioned book he exhibited several times.

2d. The same person declared on another occasion, that he was very
skilful in curing disorders; that the Holy Virgin del Rosario had
appeared to him and empowered him to heal diseases, and given him her
benediction.

3d. The same person on another occasion declared that he had a book
which he would not sell for fifty ducats, as by merely looking at it he
could cure any disease, and even restore a dead person to life; that if
people knew his great powers, he should grow very rich; and that he was
circumcised with wounds and blood like Jesus Christ.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the tenth day of
December, one thousand six hundred and thirtytwo, being present at the
afternoon audience, the Inquisitors, Dr Bernardo Luis Cotoner, Dr
Domingo Abbad y Huerta, Father Vincente Navarro, Father Martin Perez and
Geronymo Vidal, Jesuits and Calificadores of this Holy Office,--and
having examined the above propositions, declared, unanimously, that the

1st, is a superstitious compact with the devil, and the comparison of
the book to the figure of Christ a blasphemy; the

2d, vain and superstitious; and the

3d, is a superstitious imposture; and the assertion of being
circumcised, one which creates suspicions of enmity to our Holy Faith.

VICENTE NAVARRO, _Jesuit_.

MARTIN PEREZ, _Jesuit and Lecturer
in Theology_.

GERONYMO VIDAL, _Jesuit_.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.

       *       *       *       *       *

FIRST AUDIENCE.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the tenth day of
January, one thousand six hundred and thirtythree, the Inquisitor, Dr
Bernardo Luis Cotoner, being at his morning audience, ordered to be
brought from the secret prison, a certain person, who, on his
appearance, was formally sworn to declare the truth in this audience and
all others, till the conclusion of his trial, and to keep secret
whatever he might see or hear, and everything which should befall him,
concerning his trial.

Questioned, what was his name, birthplace, age, occupation, and the date
of his imprisonment.

Answered, that his name was Juan Duran, a native of the city of Manresa,
in the bishopric of Vique, of age, thirtyone years, or thereabout, by
trade a blacksmith and farrier, and that on the day of the Innocents, he
was arrested, and put in the prison of the Holy Office.

Questioned, who was his father, and wife; who were his grandfathers and
uncles, paternal and maternal; his brothers and children; what were
their birthplaces, residences, occupations, &c.

Answered, [_Here follows a long account, in reply to the above
queries._]

Questioned, of what lineage and stock were his ancestors, and collateral
relatives; and if they, or any one of them, or himself, had ever been
imprisoned, put under penance, absolved, or condemned by the Holy Office
of the Inquisition.

Answered, that they were all old Christians of pure blood, and that he
had never heard or understood that any one of them had been imprisoned,
put under penance, absolved, or condemned by the Holy Office of the
Inquisition; that he had never been imprisoned by the Holy Office till
the present occasion.

Questioned, if he was a baptized and confirmed Christian, and made it a
practice to attend mass, go to confession, and communicate, at the times
fixed by the Holy Mother Church.

Answered, that he was a Christian, and was baptized, according as he had
heard from his parents, in the cathedral church of Manresa, but did not
know the name of the bishop who confirmed him; that he made it a
practice to hear mass, confess, and commune, at the times prescribed by
the holy Mother Church, and that his last confession was in the town of
Valles Campo de Tarragona, in the month of October last, on the day of
Our Lady del Rosario of the fleet of Don John of Austria, which
confession was made to a Carmelite friar, of the convent of that city,
whose name he did not know; that he received the holy sacrament from the
hands of the same Friar; that he had also confessed and received the
sacrament during the Lent of the last year, in the church of Igualada,
before a priest belonging there, whose name he did not know; and that he
had a certificate to this effect in his possession, when he was taken to
prison.

Here he crossed himself, repeated the Paternoster, Ave Maria, and Credo
in Latin, the Salve Regina, the ten commandments, the seven deadly sins,
and the general confession in Catalan, all correctly, and declared he
knew nothing more of the christian doctrine.

Questioned, if he could write or read, or had ever studied any science
or faculty.

Answered, that he could read, but badly, having taught himself. That he
had never studied any art, and could not write.

Questioned, if he had ever been out of the kingdom of Arragon, and with
what persons.

Answered, that he had once visited the kingdom of Granada, but not in
company with any person; and that he had never had communication with
people of suspicious faith.

Questioned, what were the events of his life.

Answered, that he was born in the city of Manresa, as aforesaid, and
brought up in the house of his father, till the age of sixteen years,
when he was sent to the town of Igualada, to Maestre Ando, a blacksmith
and farrier, with whom he staid four months, learning his trade; that he
afterwards resided in several places in Catalonia, and then visited
Arragon and Granada, as above stated, made no long stay, but returned
hither about two years ago; that lately he had been dwelling in the
village of Pont de Armenteria, Campo de Tarragona, where he was seized
by the Holy Office and brought to prison.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being arrested
and confined in the prison of the Holy Office.

Answered, that he knew not, nor could conjecture, unless it was for
this; he had often cured persons of fevers and other disorders, with
rosemary water, flor vitae, rue, &c., which art he had learned from God
and the holy Mary our Lady, from whom he had received a particular gift
for this purpose.

Questioned, in what manner, and at what time he had received this gift.

Answered, that he had received it at two years of age, having been born
with a mole on his neck and two others on the left hip; that he had been
sick in his youth for ten years or more with great lameness, and had
entreated God and the Virgin to restore him to health, and grant him the
power to cure others, that he might in this way earn his living.

Questioned, what reason he had for believing that God and our Lady had
given him the above power.

Answered, that he was led to believe it from the good success which had
accompanied his attempts to perform the abovementioned cures, which had
been effected in the case of many persons whose names he did not
remember, and from whom he had never received any pay but what they gave
him out of charity; that if on the above account any testimony had been
given against him, he supposed this to be the cause of his imprisonment
by the Holy Office, although he was not conscious of ever having
committed any offence against our Lord, nor knew any other reason for
his being imprisoned.

The prisoner was then informed that in this Holy Office it was not
customary to imprison any person without sufficient information that he
had committed, or seen committed, some act which was, or appeared to be
contrary to our holy Catholic Faith and Evangelical doctrine, which is
taught and professed by the Holy Mother Roman Catholic Church, or
against the proper and free jurisdiction of the Holy Office; for which
reason he was to understand that it was in consequence of some such
information that he had been apprehended, and on this account he was
exhorted on the part of God our Lord and his glorious and blessed
mother, the Virgin Mary, to bethink himself well, and confess the whole
truth. Whereupon he was remanded to prison.

       *       *       *       *       *

SECOND AUDIENCE.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the eleventh day
of January, one thousand six hundred and thirtythree, the Inquisitor, Dr
Bernardo Luis Cotoner being at his morning audience, ordered the above
Juan Duran to be brought out of prison; which being done, and the
prisoner present, he was

Questioned, if he remembered anything relating to his affair, which he
was bound to state according to his conscience.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

The prisoner was then informed, that he had been already in a former
audience exhorted in the name of our Lord, and his glorious and blessed
mother, the Virgin Mary, to bethink himself well, and unburthen his
conscience by declaring the whole truth respecting all which he had
done, said, seen, or heard, offensive against God, or contrary in
reality or appearance to his Holy Catholic Faith and Evangelical
Doctrine, taught and professed by the Holy Mother Roman Catholic Church,
or against the proper and free jurisdiction of the Holy Office, without
testifying anything false. By following this direction, he would demean
himself like a true Catholic Christian, and would have his trial
despatched with all possible brevity and mercy; but if not, justice
should be executed upon him.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say. He was then admonished and
remanded to prison.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.

       *       *       *       *       *

THIRD AUDIENCE.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the twelfth day
of January, one thousand six hundred and thirtythree, the Inquisitors,
Dr Bernardo Luis Cotoner, and Dr Domingo Abbad y Huerta, being at their
morning audience, ordered the aforesaid Juan Duran, to be brought out of
prison; which being done, and the prisoner present, he was

Questioned, if he remembered anything relating to his affair, which he
was bound by his conscience to declare.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

The prisoner was then informed, &c. [_The whole repeated as above._]

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

He was then informed that the Promoter Fiscal of this Holy Office had an
accusation to bring against him, before which he would do well to
declare the whole truth, and unburthen his conscience, otherwise the
Promoter Fiscal would appear and proceed to his trial.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

Straightway appeared Dr Francisco Gregorio, Promotor Fiscal of this Holy
Office, and declared that he presented an accusation, signed with his
name, against the said Juan Duran, taking an oath that he did not
present the same through malice. The accusation was as follows:--

ACCUSATION.

I, Dr Francisco Gregorio, Fiscal of this Holy Office, appear before your
Excellencies, and accuse criminally, Juan Duran, blacksmith, a native of
the city of Manresa, attached to the secret prison of this Inquisition,
and now present; inasmuch as the said person, being a baptized and
confirmed Christian, and in the enjoyment of all the rights and
immunities which such persons do and ought to enjoy, not having the fear
of God before his eyes, but disregarding his own conscience and the
justice administered by your Excellencies, has committed offences
against our Holy Catholic Faith, by uttering superstitious and
blasphemous speeches, and compacting with the devil, in the manner
following.

1. A few days before the feast of All Saints last, in a certain part of
the town of Valles, in presence of certain persons, the said Duran
declared, two or three times, that he possessed a book containing a
prayer, of such efficacy, that if it were thrown into a fire along with
a crucifix, the book would be preserved, and the crucifix consumed.

2d. In the same place and on the same occasion, the persons
abovementioned hearing the said Duran repeat with much earnestness the
above assertion, reproved him, and advised him to give over saying such
things, as they were scandalous, and, if known to the Inquisition, would
bring some punishment upon him; whereupon he again repeated it, and
declared that he had said it and would say it again, thus remaining in
his obstinacy and error.

3d. About three months since, in the town of Valles, the said prisoner
being in conversation with a certain person, told him that he knew how
to cure all disorders; that he had a book worth fifty ducats, as by
merely looking at it he could cure any disease, and even restore the
dead to life; and, moreover, that if people knew his great gifts he
should become very rich.

4th. The said Duran declared, in the same place, at the same time, and
to the same person, that he, the said Duran, had been circumcised with
blood and wounds, like Jesus Christ, from which it is presumed that he
has turned Jew.

5th. In consequence of the abovementioned cures, he has been in the
habit of uttering forbidden and diabolical invocations, especially that
of St Cyprian, which he has had in a small book, about his person; and
it is believed that the cures he has performed have been executed by his
diabolical arts and the league he has made with the devil.

6th. He has boasted, on many occasions, before certain persons, that God
and the Holy Virgin had given him his power of curing; that the Virgin
del Rosario had twice appeared to him, granted him the faculty of
healing, and given him her benediction; all which assertions he has made
to cover his villanies.

7th. From the above it is to be presumed that the said prisoner has
uttered many other superstitious and blasphemous speeches, and done many
other things by the help of the devil, with whom he holds a particular
intimacy; also that he is knowing to the commission by others of many
such crimes, the whole of which he has maliciously concealed, and though
advised by your Excellencies to declare the truth, has not done it, but
has committed perjury.

For which reasons, I entreat that your Excellencies will receive my
relation for true, or such part thereof as shall suffice for the ends of
justice in a definitive sentence, and declare the accusation fully
proved, and the said Juan Duran guilty of the commission of the said
crimes, imposing upon him the heaviest punishments denounced against
such offences, and executing them upon his person and goods for a
penalty to himself, and an example to others; and also that he be put to
the torture if this be found necessary, and that the torture be
repeated till he confess the whole truth both of himself and others. And
I formally swear that I do not bring this accusation out of malice, but
solely to accomplish the ends of justice.

DR FRANCISCO GREGORIO.

The above accusation having been presented and read, the said Juan Duran
was formally sworn to declare the truth, and answer to the same, article
by article, which he did in the manner following.

To the head of the accusation, he answered that he was the same Juan
Duran whom the Fiscal accused, but that he had committed no offence
against the Holy Catholic Faith, nor been guilty of any blasphemies or
superstitions beyond what he had confessed.

To the first article he answered, that he confessed what was contained
therein; that he uttered the words specified, in the town of Valles at
the inn of La Cerdana, and that the book referred to was the one found
upon him, with the invocation of St Cyprian and which was now exhibited;
but that he had made the assertion abovementioned from mere ignorance
and simplicity, not believing it himself; which confession he made with
tears and begging for pardon.

To the second article, he answered, that it was true, but that he did
not remember repeating the assertion after he had been reproved for it.

To the third article, he answered that it was true, and that the book
alluded to was the one now exhibited; but that he never believed that
he could raise the dead to life by the help of it.

To the fourth article, he answered that it was true, but that he was not
circumcised, nor was he a Jew.

To the fifth article, he answered that he had used the invocation of St
Cyprian on several occasions in cures, without knowing that it was
forbidden, but did it from pure ignorance. He denied that he had any
league with the devil.

To the sixth article, he answered that it was true, and that he had made
some such boasts, on the following account; about fifteen years since,
he was sick of lethargy, when our Lady del Rosario appeared to him,
clothed in white, at the sight of which he was cured. The Virgin,
however, did not tell him that he should possess the power to cure all
diseases, and whether she gave him her benediction or not, he could not
tell.

To the seventh article, he answered that he had never said or done any
of the things charged upon him, save those confessed above, nor knew of
any such which had been done by others.

To the conclusion of the accusation he answered that he had stated the
whole truth; and even if he were put to the torture, could say nothing
more. He ended by begging to have mercy shown him. The above being read
in his presence is declared by him to be correctly recorded, and as he
cannot write, I, the Inquisitor sign this.

DR BERNARDO LUIS COTONER.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.

The above Inquisitors then ordered the said Juan Duran to be furnished
with a copy of the accusation, that he might within three days make
arrangements for his defence, with the help of one of the advocates for
the prisoners of the Holy Office. The prisoner made choice of Father
Geronymo Vidal, Jesuit, for this purpose, who was forthwith ordered to
be summoned; whereupon the audience closed, and the prisoner, having
been admonished, was remanded to prison.

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.


AUDIENCE TO COMMUNICATE THE ACCUSATION AND EVIDENCE.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the twelfth day
of January, one thousand six hundred and thirtythree, the Inquisitor, Dr
Domingo Abbad y Huerta being at his morning audience, ordered the
aforesaid Juan Duran to be brought out of prison, which being done, and
the prisoner present, he was

Questioned, if he recollected anything relating to his affair which he
was bound to divulge, agreeably to his conscience.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

He was then informed that Father Geronymo Vidal, whom he had chosen for
his advocate, was present, that he might communicate with him and
prepare for his defence. The said Father Vidal then swore _in verbo
sacerdotis_ to defend faithfully and diligently the said Juan Duran, in
the present trial, so far as justice would permit, to inform him if his
cause was not defensible, to do everything which a good advocate is
bound to do, and to keep the whole matter secret.

The confessions of the said Juan Duran were then read, with the
accusation against him, and his answers thereto, and the advocate
conferred with the prisoner respecting his case, advised him to confess
the whole truth, without uttering false testimony either against himself
or others, and, if he were guilty, to beg pardon, by doing which, he
would experience mercy. The prisoner stated that he had declared the
truth as appeared by his confessions, and beyond what was therein
contained denied the accusation, on which account he begged to be set at
liberty.

The Inquisitor then declared that definite trial should be now had, and
both parties bring their proofs _salvo jure impertinentium et non
admittendorum_, according to the style of the Holy Office, and the
Promotor Fiscal gave notice that he reproduced the testimony of the
witnesses which had been already recorded. This testimony he requested
might be examined, and also that all other necessary investigations
might be made, and the testimony afterwards published; whereupon the
prisoner was admonished, and remanded to prison.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.


AUDIENCE FOR PUBLICATION.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the twentyninth
day of January one thousand six hundred and thirtythree, the
Inquisitors, Dr Bernardo Luis Cotoner and Dr Domingo Abbad y Huerta,
being at their morning audience, ordered the aforesaid Juan Duran to be
brought from prison, which being done, and the prisoner present, he was

Questioned, if he recollected anything relating to his affair which he
was bound in conscience to divulge.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

He was then informed that the Fiscal of this Holy Office had demanded
publication of the testimony against him, before which it would be well
for him to bethink himself and declare the entire truth; by doing which,
his trial would be despatched with all brevity and mercy.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

Straightway appeared the said Francisco Gregorio, Promoter Fiscal of
this Holy Office, and requested publication of the testimony against the
said Juan Duran, according to the style of the Holy Office. The said
Inquisitors then ordered the publication to be made, concealing the
names of the witnesses, and other circumstances which might tend to
discover their persons, according to the orders and style of the Holy
Office.


PUBLICATION OF THE TESTIMONY.

A certain witness sworn and qualified in the proper time and manner,
declares, &c. [_Here follows the substance of the deposition of Pedro
Oriola, as already given_:]

Another witness, &c. [_In this manner, a summary of all the testimony is
given._] * * *

The publication being accomplished, the said Juan Duran was sworn to
declare the truth in answer to the above testimony, article by article.
[_Here follow the answers of the prisoner to the several specifications,
which do not differ materially from the answers to the accusation
already given._]

A copy of the above publication was ordered to be given the prisoner,
that he might, with the assistance of his counsel, prepare for his
defence. Father Vidal, the prisoner's advocate, was then summoned, and
conferred with the prisoner respecting his trial, when the audience
closed, and the prisoner, being admonished, was remanded to prison.

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.


AUDIENCE FOR THE PRISONER'S DEFENCE.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the twentyninth
day of January, one thousand six hundred and thirtythree, the
Inquisitor, Dr Domingo Abbad y Huerta being at his afternoon audience,
ordered the said Juan Duran to be brought from prison, which being done,
and the prisoner present, he was

Questioned, if he recollected anything relative to his affair, which he
was bound in conscience to divulge.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

He was then informed that Father Geronymo Vidal was present, who had
drawn up his defence, and that he might confer with him; the above
advocate then read to the prisoner a writing which the prisoner
accepted, and declared that he made a formal presentation of the same.
The defence was as follows:--

Although Juan Duran, inhabitant of Manresa, in the archbishopric of
Vique, has no necessity for a defence, on account of his full confession
and declaration of the truth respecting the matter of the Fiscal's
accusation, yet for greater security in his defence, he offers the
following.

1st. That he is ignorant, and uttered the assertions of which he is
accused, without knowing that they were heavy offences against our Lord,
for which he is extremely grieved, and begs pardon with tears, both of
God and this Holy Tribunal, having spoken out of mere vanity, things
which were not true.

2d. That he has fully confessed; and as to what is stated by one witness
against him, that he declared himself to be the God of the country, and
by another, that he affirmed he was next to God, that these testimonies
are so extravagant that they ought not to be regarded; that he is very
penitent for his offences against our Lord, and begs correction and
instruction, with all humility.

3d. That he is descended from old Christians, and is a good Christian
himself, having set a good example wherever he has resided, living by
his labor, hearing mass and sermons; that he knows the prayers, and in
whatever he has failed, he has not offended wilfully; on all which
accounts he concludes by supplicating the favor of your Excellency's
usual mercy.

GERONYMO VIDAL.

The Inquisitors then ordered the above to be notified to the Fiscal of
this Holy Office; whereupon the audience closed, and the prisoner was
remanded to prison.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.


SENTENCE.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the tenth day of
February, one thousand six hundred and thirtythree, at the afternoon
audience for the determination of causes, present, the Inquisitors, Dr
Bernardo Luis Cotoner and Dr Domingo Abbad y Huerta, and, on the part of
the archbishopric of Tarragona and bishopric of Urgel, Don Ramon de
Queralt. Having examined the proceedings of the cause against Juan
Duran, blacksmith, native of Manresa, and now in the secret prison of
this Holy Office; ordered, unanimously, that the said person attend at
an _Auto de Fe_, if any one should shortly happen, and if not, that he
proceed to some church designated by this Tribunal, in the manner of a
penitent, and with the insignia of a necromancer, that his sentence be
there read to him, and a mass be said; that he make an abjuration _de
levi_,[16] and be banished from the city of Manresa, and town of Valles,
the places where he transgressed, for four leagues roundabout, during
the space of four years; and that if he infringe this order, he suffer
double the above penalty.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ..

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the fifth day of
March, one thousand six hundred and thirtythree, the Inquisitors, Dr
Bernardo Luis Cotoner, and Dr Domingo Abbad y Huerta being at their
morning audience, ordered the said Juan Duran to be brought from prison,
which being done, and the prisoner present, he was

Questioned, &c.

Answered, that he had nothing to declare in discharge of his conscience,
either respecting his own affair, or with respect to aught that had been
done or said in the prisons of this Holy Office, or against the dignity,
authority, or secrets of its ministers, or respecting the custody of the
prisoners therein; that he had not witnessed any communication carried
on among them, or knew that any one had spoken to another, or to any one
without; that he carried no communication from them to any one, and that
the Alcayde and Steward have faithfully discharged their duties.

He was then commanded by virtue of the oath which he had taken, and
under penalty of complete excommunication, to observe perfect secrecy in
relation to all which had befallen him, and all which he had seen,
heard, learned, or understood while in prison, and not to divulge the
same, in any shape; all which he promised.

DR BERNARDO LUIS COTONER.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.




TRIAL OF LEONARDO PHELIPE,

FOR LUTHERANISM.


MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SIR,

I, the undersigned Secretary, who, in the absence of the Fiscal of this
Holy Office, exercise his duties, appear before your Excellency, and
declare, that, from the information which I now present, it appears, and
is manifest that Phelippe Leonart, a needlemaker, and a Frenchman by
birth, now resident in the city of Tarragona, is a Lutheran heretic,
commonly swearing, and denying God and the Saints, ridiculing the Holy
Sacraments of the Church, never confessing himself, for which he has
been declared excommunicated, and committing other crimes.

On which account, I request that your Excellency will order him to be
arrested and confined in the secret prison, in order that the ends of
justice may be accomplished.

MATTHEO MAGRE, _Sec'y_.

In the city of Tarragona, on the fifteenth day of April, in the year of
our Lord one thousand six hundred and thirtyseven, appeared voluntarily
Tecla Leonarda, wife of Felipe Leonart, needlemaker, a Frenchman by
birth, and inhabitant of this city of Tarragona, of age, as she stated,
fifty years, or thereabout. She made the following declaration.

'Senor Commissary, I am the wife of Felipe Leonart, needlemaker, a
Frenchman, and have been married to him about twenty years. I cannot
learn that during all this time he has confessed himself once, unless
compelled to do it during Lent. He has many times been declared
excommunicated for not confessing, and for neglecting to comply with the
precepts of the church. He formerly lived in Valencia, in the Calle de
la Mar, Parish of St Tomas. He never confessed himself here, and was
reminded of his neglect by the Rector. Upon being rebuked by me and his
son, and advised to confess, he broke out into blasphemies against God
and the Saints, with such violence that he appeared more like a demoniac
than anything else. It being suggested to him that God did not prosper
him because he did not attend mass, nor wear a rosary, nor hear sermons,
nor confess, but swore, and blasphemed, and that if the Holy Inquisition
knew of this he would be apprehended, he replied that the devil must
help him; that he did not care for me nor the Inquisition, that he would
not confess, and that God gave him nothing which the devil would give.
In particular, last Passion Week his son carried him to the Jesuits to
confess; but, on finding to what place he was conducting him, the said
Felipe abandoned him and refused to confess, greatly offending his son
and the confessor. He has given so many proofs of not being a Christian,
that many of his apprentices have left him, declaring that they would
not live in a house where God was not venerated and worshipped.'

The deponent further declared that on making a full confession last
Lent, of all the sins of her husband and her own negligence in
denouncing him, she was directed to give information of the whole to
this Holy Office, and was refused absolution unless she complied, and
that there were many more things to be told which she could not
recollect, as they happened so long since.

The above is the truth according to the oath of the deponent, and is
stated by her not out of malice, but solely to discharge her conscience.
It was read to her, and declared to be faithfully recorded. She promised
secrecy, and I, the Commissary, sign for her.

The Canon,
JUAN FERRER, _Commissary_.

Before me--

MIGUEL GIBERT, _Not'y of Tarragona_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the city of Tarragona, on the day, month, and year above specified,
before the abovementioned Commissary of this Holy Office, appeared,
according to summons, and swore formally to declare the truth, a woman
calling herself Maria Leonart, wife of Joseph Leonart, an inhabitant of
this city of Tarragona, of age, as she stated, sixteen years, or
thereabout.

Questioned, if she knew the cause of her being summoned to appear.

Answered, that she supposed it to be for the purpose of making inquiry
respecting the life and conduct of Felipe Leonart, her father-in-law.
She was married about four months ago to Joseph Leonart, his son, and
what she knew of the matter in question was this;--the said Felipe
Leonart was accustomed to swear a thousand times a day, with and without
cause. He would swear 'by the head of God;' and the deponent had heard
him declare, many times, that all his good luck happened in the name of
the devil, and not of God. The deponent had asked him why he did not
confess, observing that to kneel at the foot of a confessor, and relate
his sins, was to relate them to God; and the said Felipe Leonart replied
that this was all babble; that he believed just as he pleased. As to
hearing mass, he would take it upon trust; that the priests said in
their sermons just what they chose, and that they did nothing but
trouble the common folks. Some one asking him if he was not afraid of
dying, he replied that if he knew that there was a tavern in the other
world, he should wish to die immediately. The deponent advised him to
confess himself, as otherwise he would be declared excommunicated. He
replied that he would not confess, and in fact did not, the last Lent,
although his son attempted to carry him to confession. His common oaths
were 'the sacred host,' 'the hours of God,' 'the head of God.' His
common helpers were the devils; saying, 'by the help of the devil I will
do this,' &c. So that during the whole space of four months the deponent
has never known a word or action of a Christian to proceed from him,
never kneeling when the signal is given, nor taking off his cap, nor
leaving off eating, although requested to do so by his wife and the
deponent.

The above statement is not made from any but conscientious motives, and
on being read, was declared by the deponent to be correctly recorded.
She promised secrecy, and I, the said Commissary, sign for her.

The Canon,
JUAN FERRER, _Commissary_.

Before me--

MIGUEL GIBERT, _Not'y of Tarragona_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the city of Tarragona, on the seventeenth day of the month
abovementioned, and the same year, before the said Commissary of the
Holy Office, appeared, according to summons, and swore formally to
declare the truth, a man calling himself Joseph Leonart, an inhabitant
of Tarragona, of age, as he stated, twenty years or thereabout.

Questioned, if he knew the cause of his being summoned to appear.

Answered, that he supposed it to be for the purpose of learning the bad
conduct of Felipe Leonart, a Frenchman, and his father. For a number of
years the deponent and his mother had concealed many heavy offences
committed by him against the Holy Catholic Faith.

The said Felipe Leonart was a great swearer, saying 'The head, soul, and
body of Christ' a million times every day, declaring that he did not
fear God, the king, nor anybody; and that if he knew there was a tavern
in the other world, he should not care if he were to die, although his
body were burnt at Carraxet. Everything which succeeded well with him,
he ascribed to the devil and not to God, saying, 'The devil will give me
food, for I do not want anything from God,' and, 'The devil will give me
luck in this;' so that his patron and helper in everything was the
devil. He never confessed, and the last Lent the deponent attempted to
carry him to the convent of St Francisco; but on perceiving that he was
leading him to confession, he ran away from him. He declared it nonsense
to relate one's sins to a confessor, and that a man should tell of
nothing but what he pleased. The deponent had never seen him more than
once at mass. He wore no rosary, nor any sign of a Christian. He had
been declared excommunicated for not complying with the precepts of the
church, in this city, in Barcelona, and in Valencia. He declared that
the preachers were troublers of the people. At one time, in Valencia, he
went to bed after tiring himself with swearing, and told the family that
a woman, a monkey, and a young man then in the house, had appeared to
him in bed, scratched his face all over and thrown him down stairs. They
found him at the foot of the stairs with his face scratched, and
believed that this had been done by the devil, from his mentioning him
so often. The deponent and his wife had advised him to remove his
residence lest the Holy Inquisition should punish him; to which he
answered that he did not care for the Inquisition. Finally, the said
Felipe Leonart lead such a life that he appeared more like a Lutheran
than a Christian.

The above is the truth according to the oath of the deponent, who does
not make this declaration out of malice or ill will against his father,
but solely to discharge his conscience, and to obey the commands of his
confessors. It having been read, he declared it to be correctly
recorded, and signed his name.

JOSEF LLEONART.

Before me--

MIGUEL GIBERT, _Not'y of Tarragona_.


CALIFICACION.

A person of ordinary rank, and of an infected nation has been declared,
by persons living with him, to have confessed but once for twentytwo
years, and at this time by compulsion. On many occasions he has been
declared excommunicated for not complying with the precepts of the
Church.

The same witnesses, as they cannot perceive that he goes to confession,
rebuke him for it, whereupon he abjures God and the Saints in such a
manner that he appears possessed. He wears no rosary, does not hear
mass, nor confess, and declares that the devil helps him. On being
rebuked and threatened with a denunciation to the Inquisition, he speaks
contemptuously of it, declares that he will not confess, and that God
gives him nothing that the devil will give.

Every day he swears by God without occasion, and affirms that all which
happens well to him is done in the name of the devil and not of God.
Being told to go to mass, he replied that he would take it upon trust;
that the preachers said just what suited them; that he believed what he
pleased; that they did nothing but make trouble; that he did not wish
for anything from God which the devil could give him; and that it was
nonsense to relate a man's sins to a confessor, or anything more than
what a man pleased. Wherever he has lived he has been excommunicated for
not following the precepts of the Church.

Some one asking him if he was not afraid of dying, he answered that he
did not fear God, and that if he knew that there was a tavern in the
other world, he should not regard dying immediately.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the seventh day
of May, one thousand six hundred and thirtyseven, the Inquisitor, Dr
Domingo Abbad y Huerta presiding sole in his morning audience, ordered
the Calificadores of this Holy Tribunal, Father Maestro Onofre Ferrer,
and Father Maestro Chrysostomo Bonamich, both Conventuals of this city
to appear before him.

Having examined the propositions above specified, they declared
unanimously that the above person is a scandalous, presumptuous
blasphemer, and a formal heretic, who ought to be proceeded against.

MAESTRO FR. ONOFRE FERRER.
MAESTRO FR. CHRYSOSTOMO BONAMICH.

Before me--

DAMIAN FONOLLEDA, _Sec'y_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the seventh day
of May, one thousand six hundred and thirtyseven, the Inquisitor, Dr
Domingo Abbad y Huerta presiding sole in his afternoon audience, having
examined the information received by the Commissary of Tarragona against
Phelipe Leonardo, needlemaker, a Frenchman, and an inhabitant of that
city,--ordered, that this person be arrested and confined in the secret
prison of this Holy Office to take his trial in form, and that his
apprehension be intrusted to the Commissary of the abovementioned city,
who shall transmit him from place to place and from the hands of one
Familiar to another.

Before me--

DAMIAN FONOLLEDA, _Sec'y_.


FIRST AUDIENCE.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the twentysecond
day of May, one thousand six hundred and thirtyseven, the Inquisitor,
Dr Domingo Abbad y Huerta presiding sole in his morning audience,
ordered to be brought out of prison, a person, who, on his appearance,
was formally sworn to declare the truth, both on this occasion and in
all the other audiences which may be held till the determination of his
trial; also to preserve secrecy with respect to everything which he may
see, hear, or understand, and everything which may take place respecting
him.

Questioned, his name, birthplace, residence, age, and occupation, and
the time of his imprisonment by the Holy Office.

Answered, that his name was Leonardo Phelipe, needlemaker; that he was a
Frenchman by birth, born in the village of Agullon in the bishopric of
Genes; that he was about fortysix years of age, and that he was
apprehended by the Holy Office on Sunday, the sixteenth of the present
month.

Questioned, who was his father and mother, who were his grandfathers,
uncles, paternal and maternal, wife, children, brothers, &c.

[_Here follows the prisoner's account._]

Questioned, of what race and stock were his ancestors and collateral
relations, and whether any one of them, or he himself, had ever been put
under penance or punished by the Holy Office of the Inquisition.

Answered that they were French, and old Catholic Christians, of pure
blood and lineage; that in the place of his birth there were no
Lutherans; that none of the family had ever been contaminated with this
heresy, and that none of them had ever been apprehended, punished, or
put under penance by the Holy Office of the Inquisition, till the
present occasion.

Questioned, if he was a baptized and confirmed Christian, heard mass,
confessed, and took the sacrament at such times as the Holy Mother Roman
Catholic Church directed; at what time he made his last confession, and
from whom he received the holy sacrament.

Answered, that he was a baptized and confirmed Christian, according to
what he had been told by his parents, and that he recollected the fact
of his confirmation by the bishop of Genes, on which occasion he gave
him a slap in the face; that he attended mass, confessed, and took the
sacrament when directed by the Holy Mother Roman Catholic Church; that
the last time he confessed was at the festival of the Resurrection, the
present year, in the convent of St Francisco, at Tarragona, to the
Guardian or Sacristan; that he received the holy sacrament in the
cathedral church from the hands of one of the curates, as could be shown
by the certificate found upon him at the time of his imprisonment.

Here the prisoner crossed himself in a clumsy manner, and could not
repeat perfectly the words of the _proesignum crucis_. He said the
_paternoster_, _ave Maria_, and credo with much reverence, declaring
that he did not know the _salve regina_. He repeated the ten
commandments, and stated that he knew nothing more of the christian
doctrine.

Questioned, if he had visited any foreign countries since he came to
Spain, or had any dealings with people suspected in the faith.

Answered, No.

Questioned, if he could read and write, or had studied any science or
faculty.

Answered, that he could neither read nor write, nor had ever studied
anything but his trade.

Questioned, what were the events of his life.

Answered, that he was born, as already stated, in the village of
Agullon, and brought up by his parents till thirteen years of age,
without doing anything but eat and drink. On the death of his parents,
he was left a destitute orphan, and came to Catalonia begging. He
arrived at Barcelona, and lived three years as a servant with Maestre
Gosart, needlemaker, after which he served various other persons in
Barcelona for the space of more than eleven years. From this city he
went to Tarragona, where he worked with Francisco Roca till he married
the wife abovementioned, since which he has worked for himself without
leaving Tarragona but once, when he staid about three months in
Caragoca, at the end of which he returned home.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear.

Answered, that he neither knew nor conjectured anything, except that he
was seized by the Holy Office while at work in his shop.

The prisoner was then informed that in this Holy Office it was not
customary to imprison any one without sufficient information that he had
said or done, or witnessed the saying or doing by other persons, of
something which was, or appeared to be contrary to our Holy Catholic
Faith and Evangelical Law, taught and preached by the Holy Mother Roman
Catholic Church, or against the free and just proceedings of the Holy
Office, and on this account he must understand that he was imprisoned by
reason of some such information; therefore he was exhorted, by his
reverence for God our Lord and his glorious and blessed Mother the
Virgin Mary, to bethink himself and declare the whole truth with respect
to his own offences, and what he knew of others, without concealing
anything or bearing false witness against any one, by which proceeding
he would clear his conscience as a Catholic Christian, and save his
soul, and that his trial should, in this case, be despatched with all
brevity and mercy; otherwise justice should be executed.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

The declarations which he had made in this audience were then read and
declared by him to be correctly recorded. He declared that they
contained the truth, that he had nothing to alter in them, and if
necessary was ready to repeat them anew. And having been admonished to
bethink himself and declare the truth, he was remanded to prison. Not
being able to write, I, the said Inquisitor, sign this.

DR DOMINGO ABBAD Y HUERTA.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.


SECOND AUDIENCE.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the twentythird
day of May, one thousand six hundred and thirtyseven, the Inquisitor, Dr
Domingo Abbad y Huerta presiding alone in his morning audience, ordered
the abovementioned Leonardo Felipe to be brought out of prison, which
being done, and the prisoner present, he was

Questioned, if he remembered anything relating to his affair which he
was bound by his oath to divulge.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

The prisoner was then told that he was aware he had in the preceding
audience been exhorted by his reverence for God our Lord and his
glorious and blessed Mother, &c.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

Whereupon he was admonished to bethink himself and remanded to prison.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.


THIRD AUDIENCE.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the twentyfifth
of May, one thousand six hundred and thirtyseven, the Inquisitor, Dr
Domingo Abbad y Huerta, presiding alone at his morning audience, ordered
the abovementioned Leonardo Phelipe to be brought out of prison; which
being done, and the prisoner present, he was

Questioned, if he remembered anything relating to his affair which he
was bound to divulge according to his oath.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

The prisoner was then told that he was aware he had in the preceding
audiences been exhorted, &c.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

Whereupon the audience closed, and the prisoner having been admonished
to bethink himself, was remanded to prison.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.


AUDIENCE FOR PRESENTING THE ACCUSATION.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the twentyfifth
day of May, one thousand six hundred and thirtyseven, the Inquisitor, Dr
Domingo Abbad y Huerta presiding sole in his afternoon audience, ordered
the abovementioned Leonardo Phelipe to be brought out of prison; which
being done, and the prisoner present, he was

Questioned, if he remembered anything relating to his affair which he
was bound by his oath to divulge.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

He was then informed that the Promoter Fiscal of the Holy Office had an
accusation to bring against him, and that it would be well for him, both
as a means of discharging his conscience and despatching briefly his
trial, to confess the whole truth before the accusation was presented,
according as he had been previously exhorted, by which he would
experience the mercy which the Holy Office extends towards all who
confess freely; otherwise he was informed that the Fiscal would attend,
and justice be executed.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

Straightway appeared the Secretary, Damian Fonolleda, who, by reason of
the absence of the Fiscal, and the indisposition of Mateo Magre,
Secretary, took upon him that office. He presented an accusation signed
by him against the said Leonardo Phelipe, making oath that he did not
present the same out of malice.


ACCUSATION.

I, the Fiscal of this Holy Office, appear before your Excellency, and
accuse criminally, Leonardo Phelipe, needlemaker, born in the village of
Agullon, in the bishopric of Gens, kingdom of France, and an inhabitant
of the city of Tarragona, attached to the secret prison of this
Inquisition, and now present, inasmuch as he, being a baptized and
confirmed Christian, and enjoying all the graces and immunities which
such persons may and ought to enjoy, not having the fear of God, his
own conscience, or the justice administered by your Excellency before
his eyes, has committed offences against our Holy Catholic Faith, by
blaspheming and denying God our Lord, seeking favor and help from
devils, and doing other things in the manner following.

1. He has many times been declared excommunicated in Barcelona,
Tarragona, and other places, for not confessing in Lent according to his
duty. And while he resided in the parish of St Thomas, in Valencia, he
could not be persuaded to confess, although he received many admonitions
to that effect from the rector of the said parish, thus remaining
excommunicated, careless of the salvation of his soul.

2. Certain persons of his acquaintance rebuking him for not confessing,
he blasphemed God and the Saints with such fury and malice that he
appeared like a demoniac. He wears no rosary. Some one threatening him
with a punishment from the Inquisition, he replied that he did not care
for the Inquisition, and that he would not confess; also, that he wanted
nothing from God which the devil could give him.

3. On Passion Week, during the last Lent, some person was conducting him
to the Jesuits of the aforesaid city of Tarragona, for the purpose of
confession, out of charity towards him, and although it was in his power
to comply with the precept in this instance, he refused, and fled from
the church, to the great scandal of the confessor who was there to hear
him, as well as other persons.

4. He is accustomed to deny God, and swear 'by the head of God,' and
'the soul and body of Christ,' repeating it commonly many times a day;
also declaring that his living, and everything he gets, comes in the
name of the devil and not of God. Some one rebuking him for this, he
said that he believed what he pleased, and as to hearing mass on the
days prescribed, he would take it upon trust; that the preachers said
just what they chose, and did nothing but disturb the people.

5. He says that he does not fear God, and that if he knew there was a
tavern in the other world, he should not care if he died, although his
body were burnt.

6. I accuse him of having said that a man ought not to tell his sins to
the confessor, and that it was nonsense for a man to tell anything but
what he pleased. This being a proposition maintained by the false and
reprobate sect of Martin Luther, and the prisoner belonging to France, a
country where this sect prevails, it is to be presumed that he belongs
to it.

7. Furthermore, it is to be supposed that the prisoner has committed
many other offences against our Holy Catholic Faith, and uttered other
blasphemies and heretical speeches, as well as known that other persons
have done the same, all which he conceals like a bad Christian. Of this
I intend to accuse him more formally. At present I do it in general
terms, and although he has been exhorted by your Excellency to declare
the truth, he has not done it, but has perjured himself.

For which reasons I request and supplicate your Excellency to admit my
charges as proved, or such a portion of the same as shall suffice for
the ends of justice in a definitive sentence, or whatever measure may be
taken, and to declare my accusation fully proved, and the said Leonardo
Phelipe guilty of the abovementioned offences, condemning him to the
heaviest punishments by law thereto affixed, and executing them upon his
person and goods, by turning him over to the secular arm of justice, as
a punishment to himself and a terror to others. And I request that if
necessary, he may be put to the torture, and that the same be continued
and repeated till he confess the whole truth of himself and others.

And I formally swear that I do not present this accusation out of
malice, but solely to accomplish the ends of justice, which I request at
the hands of your Excellency.

DAMIAN FONOLLEDA, _Sec'y_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The above accusation having been presented and read, the said Leonardo
Phelipe was formally sworn to declare the truth in answer thereto, and
it being read over, article by article, he answered as follows.

To the head of the accusation he answered, that he was the same Leonardo
Phelipe whom the Fiscal accused, but that he had not committed any
offences against our Holy Catholic Faith, nor denied our Lord, although
he had sometimes sworn by his name.

To the first article he answered, that he had always confessed like
other Christians, and in Valencia had not suffered a year to pass
without doing so, and that he had never been excommunicated on this
account.

To the second article he answered, that he denied it, for it was not
true that he had no rosary. He made use of one in his prison eleven
times, and now exhibited the same in his hands; which I, the Secretary,
testify.

To the third article he answered, that he denied it, for it was not
true; and that during the said Passion Week, in the last Lent, he had
confessed in the convent of St Francisco, in Tarragona; that he complied
with the precepts of the Church, as he had stated in his first audience,
and that this could be shown by the certificate of confession found upon
him at the time of his imprisonment.

To the fourth article he answered, that he denied it, for it was not
true.

To the fifth article he answered, that he denied it; that he trusted in
God, and a heretic could not say such things.

To the sixth article he answered, that he denied it, for it was not
true, and he could not imagine how such testimony could be borne against
him.

To the seventh article he answered, that he had not committed any
offence against our Holy Catholic Faith, nor knew that any other
persons had committed offences, and that he had declared the entire
truth and had not perjured himself.

To the conclusion of the accusation, he answered that even if he were
put to the torture he could say nothing more.

The above is the truth according to the oath of the prisoner, and having
been read, was declared by him to be correctly recorded. Not being able
to write, I, the Inquisitor sign the same.

DR DOMINGO ABBAD Y HUERTA.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.

       *       *       *       *       *

The said Inquisitor then ordered the prisoner to be furnished with a
copy of the accusation, that he might on the third day make an answer
thereto with the counsel and assistance of one of the lawyers who defend
cases in this Holy Office, namely, Dr Francisco Magrinya, and the Rector
of the Company of Jesus. He was allowed to select one of these persons
and made choice of Dr Magrinya.

The Inquisitor then ordered him to be summoned, and the prisoner having
been admonished to bethink himself, was remanded to prison.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.


AUDIENCE TO COMMUNICATE THE ACCUSATION AND PROOF.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the twentyninth
day of May, one thousand six hundred and thirtyseven, the Inquisitor,
Dr Domingo Abbad y Huerta presiding sole at his morning audience,
ordered the abovementioned Leonardo Phelipe to be brought out of prison;
which being done, he was

Questioned, if he remembered anything relating to his cause which he was
bound by his oath to divulge.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

He was then informed that Dr Francisco Magrinya was present, whom he had
chosen for his advocate, and that he might confer with him about his
defence. The said Dr Magrinya swore _in verbo sacerdotis_ to defend well
and faithfully the said Leonardo Phelipe so far as justice allowed, to
inform him if his case was not a good one, to do all which a good
advocate is bound to do, and to preserve secrecy in everything.

The confessions of the prisoner were then read, together with the
accusation and his answers, and the prisoner conferred with his advocate
who advised him as the best means of discharging his conscience and
despatching his trial, to confess the truth without bearing falsewitness
either against himself or any other person, and, if he were guilty, to
beg pardon, by which he would experience mercy.

Answered, that he had declared the truth in his confessions, and denied
the accusation so far as it went beyond this. He begged in consequence
to be set at liberty, and to be mercifully dealt with, for what he had
confessed. He declared, that after publication of the testimony, he
should more formally present matter for his defence.

The Inquisitor then ordered this to be notified to the Promoter Fiscal
of this Holy Office, upon which Mattheo Magre, the senior Secretary,
acting as Fiscal, answered, that he accepted the confessions of the said
Leonardo Phelipe, so far as they were favorable to the accusation, and
no farther, denying all the rest. He requested that the proofs might be
exhibited.

The Inquisitor declared that the cause should be judged definitively,
and the proofs received _salvo jure impertinentium et non
admittendorum_, according to the style of the Holy Office. The same was
notified to both parties.

The Promoter Fiscal then stated that he produced anew and presented the
testimony and proofs against the said Leonardo Phelipe, received and
registered in the Holy Office. He requested that they might be
substantiated and ratified in form, that all other necessary
investigations might be made and the testimony published.

The prisoner then being exhorted to bethink himself and declare the
truth, was remanded to prison, which I, the abovementioned Secretary
certify.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.


AUDIENCE FOR PUBLICATION.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the seventeenth
day of June, one thousand six hundred and thirtyseven, the Inquisitor,
Dr Domingo Abbad y Huerta presiding sole in his morning audience,
ordered the abovementioned Leonardo Phelipe to be brought out of prison;
which being done, he was

Questioned, if he remembered anything relating to his affair, which he
was bound by his oath to divulge.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

He was then informed that the Promotor Fiscal of this Holy Office was
about to demand publication of the testimony against him, before which
it would be well for him to confess the whole truth, by which means his
trial should be despatched with all brevity and mercy.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

Straightway appeared the Secretary, Mattheo Magre, who officiated as
Fiscal, and requested publication of the testimony against the said
Leonardo Phelipe according to the style of the Holy Office. The
Inquisitor then ordered the said publication to be made, concealing the
names and other circumstances of the witnesses which might lead to a
discovery of their persons, according to the instructions and style of
the Holy Office.

     [_Here follows the publication, and the answers of the prisoner,
     corresponding with what has already been given._]

The Inquisitor then directed him to be furnished with a copy of the
above publication, that he might, with the assistance of his counsel,
reply thereto on the third day. Whereupon being admonished to bethink
himself and declare the truth, he was remanded to prison.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.


AUDIENCE TO COMMUNICATE THE PUBLICATION.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the twentysecond
day of June, one thousand six hundred and thirty seven, the Inquisitor,
Dr Domingo Abbad y Huerta presiding sole in his morning audience,
ordered the above Leonardo Phelipe to be brought out of prison; which
being done, he was

Questioned, if he remembered anything relating to his affair, which he
was bound by his oath to divulge.

Answered, that by reason of the troubles which arose in his house, he
had sometimes broken out into swearing, saying, 'the devil take me if
this is not true.'

He was then informed that Dr Francisco Magrinya, his advocate was
present, with whom he might communicate respecting the publication, and
other matters of his defence. The publication and the answers of the
prisoner, &c. were then read to the said Dr Francisco Magrinya, who drew
up articles of defence upon a paper prepared by the Secretary. Here the
audience closed, and the prisoner being admonished to bethink himself,
was remanded to prison.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.


AUDIENCE FOR THE DEFENCE.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the twentyfifth
day of June, one thousand six hundred and thirtyseven, the Inquisitor,
Dr Domingo Abbad y Huerta presiding sole in his morning audience,
ordered the above Leonardo Phelipe to be brought out of prison; which
being done, he was

Questioned, if he remembered anything relating to his affair, which he
was bound by his oath to divulge.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

He was then informed that Dr Francisco Magrinya, his advocate, was
present, and had arranged his defence, which he might examine. The said
Dr Francisco Magrinya then read to him certain articles which he had
drawn up in his favor, and this having been heard by the prisoner, he
declared that he made a presentation of the same, and requested an
examination of the witnesses named in the margin, and that the other
investigations referred to might be made.


DEFENCE.

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SIR--

Although Bernardo Phelippe, an inhabitant of the city of Tarragona has
no necessity for any defence against the charges of the Promoter Fiscal
of this Holy Office, yet the more clearly to show his innocence, and
premising expressly that what he declares against the witnesses is not
with an intention to injure or defame them, but solely to defend
himself, _onere superflux probationis rejecto_, he offers the
following:--

1. It is not true that he has abjured, sworn or blasphemed the head of
God, or uttered any other blasphemies, which statement is the truth.

2. It is not true that he has neglected to hear mass on the Sundays and
holidays appointed, or neglected to confess and take the sacrament every
year, or been excommunicated on such account; which is the truth.

3. The witnesses who depose against him, turn all his oaths into
swearing, 'by the head of God,' which is the truth.

4. Even though, (_quod expresse negat_) he may have at sometimes sworn
'by the head of God,' yet it was done in the heat of passion, and
inasmuch as _de jure prima motus non sit in homine_, nothing bad can be
imputed to him, which is the truth.

5. In addition to this, the above witnesses are single witnesses,
disagree among themselves, and are not deserving of credit, inasmuch as
_non det fides testibus singularibus_, which is the truth.

6. The prisoner, although a Frenchman, is still a good Christian, and
not at all of suspicious faith. He hears mass on the Sundays and
holidays appointed, as many can testify who have seen him; which is the
truth.

7. He also confesses and takes the sacrament every year at Easter, and
other times at the hands of the Guardian of the Convent of St Francisco
and the Sacristan, as may be seen by his certificate of confession given
at the last Lent, and which he now presents as a testimonial in his
favor solely; which is the truth.

8. There is also the same reason for believing that he has confessed on
every Easter, as can be seen by the books of confession kept by the
Curates; which is the truth.

9. He who states one falsehood is not to be believed in any other
assertion, and inasmuch as the witnesses against the prisoner affirmed
that he did not confess throughout the year, but was excommunicated, and
declared so, for not complying with the ordinances, and that he did not
wear a rosary, all which has been shown to be false by his certificate,
and the rosary found upon him; for this reason they cannot be believed,
when they state that he does not hear mass, and that he swears and
blasphemes; which is the truth.

10. The prisoner suspects that one of the witnesses against him is a
young man of about twenty years of age, and a mortal enemy of the
prisoner. This, added to the circumstance of his being a minor, should
cause his testimony to be rejected; which is the truth.

11. The testimony of the other witness also should be rejected, as he
supposes this person to be his wife, who leads a quarrelsome life with
him, and bears him great enmity; which is the truth.

12. The prisoner supposes that the cause of the misfortune in which he
now finds himself, is, his having given his wife a good beating on the
festival of the Resurrection, on which account she probably has
directed her malice against him, and suborned the other witnesses; which
is the truth.

13. The same hatred is borne against him by Joseph Lleonart, his son, on
account of the prisoner's having pawned an anvil, at which his son was
displeased; which is the truth.

14. The said Bernardo Phelippe is reputed throughout all the city of
Tarragona to be an honest man and a good Christian, attending mass at
the church with much punctuality on the days appointed, and confessing
and taking the sacrament at the proper time, as proved by his
certificate; which is the truth.

15. The said Bernardo Phelippe has never been imprisoned or punished by
this or any other tribunal; which is the truth.

16. From all which it appears that the said Phelippe is free from all
the offences charged upon him, and ought to be absolved and released
from the prison in which he is confined, experiencing mercy, which also
would be justice, _vel alias omni meliori modo quod de jure sibi
adaptari valeat, et verum_.

17. _Ponit quod omnia et singula sunt vera, super quibus jus diei et
justitiam ministrari postulat, et verun._

F. MAGRINYA.

The Inquisitor ordered the above to be placed among the proceedings of
the trial, and declared that he was ready to make the necessary
investigations. Whereupon the prisoner, being admonished, was remanded
to prison.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.


TO THE CANON JOAN FERRER, COMMISSARY.

Leonardo Phelipe, needlemaker, an inhabitant of this city, and now in
the secret prison of this Holy Office, on account of an action brought
against him by the Licentiate Don Andres Panyagua, Fiscal of this
Inquisition, has presented in his defence the following articles or
interrogatives, namely--

1. That the said Leonardo Phelipe, although a Frenchman, yet is a good
Christian, and not in anything to be suspected of Lutheranism or any
other heresy; that as such, he hears mass every Sunday and holiday
prescribed, as can be proved by many witnesses.

2. That he also confesses and takes the sacrament every year, at Easter
and other times, as can be shown by his certificate of confession
received during last Lent, and which he exhibits in his defence.

3. That the wife of the said Leonardo Phelipe treats him badly, and
bears him great hatred, and has brought him into this trouble because he
gave her a good beating on the festival of the Resurrection last, which
greatly increased her hatred towards him.

4. That the same enmity is borne towards him by Joseph Leonardo, his
son, with whom he had an altercation on account of his having pawned an
anvil against the inclination of his son, for which reason he concerted
with his mother this proceeding against the prisoner.

5. That the said Leonardo Phelipe is reputed throughout all the city of
Tarragona to be an honest man, and a good Christian, attending church
punctually to hear mass on the days appointed, and confessing and taking
the sacrament at the proper times.

On which account you will, on the reception of this, proceed to collect
information respecting the matter contained in the above interrogatives,
in favor of the said Leonardo Phelipe, examining the witnesses named in
the margin opposite each article, which is to be done in the presence of
the Notary, with the other legal formalities, and according to the
printed formula held by the commissaries. You will also take a copy of
the register in the church records referred to in the second article.
All which being done, you will forward the proceedings, sealed, with all
brevity to our hands.

For the above undertaking we grant you full power and commission in
form. God preserve you.

DR DOMINGO ABBAD Y HUERTA.

The Inquisitor presiding alone.

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.

Barcelona, June 25th, 1637.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the city of Tarragona, on the eighteenth day of July, one thousand
six hundred and thirtyseven, before the illustrious Juan Ferrer,
Presbyter Canon of the Holy Church of Tarragona, Commissary of the Holy
Office of the Inquisition, and by particular commission from the most
illustrious Inquisitors Apostolical of the Principality of Catalonia,
appeared according to summons, and swore formally to declare the truth,
a person calling himself Father Pablo Morer, Guardian of the Monastery
and Convent of St Francisco in Tarragona, of age, as he stated, fortysix
years or thereabout.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear.

Answered, No.

Questioned, if any one had attempted to persuade him to speak in favor
of any person imprisoned by the Holy Office.

Answered, No.

Questioned, if he knew the Fiscal of the Holy Office, or Leonardo Felipe
of the city of Tarragona imprisoned by the Holy Office of the
Inquisition.

Answered, that he knew neither of them.

He was then informed that the said Felipe presented him as a witness in
his defence, in a case brought against him by the Fiscal of the Holy
Office. He was directed to give attention while certain questions were
put to him, and declare the whole truth.

To the second question he answered that he knew nothing of the matter,
respecting which he was questioned, as he was not acquainted with the
person. To the last question, he answered that what he had stated was
the truth, and it being read, was declared by him to be correctly
recorded. He promised secrecy and signed his name.

_Pablo Morer._

Before me--

MIGUEL GIBERT, _Not'y of Tarragona_.

In the city of Tarragona, on the day, month, and year above specified,
before the illustrious Juan Ferrer, Presbyter, Commissary, &c. appeared
according to summons and swore to declare the truth, a person calling
himself Father Nicholas Gil, of the convent of St Francisco in this
city, of age, as he stated, fortyfour years or thereabout.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear.

Answered, No.

Questioned, if any one had attempted to persuade him to speak in favor
of any person imprisoned by the Holy Office.

Answered, No.

Questioned, if he knew the Fiscal of the Holy Office, or Leonardo
Felipe, needlemaker, of this city, now in imprisonment by the Holy
Office.

Answered, that he had no knowledge of the Fiscal, but knew the said
Leonardo Felipe, and had held dealings with him.

He was then informed that the abovementioned Leonardo Felipe presented
him as a witness in a case brought against him by the said Fiscal. He
was directed to give attention while certain questions were put to him,
and declare the whole truth.

To the second question, he answered that he remembered to have heard the
confession of the said Leonardo Felipe once only during last Lent, but
could not remember whether he gave him a certificate or not.

The above is the truth according to the oath of the deponent, and having
been read, was declared by him to be correctly recorded. He promised
secrecy and signed his name

PR. NICOLA GIL.

Before me--

MIGUEL GIBERT, _Not'y Public of Tarragona_.

       *       *       *       *       *

     [_Here follow the depositions in the same form with the preceding,
     of various other witnesses in favor of the prisoner, relating to
     matters alleged by him in his defence._]


AUDIENCE FOR CONCLUDING THE TRIAL.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the
twentyseventh day of June, one thousand six hundred and thirtyseven, the
Inquisitors, Dr Domingo Abbad y Huerta and the Licentiate Don Blas
Alexandra de Lezaeta presiding in their afternoon audience, ordered the
abovementioned Leonardo Phelipe to be brought out of prison, which being
done, he was

Questioned, if he remembered anything which he was bound by his oath to
declare.

Answered, that he had nothing more to say.

Dr Francisco Magrinya, the prisoner's advocate, being present, he was
informed that the investigations requested by him, had been made, and if
he wished the cause to be decided, it should be done, or if he wished
other measures to be taken, to state them, and all should be done which
justice permitted. Whereupon the said Leonardo Phelipe, by the advice
of his counsel, answered that he concluded definitively, and begged a
merciful sentence.

The Inquisitors then ordered the same to be notified to the Promoter
Fiscal of this Holy Office, in order that a conclusion might be made on
the third day. Whereupon the prisoner was remanded to prison.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ.

The above order for conclusion was forthwith notified to the Licentiate
Don Andres Paniagua, Fiscal, by me, the Secretary,

RODRIGUEZ.


SENTENCE.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the twentyeighth
day of July, one thousand six hundred and thirtyseven, the inquisitors,
Dr Domingo Abbad y Huerta, and the Licentiate Don Blas Alexandre de
Lezaeta presiding in their morning audience, (the Ordinary not attending
by reason of the Cabildo of Tarragona having neglected to appoint one to
this office _sede vacante_, although notified to this end, and the term
of eight days having expired) having examined the proceedings carried on
in the Holy Office against Leonardo Phelipe, a Frenchman by birth, and a
needlemaker by occupation, a native of the village of Agullon, in the
bishopric of Genes, and an inhabitant of the city of Tarragona, now in
the secret prison of this Holy Office,--

Ordered, unanimously, that this trial, without any other sentence, be
suspended, and remain as it is at present.

Before me--

MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ, _Sec'y_.




TRIAL OF DON ANTONIO ADORNO,

FOR NECROMANTICAL PRACTICES.


In the city of Valencia, on the thirteenth day of April, one thousand
seven hundred and fiftysix, before Dr Lorenzo Ballester, Presbyter,
Confessor to the secret prison of the Holy Office, and before the
Extraordinary Commissary for this investigation, appeared voluntarily,
and made oath to declare the truth, and preserve secrecy, a person
calling himself Joaquim Gil, scrivener, residing in the house of Felipe
Matheu in the Calle del Mar of this city, a native of Puebla de Arenoso,
in this archbishopric, of age, as he stated, twentyfour years.

Questioned, why he had demanded an audience.

Answered, that it was for the purpose of giving information to the Holy
Office respecting a certain soldier of the regiment of Asturias in the
garrison of this city. This person was called Don Antonio, and was by
birth a Neapolitan, a robust, middle sized man, with a dark complexion,
and about twentyfour or twentyfive years of age, which was all the
description the deponent could give. On the evening of the eleventh of
the present month, the deponent and the abovementioned Felipe Matheu
were in company with five soldiers at the house of the said Matheu.
Among these was the abovenamed Don Antonio, and this person declared in
conversation with the deponent that he possessed the faculty of
discovering the thief when a thing was stolen. This he had performed in
the following manner. On a certain occasion one of his friends was
lamenting the loss of some money which had been stolen from him, when
he, the said Don Antonio, replied, that he would discover the thief. He
then wrote the names of all the persons present upon separate pieces of
paper, and threw them into the fire. Those which contained the names of
the innocent were consumed, but the one containing that of the thief
remained. Nobody was able to take this out of the fire except Don
Antonio. The paper was kept from consuming by the power of the words
_Christo Senor Nuestro_, uttered by him, and it was drawn out from among
the coals by the help of this expression; _'Ego sum. Factus est homo.
Consummatum est_.' Besides this he knew another way of practising this
divination; and this was to collect the ashes made by the papers, and
rub them on the back of his hand, where they would leave marked the name
of the thief. Furthermore he stated that he possessed another method of
accomplishing this purpose, but this he did not explain.

This conversation having been heard by the abovementioned Felipe Matheu,
he rebuked Don Antonio, and this last replied that what he had done he
would repeat even before the Inquisitors, or, if that was of any
consequence, after communion, inasmuch as he used the words which had
been uttered by Christ. Proceeding in the conversation with the
deponent, he told him that he had some instruments in his pocket which
were useful for many things. He then drew from his right pocket a paper
folded up and containing two or three coils of something which the
deponent did not see distinctly, on account of the darkness, but felt
and handled them. The deponent asked Don Antonio where he had obtained
the above knowledge. He replied that he had got it by studying a book of
magic which he possessed; that he had learned from this the secret of
making himself invisible, and also to render a man invulnerable to
thrusts with a sword, a trial of which last he would make upon a dog or
cat and show the efficacy of it. The deponent asked him if he knew any
secrets relative to playing at ball. He answered that he did not
remember any at present, but would make some researches and call upon
the deponent at his house, when he would teach him a secret to gain the
favor of the ladies. This was agreed to, and the deponent described the
house to him. He offered him money if he would discover all his arts,
which he did for the purpose of laying the whole before the Holy Office
for the benefit of the Catholic Faith.

Questioned, if any other persons heard the above conversation, or knew
anything relating to it.

Answered, that the abovementioned Felipe Matheu heard a great part of
it, as also Joseph Masquef, scrivener, who lived in the same house,
Joseph Jordan, a servant, and two Alguacils, a father and son, who were
in the company, and whose names he did not know.

Questioned, if he had made this declaration out of any malice which he
bore to the said Don Antonio.

Answered, that he had made it solely from the impulse of his conscience,
and because he believed the above things were contrary to our Holy
Faith. He affirmed that the whole was the truth, promised secrecy, and
signed his name.

JOAQUIM GIL.

Before me--

DR JOSEPH MONTES,
_Presbyter Notary of the Holy Office_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the city of Valencia, on the seventeenth day of April, one thousand
seven hundred and fiftysix, before Dr Lorenzo Ballester, Confessor to
the secret prison of the Holy Office and Extraordinary Commissary for
this investigation, appeared voluntarily and made oath to declare the
truth, and preserve secrecy, Joaquim Gil, &c.

Questioned, why he had demanded an audience.

Answered, on account of the declaration made by him before the present
Commissary respecting a certain Don Antonio, of the company of Don Jorge
Duran, in the regiment of Asturias. This man, in addition to the
peculiarities of his person before described, had a scar above his left
eyebrow, apparently the effect of a wound, and a dint of the size of a
filbert in the top of his forehead, with black and rather short hair. He
came to the house of the deponent on the fifteenth of this month
according to agreement, and after some conversation gave him a strip of
parchment, about a finger's breadth wide and above a span long, this was
slit through the middle lengthwise and had written on it the following
words. _'Ego + sum. Exe + homo consummatum est. Ego Juaginus Aprecor
Dominum Nostri Jesu Christi in vitam eternam seculi seculorum libera me
de omnibus rebus de ignis cautius et omnia instrumenta hominum detentat
me hac die hac nocte custote rege et cuberna me Amen._ This was rolled
up in lead with a small piece of bone, and Don Antonio told him to wear
it in the shape of a cross, next to his skin, near the heart, and it
would shield him effectually from all thrusts with a sword. It was
exhibited by the deponent.

He also gave him another strip of parchment of half a finger in breadth,
and above two yards long. At one extremity was drawn with ink a leg and
foot, and at the other a heart with a cross above it. Other figures and
letters were drawn in different parts. With this he proceeded to take
divers measurements upon the body of the deponent, as, from one shoulder
to the other, from the shoulder to the chin and nose, &c. This he
informed him would secure him from being wounded, if he used it in the
following manner. He was to rub it with the wax which dripped from the
tapers burnt during the celebration of mass. This was to be done on nine
several days during mass, keeping it under his cloak, and taking care
that no one saw him. Afterwards it was to be worn in the shape of a
cross, next the skin, near the heart. He gave him at the same time three
bits of parchment, each about three fingers' breadth long and one wide.
Two of these contained each two lines of writing, and the other three.
They were severally numbered on the back, 1, 2, 3. To these were added
another, very small, also written over.

He informed him that by the help of these he could perform any kind of
divination, and that if he wore the thinnest of these parchments upon
his left little finger, under a white stone set in a ring, he would be
directed by it in the following manner. Whenever the stone turned red,
he might play at any game which was going on, except dice or _quillas_,
and be sure to gain; but if the stone turned black, he would lose by
playing. Before any such use, however, was made of the parchments, he
was directed to put them in the shoe of his left foot, near the ankle,
and to sprinkle them with the water used by the priest at mass. These
parchments were also exhibited.

The deponent requested Don Antonio to show him the book of magic which
he had mentioned, but he declined, alleging that the deponent could not
read nor understand it.

Questioned, if he knew, or had heard that the said Don Antonio Adorno
had any temporary insanity, or was given to wine, and if any other
person was present during the last conversation.

Answered, that he knew not whether he was subject to any such
irregularities, and that no other person was present during their last
interview. He declared that the whole of the declaration was the truth,
and not uttered by him from malice or ill feeling, but solely in
obedience to his conscience and oath. Secrecy was promised by him, and
he added his signature.

JOAQUIM GIL.

Before me--

DR JOSEPH MONTES, _Presbyter Notary
of the Holy Office_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the city of Valencia, on the fourteenth day of April, one thousand
seven hundred and fiftysix, before Dr Lorenzo Ballester, Presbyter,
Confessor of the secret prison of the Holy Office, appeared, according
to summons, and made oath to declare the truth and preserve secrecy,
Joseph Sanches Masquefa, scrivener, residing in the house of Felipe
Matheu, scrivener, of this city, a native of the city of Origuela, of
age, as he stated, nineteen years.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear.

Answered, that he did not know, but supposed it to be for the purpose of
learning what he had heard of a conversation in which a certain soldier
of the regiment of Asturias, in the garrison of this city, was engaged;
this person, who, as he had been informed was named Don Antonio * * *
and was by birth a Neapolitan, was of a middling height, somewhat full
faced, dark complexioned, and about twenty or twentytwo years of age. On
the evening of the eleventh of the present month, discoursing upon
various subjects, this person remarked that he was acquainted with
several arts, and in particular knew one by which he could ascertain who
was the thief when a theft had been committed, and which he had
practised on the following occasion. A soldier of his regiment had
stolen two or three dollars from another, at which the sergeant was
expressing his displeasure, and Don Antonio told him that if he would
promise no harm should ensue to the thief or himself, he would discover
who had stolen it. This the sergeant agreed to, and Don Antonio wrote
the names of all who were suspected of the theft upon pieces of paper.
These he put into the fire, where they were all consumed except the one
bearing the name of the thief. This was seen by all present, and some of
them endeavoured to snatch it from the flames but were unable. Don
Antonio alone was able to perform this action, and when the name of the
thief was read, he was searched and the money found in his stockings.

This relation having been listened to by Felipe Matheu, he asserted that
the thing could not be done unless by a league with the devil, and that
it was a matter which ought to be laid before the Inquisition. Don
Antonio replied that it was an action which he should not hesitate to
perform immediately after confession and communion, for it was done by
uttering words that had been spoken by Christ; that is to say, '_Ego
sum, Christus factus est homo, consummatum est_,' expressions which were
good and holy. A conversation then ensued in Italian, between Don
Antonio and Joseph * * * a servant in the house of Felipe Matheu, which
was not understood by the deponent. The conversation was broken off by
the said Matheu.

Questioned, if any other persons were present at this conversation,
besides those already named.

Answered, that there were also present Joseph Gil, a scrivener, in the
same house, two Alguacils, one of whom was named Alba, and three
soldiers of the regiment abovementioned, whose names he did not know.

Questioned, if he knew whether the said Don Antonio was subject to any
occasional insanity, or was given to wine.

Answered, that he knew not of his being subject to any such
irregularities, and that the above conversation was maintained on his
part with much seriousness. The above is the substance of what is known
to him respecting the matter, and not related from malice toward the
said Don Antonio, but solely according to his conscience and oath. It
was read in his hearing and declared by him to be the truth. Secrecy was
enjoined upon him, which he promised, and added his signature.

JOSEPH SANCHEZ Y MASQUEFA.

Before me--

JOSEPH MONTES, _Presbyter Notary
of the Holy Office_.

[_Here follow, in the original, the depositions of the other witnesses
mentioned above as present on the occasion. These are omitted, as they
do but repeat what has been already related._]


CALIFICACION.

In the Holy Office of the Inquisition of Valencia, on the seventeenth
day of May, one thousand seven hundred and fiftysix, the Inquisitor, Dr
Don Inigo Ortiz de la Pena being at his morning audience, in which he
presided alone, there appeared the Calificadores, Padre Francisco Siges,
of the Order of Mercy, Padre Antonio Mira, Jesuit, Ex-Rector of the
college of San Pablo, Padre Juan Bautista Llopis, of the Order of Mercy,
and Padre Augustin de Vinaros, Ex-Provincial of the Convent of
Capuchins, who, having conferred together respecting the acts and
assertions now to be specified, qualified them in the following manner,
viz.

1st. The person in question, in the presence of many others, on the
night of a certain day which is named, declared that he possessed the
power when anything was stolen, to ascertain who was the thief; and in
proof of this, the said person, on the same occasion declared that in a
former instance, when a quantity of money had been stolen, and search
was making for the thief, he offered, upon the condition that no harm
should ensue to him or the culprit, to find him out; which being agreed
to, he wrote the names of those whom he suspected of the theft upon
papers and put them in a fire, when those containing the names of the
innocent were consumed, and that of the guilty one remained. He then
uttered certain words, which signified '_Christ our Lord_,' by virtue of
which the name of the delinquent was preserved from burning. And by
virtue of these, words, '_Ego sum; factus est Homo; consummatum est_,'
the paper was drawn from the fire. The name of the thief was then read,
and the money found upon him within his stockings.

_Declared unanimously that this contains a profession of superstitious
necromancy, and a practice of the same, with the effects following; also
an abuse of the sacred scripture._

2d. The assertions in the above article having been listened to, it was
replied to this person that the thing could not be done without some
pact with the devil, to which he answered that it was so honest and just
a deed that he would perform it immediately after confession and
communion, and even before the Inquisitors, inasmuch as it was done by
repeating the words of Christ, which were the Latin expressions given in
the first article. It was repeated that the thing could not be done in
this manner, and that it ought to be denounced to the Inquisition;
whereupon this person persisted in his assertions. He also stated that
he knew another way of performing the same kind of divination, which was
by collecting the ashes made by burning the papers, and rubbing them
upon the back of his hand, where they would leave impressed the name of
the culprit. He furthermore asserted that he knew another method, which
he did not explain.

_Declared unanimously that this contains a confirmation of the
preceding, with a heretical assertion, and a new profession of
necromancy._

3d. The same person continuing the above conversation, asserted that he
possessed certain instruments which were useful for many things, and
proceeded to take from his right breeches' pocket a paper containing
three or four folds of something, which were not distinctly seen by
reason of the night. And it being demanded of him where he had learned
his arts, he replied that he had obtained them from a book of magic in
his possession, which taught him how to do whatever he desired.

_Declared unanimously that this contains another profession like that
already qualified._

4th. He declared to the person to whom the above assertions were made,
that out of the abovementioned book he could acquire the art of making
himself invisible; also that in this manner a man could be made
invulnerable to the thrust of a sword; in proof of which he would make
trial upon the body of a dog or cat, that they might see the truth of
it.

_Declared unanimously that this contains a new profession of
necromancy._

5th. The person who bore witness to these proceedings having asked him
whether he knew any art respecting playing at ball, he replied that he
did not at present, but would make researches and come to the house of
the above person, where he would teach him other arts which he knew, to
gain the favor of the ladies. This was agreed upon, and this person gave
him directions to find his house, offering him money if he would make
these disclosures to him, all with a view to give information of the
same to the Holy Office, in order to purify our Holy Faith, and
extirpate everything contrary thereto.

_Declared unanimously that this contains a profession of necromancy
qualified as above, with the addition of an amatory necromantical
practice._

6th. Some days after this, in consequence of the above agreement, he
went to the said person's house, where he gave him a strip of parchment
about a finger's breadth wide, and a span long, slit through the middle
and united at the extremity, on which was written the following. '_Ego +
sum, Exe + Homo, consummatum + est, Ego Joaquinus Aprecor Domini nostri
Jesu Christi in vitam eternam seculi seculorum, libera me de omnibus
rebus, de ignis cautus et omnia instrumenta hominum detenta me ach die,
ach nocte, custode rege et gubername amen._' This was rolled up within
a piece of lead and a portion of bone, and, according to his direction,
was to be worn next the skin, near the arm, in the shape of a cross.
This would, as he asserted, secure the wearer against any thrusts with a
sword. The articles have been exhibited.

_Declared unanimously that this contains a practice with instruments of
superstitious necromancy, added to a doctrine for their application
which is abusive of the sacred scripture and insulting to the holy
cross._

7th. On the same occasion, he gave to this person another piece of
parchment, half a finger's breadth wide, and above two yards long, at
one end of which was drawn with ink a leg and foot, and at the other a
heart surmounted by a cross, with other figures and letters in different
parts. With this he took divers measures upon the body of the person
abovementioned, from one shoulder to the other, from the shoulder to the
chin and nose, from the chin to the stomach, measuring also the face,
which he informed him was done to secure him from wounds. He directed
him to rub it over with the wax which dripped from the tapers burnt
during the celebration of mass. This was to be done on nine several
days, and the operation was to be concealed from view by his cloak. The
parchment was exhibited.

_Declared unanimously, that this contains an additional profession of
necromancy, with an exhibition of additional necromantical instruments,
and the method of using them, added to an insult to the holy sacrifice
of the mass and the holy cross._

8th. On the same occasion, he gave to this person three bits of
parchment three fingers' breadth long, and one wide each; two of them
containing each two lines of writing, and the other three, all numbered
on the back; also another written parchment. He directed him to wear the
thinnest of these pieces on the little finger of his left hand, under a
white stone set in a ring, and informed him that when this stone turned
red he might play at any game except dice or _las quillas_, with a
certainty of winning, but if it should turn black he was to abstain from
playing. The parchments abovementioned were, before this was done, to be
placed inside his right shoe, next the ancle, and sprinkled with the
Holy Water used at mass, after which they were to be worn next the
heart. The parchments were exhibited.

_Declared unanimously, that this contains an additional profession and
doctrine of superstitious necromancy, with an additional method of
practising it, added to a new insult to the sacred ceremonies of the
mass._

9th. The said person having requested to see the book of magic which he
declared was in his possession, he refused to exhibit the same,
declaring that the person who made the demand would not be able to read
or understand it, but that he had studied the whole in a certain place
which he named.

_Declared unanimously, that this contains a profession of possessing a
book of magic, and studying the same for the purpose of practising it._

Finally declared unanimously, that the person under qualification be
pronounced under suspicion _de levi_.

FR. FRANCISCO SIGES,
P. ANTONIO MIRA,
FR. JUAN BA. LLOPIS,
FR. AUGUSTIN DE VINAROS.
DON JOACHIN DE ESPLUGUES Y PALAVICINO,
_Secretary_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Valencia, on the twentieth day
of May, one thousand seven hundred and fiftysix, the Inquisitors
Licentiate Don Antonio, Pelegen Venero, and Don Inigo Ortiz de la Pena
being at their morning audience, having examined the information
received in this Holy Office against Don Antonio Adorno, a soldier in
the regiment of Asturias, belonging to the company of Don Jorge Duran,
by birth a Neapolitan, and a resident in this city, for the crimes of
professing necromancy and amatory divination, and practising the same
with insult to the holy sacrifice of the mass and the holy cross--

Ordered unanimously, that the said Don Antonia Adorno be confined in the
secret prison of this Holy Office; that his property be sequestered; his
papers, books, and instruments seized, and arranged for his accusation.
Ordered further, that before execution, this be submitted to the members
of His Majesty's Council of the Holy General Inquisition.

DON JOACHIN DE ESPLUGUES Y PALAVICINO,
_Secretary_.

[_In this part of the trial are inserted the originals of fourteen
letters, received from the different Inquisitions in the kingdom,
stating that their records had been examined without finding anything
against the prisoner. Also a letter from the Grand Council of the
Inquisition at Madrid, confirming the above order._]

       *       *       *       *       *

In Council May 31st, 1756.

The Dicasts Ravazo, Berz, Barreda, and Herreros.

Let justice be executed according to the above order.


TO OUR CALIFICATOR DR BOXO, AND THE FAMILIARS NAMED IN THIS LETTER.

Don Antonio Adorno, the subject of the accompanying warrant of
imprisonment, is a soldier in the company of Don Jorge Duran, belonging
to the regiment of Asturias. He is a Neapolitan by birth, of a middling
height, robust, dark complexioned, with a long scar over his left
eyebrow, and a dint in the top of his forehead. His age is twentyfour or
twentyfive years. In order to apprehend him, our Calificator, Dr Joseph
Boxo, will conduct himself in the following manner:--

He will consult, with great secrecy and caution, accompanied by our
Familiar Francisco Suner, or, in his absence, any other Familiar in that
neighborhood, as Notary, the Colonel or Commander of the regiment, where
the said Don Antonio Adorno shall be found, and if necessary, exhibit to
him the Warrant. His assistance is to be required in the apprehension,
which being performed, his person is to be immediately identified. All
the papers, books, and instruments found upon him are to be seized, as
well as those which may be found among his baggage. Care should be taken
that he may have no time to conceal anything, and all the effects
seized, the Calificador will remove to his own house. At the same time,
all his other property, if he possess any, will be sequestered, an
inventory thereof being taken, and the whole left in the hands of such
person as the Colonel or Commander may appoint for the safe keeping of
the same, commanding him not to part with anything without our order. If
any cash should be met with, the Calificador will secure it, as well as
the clothes for the use of the prisoner, all which are to be transported
to his house along with the papers, books, and instruments above
specified.

This done, the Familiar Suner, or whoever shall act as Notary, will
divest him of every kind of offensive weapon, and conduct him to the
town of Arbos on horseback, without pinioning him, as this is only
directed in cases where an escape is attempted. Two stout fellows armed
will guard him on each side. At Arbos, he is to be delivered into the
hands of our Familiar Raymundo Freiras, an inhabitant of that place.
Should he not be at hand, the prisoner is to be brought onward to
Vilafranca and committed to the care of our Familiar Pedro Batlle, along
with the papers, books, instruments, money, and clothes of the prisoner,
all which are to be brought from the place of his arrest, as well as
the warrant for his imprisonment, a copy of the inventory of his goods,
this letter, and the adjoined passport for the Gate of the Angel in this
city. The transfer being made to any one of the abovementioned
Familiars, a receipt will be taken, which it is to be transmitted to
this tribunal, as also a bill of the expenses paid by the person
receiving it, from the time he undertook the business till his return
home, specifying the pay of the guard, horse hire, his own and the
prisoner's expenses.

The Familiar of Arbos or Vilafranca, will, in the same manner, transport
him with whatever he may receive from the Familiar of Reus, to this
city, which he will enter at dusk just before the gates are shut. He
will enter at the Gate of the Angel, and present the accompanying
passport of the Governor to the Officer of the Guard. Should the Patrol
demand to see it, it may be exhibited to them, after which he will
proceed directly to this Royal Palace of the Inquisition, and inquire
for the Alcayde. Into his hands will then be delivered the prisoner, and
all the effects pertaining to him, together with the warrant of
imprisonment, the inventory of the goods, and this letter. The next day
he will come before this tribunal and give a relation of his
proceedings. God preserve you.

Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, June 30th, 1756

The Licentiate,
D. JOSEPH DE OTERO Y COSSIO.
The Licentiate,
DON MANUEL DE GUELL Y SERRA.
JUAN ANTONIO ALMONACID, _Sec'y_.


ANSWER.

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SENORES.

Until the 10th of the present month I was not able to succeed in
apprehending Don Antonio Adorno, as he did not make his appearance in
this quarter before that date. The capture was made with great caution,
the commander having contrived to deliver him into my hands in the
prison of the regiment, from which place he proceeds this day, Tuesday,
July 13th, under the care of the Familiar Rafel Bellveny, the Familiar
Francisco Sunez being sick.

No inventory of his property was taken, as none was to be found either
upon his person or in his knapsack, except the papers herewith
transmitted, and a book containing various documents respecting the
nobility of the house of Adorno. No money has been found, and the
prisoner is considerably in debt to the regiment. The commander has kept
every article of his clothing, so that it has been necessary to purchase
a suit for him. God preserve your Excellencies many years.

DR JOSEPH BOXO, _Calificador and
Commissary of the Holy Office_.

Reus, July 13th, 1756.


FIRST AUDIENCE.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the fifth day of
August, one thousand seven hundred and fiftysix, the Inquisitor,
Licentiate Dr Joseph de Otero y Cossio, being at his morning audience,
ordered to be brought out of prison, a person calling himself Don
Antonio Adorno, a native of the city of Genoa, aged twentyseven years,
who was sworn to declare the truth, and preserve secrecy as well on this
as on all other occasions, till the decision of his cause.

Questioned, his name, birthplace, age, occupation, and the date of his
imprisonment.

Answered, that he was born, as above stated, in the city of Genoa, that
his age was twentyseven years, that he was a soldier in the infantry
regiment of Asturias, company of Don Jorge Duran, and that he was
arrested on the tenth of the last month.

Questioned, who was his father, mother, grandfather, uncles, &c.

[_Here follows the genealogy of the prisoner._]

Questioned, of what lineage and stock were his abovementioned ancestors
and collateral relatives, and whether any one of them, or he himself,
had ever been imprisoned or put under penance by the Holy Office of the
Inquisition.

Answered, that his family was noble, as above stated, and that neither
he, nor any one of them had ever been punished or put under penance by
the Holy Office.

Questioned, if he was a baptized and confirmed Christian, and heard
mass, confessed, and communed, at such times as the Church directed.

Answered, Yes; and the last time he confessed was to Father Fr.
Antonio ----, (his name he did not know) a barefoot Friar of the Convent
of the Holy Trinity; and that he partook of the sacrament in this
Convent in the city of Valencia, where his regiment was then stationed.

Here the prisoner crossed himself, repeated the _Pater Noster_, _Ave
Maria_, and _Credo_, in Spanish, without fault, and answered properly to
all the questions respecting the Christian doctrine.

Questioned, if he could read or write, or had studied any science.

Answered, that he could read, write, and cipher, having learned of Dr
Francisco Labatra, in Vienna; and that he had studied grammar in the
Colegio de los Praxistas in this capital.

Questioned, what were the events of his life.

Answered, that he was born in Genoa; and while a boy, was carried by his
parents to Vienna, where he followed his studies as above stated. At the
age of sixteen he entered as a cadet in a regiment of infantry. After
serving here till twentytwo, the regiment was broken up, and he remained
with his mother at Vienna for the space of a month. He then set out for
Spain for the purpose of securing some property belonging to him by
inheritance from his ancestors in Bellpuix and other parts of the
kingdom. He landed at Barcelona, and proceeded to Bellpuix, Malaga,
Granada, and Seville; but, failing in his attempts to obtain his
property, he enlisted in the infantry regiment of Asturias then
quartered in this city. In this regiment he visited several parts and
cities of these kingdoms at their respective garrisons, and particularly
the kingdom of Valencia, from whence he proceeded to Reus, where he was
arrested.

Questioned, if he knew or suspected the cause of his imprisonment.

Answered, that he supposed it to be on account of some acts he had
performed to discover certain thieves in his company, which performances
he had executed with a degree of mystery and mummery to create wonder.
The facts were as follows.

In the Guard of the Duke of Berwick, at Valencia, some shirts and
stockings were stolen, and the commanding officer requested the prisoner
to make trial of one of his methods of discovering the thief, he having
before been a witness of the operation of one of them. He accordingly
assembled all the soldiers of the guard in a dark room, and informed
them they must each one put his finger into a cup of water, and that the
water would blacken the finger of the thief. Before the room was
darkened he showed them the cup containing a quantity of clear water.
They all agreed to the proposal, and the room was shut up so as to
exclude every ray of light. The prisoner then conveyed a quantity of ink
into the cup, and after making a preliminary harangue directed every one
to dip his finger within. This they all did except one whom he supposed
to be the thief. He wet his finger in his mouth lest it should be
discovered that he had not complied with the direction.

They now threw open the windows and found every man's finger black but
that of the delinquent. The prisoner perceiving this and observing the
agitation which he manifested, exclaimed to him, 'You are the thief;'
and finally compelled him to pay for the stolen articles.

In order more fully to impress them with the belief that this man was
guilty, the prisoner directed the commander of the guard to write the
name of each person on a piece of paper and burn it to ashes, informing
him that this ashes would give the impression of the name of the one who
was guilty, upon his hand. In order to effect this the prisoner wrote
with a certain liquor upon his own hand the name of Juan Antonio ----,
(his other name he did not remember) then showing himself to the company
he washed his hands before them, (taking care, however, not to rub them
much) and observed, 'You see there is nothing now written upon my hand;
but when this list is burnt it will exhibit there the name of the
thief.' The paper was then burnt, and he rubbed the ashes upon his hand,
when the letters made their appearance, and the prisoner gained the
reputation of a wizard, more especially in the conception of the said
Juan Antonio.

The prisoner declared that in the harangue abovementioned, he made use
of no prayers, and that the words which he uttered were made use of
solely to astound and amaze the hearers.

He was then informed that in this Holy Office it was not customary to
imprison any one without sufficient information that he had said, done,
or seen, or heard something contrary to the Holy Religion of God our
Lord, and the Holy Mother Apostolic Roman Church, or against the proper
and free jurisdiction of the Holy Office, in consequence of which he was
to understand that he was imprisoned on account of some such
information. Therefore he was exhorted in the name of God our Lord and
his glorious and blessed Mother our Lady the Virgin Mary, to bethink
himself and confess the whole truth in relation to the matter wherein he
felt guilty, or knew of the guilt of others, without concealing anything
or bearing false witness against any one, by doing which, justice should
be executed, and his trial despatched with all brevity and mercy.

Answered, that he recollected nothing more, and that what he had stated
above was the truth. His declarations were then read, and declared by
him to be correctly recorded. He was then admonished to bethink himself
and remanded to prison.

Signed by him,
M. ANTO. ADORNO.
DON JOSEPH DE NOBOA, _Sec'y_.


SECOND AUDIENCE.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the seventh day
of August, one thousand seven hundred and fiftysix, the Inquisitors,
Licentiate Dr Joseph de Otero y Cossio, and Dr Manuel de Guell y Serra,
being at their morning audience, ordered the abovementioned Don Antonio
Adorno to be brought out of prison; which being done, and the prisoner
present, he was

Questioned, if he remembered anything relating to his affair which he
was bound to divulge according to his oath.

Answered, No.

He was then informed, that he was aware he had, in the preceding
audience, been exhorted in the name of God, our Lord, &c.; and he was
anew exhorted in the same manner, by conforming to which he would acquit
himself like a Catholic Christian, and his trial should be despatched
with all brevity and mercy; otherwise justice should be executed.

Answered, that he had considered the exhortation, but had nothing to
add, and what he had above related was the truth, according to the oath
he had sworn. This declaration being read, was declared by him to be
correctly recorded, and, exhorted to bethink himself, he was remanded to
prison.

Signed by him,

M. ANTO. ADORNO.
DON JOSEPH DE NOBOA, _Sec'y_.


THIRD AUDIENCE.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the twelfth day
of August, one thousand seven hundred and fiftysix, the Inquisitors,
Licentiate Dr Joseph de Otero y Cossio, and Dr Manuel de Guell y Serra,
being at their morning audience, ordered the said Don Antonio Adorno to
be brought out of prison; which being done, and the prisoner present, he
was

Questioned, if he remembered anything relating to his affair, which he
was bound to divulge according to his oath.

Answered, No.

He was then informed, that he was aware he had been exhorted in the
preceding audience, &c.

Answered, that he had considered the exhortation, but had nothing more
to say.

Straightway appeared the Licentiate Don Fausto Antonio de Astorquiza y
Urreta, Inquisitor Fiscal of this Holy Office, and presented an
accusation, signed by him, against the said Don Antonio Adorno, which
accusation he formally swore was not offered through malice. Here
follows the accusation.

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SIRS,

I, the Inquisitor Fiscal, appear before your Excellencies, and accuse
criminally Don Antonio Adorno, a native of the city of Genoa, aged
twentyseven years, a soldier in the regiment of Asturias, and at the
time of his arrest, in garrison, in the town of Reus, in this
principality, now attached to the secret prison of this Holy Office,
with his property sequestered, and present here in person--for that this
person, being a baptized and confirmed Christian, and not having the
fear of God, or the justice of your Excellencies before his eyes, has
committed heavy crimes against our Holy Catholic Faith, by professing
and practising various necromantical arts, with insult to the holy
sacrifice of the mass, its sacred ceremonies, and the holy cross; also
imparting his evil art and instruments to others, for their practice,
with the like insult to the holy cross and holy sacrifice of the mass.
On which account, I hold him at least to be suspected _de levi_ in the
faith, and accuse him of the whole, both in general and in particular.

1. The said person, on a time specified, and in the company of certain
persons named, declared that he was able when anything was stolen, to
discover the thief, and in proof of this assertion, stated that he had
formerly done this by writing the names upon papers, of some persons,
among whom a sum of money had been stolen, and putting the papers into
the fire, repeating the words, '_Ego sum; factus est homo, consummatum
est_.' The papers were consumed, except that bearing the name of the
thief. None but the said person could take this paper out of the fire,
and the money was found upon the one designated.

2. Some one objecting to him, that this could not be done without some
pact with the devil, he replied that it was so justifiable an act, that
he would perform it immediately after mass or communion, and it being
declared a matter to be laid before the Inquisition, he affirmed that he
would do it in presence of the Inquisitors.

3. Furthermore, he asserted that he could execute the above purpose by
rubbing the ashes of the papers upon his hand, where it would leave
impressed the name of the thief; also, that he knew another method which
he did not explain. I request that he may be questioned what this method
is, where he learned it, and whether he has practised these two last,
uttering the words before specified.

4. Continuing the conversation with the abovementioned person, he
informed him that he possessed certain instruments of use in various
ways, and in fact showed him something folded up, which he took out of
his pocket. And, on being asked whence he obtained the knowledge of
these arts, replied that he learned them from a book of magic in his
possession, which enabled him to do whatever he pleased. I request that
he may be questioned respecting this book of magic, as well as the
contents of the abovementioned envelope.

5. He told this person that he could learn from the same book how to
make himself invisible, as well as invulnerable to the thrust of a
sword.

6. Being questioned by this person whether he knew any art relative to
playing at ball, he answered, not then, but that he would come to his
house, and reveal to him a secret for gaining the favor of the ladies.

7. He went accordingly to this house, and there gave to the said person
a strip of parchment bearing these words, '_Ego + sum. Exe + homo
consummatum + est. Ego Juaginus Aprecor Domini Nostri Jesu Christi in
vitam eternam seculi seculorum libera me de omnibus rebus de ignis
cautus et omnia instrumenta hominum detenta me ach die ach nocte custode
rege et guberna me Amen._' This was rolled up with a piece of lead and
bone, and directed to be worn, in the shape of a cross, next the skin,
near the heart, which would make the wearer invulnerable. I request that
this parchment may be examined, and the prisoner questioned respecting
it.

8. He also gave the same person another strip of parchment, containing
various letters and figures, taking measures with it upon his body, for
the purpose of securing him from wounds. He directed him to rub this
over with the wax which dripped from the tapers during mass, and
afterwards to wear it next his skin. I request that this may likewise be
examined, and the prisoner questioned respecting it.

9. He furthermore gave to the same person four other written parchments,
directing him to wear one of them upon the little finger of his left
hand under a white stone set in a ring. When this stone turned red, he
might play at any game except dice or _las quillas_, and be sure to win;
but, if it turned black, he was not to play. He directed him further to
put these parchments in his right shoe and sprinkle them with holy
water, after which they were to be worn near the heart. I request that
these also may be examined, and the prisoner questioned concerning them.

10. The same person requesting to see the abovementioned book of magic,
he refused him, alleging that he could not read or understand it, but
that he, the prisoner, had studied the whole. I request that farther
investigations may be made respecting this book.

11. On another occasion, when some articles had been stolen, he
discovered the thief in this manner. Collecting all the suspected
persons in a dark room, he made a harangue, and ordered each man to dip
his finger into a cup containing water, informing them that the water
would blacken the finger of the thief. Before this was executed, he
conveyed some ink into the cup. Afterwards the windows were opened with
another harangue, and each man's finger was found black with the
exception of one who had not obeyed the direction. This the prisoner
judged to be the thief. Without doubt the abovementioned harangues were
conformable to the rest of his actions, and I request that he may be
examined concerning them.

12. Furthermore he directed that the names of the persons present on the
above occasion, should be written upon a paper and burnt. The ashes he
rubbed over his hand, where it left marked the name of the delinquent,
which the prisoner had previously written there with a certain liquor,
in such a manner that it could not be seen.

13. In the audiences which have been held respecting him, he has been
exhorted to declare the truth and confess his crimes, which he has not
done, but endeavoured to hide the enormities so recently committed by
him, thus rendering himself unworthy of that mercy which your
Excellencies extend to those who confess with sincerity, and deserving a
punishment corresponding to his great offences.

Therefore, I request and entreat your Excellencies to accept the
confession of the said prisoner, so far as in my favor, and no farther,
and to regard as fully proved my accusation, or such part thereof as may
suffice to obtain a sentence, condemning the prisoner as perpetrator of
the above crimes to the heaviest punishments thereto assigned by the
sacred canons, pontifical bulls, common laws, and edicts of this realm,
for a punishment to him, and a terror and example to others.

Furthermore I request your Excellencies that without any diminution of
my proofs, the prisoner may, if necessary, be put to rigorous torture,
to be continued and repeated till he confess all his crimes and
accomplices.

The Licentiate,

DON FAUSTO ANTONIO DE ASTORQUIZA Y URRETA.

       *       *       *       *       *

This accusation having been presented and read, the said Don Antonio
Adorno was formally sworn to answer thereto, and declare the truth; and
the same being again read, article by article, he answered as follows.

To the head of the accusation he replied that he was the same Don
Antonio Adorno mentioned therein, and that although he in reality
performed what has been laid to his charge, yet he never imagined it to
be contrary to our Holy Catholic Faith, nor supposed it to be
necromantic or superstitious; that he never had practised anything out
of disrespect for the mass, nor had uttered sacred language for a
superstitious purpose, nor imparted evil doctrine or instruments to
others for this end; therefore he ought not to be suspected in the
faith.

To the first article, he answered, that it was true, and that the
circumstances occurred in the city of Valencia, in the house of a person
whose name he could not recollect, but only that he resided in the Calle
del Mar, near a Convent of Nuns. He made the assertions to give the
company a high opinion of him. There were present on this occasion,
three soldiers and an officer, who, with the prisoner, formed the
patrol, a scrivener and two Alguacils, who also were attached to the
patrol in Valencia. The operation which he described, he had heard of in
the city of Inspruck in Germany. He had once practised it on the
occasion of three dollars being stolen from Matheo Suarez, his sergeant.
He wrote the names of some persons upon pieces of paper, and on the back
of each, the words '_Ego sum: exe homo: consummatum est_.' These were
thrown into the fire, but the experiment did not succeed, for they were
all burnt. He did this in private, and merely to satisfy his curiosity,
without imagining it to be superstitious.

To the second article, he answered, that it was true he had made the
assertions contained therein, as he could not believe the act to be
evil, in which the words of Christ were used.

To the third article, he answered, that it was true he had spoken what
is therein stated, and that the divinations mentioned, were those he had
confessed in the first audience, but that he had not made use of any
prayers in these operations, although on the abovementioned occasions he
gave those present to understand that various words were to be uttered.

To the fourth article, he answered, that it was true the conversation
and acts therein described took place; that it happened in Valencia,
with the scrivener abovementioned. The paper which he took from his
pocket, contained some bits of bone and a bullet battered to pieces. As
to what he asserted respecting the book of magic, he had done it to
measure the degree of credulity of the said scrivener, who readily
swallowed all his tales, and offered him money to learn the
abovementioned arts. He never possessed any such book of magic.

To the fifth article, he answered, that what it contained with respect
to the security from the thrust with a sword, was true, but as to what
it stated respecting his assertion of making himself invisible, he had
no recollection of any such thing.

To the sixth article, he answered, that it was true.

To the seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth articles, he answered, that
they were true. The parchments described by the Fiscal, and now
exhibited, were recognised by him for the same he gave to the scrivener,
with whom he held the conversation described. This man's name was
Joachin. He was so desirous of obtaining a knowledge of the things
related by the prisoner, that he furnished him with the parchment for
the purpose. It was all done by the prisoner, to divert himself with the
credulity of this person, and upon the parchments was written, among
other expressions, these words in the German language, '_tu pist aynor
tas tu tost claupt_;[17] that is, '_you are a fool to believe this_,' by
which it might be easily perceived that his only object was to impose
upon him.

It being now late, the audience closed, and the above having been read
to the prisoner, was declared by him to be correctly recorded, and the
truth, according to the oath which he had sworn.

Signed by him,

M. ANTO. ADORNO.
DON JOSEPH DE NOBOA, _Sec'y_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the thirteenth
day of August, one thousand seven hundred and fiftysix, the Inquisitors,
Licentiate Don Joseph de Otero y Cossio, and Don Manuel de Guell y
Serra, being at their morning audience, ordered the abovementioned Don
Antonio Adorno to be brought out of prison; which being done, he was
ordered to continue his answers to the accusation under the oath which
he had already sworn.

To the eleventh and twelfth articles he answered that they were true,
and that the circumstances took place in the manner described by him in
the first audience, but that the harangues he made, had only for their
object to create wonder in the hearers, and that he used no prayers nor
sacred words.

To the thirteenth article he answered that he had confessed everything,
and that he promised a thorough amendment of his follies into which he
had been drawn by his ignorance, and desire to gain a little money to
relieve his misery.

To the conclusion he answered that he again implored the mercy of the
Holy Office for what he had confessed, which was all he had done, and
that although he were put to the torture he could say nothing more. The
above being the truth according to the oath he had sworn, and the whole
having been read in this audience, was declared to be what he had
confessed, and was signed by him.

M. ANTONIO ADORNO.
DON JOSEPH DE NOBOA, _Sec'y_.


SENTENCE.

In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the fourteenth
day of August, one thousand seven hundred and fiftysix, the Inquisitors,
Licentiate Don Joseph de Otero y Cossio and Don Manuel de Guell y Serra
being at their morning audience, and having examined the proceedings
against Don Antonio Adorno as far as the accusation and answers
thereto--

Ordered, unanimously, that this person be severely reprehended,
admonished, and warned, in the Hall of the Tribunal with closed doors,
and that he be banished perpetually from the Spanish dominions at a date
to be fixed upon, and that he be informed that if he fail to comply
punctually with every order, he will be severely punished and proceeded
against with all the rigor of justice;--that this trial be suspended for
the present and the sentence submitted to the Council.

DON JOSEPH DE NOBOA, _Sec'y_.

In the Council, September 4th, 1756.

Senores, BARREDA, RAVAZO, and HERREROS.

Let justice be executed according to the above sentence.




EXTRACTS

FROM THE REGISTER OF THE PRISONS.


March, 1730.

[Sidenote: No. 8. Juan Panisso. Prison of the Martyrs. Maintenance, two
sueldos and the bread of the Contractor.]

Juan Panisso, a native and inhabitant of this city, a married man, in
custody in the secret Prison of this Holy Office, with his property
sequestrated, for uttering heretical speeches. Respecting this prisoner,
information was forwarded last January, that proceedings were on foot
for taking the depositions of the witnesses against him, with a view to
their publication. The audience for this purpose was held on the
twentyninth of this month, and the prisoner answered to the charges with
a full denial. In this state the case remains at present.


April, 1730.

The prisoner was furnished with the publication of the testimony, and
allowed to confer with his counsel. He drew up articles of defence, and
in this state the case remains.


June, 1730.

The prisoner's defence was received on the third of this month, and the
audience for communication with his counsel was held on the eighth, when
his final defence was made. On the ninth, sentence was passed with the
assistance of the Ordinary, unanimously, that the prisoner should be put
to the regular torture, before the execution of which, it was resolved
that the case should be referred to your Highness, which was done on the
tenth. The matter remains in this state waiting for the decision of your
Highness.

August, 1730.

On the first of July we received the order of your Highness to put the
prisoner to the torture _ad arbitrium_. On the twelfth an audience was
held, in which a sentence to that effect was passed. The prisoner was
informed of the same, and admonished in the customary manner, but
persisted in his denial. He was then put to the torture,[18] but
suffered the whole without confessing anything. On the fifteenth, with
the assistance of the Ordinary, his case was definitively judged by a
sentence pronounced unanimously, that the prisoner hear his own
condemnation read in the hall of the Tribunal with open doors; that he
make an abjuration _de levi_, be severely reprehended and warned,
absolved _ad cautelam_, and be banished from this city, Madrid, and the
court of his Majesty, to a distance of eight leagues, for the space of
five years, the three first of which to be spent in the royal garrison
of this city. This sentence was referred to your Highness the same day,
and on the fourteenth of August, the answer received in which your
Highness ordered that the prisoner be brought into the hall of the
Tribunal, and there, with closed doors, be severely reprehended and
warned, that he be admonished to abstain from the like offences in
future, and forthwith dismissed. This was executed on the same day,
together with the audience for binding him to secrecy, and making
inquiries respecting the prison. The prisoner was then dismissed.

DR DON MIGUEL VIZENTE CEBRIAN Y AUGUSTIN.


March, 1730.

[Sidenote: Isabel Boxi, alias Modrono. Prison of Sta. Maria.
Maintenance, two sueldos and the bread of the Contractor.]

Isabel Boxi, alias Modrono, widow, native of Vilaseca, in the diocese of
Tarragona, aged sixtythree years, confined in the secret prison of this
Holy Office, with her property sequestered, for witchcraft and
superstition. Respecting this prisoner your Highness was informed in the
month of January, that the witnesses were giving their testimony against
her for publication. Nothing was done in all February, and part of the
present month, with respect either to this or the other cases, for this
reason; the Inquisitor, Licentiate Don Balthasar Villarexo has been out
of health most of this month, and I have been in the same state all the
month of February. For the same reason, also, no account was transmitted
the last month, there being no proceedings to relate. At present, we
have done nothing more than hold an audience for the publication of the
testimony against the above prisoner, and shall proceed with this case
after the holidays.


April, 1730.

The publication of the testimony was done on the eighteenth and
twentyfourth of this month, on which occasions the prisoner made her
answers to the charges, and denied the whole. In this state the case
remains at present.


May, 1730.

The publication was communicated to the prisoner, and she conferred with
her counsel, and drew up her defence. Sentence was passed, and the same
referred to your Highness.


June, 1730.

On the third of this month, the order of your Highness respecting the
prisoner was received, which having confirmed the sentence, an _auto_
was given in the church of Santa Agueda on the eighteenth of this month,
the prisoner being present in penitential garments, with the insignia of
her offences. Her sentence was read and she made an abjuration _de
levi_, after which she was absolved _ad cautelam_.[19] On the
nineteenth, she received a scourging, and on the twentieth, after being
reprehended, admonished, and threatened, she was informed that she must
pass three years of confinement, in Vique, and be banished seven years
more from Tarragona, Barcelona, and Madrid. On the same day, the
audience was held for binding her to secrecy and ascertaining the state
of her connexion with the prison. The day following she was despatched
to Vique where she now remains in the custody of a learned person who is
to instruct her in the Catholic Faith.

DR DON MIGUEL VIZENTE CEBRIAN Y AUGUSTIN.


March, 1730.

[Sidenote: No. 3

Ana Vila y Campas. Prison of La Cruz. Maintenanace, two sueldos and the
bread of the Contractor.]

Ana Vila y Campas, a native and inhabitant of this city, aged thirtyfive
years, and a widow, confined in the secret prison of this Holy Office,
with her goods in sequestration, for witchcraft and superstitious
impostures. With relation to this prisoner, your Highness was informed
in the month of January, that the depositions were collecting against
her. The audience has since been held, and after the holidays, the cause
will be carried on.


April, 1730.

On the seventh and twentyfirst of this month, the audience for
publication was held, in which state the case remains at present.


May, 1730.

The prisoner communicated with her counsel, answered to the charges, and
was sentenced. The sentence was referred to your Highness.


June, 1730.

On the thirteenth day of this month, the order of your Highness
confirming the sentence, was received, in consequence of which an _auto_
was given in the church of Sta Agueda, where the prisoner was present,
in penitential garments, with the proper insignia of her offences. Her
sentence was read, she made an abjuration _de levi_, and was absolved
_ad cautelam_. On the nineteenth, she was scourged, and on the
twentieth, was reprehended, admonished, and severely threatened, after
which the audience was held for binding her to secrecy, and making
inquiry respecting the prison. On the night of the same day, she was
carried to the _casa de la Galera_, where she is to be confined for ten
years, at the expiration of which term, she is to be banished
perpetually from this city and Madrid, for the distance of eight
leagues. She remains at present in the charge of a learned person, who
will instruct her in the Catholic Faith.


February, 1736.

[Sidenote: Joseph Fernandez in the secret prison of this tribunal, for
having written and spoken divers heresies, blasphemies, and insults
against our Holy Faith.

Distitute.

Maintenance, two sueldos, and the bread of the Contractor.

Prison of the Innocents.]

Joseph Fernandez, a native of the town of Santa Llina, in the bishopric
of Urgel, aged eighteen years, formerly an apothecary, and latterly a
soldier in the cavalry regiment of Calatrava, taken from the Royal
prison of this city of Barcelona, and transported to the secret prison
of this tribunal, on the twentieth of the present month of February.
This prisoner made a spontaneous confession on the fifteenth of January
of the present year, declaring that he had made an explicit league with
the devil, and had granted him his soul. He furthermore stated that he
had uttered, on many occasions, divers impious and heretical sayings
against God, and against Christ and his Holy Mother. This confession was
ratified on the eighteenth and twentyfirst of the month; and on the
twentyeighth, in consequence of his confession, a sentence was passed,
that the said Joseph Fernandez be reprehended, admonished, and warned;
that he make an abjuration _de vehementi_, be absolved _ad cautelam_,
and intrusted to the charge of a Calificador or learned person, for the
purpose of being instructed in the mysteries of our Holy Faith,
ratifying his previous confession, which sentence was ordered to be
referred to your Highness, and transmitted the same day.

On the eighteenth of February, the answer of your Highness was received,
with a confirmation of the sentence, which was not put in execution, in
consequence of the prisoner's having written several letters to the
Inquisitor Don Balthasar Villarexo, which letters contained insulting,
heretical, and blasphemous matter against our Holy Catholic Religion, as
well as contemptuous and insolent language against the said Inquisitor.
For this reason an order was issued for his imprisonment, and the said
Joseph Fernandez was, on the twentieth of the same month, taken from the
Royal Prison, where he was then confined. On the twentysecond and
twentythird, an audience was held, in which he confessed that the
letters were his, and that he had written them for the purpose of
getting free from the Royal Prison, and the garrison where he was
confined for desertion. He having named several persons in prison,
before whom he had uttered heretical speeches, a commission was
expedited on the twentyeighth to take their depositions. The cause is
delayed till the depositions are completed.


April, 1736.

On the twentysecond of March, the depositions of several witnesses were
received, and some of them were ratified _ad perpetuam rei memoriam_, as
the deponents in question were about to depart for the garrisons, to
which they were condemned. A meeting of the Calificadores was held on
the twelfth of April, and the proceedings examined. On the thirteenth,
an order was issued that the prisoner should be taken from the
intermediate prison, which he then occupied, and transferred to the
secret prison. On the seventeenth, nineteenth, and twentieth, audiences
were held, in which he confirmed what he had before declared in the
audiences of the twentysecond and twentythird of February; namely, that
his confession of leaguing with the devil and giving up his soul, was
wholly fictitious, having been fabricated by him for the purpose of
getting free from the garrison of Oran, where he was confined. He
further confessed, that he had, in reality, uttered speeches against our
Holy Faith, but that this also was done for the purpose above stated,
and not with any belief in his own assertions. On the twentyseventh of
the present month, an audience was held, in which the prisoner nominated
for his _Curador_, Dr Joseph Vinals, who accepted the trust, and was
allowed to exercise it. On the same day, the prisoner, in the presence
of his _Curador_, ratified his confession without adding or diminishing
anything, and the prisoner having been admonished in the regular manner,
the accusation against him was presented.


May, 1736.

The prisoner answered to the accusation on the twentyseventh and
thirtieth of April, confessing the charges to be true, repeating as
before, that he had spoken the words as a means of being liberated from
his confinement in the garrison of Oran, and without any bad intention.
Having appointed the abovementioned Dr Joseph Vinals for his counsel, he
conferred with the prisoner respecting his case on the second day of the
present month. The counsel declared that he was ready for the proofs and
a definitive decision, whereupon a commission was ordered for a
ratification of the testimony _in plenario_. On the eleventh, the
ratifications were received, and on the twentyfifth and twentyninth,
audiences were held, in which a regular and formal publication of the
testimony was performed.


September, 1736.

On the first of June, publication was made of several letters written by
the prisoner to different persons. On the fifth, the answers of the
prisoner to the charges were ratified before Dr Joseph Vinals, his
_Curador_, and the prisoner communicated with the counsel respecting his
defence. On the thirtieth, the defence was offered by the prisoner's
counsel, and a commission was granted to make the inquiries requested
therein. On the eighteenth of July, the twentyeighth of August, and
first of September, the result of these inquiries was received in the
tribunal. On the fourth of September, an audience was held, and the
prisoner informed that the matters for his defence were arranged, to
which he answered, that he had nothing further to offer, and was ready
for the decision. One of the charges against him, being that he had
affirmed the physicians had pronounced him disordered in his mind,
sometime in the last year, an order was issued for the physicians of the
prisons to examine him. On the twentyfifth of September, a paper was
received from the two physicians declaring that they had examined him,
and that he was not then, nor had been at any time previous, in a state
of mental alienation.


December, 1736.

On the eleventh of October, an audience was held, at which the Ordinary
attended, and sentence was passed, that the condemnation of the prisoner
be read before him in the hall of the tribunal with open doors; that he
make an abjuration _de levi_, and be banished eight leagues from this
city and Madrid, for the space of three years, the first of which to be
passed in confinement in some garrison to be fixed upon for that
purpose; also that he be severely reprehended, admonished, and warned,
and returned to the confinement from which he was taken, when brought to
the prison of this tribunal. Ordered also, that before the execution of
the above sentence, it be referred to your Highness, which was done on
the thirteenth of October. The matter is now in waiting for the answer.


January, 1737.

On the eleventh of this month, the answer of your Highness was received
with the order respecting the prisoner, in execution of which, his
sentence was read to him in the hall of the tribunal, and he made an
abjuration _de levi_, was absolved _ad cautelam_, admonished,
reprehended, and warned, after which he was sentenced to ten years
banishment from this city and the Court, to the extent of eight leagues,
the first five years of his banishment to be passed in confinement in
the garrison of Oran. The same day an audience was held to bind the
prisoner to secrecy, and make inquiries respecting the prison; after
which he was sent to the Royal Prison of this city.

Secret prison of the Inquisition of Barcelona, January thirtyfirst,
1737.

DON FRANCISCO ANTONIO DE MONTOYER.


January, 1737.

[Sidenote: Miguel Antonio Dundana, alias Miguel Antonio Maleti, in the
secret prison of this tribunal, for heretical speeches.

Prison of St. Bartholome.

Destitute.

Maintenance, two sueldos, and the bread of the Contractor.]

Miguel Antonio Dundana, alias Maleti, a native of the city of Coni, in
Piedmont, aged twentyfour years, a soldier in the regiment called the
Queen's Dragoons, confined in the secret prison of this tribunal on the
sixth day of December last, for heretical speeches. On the tenth,
fourteenth, and seventeenth of the same month, the customary audiences
were held, in which the prisoner confessed nothing to the point. On the
last day he nominated for his counsel, Dr Manuel Bonvehi, who accepted
the trust, and the confessions of the prisoner were ratified. The
accusation was then presented, to the several articles of which the
prisoner replied on the sixteenth and nineteenth of the same month,
declaring that some of them were false, and some true; but that he had
uttered the words in mere jest. On the twentieth, an audience was held,
in which the prisoner conferred with his counsel concerning his defence,
and ratified the answers made to the articles of the accusation, making
an end by calling for the proofs. On the same day, letters were sent to
the other Inquisitions, requesting that their records might be inspected
to know if any proceedings existed against this person. On the eleventh
of the present month, a commission was granted to ratify the testimony
for a decisive trial.


March, 1737.

On the sixteenth of this month, the ratifications of the testimony were
received in the tribunal, the business having been delayed on account of
the great diversity of quarters occupied by the regiment of the Queen's
Dragoons.


May, 1737.

On the eighth, ninth, and tenth of April, the testimony was given in
publication, and a copy of the same given to the prisoner, that he might
arrange his defence by the help of his counsel. On the eleventh, an
audience was held, in which he conferred with Dr Manuel Bonvehi, his
advocate, and on the second of May, an audience was held, in which his
defence was received. On the ninth of the same month, the commission and
papers relating to the affair, were sent for.


June, 1737.

The papers were not received this month, on account of the difficulty in
finding the requisite persons, but it is expected the business will be
accomplished shortly.


July, 1737.

On the sixth of this month, the papers were received, and on the eighth
the prisoner communicated with his counsel. On the seventeenth, the
testimony against him was attested _in plenario_, and his condemnation
confirmed. On the twentyninth, the proceedings of the trial were
examined, and the Reverend Father M. Fr. Mariano Anglasell being
present in the capacity of Judge Ordinary of the bishopric of Solsona,
it was unanimously ordered that the prisoner be put to the regular
torture; which sentence was ordered to be previously submitted to your
Highness.


September, 1737.

On the thirtieth of August, your Highness confirmed the above sentence,
and ordered that the torture should be given _ad arbitrium_, to extort a
confession of the acts and intentions of the prisoner. The papers
relating to the trial which had been forwarded, were received back on
the seventh of the present month. The prisoner being under the hands of
the physician, on account of his health, the torture could not be
applied till the twentieth, when the physician having certified that he
was then in a condition to endure it, an audience was held, and the
charges against the prisoner repeated, to which he answered that he had
nothing to reply, further than what had been already said. He was then
apprised of the sentence against him, and despatched to the torture
room, where he confessed that he had uttered many of the assertions
imputed to him, but that it was done in sport, and at times when his
companions had intoxicated him, and he was not conscious of what he
said, believing in his heart the contrary to what he had uttered.

On the twentyfifth, an audience was held, in which he confirmed without
alteration, what he had confessed under the torture, adding that he had
made other assertions of the like nature, all for the motive above
stated, and without entertaining inwardly any belief contrary to the
precepts of the Holy Mother Catholic Church. In this manner the prisoner
attempted to palliate his heretical speeches. On the twentyseventh, his
confessions having been examined, they were attested, and the censure
previously passed upon him confirmed, by which he was declared to be
strongly suspected in the faith. On the twentyeighth, a final decision
was given in the presence of Father P. Mro. Fr. Mariano Anglasell as
Ordinary, and the prisoner was sentenced unanimously to be brought into
the hall of the tribunal, and there, with open doors before the Secret
Ministers, and with the insignia of his offences, to hear his
condemnation read, make an abjuration _de vehementi_, be absolved _ad
cautelam_, be severely reprehended, admonished, and warned, and then to
be banished from this city, Madrid, the Court of His Majesty, and the
town of Guisona and Tarragona, to a distance of eight leagues, for the
period of eight years; the first five of them to be spent in
confinement, in some garrison in Africa, to be fixed upon for this
purpose, and that he be previously intrusted to the care of some learned
person to receive instruction in the faith.


November, 1737.

On the sixteenth of October your Highness was pleased to order that the
prisoner attend at an _auto de fe_ if one should occur soon, otherwise
to be led to some church in the guise of a penitent, and there hear his
sentence read, make an abjuration _de levi_, be severely reprehended,
admonished, and warned, and banished for life from Spain, after passing
five years of confinement in the garrison of Oran, where he should be
put under the care of some learned person, to receive instruction in the
mysteries of our Holy Faith. On the third of November, the sentence was
executed in the church of Sta Agueda. The same day he was sworn to
secrecy, and despatched to the Royal Prison of this city, thence to be
transported to his confinement in Oran. A letter was sent to Father Fr.
Pablo de Colindus at that place, intrusting to him the instruction of
the prisoner.

Inquisition of Barcelona, Nov. 28th, 1737.

DON FRANCISCO ANTONIO DE MONTOYA Y ZARATE.


July, 1739.

[Sidenote: Juan Bautista Segondi, imprisoned for the crime of searching
for treasures. Prison of San Francisco Xavier.

Maintenance, two sueldos, and the bread of the Contractor.]

Juan Bautista Segondi, a native of the town of Perpignan in France, and
an inhabitant of this city, aged fortytwo years, a married man, and by
trade a watchmaker, confined in the secret prison of this tribunal, with
a sequestration of his property, on the fourteenth of July, for
superstitious and necromantical practices. He was assigned two sueldos
and the bread of the Contractor, on account of the Treasury, as little
of the prisoner's property was secured. On the fifteenth, the first
audience was held, in which he confessed that he had used the hazel rod
for the purpose of discovering the situation of water, metals, and
mines, inheriting the capacity to practise this art, from his being a
seventh son, without the intervention of a female, and being born in the
month of May. He stated that he had heard his father declare such
persons could make the abovementioned discoveries, by holding the hazel
rod in their hands. On the twentieth and twentyfourth, audiences were
held, in which he confessed nothing more. The accusation was then
presented against him, the several specifications of which he granted to
be true. On the twentyfourth, he was furnished with a copy of the
accusation, and nominated for his counsel, Dr Joseph Vila. On the
twentyseventh, an audience was held, in which he communicated with his
advocate, respecting his defence, and the cause was received for proof
in a full trial. A commission was granted for the ratification of the
testimony.


August, 1739.

The testimony having been ratified, it was given, in publication, on the
nineteenth of this month, at which time, and on the twentyfirst, the
prisoner replied thereto, by confessing the truth of the charges, and an
additional one, of the same kind, being produced against him, it was
also given in publication. On the twentysixth, an audience was held, in
which the testimony, and the responses of the prisoner were read to his
advocate, Dr Joseph Vila, and arrangements were made for the defence.


September, 1739.

On the ninth of this month, the defence was offered, and on the twelfth,
the cause was judged before Father Mro. Fr. Mariano Anglasell, as Judge
Ordinary, and sentence was passed upon the prisoner; which was, that he
be brought into the hall of the Tribunal, and there, with open doors,
hear his condemnation read, make an abjuration _de levi_, be severely
reprehended, admonished, and warned, and apprised, that if he commit the
smallest act of the nature of his former offences, he shall incur the
penalty of two hundred lashes. It was also ordered, that the sentence,
before execution, be submitted to your Highness.


October, 1739.

The confirmation of the sentence having been received on the ninth of
this month, it was put in execution on the thirteenth, on which day
audience was held to swear secrecy respecting the prisons.

Inquisition of Barcelona, Oct. 31st, 1739.

DON FRANCISCO ANTONIO DE MONTOYA Y ZARATE.


July, 1731

[Sidenote: Joseph Oliver. Prison of La Cruz.

Destitute.

Maintenance, two sueldos, and the bread of the Contractor.]

Joseph Oliver, a native of this city, aged twentyseven years, a married
man, and by occupation a husbandman. Proceedings were instituted against
this person, and his actions having been attested to, he was ordered, on
the eleventh of this month, to be imprisoned, with a sequestration of
his property, for performing superstitious and magical cures. On the
fifteenth of this month, he was confined in the secret prison of this
Holy Office; and on the seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth,
audiences were held, in the last of which, the accusation against him
was presented. In the aforementioned audiences, and in his answers to
the accusation, he confessed the most of his crimes. On the twentieth
and twentyfirst, he communicated with his counsel, and the case was
admitted for proof in a full trial. The customary preparations being
made, and the testimony ratified, the proofs are preparing for
publication, and in this state the case remains.


August, 1731.

On the eighteenth and twentyfirst of this month, the audience for
publication was held, and the prisoner having answered to the charges,
the audience for communication with his counsel, was held on the
twentyseventh. By the advice of his advocate, the prisoner concluded his
defence without alleging anything in his own justification. In this
state the case remains.


September, 1731.

On the sixth of this month, judgment was pronounced before the Ordinary,
and the prisoner was unanimously sentenced to attend at an _auto de fe_
if one should take place soon, otherwise at some church, in penitential
guise, with the insignia of his crimes; and there hear his condemnation
read, make an abjuration _de levi_, be severely reprehended, admonished,
and warned, and be banished eight leagues from this city, Madrid, and
the Court of His Majesty, for the period of ten years, being first
confined three years in the garrison of this city of Barcelona. It was
also ordered, that, before the execution of the sentence, it be
submitted to your Highness.


October, 1731.

On the first of this month, the answer of your Highness was received,
ordering that the prisoner should hear his condemnation, and undergo the
first part of his sentence in the hall of the tribunal, then to be
banished as above specified, for the period of five years. This order
was executed on the fifth, when the prisoner was sworn to secrecy
respecting the prisons, and forthwith despatched.

DR DON MIGUEL VIZENTE CEBRIAN Y AUGUSTIN.


December, 1732.

Blas Ramirez, a native of the village of Paya, in La Huerta, bishopric
of Murcia, a soldier in the regiment of dragoons of Tarragona, aged
thirtytwo years. Sent prisoner to this Holy Office, by Dr Jacinto
Christofol, Curate of the town of La Selva, in the archbishopric of
Tarragona, and Commissary of the Holy Office. A letter accompanied the
prisoner from this Commissary, dated the eighth of November, and another
of the same date was received from Dr Joseph Solano, chaplain of the
regiment abovementioned. In both of these it was stated that the said
Blas Ramirez had made a league with the devil, according to his own
spontaneous confession. The aforementioned Dr Joseph Solano having
communicated the case to the Archbishop of Tarragona, he was directed by
him to transmit information of the same to the Commissary Dr Jacinto
Christofol, who apprehended the said Blas Ramirez, and sent him under a
guard to this Holy Office. On the thirteenth of November, Luis Pusol,
the Familiar, gave him in charge to the Alcayde of the secret prisons,
and on the same day the Inquisitor Fiscal offered a request that he
might be kept in the _carceles comunes_, till the letter of the above Dr
Joseph Solano should be examined, and his reasons explained for putting
him into the hands of the Commissary as an offender against the faith,
as well as to ascertain if there existed other evidence against him
besides his confession. On the sixteenth a commission for making
investigations upon this head was granted to Dr Mariano Morlaus,
Commissary of the Holy Office, in the town of Tarragona, as the regiment
abovementioned was quartered in that town and the neighbourhood. On the
twentieth the commission was returned with the information that the
abovementioned Dr Joseph Solano had left that place for Logrono, there
to remain till Lent.

In the meantime the prisoner requested an audience, which was granted on
the nineteenth of November, and he made the following declaration. When
he was a youth he lived with the Curate of his village, and performed
the offices of cooking, sweeping the house, and such other work as is
usually performed by women, on which account some people called him a
hermaphrodite, which, however, was not the fact. After his master died
he suffered much poverty and mortification on account of the ridicule
which this brought upon him. He joined the religious orders of St
Francis and St Dominic, but was expelled from both when the report
became current that he was a hermaphrodite. Finding himself overwhelmed
with vexation and poverty, he at last invoked the devil to assist him in
his misfortunes, offering him his soul if he would change his appearance
into that of a woman, that he might earn a living by prostitution. The
devil accordingly appeared to him several times, first in a human shape
and afterwards in that of a monstrous animal. He demanded a certificate
of the possession of his soul, which he was unwilling to grant, but
offered to give him his word to surrender himself after seven years, if
the devil would grant him his conditions. He afterwards repented of his
iniquitous practices, and sought a remedy for his soul by following the
directions of the Rector of the town of La Selva, Commissary of the Holy
Office, and those of the Chaplain of his regiment, Dr Joseph Solano,
which persons, in consequence of his confessions, transmitted him a
prisoner to this Holy Office. A request has been made that letters be
sent to the Inquisition of Navarre, demanding an examination of the said
Dr Joseph Solano.


April, 1733.

Letters were sent to the Tribunal of the Inquisition of Logrono,
requesting an examination of Dr Joseph Solano, who was residing in that
district. On the twentieth of November, a letter was received from Dr
Mariano Morlans, Commissary of the Holy Office in the town of Tarrega,
bishopric of Solsona, stating that a priest of that town was ready to
denounce the prisoner, from what he had heard of the colonel of his
regiment respecting his compact with the devil. On the twentysecond of
the same month, a commission was demanded for the above mentioned Dr
Mariano Morlans to examine the said priest, and summon the colonel
referred to, as a witness against the prisoner. On the eleventh of
December following, the said Commissary Morlans transmitted the
information against the prisoner, gathered from thirteen witnesses, most
of whom deposed that they positively knew the prisoner to be a woman,
and one of them stated that he had asked the prisoner how she could,
being a woman, procure such a thick beard. She replied that she had
produced it with the help of an ointment; that she had been seduced and
abandoned in her youth; that she afterwards dressed herself like a man,
and turned soldier.

Another of the witnesses deposed that the prisoner informed him she was
once a boy, and entertained a wish to become a female from her
attachment to a young man. That the devil appeared to her in the shape
of a handsome youth, and demanded what she wanted; to which she replied
that she wished for the shape of a female. This the devil granted her,
and they made a compact, by virtue of which she was to be alternately
male and female, changing sex every seven years; which alteration she
had effected by means of a certain herb.

On the seventeenth of December, the Inquisitor Fiscal requested that the
acts and declarations of the prisoner might be attested, and this having
been done in a junta of four Calificadores, the same persons unanimously
presented the prisoner as a wizard, sorcerer, and one holding an
explicit compact with the devil.

The information above specified having been received distinct from the
prisoner's own declaration, in the audience which he had requested, the
Inquisitor Fiscal petitioned that he might not be tried as an
_Espontaneo_,[20] on account of what he had concealed in his
confession, that he might be removed into the secret prison, and his
trial instituted forthwith. On the eighteenth of the same month, orders
were issued for confining him in the secret prison, and commencing his
trial. Three audiences were held, in which he confessed nothing beyond
what he had declared in his first confession on the thirteenth of
November. On the twentyfirst of January the accusation was presented,
and an audience was held the same day, when the prisoner replied to the
charges. On the two following days the acts which he had omitted in his
confession were attested, and the prisoner declared that although in the
bargain which he had made with the devil he had offered to surrender up
his soul, yet he had not paid him any worship, nor abjured our Holy
Faith, notwithstanding he internally consented to the delivery of his
soul, and in consequence departed from our Holy Faith and God our Lord.

The prisoner was furnished with a copy of the accusation, and on the
twentyfourth conferred with his counsel, reserving his defence till
after the publication of the testimony. The case was then admitted for
proof, and the witnesses residing at a great distance, and in various
places, the ratification of the testimony was delayed for some time. The
business being finally accomplished, publication of the testimony was
made on the thirteenth and fourteenth of April. In the audiences which
were held on those days, the prisoner declared nothing of consequence.
The audience for communication with his counsel was held on the
sixteenth, and that for the defence will be held as soon as possible.

       *       *       *       *       *

[_Here occurs a chasm in the manuscript._]


July, 1740.

[Sidenote: Juan Ginesta, confined in the secret prison.

Prison of the Martyrs.

Maintenance, two sueldos and the bread of the Contractor.]

Juan Ginesta, a native of this city, aged twentyfive years, was confined
in the secret prison on the sixth of June, with sequestration of
property, for performing magical cures and deceptive tricks, and
uttering speeches against our Holy Faith. The first audience was held on
the eighth, when he confessed that he had taught a person to perform
cures by the application of certain remedies, and the uttering of a
prayer; and also that he had practised the same arts himself. On the
ninth, another audience was held, in which he confessed other practices
of the same nature, and that he had uttered many speeches, by way of
joke and pastime. On the fifteenth, the third audience was held, in
which he declared, that having been questioned several times whether he
had been in the Inquisition, he had answered, Yes. The accusation
against him was presented on the eighteenth, at which time, and on the
twentyfirst and twentyfifth, the prisoner answered to the charges,
confessing the performance of the cures imputed to him, and the mode of
executing them, denying withal some parts of the accusation. On the
twentyfifth, he was ordered to be furnished with a copy of the
accusation for the purpose of making his defence within three days. He
nominated for his advocate Dr Manuel Bonvehi. On the twentyseventh, an
audience was held, in which the prisoner communicated with his counsel
respecting his defence. The Inquisitor Fiscal demanded ratification of
the testimony, and the case was admitted for proof in a full trial. The
testimony was then ratified and given in publication on the thirteenth,
fifteenth, and nineteenth of July. On the twentythird an audience was
held, in which the prisoner conferred with his counsel. The publication
of the testimony was read to him, and he was furnished with the
necessary papers for drawing up the defence. On the twentyninth an
audience was held, when the prisoner's counsel presented the defence,
and demanded investigations; for which purpose a commission was granted
on the same day.


September, 1740.

The result of the investigations was presented on the third of August,
and on the eighth, were communicated to the prisoner's counsel, when the
defence was concluded. On the eleventh, before the Judge Ordinary, the
Most Reverend Father, M. Fr. Mariano Anglasel Merzenario, sentence was
passed that the prisoner be brought into the hall of the tribunal, and
there, with closed doors, in the presence of the Secret Ministers, hear
his condemnation read, be reprehended, admonished, and warned, and
afterwards banished eight leagues from this city, Madrid, and the Court
of His Majesty, for the period of two years; which sentence was
submitted to your Highness on the thirteenth of the same month, and on
the tenth of September the answer was received ordering the first part
of the sentence to be executed as above specified, and the prisoner to
be banished for one year. This was carried into execution on the
eleventh of September, and the audience held for binding the prisoner to
secrecy and taking the customary precautions respecting the prison;
after which an order was despatched to the Alcayde to take him from his
confinement.

Inquisition of Barcelona, Sept. 27th, 1740.

DON FRANCISCO ANTONIO DE MONTOYA Y ZARATE.




MISCELLANEOUS DOCUMENTS.

_Augustin Tamarit, a physician, of the town of Salas, was imprisoned in
the Inquisition on the third of July, 1757, and tried for heretical
speeches. The following are some of the articles of the accusation, with
the imputed assertions qualified; that is, their character and tendency
formally pronounced by the officers of the Inquisition._


In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the twentyninth
day of March, one thousand seven hundred and fiftysix, at the morning
audience, the Inquisitors Licentiate Don Joseph Otero y Cossio,
Licentiate Dr Manuel de Guell y Serra as Calificadores, and Father
Mariano Alberich, Jesuit, Fray Augustin Voltas, Dominican, Fray Raphael
Talavera, Minim, and Fray Buenaventura de Lanuza, Observante, all of
this Holy Office--having read article by article the following
propositions, _qualified_ them in the following manner.

A certain person, a native of these kingdoms, has asserted,

That the Moors were wealthy, prosperous, and in the enjoyment of
plentiful rain, directly the reverse of us Christians, and concluded by
saying 'What remains for us but to join the Moors?' On another occasion
he asserted that it was better to be bad than good, as good people were
generally poor, and bad ones rich.

_The first part of this proposition is scandalous, savouring of Molinism
and apostacy. The last is heretical._

Speaking of the bishops, he said, in answer to a question, 'What power
have they to ordain priests?'

_This proposition is insulting to the episcopal dignity, and by the way
in which it is expressed, the inference is drawn that it is virtually
heretical._

That the friars and ecclesiastics devoured the people, and that the king
ought to take them into his service, by which means he would have
soldiers enow.

_This is scandalous, and insulting to the ecclesiastical and secular
state._

That the figures of the Saints were said to work miracles, and if this
were the fact, let one of them be thrown into the river to see if he
could save himself.

_Blasphemous and virtually heretical._

That it was a great pity for a man to be obliged to tell another,
meaning the Confessor, everything he did, and that it would be better to
speak into a hole and stop it up, for 'what good did confession do?'
That he went to confession but once a year, signifying that but for
constraint he would not go at all.

_This is heretical, as it is a scorning of the Divine institution of
sacramental confession._

Speaking of the supplications which are made for rain, he asked, 'What
use is there in running after these Saints, and what power have they to
make it rain? What is the use of carrying in procession these images?'
meaning several, and among others that of Nuestra Senora del Coll, 'as
they are nothing but bits of wood or stone.'

_A heretical blasphemy._

Speaking of the Bull of the Santa Cruzada, he asserted that if he was
sovereign, he would hang every one who received the Bull.

_This is insulting, et sapiens haeresin._

Speaking of the chapels and hermitages in the village where he lived, he
asked 'What do those images do there?' meaning, 'Why do not people
destroy them?'

_A heretical blasphemy._

Others saying to him 'Let us go to mass,' he answered by asking, 'What
could they get by hearing mass?' thus disturbing the devotions of the
hearers, and scorning this holy performance.

_Considered in connexion with the other assertions, this is scandalous,
and sapiens haeresin._

Speaking of Indulgences, he said with some contempt, that he should
value six dineros more than all the Indulgences together, and that they
were good for nothing.

_Scandalous and heretical._

Speaking of prodigies and miracles, he said that from the time of Christ
to the present day there had been no miracles, that he knew this well,
since he had conversed with a learned person. On another occasion,
discoursing on the same subject, he said, that God had never performed
a miracle, and he knew it, making at the same time the sign of the
cross upon his forehead.

_Heretical._

Speaking of tithes, he asserted that, were it not for compulsion, he
would not pay tithes, and that it would be better for people to enjoy
the fruit of their labors themselves, and not the ecclesiastics.

_Insulting and scandalous._

Speaking of burials and supplications for the dead, he asserted that
when he died he would as willingly be interred in common, as in
consecrated ground, and that but for compulsion he would not have a mass
said for his soul.

_Sapit haeresin._

He spoke with disrespect of the Holy Inquisition, and said that the
Inquisition corrected none but madmen and fools, making them declare
just what was desired, and then punishing them.

_Scandalous and insulting to the Holy Tribunal._

The bells tolling for a dead person, some one said to him, 'Let us say a
_paternoster_ for the dead,' to which he replied with contempt, 'To what
purpose all these prayers for the dead?' The other person answering that
they were supplications for his soul if in Purgatory, inasmuch as the
souls, which do not go to heaven or hell, are detained in Purgatory, he
replied scoffingly to this effect: 'Who has ever been in Heaven, Hell,
or Purgatory, to tell us what becomes of the souls of the dead?' adding,
that sooner than die he would be transformed to a horse, an ant, or any
other animal, for dead men never come back, and that when dead he would
as willingly be buried in rubbish as in consecrated ground.

_Heretical._

Speaking of supplications for rain, he said they were good for nothing,
and that it was nonsense to waste money for this purpose, for whether
supplications were made or not, it would rain and shine just as it did
in other parts of the world; that the rain depended upon the clouds, and
God did not concern himself about it, adding, 'Search in what part God
exists to make it rain;' and some one answering him, he repeated that
they must get this error out of their heads, about supplicating for
rain, as it was of no effect.

_Scandalous and heretical._

That St Thomas committed errors like the rest, and that it was useless
to cite the authority of the Holy Fathers, for they were not to the
purpose.

_Scandalous and insulting to the Holy Fathers._

That we could not be certain that the supplications produced rain or
cured sickness, and that it was superstitious to believe so as the
vulgar did.

_Heretical._

The person who uttered the above sayings is declared unanimously to be a
scandalous, presumptuous, and insulting blasphemer of the Saints, Holy
Fathers, the Pope, and Ecclesiastical State, and to be suspected _de
vehementi_.

MARIANO ALBERICH.
FR. RAFAEL TALAVERA.
FR. AUGUSTIN VOLTAS.
F. BUENAVENTINA DE LANUZA.
JUAN ANTONIO ALMONACID, _Sec'y_.

[_Dr Tamarit, however, was fortunate enough to escape with a penance,
the customary reprimands and threats in case of repeating his offences,
and an imprisonment of about three months._]

       *       *       *       *       *

In the town of Cardona, in the bishopric of Celsona, on the thirtieth of
May, one thousand six hundred and fortyeight, in the afternoon, appeared
voluntarily, before the Revered Joseph Riera, Presbyter and Commissary
of the Holy Office of the Inquisition, and Dr Pablo Serra, Presbyter
Rector of the said town of Cardona, and Notary, sworn, a woman calling
herself Vitoria Sala, wife of Hermenter Sala, who came, as she stated,
to give information of something relating to the Holy Office.

Questioned, what she had to declare.

Answered, that about a year ago, while she was confessing herself in the
church of San Diego, of the aforesaid town of Cardona, to Father Fr.
Felix Coll, a regular Ecclesiastic of St Francisco, and at that time
Conventual of the Convent of San Diego, on many occasions during the act
of confession or immediately after, and while in the confessionary, he
had told her that he should ruin her, and many times he practised
touching her face, thighs, and back. On one occasion he endeavored to
feel of her bosom but she prevented him. At other times he touched and
squeezed her with his hands, and in one instance attempted to kiss her,
which she avoided by turning away her head. He told her that she must
not discover these things to any other confessor, for he did not behave
thus with any bad intention, but for the purpose of removing her
scruples, and that it would be for her benefit.

The deponent was informed that the Promoter Fiscal of the Holy Office
presented her as a witness in a cause under his direction against the
said Father Fr. Felix. She was directed to give attention while her
deposition was read word for word, and she declared that it was all
true, and that she had nothing to add, diminish, or alter, respecting
it, as it was the truth, and if necessary she was ready to repeat it
anew against the said Father Fr. Felix Coll; that she did not make the
declaration out of malice or ill will, but solely to discharge her
conscience. The said Vitoria not being able to write, I, the said
Commissary, sign in her name.

JOSEPH RIERA, _Presbyter Commissary_.

Before me--

PABLO SERRA, _Presbyter, Rector of Cardona,
sworn Notary_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the town of Cardona, in the bishopric of Celsona, on the fourth of
August, one thousand six hundred and ninetyeight, before the Reverend
Joseph Riera, Commissary of the Holy Office of the Inquisition,
appeared, according to summons from Celadonio Siejas, sworn Nuncio of
the Holy Office, a woman calling herself Vitoria Salas, an inhabitant of
the town of Cardona, in the bishopric of Celsona, aged, as she stated,
thirtyfive years, more or less. She was formally sworn to declare the
truth and preserve secrecy.

Questioned, if she knew why she was summoned to appear.

Answered, that she supposed it to be on account of the following
statement which she had made to the Inquisition. She had confessed
herself in the chapel of San Luis, or the church of the Convent of San
Diego, in the town of Cardona, to Father Fr. Felix Coll, of the order of
St. Francisco, then residing in the said convent, and, during confession
or immediately after, while in the confessionary of that chapel, where
he was deputed to hear confessions from February till September, 1697,
he, at various times to the number of twenty or twentyfive, touched her
with his hands, squeezed her face and neck, and on one occasion
attempted to kiss her, but she prevented him by turning away her head.
Also, on another occasion, he told her that he should ruin her, and that
she must not speak of it or discover it to any one, as he did not act
from any bad intention, but that all was done for her benefit. He
further told her that he wanted to go to her house.

Questioned, if she knew that this person had solicited any others during
confession or immediately before or after.

Answered, that she had no knowledge of any such matter, but had been
told by Marianna Guer y Savall, that the same Father Fr. Felix Coll had
squeezed her hands in the act of confession several times.

The above is the truth according to the oath of the deponent. She was
enjoined secrecy, which she promised. I sign in her name,

Before me--

VITORIA SALA.
DR PABLO SERRA _Presbyter_,
_Rector of Cardona, &c._

       *       *       *       *       *

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SIR,

When the guilty acknowledge their offences and repent with sorrow, God
accepts them and grants them his most holy grace; and inasmuch as I have
been so unfortunate as to commit some offences which relate to this Holy
Tribunal, I transmit the following confession of them, not being able to
present myself in person.

I was accustomed frequently in the town of Cardona, to hear the
confessions of a married woman named Vitoria Sala. I never took any
great liberties with her, but touched her a few times while in the
confessionary. Neither I nor she had any bad intention in this, but as I
perceived that she was affected with some internal inquietude, I took
her by the hand and touched her face and bosom with the other, as also
her neck; this I did thirty or forty times. These slight faults I
confess before God and the Holy Tribunal on account of the scandal which
they may occasion. I cast myself at the feet of your Excellency, hoping
to have my offences overlooked with love and charity, and promising
henceforth the amendment of my errors. Trusting in this my conscience
remains quiet, and I continue secure in my obedience, praying to God for
the prosperity of your Excellency.

Gerona, September fourteenth, 1697.

Your most humble servant, who kisses the feet of your Excellency,

FR. FELIX COLL

       *       *       *       *       *

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SIR,

Since my letter of the fourteenth of September, to your Excellency, I
have conducted myself with great circumspection on account of the
charges I made to your Excellency against myself for faults committed
against the Holy Tribunal. And as I am hindered from presenting myself
at the feet of your Excellency, I again place myself in the same
condition, under the shelter and patronage of the Holy Tribunal, in
order that your Excellency, as the father of all piety and clemency, may
clear my conscience and soul. Your Excellency must know then, that
during a year which I lived in the town of Cardona as preacher of the
convent, I was in the practice of confessing a certain female named
Vitoria Sala, who was afflicted with many scruples, and in order to
remove them at the pressing instances of her husband, I suffered myself
to be led away by the devil so far as to behave with much impropriety
towards her, as on many occasions when she was at my feet, I uttered to
her very unchaste language, touching her bosom and face with my hands.
This I did to the amount of seventy times or thereabout. Also, being
without the confessionary, I gave her many embraces, and solicited her
to love me. Although it be true that I practised these evil deeds, yet
by the mercy of God I did not injure her honor or reputation.

Furthermore at the same time I was so forgetful of my duty, that,
falling unhappily in company with a female named Marianna Guer y Savall,
who came to the holy confessionary to confess her faults to me, which
faults were committed in my own person, the devil was so crafty that he
caused me, a miserable sinner, to be led away in ten or twelve instances
to speak language of endearment to her, and touch her bosom and face.
These, father of all clemency, are my depraved actions in the Holy
Sacrament of penitence. Instead of directing these two souls in the way
of salvation, I led them to the devil by reason of my incontinence,
malice, and little fear of God. And now, as God has granted me time,
place, and occasion, I throw myself, like another Prodigal Son, at your
feet, that like a loving father you may extend toward me whatever may be
requisite to punish my heavy sins and offences, promising henceforth, to
amend my evil ways, that the light of God may shine more clear. May God
prosper and guard the infinite years of your Excellency.

Barcelona, May seventeenth, 1698.

Your most unworthy servant, who kisses
the feet of your Excellency,
FR. FELIX COLL.

P. S. Although I write from this city, yet I have come hither to throw
myself at the feet of your Excellency. My residence is in the Convent
of St Francisco in Gerona.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Imperial College of Tortosa, on the eighteenth day of March,
seventeen hundred, the Inquisitor Licentiate, Don Juan Joseph Hualte
presiding sole in the afternoon audience, having examined the
information and proceedings in this Inquisition against Fr. Felix Coll,
an Ecclesiastic and Confessor, of the Order of St Francisco, and a
resident in the Convent of that order in Gerona,

Ordered that he be reprehended, admonished, and directed to refrain from
confessing females in private; submitting this sentence to the Council.

Before me--

DON JUAN DE CASTILLA.

[_Further proceedings were carried on against this person, but suspended
by his death._]

       *       *       *       *       *

In the town of Besahi, on the twentysecond day of February, one thousand
seven hundred and eightyfour, before me, Estevan Castanir, Presbyter and
Curate of the Parochial Church of St Vicente, and me, Lorenzo Terrader,
Presbyter and Canon of the Collegial Church of Besahi, Notary, sworn to
preserve secrecy and perform faithfully our duties, appeared, according
to summons, and made oath to declare the truth, and preserve secrecy,
Juan Ricart, porter royal, a native of the above town, of age, as he
stated, thirtyfive years or thereabout.

Questioned, if he knew the cause of his being summoned to appear.

Answered, that he could conjecture nothing.

Questioned, if he knew that any person had said aught which was, or
appeared to be contrary to our Holy Catholic Faith and Evangelical
Doctrine.

Answered, No.

He was then given to understand that information had been received and
sworn to in this Holy Office, that a certain person had, accompanied by
others, been to a certain castle in search of enchanted money; that they
had signed a compact with the devil; that on reading a book the devil
had appeared to them and promised them riches; and that he, the said
Juan Ricart could give intelligence of these and many other things. For
this reason he was admonished, in the name of our Lord and his glorious
and blessed Mother, to bethink himself and declare the whole truth.

Answered, that in June or July, 1783, he learned that Narcisso Manalich,
Advocate, with some associates were about to visit the devil in search
of money; which information he had communicated to the Alcalde of this
town; that these persons went to the castle of Madremana, where the
devil appeared to them. They read from a book, and the devil asked what
they wanted. The one who was reading (name not known) answered,
'Twentyfive millions.' The devil replied they must give themselves to
him. They signed the agreement, and were allowed six years to live. They
then demanded the money and were told that they must bring him a certain
stone (_piedra de espiritu_). They went afterwards to the castle of
Esponella, read the book, and the devil came. He asked what they wanted.
They answered, the money which he had promised. He asked for the stone,
and they replied that some one had stolen it. He then exclaimed, 'Fulfil
your promise, and I will fulfil mine,' and disappeared. All this the
deponent learned from the account of Manalich and his companions.

Some days afterwards, the greater part of the same persons were
assembled at the house of Juan Traver de Ursall, in Barcelona, where the
deponent was present to watch their proceedings, by the direction of the
Alcalde of Besahi. He was also to endeavour to get possession of the
book, and have them all apprehended. The other persons present were the
said Manalich, Juan Fraver de Ursall, his wife, a young man of the
family, and Monsieur Josef. It was resolved in the meeting, to choose a
new reader, and practise further operations. A person in the town of
Junquera was elected, and it was resolved to go to the castle of Benda,
on the next Tuesday. The deponent went to the Alcalde with this
intelligence, and he despatched a party, with the deponent, to lie in
wait for them at a place on their route, but they had taken the alarm
and avoided the deponent's company. The deponent was informed by Tomas
Riera that he had gone by night to Gerona, to get some nails out of the
coffin of a child of three or four years, and that on beginning to dig,
there appeared to him many visions. Manalich told the deponent that he
believed the devil never cheated any one, but performed all his
promises. The abovementioned Tomas Riera had slept with Monsieur Josef,
and he was accustomed to hold conversations with the devil in his own
language; and the persons aforementioned had informed the deponent that
Monsieur Josef had obtained money of the devil.

Questioned, what was the age, personal appearance, &c., of the said
Narcisco Manalich, and of all the others. [_Here follows the
description._]

The above is the truth according to the oath of the deponent, &c.

JUAN RICART, _Porter Royal_

Before me--

LORENZO TERRADER, _Canon, and Presbyter
Notary, appointed for this investigation_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the town of Besahi, bishopric of Gerona, on the twentyfourth day of
February, one thousand seven hundred and eightyfour, before the
abovementioned officers sworn to preserve secrecy and perform well our
duties, appeared, according to summons, and made oath to declare the
truth and preserve secrecy, Miguel Berga, advocate, a native of this
town, aged thirtythree years.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear.

Answered, that he supposed it to be on account of Manalich's affair.

Questioned, if he had written any letter or communication to the Holy
Office of the Inquisition, giving an account of any crime within his
knowledge; what were the contents of that paper or communication, and by
whose hand was it written.

Answered, that he had written three letters to Dr Ignacio Sans Pabordre,
at Figueras; that in the first, dated July fourteenth, 1783, he stated
that the said Manalich had told him he had gone twice with his
associates to the castle of Esponella after money, and that both times
the devil had appeared to them; that they had all signed a bargain with
him, and were promised the money when they returned to the castle.

The second, dated August fourth, 1783, stated that Manalich had declared
that the sixth day of that month was fixed upon to visit the castle of
Monroig, in search of money.

The third, dated the thirteenth of the same month, informed that he had
seen Manalich, but could give no further intelligence respecting the
affair, and that something more might be learned from Juan Ricart.

The deponent went on to declare that Josef Llonella informed him that he
and the said Manalich, accompanied by Jaime Gubert, a young man of
Besahi, went to Montpelier to meet a Jew, in order to learn from him the
means of obtaining money by diabolical art. The Jew gave them a maggot
within a tube, and told them a maggot must be added to the tube every
day to be eaten, and that if they swore, which they did, to make a
league with the devil, and perform what he directed them, written upon a
paper, they should have what money they pleased. They signed in blood an
agreement with the devil, written in his own characters, and promised
never to go to confession. Notwithstanding they did everything according
to the Jew's directions, they got nothing.

The deponent continued in these words;--'Some time afterwards I called
upon Manalich, endeavouring to bring him into the company of the
abovementioned Dr Pabordre Sans, or Dr Revira, Canon of the Cathedral of
Gerona, but he replied to me that he would not see either of them till
he got the money; and furthermore informed me that they and the devil
had fixed upon the sixteenth of August for the time to receive the
treasure; that the devil appeared to them dressed in red, and promised
if one of their number were given up to him, they should have thirtyone
millions; that Manalich offered himself, and the devil gave him eight
years to live, but this period was not to begin till the money was
received. I exclaimed, "The devil will deceive you." He answered that
the devil's promises were truer than the Faith, and further told me that
to raise the devil, the following things were necessary;--a book which
directed everything that was to be said, a loadstone, a _piedra de
espiritu_, six nails from the coffin of a child of three years, six
tapers of rosewax made by a child of four years, the skin and blood of
a young kid, an iron fork with which the kid was to be killed,
camphorated high proof brandy, lignumvitae charcoal to make a fire, and
hazel rods. Intelligence of all this I gave to Sr Domero Gerones, the
Vicar Boada, and the Alcayde. The Alcayde sent Juan Ricart, his porter,
to join them, and learn the day fixed upon for going, after the money,
in order that he might take them prisoners. This Juan Ricart went with
them for some days, and gave notice when the Jew arrived who was to read
the book. The Alcayde set a watch for them, which was discovered, and
the Jew escaped.

'After this, I endeavoured again to bring Manalich into company with Dr
Pabordre Sans. This I effected, but found that Manalich would not
declare the truth to the Doctor. He gave me to understand that he still
retained the book and instruments enumerated above, and they should let
the business lie by for some time, without speaking about it, and then
renew it and get the money of the devil. Afterwards, when I censured his
conduct, he tried to make me believe that all he had told me was a
fabrication, but I have always believed it to be the truth.'

The above having been read to the deponent, is declared by him to be
correctly recorded, and the truth according to the oath sworn by him.

Signed,

MIGUEL ANTENTAS Y BERGA, _Advocate_.

Before me--

LORENZO TERRADER, _Presbyter and Canon,
Notary in this investigation_.

In the town of Besahi, on the thirtieth day of May, one thousand, seven
hundred and eightyfour, before the abovementioned officers, sworn to
preserve secrecy and perform faithfully their duties, appeared,
according to summons, and made oath to declare the truth and preserve
secrecy, Josef Gircos, Advocate of Besahi, a native and inhabitant of
the said town, of age, as he stated, thirtysix years or thereabout.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear.

Answered, No.

Questioned, if he knew that any person had said or done aught which was,
or appeared to be contrary to our Holy Catholic Faith, and Evangelical
Doctrine.

Answered, No.

He was then given to understand that information had been received and
sworn to in this Holy Office, that certain persons, Narciso Manalich and
Josef Llorella, had been at Montpelier to visit a Jew, &c. [_Here
follows a recapitulation of the preceding testimony._]

Answered, that he had heard the same from Narciso Manalich, and what he
knew of the matter was the following;--'About eighteen months since,
this person and Josef Llorella y Saler, of this town, left the place,
accompanied by a young man named Gubert. To what place they went, and
whether they kept company all the way, I do not know. They were gone
about three weeks, and shortly after their return I heard Miguel
Antentas y Berga, Advocate, of this town, declare that they had been to
Montpelier, in France, to meet a Jew who was to show them how to obtain
money by diabolical arts; that the Jew gave Manalich a maggot in a tube,
to which he was to add a new maggot every day to be eaten, and that the
Jew told them they might have as much money as they wanted by swearing a
pact with the devil, and doing what he prescribed to them upon a written
paper. One of the conditions was, never to go to confession. For these
instructions I think the said Antentas told me they paid the Jew seven
or nine _Louis d'ors_. On their return from Montpelier, at a village or
place near Bisbal, they made trial of one of the Jew's methods of
obtaining money. This was done at a spot where two roads crossed each
other. A trench was dug in the ground and a hen killed, with the blood
of which they all wrote their names on a paper and placed the same in
the trench, taking care, as the Jew directed them, not to be frightened.
Notwithstanding they complied with all these directions, the money did
not appear.

'After their return to this town, they went with some others to the
castle of Esponella, where the book was read for the purpose of raising
the devil. Here the devil appeared in the shape of a man dressed in
flesh colored clothes, and, as Antentas told me, with large eyes. The
devil asked what they wanted, to which Manalich or some other replied,
"Money, good money, and not enchanted." The devil told them they should
have it if one of the number would give himself up, but this no one of
them was willing to do.

'Llorella related the affair to his wife, and she gave information of it
to Antonio Rigalt, that he might assist in extricating her husband from
such a desperate business. Rigalt consulted Antentas and they concluded
to lay the case before the Inquisition, which was done.

'What Antentas knew of the affair he learnt of Rigalt, Llorella, and
Manalich. Afterwards, when Llorella repented of his connexion with the
others, and left their company, I think I heard him say, at the house of
Antentas, that he had seen, shortly before, in the possession of
Manalich, the paper which the Jew gave them, and that the devil appeared
to them in a flesh colored dress, with large eyes and sharp finger
nails. I was afterwards told by Antentas that Manalich, seeing Llorella
had left them and they could not proceed with their undertaking
according to the direction of the Jew, who informed them that if one of
the number died or left them they must get another, made choice of an
uncle of Traver beforementioned, for this purpose.

'Manalich then resolved to give himself up to the devil according to his
demand, stipulating for some years' grace. This matter was discussed by
the company at the castle of Esponella, in connexion with a plan for
getting thirtyone millions, or some such sum, from the devil. The plan,
however, failed in this manner. On the night of Monday, before St John's
day, in 1783, the company, or part of them, met at the house of Traver,
but Manalich being suddenly taken sick, could not accompany them to the
castle.

'Antentas also informed me, that he told Manalich that the devil would
deceive him, and that he could not make any man rich. To this he replied
that the devil fulfilled all his promises, and that if he once got the
money of him, he would go to confession nevertheless, and so would cheat
the devil. He also told me, in the month of August of the same year,
that Manalich had resolved to make an attempt for the money again, at
the abovementioned castle, or at another, called the castle of Buadella;
that he deferred it on account of the affair having become noised
abroad. Since this time I have heard nothing of him or his undertakings,
except that he proposed another journey to Montpelier, and offered two
hundred pounds to Simon Escaellar or Ventura to accompany him.'

The above is the truth, according to the oath of the deponent, who
declares that he has not spoken out of malice, but solely in obedience
to his conscience, and having been read to him, is declared to be
correctly recorded.

Signed--

JOSEF GIRCOS, _Advocate_.

Before me--

LORENZO TERRADER _Presbyter,
Notary in this investigation_.

       *       *       *       *       *

DON LEONARDO VIDAL, assistant to a founder of brass cannon, aged
twentythree years, a native of San Estevan de Ripollet, in the diocese
of Barcelona, and residing in _la Rambla_, near the theatre, next door
to a tallow chandler's, to discharge his conscience, and for no other
purpose, gives the following information to the Holy Office.

Antonio Suarez, the keeper of a coffee-house, opposite the Theatre in
_la Rambla_, has in one of his rooms six or eight pictures, rather
coarsely done, two of which contain indecent figures. All of these the
informant has seen, but remembers only one, which represents a young man
taking hold of a female who has her bosom indecently exposed. The said
Antonio is about fifty years of age, lame and splayfooted, with one arm
partly crippled and the fingers contracted.

Also, with the same motive, he gives information that Dr Manuel Portius,
Presbyter, a public teacher of Latin and the Humanities, aged
thirtyeight years, of a low stature, and with a somewhat long nose,
living in the Baxada de San Miguel, in the third story of a house, the
corner of which is occupied by a baker, has several pictures, colored
and uncolored, among which are some representing females whose bosoms
are scandalously exposed, and others with improper representations. One
of these has this title; 'L'Abbe a la Toilette,' and exhibits with other
figures, a priest in his calotte, very nicely dressed in the clothes of
a layman, seated at the side of a lady, with whom he appears to be
talking about dress. All these pictures of Dr Manuel Portius are
handsomely executed, and consequently the more provocative and
scandalous. They are hung upon the walls of his cabinet or study, in
view of every one who enters, and particularly of his pupils, the number
of whom, as I understand, amounts to nearly thirty.

Furthermore, he gives information that Don Felipe Crame, a captain in
the royal artillery, tall, light complexioned, red haired, and blind of
one eye, aged thirtyfive years, being in conversation with the informant
and three others, whose names will be hereafter specified, made the
following observation:--'_A Spanish officer whom I hold in estimation,
has said that it was not the will of God that there should be any kings,
which could be proved by a passage from scripture._' This passage he
quoted, which was not to the purpose, but only, as I remember, stated
that God told the Israelites that a king was not convenient for them.
The name of this officer, the said Don Felipe Crame did not mention, and
nothing else respecting him is known to the informant.

The persons who heard these observations from the mouth of the said Don
Felipe Crame, were Don Manuel Pe, an assistant of the cannon founder,
and Don Antonio de la Torre, clerk of the director of the foundry. There
are also others who have some knowledge of the same; namely, Don Manuel
Brito, and Don Alexandro Vicente, assistants in the foundry.

The informant undertook to make an accusation in the name of the above
persons. He also apprized the said Don Felipe Crame, that he was under
an obligation to denounce his friend, and as the informant knows not
whether this has been performed, he gives the present information in
order fully to discharge his conscience.

Barcelona, February fourth, 1793.

LEONARDO VIDAL.


TO OUR COMMISSARY, THE REVEREND ANTONIO FONT, PRESBYTER.

We herewith transmit you a letter, received by us, from Don Leonardo
Vidal, assistant to a founder of cannon, and a resident in this city. We
hereby commission you to summon him to appear before you, and ascertain
according to form whether the letter be his, causing him to specify
clearly every circumstance of person, place, and time, relating thereto.
This done in due form, and before a Presbyter in your confidence to
serve as Notary, you will forward the minutes of the examination to us
along with these papers. Our Lord preserve you many years.

Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, February seventh, 1793.

DR DON PEDRO DIAZ DE VALDES.
The Licentiate,
DON MANUEL DE MERRA Y PANIAGUA.
DR DON JOSEPH FRANCISCO GONZALES DE NOBOA,
_Secretary_.


TO THE REVEREND CURATE OF THE PARISH OF ST MARTIN DE PROVENSAL.

Information has been received in this Holy Office, that Antonio Axis,
and Josefa, his wife, who perform cures, and practise various
superstitions, have taken up their abode in Clot, in the district of St
Martin de Provensal. The tribunal have, in consequence, ordered that a
letter be despatched, ordering you to make investigations respecting
these facts, and also respecting the life and conduct of the said
persons, whether they obey the precepts of the church, and attend at
confession and communion. Our Lord preserve you many years.

Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, September ninth, 1803.

DR DON CYRO VALLS Y GELI, _Sec'y_.


ANSWER.

In obedience to the orders of the Holy Tribunal of the Inquisition,
which God preserve in all its strength, dated the ninth of this month, I
have made the following investigation. I summoned before me Joseph
Masvidal of this village, and made him swear not to divulge to any one
the questions I asked him, and also to declare to me the truth. I
demanded who informed him that Antonio Axis could cure his disorder. He
answered, Felipe Cadena of this place, and Pablo Marine of the Llano de
Barcelona. Felipe Cadena stated that the said Antonio had cured him by
cutting off the crest of a black cock, taking from it three drops of
blood, mixing it with water and making him drink it, adding that if a
priest were in the house, it would be necessary to go out of doors to
practise the operation.

I demanded what medicines the said Antonio prescribed him. He replied
that the first was a white onion and five plantain leaves. These were
cut up and placed upon his stomach, which relieved his pain, a symptom
which the wife of Antonio pronounced good. The cure, however, not being
effected, he was ordered to procure a partridge, twentyfive needles, and
a new pot, all of them to be bought and carried home with the left hand.
The needles were to be stuck into the partridge with great fury, and the
whole put into the pot. Then at midnight the sick man was to set it on
the fire with the left hand, and with the left hand keep stirring the
fire till two o'clock in the morning. He informed him that during this,
the tables and plates would put themselves in motion, but that he must
not be frightened, as he should be present himself. All these directions
were followed, and there were also present at the time, Francisco
Vintro, and Francisco Siralt, his brothers-in-law, to keep him in
courage during the operation. At two o'clock he took it off the fire,
but found himself no better. Antonio's wife, Josefa, directed broth to
be made for him, he being as thin and spare as if he had suffered a long
illness. This was done the next morning, when he found himself
exceedingly weak and fatigued. A similar case occurred, as he believes,
to a tavern keeper in Barcelona, which is known to the Reverend Father
F. Juan Mesados.

His health not improving for the space of three months, he saw Axis
again, who made signs of the cross upon the parts of his body where he
felt pain, but this had no more effect than the preceding experiments.
Axis then told him that he was possessed by five companies and five
captains of evil spirits, that the companies amounted to five hundred in
number, and might be easily cast out, but the five captains were not so
easily got rid of. He proceeded to exorcise them, and Masvidal fell to
screaming and behaving like one possessed. The _little ones_, as he
called them, being despatched, he went to work upon the captains, and
the first night, after supper, about nine o'clock, he began to make
signs of the cross, and talk in unintelligible language. He then gave
two loud screams, so horrible as to frighten every one; and Axis
affirmed that they were heard in the farthest regions of the air by the
other spirits. On this occasion, the two brothers-in-law,
beforementioned, were present.

Axis declared that the spirits were not despatched, and he exacted a
promise from them by the mouth of the patient, that they would depart at
nine o'clock the next morning; but continuing to remain at that time,
they promised anew in the same manner, to depart at nine that night. The
patient sent for Juan Munseis, Juan Baxo, and Antonio Torras, all
inhabitants of the place. At nine o'clock, the performances before
described, were repeated, the patient suffering greatly, crying out and
talking, as people do when bewitched. This was repeated morning and
night, for five or six days.

All this producing no effect, they advised him to confess the whole to
the abovementioned Reverend Father, F. Juan Mesados Servita. This was
agreed to, and Axis, the patient, Munseis, Torras, and Baxo, went to his
cell. The Reverend Father repeated some exorcisms, and Axis repeated his
crossings and supplications. He afterwards declared he had seen the
spirits, and described their shapes.

My informant also stated that Axis possessed the power to restrain the
tempests, for as they were returning in company from St Cypria, a storm
overtook them, and he was in great terror. Axis told him that a shower
of stones was falling at San Cucufase del Valles, but that he need not
fear, as he would shelter them from it, by means of a prayer that he
knew. And so it happened, for the shower fell as they learned
afterwards, but did not touch them, although they were forced to travel
quite to the seashore. Furthermore, Axis declared to him that he had
been in hell, and described to him the condition of the damned. One
night some evil spirits appeared to him, and offered him money if he
would give himself up to them, but he would not consent.

I likewise summoned to appear before me, Isidro Lepu of this place, and
obliged him to swear to declare the whole truth, and preserve secrecy. I
demanded whether he knew Antonio Axis, and his wife, Josefa Axis. He
answered that he did, inasmuch as they lived in the same house with him,
although in a different part. I asked him if he knew whether the said
Axis performed cures. He replied that he knew of his performing some,
and that Axis asked him to go in company with him one night, adding that
they would hear a loud noise, but he must not be frightened being in his
company, as they would be out of danger; that they must go at midnight,
and without any clothes. This proposal was rejected. Axis replied to
him, that he had no way to get a living, but my informant persisted in
his refusal.

The above are the literal declarations which I have taken under oath
from the person named. I have, moreover, strong suspicions that Axis and
his wife neglect mass on many occasions. Axis himself during his
residence this year in my parish, has not confessed, nor taken the
Pascal communion, although this has been done in the house where he
lives, and I have entreated him and his wife to comply with the
observance. Besides what is related above, he has attempted many other
superstitious cures upon people belonging to Barcelona and strangers;
all which I certify to be the exact truth.

DR FRANCISCO GUIU, _Parochial Curate_.
St Martin de Provensals, October second, 1803.

       *       *       *       *       *

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SENORES,

The supernumerary Inquisitor Fiscal declares that a commission should be
granted for the purpose of examining this letter, and also to examine
and ratify the depositions of the delator and the witnesses, which is
submitted to the opinion of your Excellencies.

The Licentiate, BASARRATE.

Secret Chamber, October tenth, 1803.

       *       *       *       *       *

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SIR,

In obedience to the dictates of my conscience and the counsel of my
confessor, Padre Gervasio Minguella, Carmelite Calzado, I inform your
Excellency of the following act which I have committed. Upon three
several times, at the solicitation of one of my companions, I went to
visit a woman for the purpose of learning, by a divination with cards,
whether a certain young man, to whom I am betrothed, would return hither
from Olot, where he now is. The above woman, having consulted the cards,
answered that he would return; but that it would be sometime first.
Other things she also informed me by divination. The woman's true name I
do not know, but she is called Pepa dels Gossos, and lives in the Calle
dels Tallers. I entreat that your Excellency will pardon this weakness
of mine, for I was not aware that I was committing an offence. My
confessor informs me of the fact that I have been guilty, and that I
must, within six days, give notice of the same to your Excellency.

God preserve your Excellency many years.

I kiss the hands of your Excellency.

Your servant, ANTONIA PUXANT,
daughter of JAIME PUXANT, Calle del Hom.
Barcelona, February third, 1805.

TO PADRE GERVASIO MINGUELLA, CARMELITE CALZADO.

We herewith transmit you orders to proceed in company with another
person of sacerdotal character to officiate as Notary, having first
sworn fidelity and secrecy, and summon before you, Antonia Puxant,
daughter of Jaime Puxant, living in the Calle del Hom. You will
ascertain from her, upon oath, whether the subjoined letter be hers,
whether she affirms the contents to be true, and whether there be any
part of the same to alter, or any addition to make. Within four days of
this, you will ratify the above depositions before the Notary, and other
trustworthy persons, and if any testimony which may corroborate the same
should offer, you will receive it, and ratify the said testimony at the
end of four days in like manner. Information respecting the character
and credit of the witnesses, you will transmit, written in the margin of
the depositions. Also in a separate paper you will forward an account of
the character and christian conduct of the person denounced. This order
is to be returned to our hands with all the other papers. Our Lord
preserve you many years.

Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, February thirteenth, 1805.

DR DON JOSEPH DE LLOZER.
Licentiate, DON MANUEL DE MERRA Y PANIAGUA.
DR DON JUAN DE RODAS.
D. D. JUAQUIN MONER, _Secretary_.

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SENORES,

I return your Excellencies the order of the date of February thirteenth,
of the present year, along with the deposition of Antonia Puxant, native
of Ripoll, in the bishopric of Vique, daughter of Jaime Puxant, resident
in the Calle del Hom, of this city. With this you will also receive the
depositions of six other witnesses to the same facts, which I have taken
by the information of the abovementioned Antonia. The tardiness with
which this business has been accomplished, will be overlooked by your
Excellencies, on reflecting upon the extent of my occupations, and on
the fact that the people from whom the depositions were taken, are of
the laboring class, seldom at their houses, and of consequence difficult
to find. The last named among them was not met with till the
twentyseventh of March.

With regard to the declarations of Antonia Puxant, I have to state that
both in her deposition, and in the ratification, she appears to have
disclosed the truth with perfect ingenuousness, as far as her knowledge
extended and the interrogatives went, although a mistake was made in the
name of the street, in which Pepa de los Gosos performed her
divinations, which she affirmed was the Calle de Nazaret; but on being
reminded of the error, she informed me, after the ratification, that it
was the Calle de Farlandina which is situated at the head of the street
leading from the convent of Nuestra Senora de los Angeles, to the Casa
de Charidad of this city.

Respecting the persons denounced by the said Antonia Puxant, both in the
deposition and ratification, I have summoned only those who, as I
understood from her, were present when the aforementioned Pepa de los
Gosos performed her divinations before the said Antonia. As to the other
persons and matters, referred to by her, I have instituted no
proceedings respecting them, deeming an additional order from your
Excellencies necessary to this step.

I have also to inform your Excellencies that the said Antonia Puxant is
very anxious that her father, Jaime Puxant, may know nothing of her
declarations, and in particular, that in the ratification, respecting
Margarida Puxant, inasmuch as this woman is married to the brother of
the above Jaime Puxant. She states further, that she heard sometime
since that the above Margarida, her aunt, had been summoned before our
Holy Tribunal for witchcraft and superstition; whether at the instance
of her father or relations, or other persons, does not appear, and for
this reason or some other, a discord had arisen between them.

With respect to the character and occupation of the denounced Pepa de
los Gosos and the fact whether she observes the precepts of the church,
I cannot transmit you any information, as I do not know the person, and
have not yet been able to find her; but according to all that can be
learned from the witnesses, she is undoubtedly guilty. They inform me
she is very cautious in concealing herself.

In relation to the other witnesses, I have to remark the following. As
to Gertrudis Poc y Marti, mentioned in the deposition of Antonia Puxant,
it appears to me that he has concealed the truth in his declaration,
from fear or some other motive; which opinion is confirmed by his having
delayed the ratification beyond the specified time, so that it was found
necessary to summon him anew. He appears, however, after he had been
charged to declare the truth on the eighth of March, when the
ratification took place, to have made a full and ingenuous declaration,
which corresponds with the statements of the above Antonia Puxant.

As to the deposition of Rosa Llobet, it appears to be true, although
nothing to the purpose. This person was summoned as she was supposed to
be the lady of the house where the divinations were performed, from the
description of Antonia; but I found, upon examining her, that she was
not. Still some information was obtained by her means, she having
informed me that a house near the one abovementioned, on the left hand,
is a great resort for young females for some unknown purpose. In
consequence, I have summoned the occupant, Francisca Jacoba, whom I
shall hereafter refer to.

Respecting Madalena Masllorens, I believe that she has declared
sincerely the whole truth. It is to be observed that this person is not
the proprietor of the house in the Calle de Farlandina in which Pepa de
los Gosos practised her arts, as was thought by Antonia Puxant.

With relation to Francisca Jacoba, who occupies the first floor of the
first house in la Riera Alta, on the left hand as you go from the
Convent of the Capuchins, she confesses that the said Pepa de los Gosos
has visited her house upon business, as many other persons have done,
but affirms that she never practised there, any performance or
divination with cards; yet from her manner of answering the
interrogatories, and her warmth in defending the said Pepa, talking at
great length in her favor, and declaring she had been accused falsely, I
have no doubt she is a friend of hers, and, therefore, that her
testimony is very suspicious. In this, however, I may be mistaken.

With respect to Maria Tintorer, who is the proprietor of a house in the
Calle de Farlandina where the divinations above referred to were
performed, I think she has spoken the truth, and that her whole
testimony may be credited. As to the Gipsey of the Calle de St Pablo,
Senor Augustus Fuster, and the other females, I have not summoned them,
waiting for an order from your Excellencies to this effect.

With regard to Antonia Ragas, I think her testimony may be admitted, as
it corroborates that of Antonia Puxant in some points. Respecting the
other witness, mentioned by Antonia, named Margarida, I have not been
able to take her deposition, as she has been long confined by sickness,
in the hospital in this city.

The above, Most Illustrious Senores, are the depositions which I have
taken, and the judgments I have formed respecting them. I trust you will
pardon the faults which I have committed therein, and rectify my errors.

I remain your Excellencies' most humble servant, and kiss the hands of
your Excellencies.

FR. GERVASIO MINGUELLA, _Carmelite Calzado_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the city of Barcelona, on the twentieth day of February, one thousand
eight hundred and five, before the Reverend Father Fr. Gervasio
Minguella, Carmelite Calzado, Presbyter and Commissary appointed for
this investigation, and me, Fr. Joseph Abella, Presbyter Carmelite
Calzado, Notary, having sworn to preserve secrecy and perform faithfully
our duties, appeared, according to summons, and made oath to declare the
truth and preserve secrecy, Antonia Puxant, a native of Ripoll, in the
bishopric of Vique, daughter of Jaime Puxant, of this city, aged
seventeen years.

Questioned, if she knew or conjectured the cause of her being summoned
to appear.

Answered, that she supposed it to be on account of a letter which she
had caused to be written in her name, to the Holy Tribunal, on the third
day of the present month.

Questioned, at what time and place, and in the presence of what persons
were the operations with the cards performed; also, with what words and
gestures, and whether the performer received any rebukes for her
actions, or appeared to be of sound mind.

Answered, that about six months ago, at the request of the deponent, she
performed the operation three several times in the space of three or
four weeks at different places; that is to say, the first time in the
Calle de la Riera Alta, at the other times in the Calle de Nazaret. The
houses she did not know. In the Calle de Nazaret the entrance was by a
small door in the lower story near a garden. The places she could
recognise on seeing. The person who performed the operation was always
unwilling to do it at her own house. Those present on the first occasion
were four in number; the deponent, the operator, one of her friends
called Gertrudis, and sometimes Jesus, because she lives in the Calle de
Jesus. She was a married woman. The fourth was, as the deponent
imagined, the lady of the house. On the second occasion there were
present the two first persons before mentioned, a young woman named
Antonia Ragosa, living in the Calle del Conde del Asalto, a native of
Ripoll, and the lady of the house called Helena or Magdalena. On the
third occasion there were present the two first persons, and another
called Puntina, the widow of a weaver. The operations were performed
with singular actions and unintelligible language. All that the deponent
could understand was the word 'Barrabast.' Nobody rebuked the
performer, and she practised the whole seriously, and in her right mind.

Questioned, what things she divined.

Answered, that she told her what money she had in her pocket; what she
was thinking about; that her father wanted her to marry a young man whom
she disliked, and that on this account her father was displeased with
her. Sometimes she made wrong statements, but this the deponent thinks
was done designedly, and in order that she might not be discovered. She
also told the deponent that the young man of Olot, to whom she was
betrothed, and whose name was Caspar Giralt, would write to her within
three weeks, and that he would visit this city, adding other
information. The operator always chose Friday for her performances, and
the deponent paid her two reals vellon.

Questioned, if she knew that any other persons had said or done anything
which came under the cognisance of the Holy Office.

Answered, that she had heard of four other persons who performed
divinations. One was named Fargas, and lived in a lane near St Paul's
Church. Another was named Teresica, and appeared to be a married woman.
She lived in the same street. Another was called Garvi. Her residence
unknown. The last was called Teresa, and sometimes Ballarenga, a married
woman, and formerly living in the Calle de la Parra. The deponent was
told by a young woman named Felipe, that on the second of this month
she passed the night with the said Ballarenga, where they burnt a rosary
and a two real piece along with some holy water. On the following
morning the said Felipe showed the deponent some black powder which she
stated to be the ashes of the rosary and money, and said it was a potent
love powder. The deponent was also informed by a young woman named
Ursula, who lives in la Riera Alta, that a person living in Barceloneta
carried on the same practices.

Questioned, if she knew anything more.

Answered, that a young woman named Teresa, living in the Calle del Conde
del Asalto, told her that a certain man declared to her mother, that he
knew a woman who would carry her to Olot in an hour's time, upon the
condition that she should not invoke any Saint.

Questioned, what was the age and personal appearance of the
abovementioned Pepa de los Gosos.

Answered, that she was a little old woman with sunken eyes and a
wrinkled face.

Questioned, if she knew anything more.

Answered, that a woman named Serafina Xuera, wife of Senor Miguel in the
Calle de St Olegario, had told her there was a woman in her house who
performed divinations.

Questioned, if she knew anything more.

Answered, No.

The above having been read to the deponent, is declared by her to be
correctly recorded. She further states that she has not made these
declarations out of malice, but solely in obedience to her conscience.
Secrecy was enjoined upon her, which she promised, and not being able to
write, I, the said Commissary, sign in her name.

FR. GERVASIO MINGUELLA,
_Carmelite Commissary_.
ANTONIO PUIXANT.

Before me--

FR. JOSEPH ABELLA, _Carmelite Calzado, Notary_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the suburb of Barceloneta, on the thirtieth day of October, one
thousand eight hundred and six, before the Rev. Juan Pedrals, Presbyter
and Commissary, and me Ignacio Ribes, Presbyter Notary, sworn to
preserve secrecy, and perform faithfully our duties, appeared, according
to summons, and made oath to declare the truth and preserve secrecy,
Manuel Baxo, a native of the town of Blancas, in the bishopric of
Gerona, aged sixtyfour years, and dwelling in Barceloneta, in the Calle
del Sementerio.

Questioned, why he had demanded audience.

Answered, to give the following information to the Holy Office. Within
about three years he had observed that his wife, named Cecilia Pruna,
and vulgarly la Cileta, had, on many occasions, in his house, performed
such practices as these. About ten or twelve o'clock at night, she took
a sheep's liver and put it in an earthen pot with a small quantity of
water. This she boiled over the fire and kept piercing it with a nail
set in the end of a stick, which he observing, she hid the stick and
made use of a knife for this purpose. She practised divinations with
cards to ascertain whether any person would be rich or poor, married or
single, or whether any one arriving from America brought money or not.
There was a ship which ran out to sea in the night, with the Collector
of the Customs and some of his officers on board, and while the whole
city was in suspense as to their fate, not knowing whither the ship had
gone, she informed the second officer of the marine that he might be
under no apprehensions, for they had arrived at Naples, without any
injury, which in fact turned out to be the case. Furthermore, she used
to gather dead men's bones out of the graveyard, and burn them to
powder, but what she did with this powder he did not know. She also made
use of certain grains which she obtained at the Convent of Jesus, and
observed that in order to be efficacious they should be gathered at the
time when our Lord was in his tomb, and not suffered to touch the
ground. These practices his wife had learned from a sailor of St Felio
Guixots, named Pedro Torrent, according to what she had stated to a
woman residing in the house. The deponent had made many exertions to
persuade his wife to comply with the precept of the church, and attend
mass, but she refused.

Questioned, what persons were present when these superstitious and
necromantic deeds were done, what persons took part in them, what
instruments were used, what words spoken, what ceremonies performed,
and whether the whole was done seriously or in a jesting manner; whether
she was rebuked by any one, and by whom; whether, after being rebuked,
she continued the practices, and whether she was in her right mind.

Answered, that various persons were present on the above occasion, but
their names and residences were unknown to him. Many persons likewise
unknown had participated in the operations. As to the instruments used,
they had been already described, as well as the manner and ceremonies;
that it was not done in jest, and she was in her right mind; and
finally, that he had often reproved her without effect.

Questioned, what was the age, personal appearance, and residence of the
person in question.

Answered, that she was about sixty years of age, tall, of a swarthy
complexion, and lived in his house.

Questioned, if he knew that any other person had said or done aught
contrary to our Holy Catholic Faith, or against the proceedings of the
Holy Office.

Answered, No.

The above being read to the deponent, he declared it to be correctly
recorded, and that he had nothing to add or alter in relation to it;
that it was the truth, and not uttered by him out of malice or ill will
against his wife, but solely in obedience to his conscience. Secrecy was
enjoined, which he promised, and added his signature.

MANUEL BAXO.
JUAN PEDROLS, _Commissary_.

Before me--

IGNACIO RIBES, _Notary_.

       *       *       *       *       *

To the reverend Vicar of Santa Maria de los Reyes to whom is intrusted
the district of the Calle del Santo Hospital, Barcelona.

It is desired in this Tribunal of the Holy Office, to learn the conduct
in a religious, moral, and political relation, of Dr Don Josef Baldrich,
advocate of the Royal Audience, and a resident in the Calle de
Jerusalem, at the corner opposite the church of St Augustin, in this
city. To know whether he observes the regulations of our Holy Mother
Church, and his general character in religion and politics. For this
purpose the Tribunal have directed that instructions be sent you to make
all possible exertions to this end, both in the discharge of your
ordinary functions, and by cautious and secret inquiries from persons of
good credit, not omitting anything in these researches which may
discover his most secret thoughts upon the matters above specified.

The above instructions I communicate to you by order of the Tribunal.
God preserve you many years.

Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, October thirtieth, 1818.

DON JOSE AYMAR Y SOLER, _Sec'y._


ANSWER TO THE ABOVE.

To Don Josef Aymar y Soler, Sec'y.
Sir,

Dr Don Josef Baldrich conforms punctually to the precepts of the church,
and regularly presents me his certificate to this effect. I have also
ascertained by inquiries, that his character is good in a political
view, and that he is a well informed and industrious person. I can
furthermore state that I have never had any complaint against him, all
which intelligence I transmit in discharge of the duty imposed on me.
God preserve you many years.

Barcelona, November seventh, 1818.

CLOY TUBERI, _Presbyter and Vicar del Pino_.

       *       *       *       *       *

To the Reverend Cura Parroco of Canellas.

This Tribunal of the Holy Office, desire to know the religious, moral,
and political behaviour of the Baron de Canellas; whether he follows the
precepts respecting Easter, and the other regulations of our Holy Mother
Church; and, having learnt that he has taken up his residence in your
town, the Tribunal have ordered that you receive instruction to make all
possible researches for this purpose, both in the performance of your
ordinary duties and by making inquiries through the instrumentality of
trustworthy persons, with all proper caution and secrecy; the
satisfactory performance of which, the Tribunal expect from your
prudence and zeal.

These instructions I transmit by order of the Tribunal. God preserve you
many years.

Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, November fourth, 1819.

DON JOSE AYMAR Y SOLER, _Sec'y._

       *       *       *       *       *

ANSWER.

To Don Josef Aymar y Soler, Secretary of the Holy Office of Barcelona.

In compliance with the order of the Tribunal of the Holy Office, I am
enabled to state that the Baron de Canellas has resided in this place
ever since the beginning of 1815, except being occasionally absent on
account of the season or his health, as at the present time; he is now
at Manlleu where he has resided since the first of August of the present
year, with the intention of passing the hot months there. It has not
been ascertained when he means to return, but I believe he has
determined to do this next January.

As to his moral and religious conduct, he commonly hears mass once or
twice a day, says his prayers very devoutly, and enjoins the same upon
all his family; but when his mental irregularities occur, which have
happened three or four times within six years, he is highly phrenetical,
and will utter blasphemies like a heretic, as I have been informed,
although such a thing has never happened in my presence or that of my
vicar. Even in these fits of delirium, however, he manifests towards us
some respect and fear. His last attack, according to what I have been
able to learn, endured from January till the end of April of the
present year, during which he conducted in a most inexplicable manner,
behaving at times very regularly, and at others like a madman. During
all this period I believe he never failed to attend mass at the stated
time, although he declared that he was no better than a dog, that he
possessed neither faith, hope, nor charity, that everything was a dream
to him, and that he had no belief in the divine mysteries.

Sometimes he would fall to raving, and declare that he had all hell
within him, on which occasions he would utter the most horrid
blasphemies. Finally at the end of the period abovementioned he grew
tranquil, and I directed him to observe the ordinances relating to
Easter, threatening him, in case of refusal, with a denunciation to my
prelate. All the threats and exhortations I could use were fruitless for
some time. At length, learning that the Missionary Fathers from
Villanueva were to take this parish in their way in the course of their
labors, he sent me a message, desiring me to grant him a forbearance for
a few days, as he was in readiness to perform his duties to the mission.
Notwithstanding, however, the assurances I had received from the
Missionary Fathers, they did not visit us, and the Baron remained
without confession, in which state he left this place for that in which
he now resides.

In the year one thousand eight hundred and eighteen he also omitted the
above duty in this place, and passed the Lent at the college, in the
capital, where he confessed, and took the sacrament, as appears from a
regular certificate which he showed me. When in good humor, which
happens the greater part of the time, he exhibits outwardly, great piety
and zeal, taking much care that his religious worship is accompanied
with every mark of respect, and paying the regular sums for the support
of my church. He is also very charitable, in which point, indeed, I can
bear witness that he follows his natural inclination.

Father N. de Barbara, lecturer in philosophy, of the Franciscan Convent,
at Villafranca, preached in this place during the last Lent, and had
many disputes with the Baron while he was in the height of his
extravagances. In the course of these the Baron uttered some assertions
which, had they proceeded from a person of sound mind, would have been
reported to the Holy Tribunal, but in his condition it was judged best
to consider him as a madman.

In fact, I am convinced that with occasional seasons of intermission, he
is not to be looked upon as a sane person; and finally with all his
singular piety and devotedness to the cause of the church, charity to
the poor, and apostolic zeal in speaking against the vices of these
miserable days, I perceive in him a great fund of excessive vanity and
pride.

The above information I lay before the Tribunal of the Holy Office, to
be applied to the requisite purposes. God preserve you many years.

FRANCISCO MARCER, _Cura Parroco_.
Canellas, November 18th, 1819.

The Inquisitor Fiscal declares it as his opinion that the investigation
of the above matter should be suspended and recorded for want of proof.

D. CASTILLON.
Secret Chamber, November 23d, 1819.

       *       *       *       *       *

The said Inquisitor having examined the above proceedings, in his
morning audience, on the day before stated, ordered that the
investigation be suspended for want of proof, and that it be recorded in
the registers under the name of the person referred to.

Attest. DR DON CYRO VALLS Y GELI, _Sec'y._

       *       *       *       *       *

Information has been received and sworn to in this Holy Office, that a
certain person has, in the presence of others, among whom was Juan
Bonafos, surgeon, living in the house of Don Antonio Canals, uttered the
following assertions.

1st. That the priests in the holy sacrifice of Mass, have no power to
bring Christ down from heaven, which is proved by the example of the
English, who, although so learned a people, yet do not believe this,
which they would if it were true, from their great sagacity.

2d. That the French have done right in breaking up so many
ecclesiastical and lay communities, which were the cause of such a
multitude of dissensions and altercations, destructive to the crown and
to the Apostolic Roman Catholic Church.

3d. That the chaplains dress in black to cover their ignorance, inasmuch
as they know nothing.

4th. That there is no hell nor purgatory.

5th. That the highest disgrace which could befall him in this world,
would be to have one of his relations a monk, or the Beneficiado of a
parish.

6th. That if the Tribunal were to order him to be arrested, he had arms
in his house and would resist till he had killed four or five.

In consequence of this, we hereby grant a commission to our Commissary
Dr Antonio Amill, for the examination before Dr Andres Fernandez de la
Cuesta, Presbyter, as Notary, of the said Juan Bonafos, according to the
formula herewith subjoined. The name and residence of the speaker and
those who were present, are to be recorded, as also all the
circumstances of time, place, &c., as prescribed in the above direction;
the whole to be forwarded to us with this commission. God preserve you.

Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, June eleventh, 1791.

The Licentiate,

DON MANUEL DE MERRA Y PANIYGUA.
DR DON PEDRO DIAZ DE VALDES.
JUAN ANTONIO ALMONACID, _Sec'y._

       *       *       *       *       *

In the city of Barcelona, on the eleventh day of July, one thousand
seven hundred and ninetyone, before Dr Antonio Amill, Presbyter and
Commissary of the Holy Office, by virtue of a commission of the Holy
Tribunal of the Inquisition of Catalonia, and me, Andres Fernandez de
la Cuesta, Presbyter and Notary, having sworn to preserve secrecy, and
perform faithfully our duties, appeared and made oath to declare the
truth and preserve secrecy, Juan Bonafos, surgeon, a native of the
village of San Lorenzo de la Muga, in the bishopric of Gerona, of age,
as he stated, twentyone years.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear.

Answered, that he did not know.

Questioned, if he knew that any person had said or done aught which was,
or appeared to be, contrary to our Holy Catholic Faith and Evangelical
Doctrine.

Answered, Yes, inasmuch as about six months before, he had heard Joseph
Coch, a surgeon, native of Sellern, and at present residing in
Barcelona, make the following assertions.

1st. That the priests &c. [_The six assertions specified above._]

On another occasion, the deponent having stated to him that he had been
in the Carthusian Convent, where he read an edict of the Holy Tribunal,
prohibiting several books, and among them, one called _Avisos de
Moises_, the above person replied, that as Christ had abolished the law
of Moses, he hoped that another Christ would come and abolish the laws
of the first. He moreover told him that he had prohibited books in his
possession, which in fact he showed to the deponent. Their titles the
deponent does not know.

Questioned, in what place the abovementioned Josef Coch made these
assertions, and what persons were present at the time.

Answered, that it was at the house of the surgeon Baramon, in the Calle
de los Flasades; and that the person present was Antonio Trabe, surgeon,
who lives with Dr Torner, Beneficiado of San Justo.

Questioned, what was the age and personal appearance of the said Joseph
Coch.

Answered, that he should suppose him to be about thirtythree years old;
that he was of a middling height, with a thin, pock marked face, and
black hair.

The above is the truth, according to the oath of the deponent, who
states that he has not made this declaration out of malice, but solely
from conscientious motives. Having been read to him, he declares it to
be correctly recorded. I add his signature.

JUAN BONAFOS.
DR ANTONIO AMILL, _Presbyter Commissary_.

Before me--JUAN BONAFOS.

DR ANTONIO AMILL, _Presbyter Commissary_.

Before me--

ANDRES FERNANDEZ DE LA CUESTA,
_Presbyter Commissary, Notary_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the city of Barcelona, on the twentysecond day of March, one thousand
eight hundred and ninetytwo, before Dr Andres Fernandes de la Cuesta,
Presbyter and Commissary of the Holy Office, by virtue of a commission
from the Holy Tribunal of the Inquisition of Catalonia, and me,
Francisco Junca, Presbyter Notary, appointed for this investigation,
sworn to preserve secrecy and perform faithfully the duty,--appeared
according to summons, and made oath formally to declare the truth and
preserve secrecy, Francisco Beau, clerk, a native and inhabitant of
Barcelona, and residing in the Calle dels Tallers, in the house of the
Earthen Ware Company, on the second floor, of age, as he stated,
thirtyeight years.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear.

Answered, that he supposed it might be for the purpose of inquiring
about the following matter. Being one day at dinner, in the tavern of
Domingo ----, in the Calle de la Paja, he heard a certain Estruch, and
another person who was a fifer in the Walloon Guards, talking about the
French affairs. The said fifer spoke against the christian religion and
Spain, and Estruch opposed him. Among other things in the conversation,
this fifer observed that he believed only three things; but what these
were, the deponent could not recollect--it was so long ago--only one of
them, as it appears to him, related to giving charity. He declared that
he possessed many books, and was not afraid of the Inquisition, for he
had already been engaged in some disputes relative to a woman, which had
come under the cognisance of the Holy Tribunal, or some of the officers.
More of the conversation than this, he does not remember.

The deponent was then told that information had been received and sworn
to, that a certain person had uttered, in his presence, and in that of
others, the following assertions; _that fornication was no sin, and as
to the rest, the whole was made good by giving charity to the poor_.
Other persons having mentioned the commandments, he replied, that they
were all fulfilled by giving alms. Speaking disrespectfully of the
church, he asserted, _that the friars and chaplains did nothing but eat
and stuff their paunches; that the church sought nothing but her own
interest, collecting tithes from one year's end to another; that the
Pope had no more power than any other man; that he did not believe in
the decalogue, nor the obligation to hear mass and confess, but only
that there was a God, and that men were bound to give to the poor, and
not steal_. The conversation turning upon the miracles performed by the
intercession of the Saints, he asserted _that he believed none of them,
because he had not witnessed them_. Those of Christ being mentioned, he
made this remark;--'_What a length of time from that period to 1791! and
yet you believe them!_' thereby giving it to be understood that he did
not believe them.

The deponent was therefore admonished in the name of God our Lord, and
his Glorious and Blessed Mother, Our Lady, the Virgin Mary, to bethink
himself and declare the whole truth.

Answered, that he heard the whole of these assertions except the first
and last, relating to the miracles.

Questioned, why he had not given information of what he had heard to the
Holy Office, inasmuch as it was so directly contrary to Our Holy
Religion and Evangelical Law.

Answered, that he was so occupied with his dinner, and the debates going
on, that he never thought of the obligation.

Questioned, from what cause and motive, and to what end the said fifer
uttered these scandalous expressions; how many times, and what persons
were present. Also, whether he was mad or drunk at the time, and whether
he had been rebuked; how many times this was done, and if he abstained.

Answered, that he knew nothing of the cause, motive, or end of these
words being spoken; that they were uttered only once at the noon above
specified, in the sight and hearing of the deponent. That the persons
present were the abovementioned Domingo, and a certain Juan, who, he
believed, resided in the Calle Condal, next the house of Dr Juncia, on
the second or third floor; also another person whom he did not remember;
that he judged him to have been in his right mind, having asked the said
Domingo in the presence of Estruch whether this man had not drunk too
much, to which he replied that it could not be the effect of the wine,
as he had, on other occasions, drunk more. That he did not recollect
whether he was rebuked, but only that they kept disputing.

Questioned, what was the personal appearance and age of the said fifer.

Answered, that he was of a middling size, about forty years old, and had
been the gardener of the citadel; that he belonged to the grenadier
company of Brias, according to his own statement.

The whole of the above is the truth according to the oath sworn by the
deponent, who also declared that the declarations were not made by him
out of malice or ill will, but solely to discharge his conscience. The
whole being read in his hearing, was declared by him to be correctly
recorded, and he added his signature.

FRANCISCO BEAU.
DR ANDRES FERNANDEZ DE LA CUESTA,
_Presbyter and Commissary_.

Before me--

FRANCISCO JUNCIA, _Presbyter Notary
for this Investigation_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the city of Barcelona, on the fourteenth day of June, one thousand
eight hundred and two, before the Reverend Cayetano Tuco, Presbyter and
Commissary appointed for this investigation, and me, the Reverend Juan
Palol, Presbyter Notary, sworn to preserve secrecy and perform
faithfully our duties, appeared, voluntarily, and made oath in the name
of God our Lord to declare the truth and preserve secrecy in everything
upon which she might be questioned, a woman, calling herself Maria Anna
Sauri, a native of the town of Trem, in the bishopric of Urgel, of age,
as she stated, forty years, a resident in Barcelona for twentysix years,
and at present residing in the Calle de Basea, in the fourth story of a
house opposite a carpenter's, next the stairs called den Casador. She
was the widow of Juan Martines, merchant, a native of the town of
Figueras in the bishopric of Gerona.

Questioned, why she had demanded an audience of the Holy Office.

Answered, for the purpose of denouncing certain matters to the Holy
Tribunal.

Questioned, what matters.

Answered, that about six months ago she dwelt in the Calle de San
Raymundo, near the Calle del Asalto, in a house between a tavern on one
side, and a tailor's shop on the other. In this neighbourhood resided a
female named, formerly, Teresa Sola, and after her second marriage,
Salanova, a native of Barcelona, aged from forty to fortyseven years.
Her husband was named Francisco Salanova, and was by trade a weaver, and
a native of San Felix de Llobregat. The deponent witnessed several
transactions between the said Teresa Sola, now Salanova, and a Swiss
soldier of the regiment called Bretxa. This soldier was called Joseph;
his other name unknown, as well as the place of his birth. Information
respecting him could be obtained of a certain captain, called Don Felice
Cristi.

The deponent saw these two persons take certain live frogs, stick
needles into their eyes, breasts, and backs, and put them into a new pot
over a great fire. This was done, as they informed her, for the purpose
of compelling a certain man to marriage. She also saw them take three
or four wax candles and light them. These they burnt bottom upwards,
burning, at the same time, rosemary, and repeating unintelligible
language, and making divers motions with the feet and hands.

The deponent also saw them practise operations with cards for the
purpose of divining whatever things they chose. She requested them to
perform one for her, and ascertain whether a person named Vicente, whom
she supposed to be sick, would return soon from Valencia. 'The said
Teresa shuffled the cards, and then answered me that he was not sick,
and would return soon, which in fact took place, and the abovementioned
Vicente shortly appeared. She told me, at the same time, that I was in
much distress, and if I would give her and the abovementioned soldier
half a dollar, they would enable me to attain all my wishes. I gave them
the money, and saw that they immediately took the figure of a dragon
tied by the neck, and placed it in the sun. This occasioned me so much
terror that I begged them to desist. Upon this they gave me back the
half dollar, uttering maledictions, and the said Teresa declared that I
was about to fall into an irretrievable misfortune, and that I should be
obliged to sell every rag from my back, which in truth is my condition
at present; and although I only laughed at the prediction then, they
both told me that I might proclaim to the whole world that they had said
it.'

The deponent further stated that the said Teresa had a companion named
Maria Anna Gitar, a native of Barcelona and a resident in the Calle de
San Raymundo. The deponent has never seen this person perform any
superstitious acts, but has heard that on occasion of a quarrel between
them, some witchcraft was practised; also that the said Maria Anna Gitar
had a sister named Magdalena, (the name of her husband unknown) and the
deponent heard the abovementioned Teresa Sola, now Salanova, declare
that her sister Magdalena had not been at confession for the space of
eight years. At other times, when these two were quarrelling, the
deponent has heard the said Magdalena exclaim, 'I am not like you, who
lay heaps of rosemary in the balcony at night to burn the next morning.'

Furthermore, the deponent has seen the said Teresa Sola, now Salanova,
burn alum for some superstitious purpose, to her unknown. On this
occasion there were two other persons present, namely, a girl called
Antonia, about twentythree years of age, a native of Barcelona, and
living with the abovementioned Teresa, and Raymundo Campens, widow of
Esteva Campens, tailor, dwelling in the Calle de San Raymundo, aged,
apparently, about fortyfive years.

Furthermore, the deponent remembers that she saw the said Teresa and the
abovementioned soldier called Joseph, burn alum for the purpose of
causing a reconciliation between a young man and a female named
Magdalena, which persons had fallen into a quarrel. The said Teresa also
practised operations with cards, and burnt rosemary, in order to effect
this object. On the first occasion were present the abovementioned
Antonia and Raymunda Campens, and on the second, Josefa Bardaguer, a
girl of about twenty years of age, living in the Plazuela del Pino in
the second story of a house which makes a corner of the Plazuela, and
other persons whom she does not remember, as she had witnessed these
performances between the said Teresa and the soldier so many times.

The said Teresa also informed her that she possessed a St Antonio upon
paper, which sweated whenever any ill was about to happen, and that when
a pack of cards was shuffled and the ace of spades and five of diamonds
drawn, it signified death or apprehension by the Holy Office. The
deponent further stated that the said Teresa, was accustomed to burn
rosemary, and sprinkle holy water all over her house, walking backwards
to the door; and that she possessed an herb which foretold everything,
good or bad, about to happen. Upon the stalk of this herb she placed a
piece of gold or silver money, or a ring; and the deponent on one of
these occasions saw a tile fall from the balcony into the street. In
this tile was a piece of a silver key, a gold ring, and seven reals
vellon.

Furthermore, the deponent has heard that when the said Teresa lived in
the Calle de Arolas, there ran out of her house, one day, a dog, with an
ox's heart, stuck full of needles, and that the Alcalde, whose name is
unknown to the deponent, with the men and boys of the neighbourhood,
caught the dog and burnt him in the middle of the street.

The deponent has also seen the said Teresa burn nine plates and three
strings of cotton, which she informed her was done to break the heart of
a certain person. She also told the deponent that on the night of St
John's day, she went to collect the leaves of certain herbs in a place
called Trinidad, where criminals who have been hanged are buried. There
accompanied her three or four women and a man who was a lamplighter. The
names of none of them were known to the deponent. Three or four men came
out and threw stones at then without hitting any one. She also informed
the deponent that she had in her possession medals and a crucifix of the
Holy Office.

Furthermore, the deponent stated that she requested her to ascertain
whether a person of her acquaintance in Valencia would return soon to
Barcelona; and the said Teresa Sola, now Salanova, bade her go and
purchase a pack of French cards at the shop of Revella, in the Plaza del
Angel. This the deponent did, and paid two reals plate for them. The
cards being produced, an operation was performed, and she pronounced
that he would return ere long, and that he had met with a misfortune;
for, on a journey to visit his sister, he had fallen from his horse and
broken his leg. She then further declared that at half past six o'clock
the next morning he would be in Barcelona; the whole of which proved
true, for at half past six he knocked at the door and said he had been
on a visit to his sister, who was a nun, and had fallen from his horse
and broken his leg.

Furthermore, the deponent stated that she had seen divinations with
cards performed by the surgeon of the Swiss soldiers in the regiment
called the regiment of Bretxa, now in Madrid. This surgeon was called
Don Felipe. His other name is unknown to the deponent. She has also seen
in his possession a book filled with figures of tombs, evil spirits, and
skeletons; and the surgeon told her that it contained matter which was
denounceable. There was present on this occasion the wife of the colonel
of the Swiss regiment, called Dona Maria. Her other name and birthplace
the deponent did not know; but only that when the regiment was in
Barcelona, the said Don Maria dwelt in the Calle Nueva del Asalto.

Questioned, what else she knew or had to relate.

Answered, that she had seen the above practices performed so often that
she had forgotten a great many instances.

Questioned, what persons were present on any of the above occasions.

Answered, that she had already named them.

Questioned, if she had seen or heard that any other person had said or
done anything against Our Holy Catholic Faith, or against the
proceedings of this Holy Office.

Answered, that she knew nothing further, and had she known anything,
should have divulged it before.

Questioned, why she suffered so much time to elapse without giving
information.

Answered, that she was ignorant of her obligation to do this, till on
relating these things to her spiritual father, he ordered her to make a
deposition of the whole before the Holy Tribunal.

Questioned, what was the personal appearance of the above mentioned
Teresa Sola, now Salanova; of the soldier; of Maria Anna Gitar, and her
sister.

Answered, that Teresa Sola, now Salanova, was a well shaped person,
somewhat fleshy, with a dusky complexion, reddish eyes, chestnut hair,
and small hands, having no scar to distinguish her. That Maria Anna
Gitar was a tall person, with an ugly pock marked face, the color of her
eyes, hair, &c. not remembered. That her sister Magdalena was a small
person, with a face likewise ugly and pock marked; other characteristics
forgotten. That the soldier called Joseph was a well shaped person, with
a long, palish face, and chestnut hair; the other marks not remembered.

The above, being read to the deponent, was pronounced to be her own
declaration, and faithfully recorded. She declared that she had nothing
to correct of its contents, except that the abovementioned Magdalena was
not the sister of the said Teresa, but of Maria Anna Gitar. She affirmed
that she did not make the declaration out of malice or ill will against
the abovementioned Teresa Sola, now Salanova, the soldier Joseph, Maria
Anna Gitar, and her sister Magdalena; but solely to discharge her
conscience. Secrecy was enjoined upon her which she promised, and not
being able to write, I, the present Commissary, sign in her name.

CAYETANO TUCO, _Presbyter and Commissary_.

Before me--

JOAN PALOL, _Presbyter, Commissary, and Notary_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the city of Barcelona, on the eighteenth day of June, one thousand
eight hundred and two, before me, Cayetano Tuco, Presbyter and
Commissary, appointed for this investigation, and me, the Reverend Juan
Palol, Presbyter Notary, both sworn to preserve secrecy, appeared and
made oath in the name of God our Lord, to declare the truth and preserve
secrecy, Maria Anna Sauri, widow, being also present, in the quality of
honest and religious persons, the Presbyters whose names are signed
below.

Questioned, if she remembered having made a declaration before the
ministers of the Holy Office against any persons for crimes within her
knowledge.

Answered, and related substantially the whole of the preceding
declaration. She requested that it might be produced and read.

The deponent was then informed that the Promotor Fiscal of the Holy
Office presented her as a witness _ad perpetuam rei memoriam_, in a
cause under his direction against the said Teresa Sola, now Salanova,
against the Swiss soldier named Joseph, against Maria Anna Gitar, and
against her sister Magdalena, whose husband's name is unknown. The
deponent was directed to give attention while her declaration was read,
and if she found anything to add or alter of its contents, to perform it
in such a manner as to declare the truth, as her assertions might
prejudice the said persons. The above deposition was then read _de verbo
ad verbum_, the deponent hearing and understanding the same.

The deponent declared that it was her identical deposition, as it had
been read and recorded; that she had nothing to add or alter respecting
it, for the whole was the truth which she attested and ratified; and
that if necessary, she was ready to repeat the whole against the said
Teresa, Maria Anna, Magdalena, and the soldier, and against the surgeon
Don Felipe, not from malice or ill will, but solely to discharge her
conscience. Secrecy was enjoined upon her anew, which she promised to
observe, and the deponent not being able to write, I, the said
Commissary, sign in her name along with the honest persons.

CAYETANO TUCO, _Presbyter and Commissary_.
FRANCISCO PALMAROLA, _Presbyter_.
ANTONIO HUGUET, _Presbyter_.

Before me--

JUAN PALOL, _Presbyter, Commissary, and Notary_.

       *       *       *       *       *


TO CAYETANO TUCO, PRESBYTER COMMISSARY.

In consequence of the deficiency of the information relating to the
deposition of Mariana Sauri, widow, native of Tremp, and residing in
Barcelona, in the Calle de Basea, in the upper story of a house
opposite a carpenter's, the Tribunal has ordered that you be instructed
to make inquiries with all possible expedition respecting the character
and responsibility of the abovementioned person, and of the credit due
to her testimony; also respecting the character and conduct of Teresa
Salanova, wife of Francisco Salanova, weaver, living, as it appears, in
the Calle de San Raymon, between a tavern and a tailor's shop. You will
likewise make the same inquiries respecting the life and character of
Joseph ----, a soldier in the Swiss regiment of Vetchar, and whether
these persons conform to the precepts of the Church in the annual
confession and Paschal communion. These orders I transmit for your
execution. Our Lord preserve you.

Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, June 28th, 1802.

DR DON CIRO VALLS Y GELI, _Sec'y._

       *       *       *       *       *


TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS INQUISITOR.

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SIR,

I have made inquiries of the Vicar of the district of the Calle Nueva de
Asalto and other streets, for the purpose of learning the character and
conduct of Teresa Sola, now Salanova, and of the girl Antonia, who lives
with her, and whose name has hitherto been unknown, but is now
ascertained to be Antonia Costa. These two persons live in the third
story of a house which makes the corner of the Calle de la Guardia. It
has been ascertained from the _cartepacio_ of the communions, that
neither the said Teresa Salanova, nor Antonia Costa, have, within the
present year, presented their certificates of the Paschal communion.

Respecting the soldier named Joseph, of the Swiss regiment of Vetchar, I
have not been able to learn anything, except that the regiment is now in
Madrid.

The above is the substance of what I have succeeded in learning, and I
communicate the same that your Excellency may apply it to the proper
purposes. God preserve the life of your Excellency many years.

Barcelona, July 2d, 1802.

Your most humble chaplain who kisses the hands of your Excellency,

CAYETANO TUCO, _Presbyter Commissary_.

       *       *       *       *       *


TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS INQUISITOR.

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SIR,

I have made the most industrious search for information respecting the
character and life of Maria Anna Sauri, widow, but cannot ascertain what
degree of credit ought to be attached to her testimony. I am informed by
the Reverend Antonio Huguet, Presbyter, that he has some knowledge of
her, as all these persons belong to the town of Tremp. He cannot tell,
however, what life she leads, and only knows that she has been in the
Galera. I made inquiries of the Pacionero del Pino, and he stated to me
that he had seen her in the Galera, where she was then in custody for
smuggling. Nothing more respecting her was known.

I have, with the assistance of the Vicar del Pino, examined the
_cartepacio_ of communions of the whole district of the Calle de Asalto,
Calle de Lancastre, Calle den Guardia, Calle del Olmo, Calle de San
Olaguer, which, as supposed by her in her deposition, must be the second
Calle de San Ramon, the whole Calle de San Ramon, and all the lanes. No
part of the _cartepacio_ exhibits the name of Marianna Sauri. I then
proceeded to Santa Maria del Mar, as the Calle de Basea, where she
resides, is situated in that parish, and here in the _cartepacio_ of the
communions it was found, but nothing further to direct me. She has left
Barcelona, whether for Tremp or Figueras, I cannot positively determine.

The above information I communicate to your Excellency to be applied to
the proper purposes.

Barcelona, July 2d, 1802.

Your most humble chaplain who kisses the hands of your Excellency.

CAYETANO TUCO, _Presbyter and Commissary_.

       *       *       *       *       *


MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SIR,

Father Fr. Vicente Xaus, Franciscan, residing in the Franciscan Convent
of Gerona, by an extra sacramental commission from Eulalia Forcat,
dwelling in the Hospicio of that city, with the intention to assume the
scapulary of a sister, gives information to the Holy Tribunal, that
Joseph Jalbert, merchant, a resident, as well as the other persons
referred to, in this city of Barcelona, and now residing in the
Callejuela de San Antonio, in a house where a herbseller keeps, uttered
about two years ago, certain insulting language about Ecclesiastics,
both secular and regular, saying they were a set of vagabonds, and that
he would not give them money, with many other things which she has
forgotten. These words were said at the house and in the presence of
Senor Francisco Galup, merchant, living in the Calle de la Merced, and
who can give further information of the facts. At another time, and in
the presence of the abovementioned Eulalia Forcat and Augustina Buxeras,
a resident in the Calle de Basea, besides his accustomed speeches above
described, he took a paper on which was the figure of a Saint, and
rubbed it over his posteriors outside of his clothes. The said Eulalia
also saw him open a book containing many indecent figures.

Furthermore, in the name of the same person, he denounces to the Holy
Tribunal the following matter. Father Fr. Antonio Puig, of Barcelona, a
monk of my seraphic order, and residing in the Grand Convent of
Barcelona, a thing which grieves me exceedingly, hearing the confession
of this person, in which she informed him that she was mortifying
herself with the exercise of the penal discipline, he visited her one
day when she was confined to her bed by indisposition, and speaking of
her penance, she discovered to him a portion of her body where she had
applied it, when the abovementioned Father examined it, and felt it with
his hand, asking her if it pained her where he touched. This business,
God be thanked, proceeded no further.

He furthermore states that the said Father did even worse than this to
the abovementioned Augustina, as he had learned from her own mouth. He
had ascertained from her confession, that she also was practising the
penal exercise, and went to her house one day, where he disciplined her
so violently that she was unable to sit down. She sent for the
abovementioned Eulalia to examine her, fearing that she had received
some wound. The said Eulalia does not recollect that she stated he had
disciplined her twice before, but remembers that she asserted she had
seen a part of the good Father's body uncovered.

Upon these matters the Holy Tribunal will institute the necessary
proceedings.

P. VICENTE XAUS, _Franciscan_.

Gerona, June 2d, 1807.

P. S. Both the above occurrences happened about two years ago.
Nevertheless a few days after the confession, I remember that the said
Eulalia told me they continued to confess to the same Father.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the city of Gerona, on the twentieth day of June, one thousand eight
hundred and seven, before Dr Narciso Coll, Presbyter, Inquisitor
Honorary, and Commissary, appointed for this investigation, and me
Joseph Gasull, Presbyter Notary, both sworn to preserve secrecy, and
perform faithfully our duties, appeared voluntarily, and made oath to
declare the truth and preserve secrecy in everything which she knew, and
about which she might be interrogated, a person calling herself Eulalia
Forcat, of the city of Barcelona, aged about thirty years, a nun and
attendant upon the foundlings in the Royal Hospicio of this city.

Questioned, if she knew or conjectured the cause of her being summoned
to appear by the Holy Office.

Answered, that she did not know.

Questioned, if she knew or had heard that any person had said or done
anything which was, or appeared to be, contrary to Our Holy Catholic
Faith and Evangelical Law, or against the just proceedings of the Holy
Office.

Answered, that about two years since, being in this city, and serving as
a domestic in the house of Senor Francisco Galup, merchant, in the Calle
de la Merced, she heard on many occasions, Joseph Jalbert, merchant, a
young man, a native of Puigcerda, and who transacted business in this
house for a year, and then removed with his parents to the Calle de San
Antonio, utter various insulting and abusive words against the Priests,
both secular and regular, disputing often at table with the said Senor
Francisco Galup, respecting matters of religion, declaring that the
Priests were a parcel of useless vagabonds, and that they ought to be
set to work, with other assertions of the same kind, which were uttered
repeatedly in the presence of the deponent and Augustina Buxeras, both
domestics in the house, Senora Maria Galup, Cayetano Galup, and Senor
Francisco Galup. He persisted in this language, notwithstanding they all
checked and rebuked him, in particular the abovementioned Senor
Francisco Galup.

On another occasion the deponent being in company with the aforesaid
Augustina Buxeras, in the kitchen of the house, the abovementioned
Joseph Jalbert took a paper, on which was the figure of a Saint, and
with approbrium to religion passed it behind him over his clothes. And
when they rebuked him in a christian manner, he laughed and left them.
At the same time she saw in the room in which he dwelt, three books,
bound in the French manner, of a small size, and containing very
indecent pictures of men and women. Neither the author of the books nor
the subject were known to her, as they were in French. He kept them in
his possession while he remained in the house, and on his departure took
them with him.

Questioned, what was the age, personal appearance, residence, &c. of the
abovementioned person.

Answered, that he was then about twentyone or twentytwo years old, of a
moderate stature, fleshy, with a face somewhat long, and flaxen hair. He
was unmarried, and engaged in mercantile trade. She believed that he
lived at present in Barcelona.

Questioned, if she knew that any other person had said or done anything
which was or appeared to be contrary to our Holy Faith or against the
just proceedings of the Holy Office.

Answered, No.

The above being read to her she declared that it was faithfully recorded
conformably to her own declaration, and that she had nothing to add or
alter respecting it, as it was the truth. She further stated that she
had not done it out of malice, or ill will against the said Joseph
Jalbert, but solely to discharge her conscience. Secrecy was enjoined
upon her, which she promised; and the deponent, not being able to write,
I, the said Commissary, sign in her name.

NARCISO COLL, _Presbyter, and for
the said Deponent_.

Before me--

JOSEPH GASULL, _Presbyter Notary_.

       *       *       *       *       *


In the city of Gerona, on the twentyfifth day of June, one thousand
eight hundred and seven, before Dr Narciso Coll, Presbyter, Commissary
commissioned for this investigation, and me, Joseph Gasull, Presbyter
Notary, sworn to preserve secrecy, and perform faithfully our duties,
appeared, and made oath to declare the truth and preserve secrecy,
Eulalia Forcat, and being present in the quality of honest and religious
persons, the Rev. Gines Torrent and the Rev. Thomas Parella, both
Presbyter Beneficadores of the Holy Church, sworn to preserve secrecy.
She was

Questioned, if she remembered having made a declaration before the
Ministers of the Holy Office against any person for crimes within her
knowledge.

Answered, by repeating, substantially, the foregoing declaration of the
twentieth of June current, made before the Commissary and Notary whose
names are signed below. She requested that it might be produced and
read.

The deponent was then informed that the Promotor Fiscal of the Holy
Office presented her as a witness _ad perpetuam rei memoriam_ in a cause
under his direction against the persons referred to in the said
declaration. She was directed to give attention while it was read, and
if she found anything to add or alter respecting the contents of it, to
do it in such a manner as to declare the truth, as what she now uttered
might operate to the prejudice of the aforesaid persons. The declaration
made before the abovementioned Commissary and Notary, on the twentieth
of June current was then read _de verbo ad verbum_, the deponent hearing
and understanding the same.

She declared it was her declaration, and correctly recorded; that she
had nothing to add or alter respecting it, as it was the truth, and she
attested it for the same, and if necessary was ready to repeat the whole
anew against the said Joseph Jalbert, not out of malice or ill will, but
solely to discharge her conscience. Secrecy was enjoined upon her which
she promised to observe, and the deponent not being able to write, I,
the said Commissary, sign in her name, along with the honest persons.

NARCISO COLL, _Commissary,
and for the said Witness_.
GINES TORRENT, _Presbyter,
in the same name_.
THOMAS PARELLA, _Presbyter_.

Before me--

JOSEPH GASULL, _Presbyter Notary_.

       *       *       *       *       *


In the city of Gerona, on the twentysecond day of June, one thousand
eight hundred and seven, before Dr Narciso Coll, Presbyter, Inquisitor
Honorary, and Commissary appointed for this investigation, and me,
Joseph Gasull, Presbyter Notary, sworn to preserve secrecy and perform
faithfully our duties, appeared, voluntarily, and made oath to declare
the truth and preserve secrecy in everything which she knew, and about
which she might be interrogated, a person calling herself Eulalia
Forcat, of the city of Barcelona, aged about thirty years, a nun, and
attendant upon the foundlings in the Royal Hospicio of this city.

Questioned, if she knew or suspected the cause of her being summoned to
appear by the Holy Office.

Answered, that she did not know.

Questioned, if she knew or had heard that any person had said or done
anything which was or appeared to be contrary to our Holy Catholic
Faith and Evangelical Law, or against the just proceedings of the Holy
Office. Answered, that at present she could remember nothing.

Questioned, if she knew or had heard that any Ecclesiastic had practised
irregularities towards any person of the other sex in hearing them often
at confession.

Answered, that all she knew was this; about two years ago she served as
a domestic in this city, along with Agustina Buxeras, who afterwards
lived in the family of Puigcech, a button maker, in the Plazuela de
Basea in Barcelona, and being at that time in the house of Senores
Francisco Galup and Cayetano, merchants, in the Calle de la Merced in
Barcelona, she heard, on several occasions, the said Agustina declare
that on confessing herself to the Reverend Father Fr. Antonio Puig, of
Barcelona, of the order of San Francisco de Asis, he had ordered her
many times at evening to go into a room at the entrance of the church of
the Convent of San Francisco, on the right hand, where he disciplined
her and caused her to do the same to herself, and that, he had done this
also at the house of the abovementioned Senores Galup. This the deponent
learned from the mouth of the said Agustina, and furthermore by
examining her person on the second occasion, when she found her
posteriors were black and blue, and that she had evidently been severely
handled.

The said Augustina also informed her that in one or more of these
instances while she was in the room with the abovementioned Confessor,
at the entrance of the Convent, he had taken off her petticoat and stays
to give her the discipline; at the same time he uncovered his back,
which she supposed was done for the purpose of exhibiting the effect of
his flagellation. These confessions and disciplines continued, as the
deponent learned, for some time, when finding that he did nothing to
effect her admission as a nun into some Convent, of which she was
desirous, she left him and sought another Confessor. What other things
were done was not known.

The deponent was then informed that information had been received in
this Holy Office that on the time above specified, while she was
confined to her bed by some indisposition, her Confessor had paid her a
visit, and in conversation upon penal mortifications he had uncovered a
part of her body, examined it, and touched with his hands the places
where she exercised her discipline, demanding if she felt any pain while
he was touching them. Therefore, by virtue of the oath she had sworn,
she was exhorted to bethink herself, reflect attentively upon the
matter, and declare the truth.

Answered, that this was all true; that it occurred in the abovementioned
house of the Senores Galup, with the aforesaid Father Fr. Antonio Puig,
her Confessor, and that on this occasion she did not confess herself to
him. She did not remember how long she had then gone without confessing,
nor how long she deferred afterwards confessing to the same person. She
however continued in company with him but without ever speaking of the
matter. She knew not whether the abovementioned Father had ever
solicited any person during confession or at any other time, nor had
ever heard that any person has declared that there was no obligation to
denounce such things to the Holy Office, but has heard the contrary from
her present Confessor, Father Fr. Vicente Xaus, a monk of the same
order, and now a conventual in this city of Gerona.

Questioned, what was the age and personal appearance of the said Father
Fr. Antonio Puig, also his condition, residence, &c.

Answered, that she believed him to be under forty years of age, that he
was of a middling height, rather thin, with a handsome face, large black
eyes and eyebrows, hair and beard a little whitened, and that she
believes he resides in Barcelona as one of the four ordinary Confessors
of the aforesaid Convent.

The above having been read in her presence, she affirmed that it was
correctly recorded conformably to her declaration; that she had nothing
to add or alter respecting it, as it was the truth; and that it was not
uttered by her out of malice or ill will against the abovementioned
ecclesiastic, but solely to discharge her conscience. Secrecy was
enjoined upon her, which she promised, and being unable to write, I, the
said commissary sign in her name.

NARCISO COLL, _Commissary,
and Presbyter for the Deponent_.

Before me--

JOSEPH GASULL, _Presbyter Notary_.

       *       *       *       *       *


In the Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, on the twentyninth
day of August, one thousand seven hundred and eightyone, the Inquisitor
Licentiate, Dr Manuel de Merra y Paniagua, ordered to appear before him
according to summons, a foreigner, established in this city, who, being
present, was formally sworn to declare the truth and preserve secrecy
with respect to everything which he knew, and concerning which he might
be interrogated, and in relation to everything which he might see or
understand, and everything which might befall him.

Questioned, his name, birthplace, residence, condition, age, and
occupation.

Answered, that his name was Pedro Remson; that he was born in the town
of St Jean in the district of Laval, in France; that he had resided in
this city four years, doing business as a linen draper; that he had no
wife, and was about thirtyfive years of age.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear by this Tribunal.

Answered, that he neither knew nor conjectured.

Questioned, if he had said or done anything which was or appeared to be
a matter within the cognizance of the Holy Office, or against our Holy
Catholic Faith and Evangelical Law.

Answered, that he had never said or done anything contrary to the
Catholic Faith, nor anything pertaining to the cognizance of the Holy
Office.

He was then told that information had been received and sworn to in this
Holy Office, that he, the deponent, had uttered certain speeches
containing matter which came under the jurisdiction of the Holy Office;
that he was summoned to be examined respecting it, and that he would do
well to confess the whole before he was compelled to it.

Answered, that he was confident he had never said or done anything of
the kind unless the following could be denominated such. About a year
since, conversing with Carlos Coquet with whom he resided in this city,
speaking of our Lady, of Mary and her image, the deponent affirmed that
the Holy Virgin Mother of God was the only one, and that there was no
difference between the image of Our Lady, of Mary, and any other. On
another occasion, about the same time, he told the abovementioned Coquet
that in France they were not obliged to present certificates of
compliance with the annual precepts of sacramental confession and
communion; that he considered it a burdensome practice and exposed to
great abuses, and that he had understood these certificates were often
sold about to persons who did not choose to comply with the precept,
which thing he had heard publicly declared in coffee houses and
clubrooms, but did not recollect by what persons.

At another time, finding that at his meal the oil did not suit his taste
nor agree with him, he observed to the said Coquet that he thought he
should not offend by eating the fat of beef on fast days, in place of
oil.

On another occasion, about the same time, being out of the city, Josefa
Coquet, wife of the abovementioned Carlos Coquet, was looking over his
books, among which she found one entitled La Henriade, by Mons.
Voltaire, which book belonged to Bernardo Carles, a Frenchman, who
passed through this city for Andalusia, and gave the book in keeping to
the deponent. He received it knowing that it was a prohibited book. When
the deponent returned to the city, the said Josefa Coquet told him, with
a mysterious look, that she had seen this book, and that her Confessor
had ordered her to give information of it to the Holy Office. He replied
that she had done wrong, and should have given up the book on mentioning
it. He offered her the key of his writing desk that she might see
whether he had any other bad or prohibited book.

Another day, talking with the aforesaid Coquet about the infallibility
of the Pope, the deponent declared that inasmuch as he had never read in
any book that the Pope was infallible, although he believed and held him
to be the head of the church, yet he was persuaded that God alone was
infallible; that the catechism which was taught him in France did not
declare that the Pope was infallible, and therefore he did not believe
it; but if his confessor or any other learned person were to say that he
was, he should believe it; upon which Coquet was offended and went off
to his own apartment. Further than this he did not remember to have said
or done anything relating to matters of religion, and if he were
apprised of anything, which had been denounced to the Holy Office, he
would disclose all he knew with the same sincerity.

He was then told that information had been received and sworn to in this
Holy Office, that he, the deponent, had said he was a freemason, and had
a book containing the constitutions of that society, that he produced
the book, read a portion of it, and declared that there was nothing in
it contrary to the Catholic Religion; furthermore, that the person to
whom he made these assertions and read the book, making some objections,
and telling him to conceal the book and take care that it came not to
the knowledge of the Inquisition, for they would punish him, he laughed
at him.

Answered, that it was false that he had ever told any one that he was a
freemason, as he was not, nor ever had been one of that order, although
he had held communication with some of them in France, had dined with
them, and seen them converse together by signs; also, that he never
possessed, nor said that he possessed a book containing their
constitutions, and although he once had a book which spake in praise of
freemasons, and commended their charities and other good works, yet it
was false that he ever read any part of the same to any person; that he
burnt this book with some other papers in presence of the abovementioned
Josefa Coquet, and that he did not remember to have made the assertions
imputed to him.

He was then told that information had been also received and sworn to,
that he, the deponent, on a certain occasion, gave to another person a
book whose author was Mons. Voltaire, informing him that he had
possessed it for fifteen years; and that a certain ecclesiastic
reprehending him for it, he replied that the book was not his, and that
on the same day, in presence of the person aforesaid, he burnt some
papers, saying, that he did it for fear of the Inquisition.

Answered, that the first part of this assertion was false; namely, that
relating to the work of Mons. Voltaire, and that no part of it was true,
except what he had already related as having passed between him and
Josefa Coquet; that it was true he had burnt, in her presence, the book
in praise of the freemasons, the history of the Incas of Peru, and some
papers relating to the entertainments given to the Prince of Chartres,
who was considered as the head of the freemasons, and also that he
declared he had done the same for fear of the Inquisition.

It being late, the audience closed, and the deponent was ordered to
appear again the next morning. The whole was read to him and he declared
it to be true, which I certify.

PEDRO REMUSSON.
JUAN ANTONIO ALMONACID, _Sec'y._

       *       *       *       *       *


To the Members of the Tribunal of the Inquisition of Catalonia, at their
Royal Palace, Barcelona.

Barcelona, March 20th, 1802.

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SIR,

I have some information to give your Excellency respecting a certain
person who has uttered in my presence some words which it appears to me
come within the cognizance of your Excellency. Various causes have
hindered me from appearing before the respectable tribunal of your
Excellency and denouncing the whole matter. I trust your Excellency will
favor me so far as to take my deposition at the hands of some clerical
person. I live in the Calle Ancha, in the second room of a house which
forms the corner of the Callejon de la Plata, No. 1, and for more
particular direction, my house is so near that of Senor Don Juan Larra,
that nothing separates them but the abovementioned Callejon.

Your Excellency's most humble servant,
MARIA BERNARDA HALLEGG, _wife of
Don Pedro Hallegg, Captain in the
Regiment of Rutiman_.

       *       *       *       *       *


In the city of Barcelona, on the third day of June, one thousand eight
hundred and two, before Dr Andres Fernandez de la Cuesta, Presbyter and
Commissary appointed for this investigation, and me, the Reverend
Cayetano Tuco, Presbyter, Commissary, and Notary on this occasion, sworn
to preserve secrecy and perform faithfully our duties, appeared,
voluntarily, and made oath to declare the truth and preserve secrecy
with respect to everything which she knew and about which she might be
interrogated, a person calling herself Dona Maria Bernardo Halegg, wife
of Don Pedro Hallegg, Captain in the Regiment of Rutiman, a native of
the town of Estipona, in the province of Andalusia, of age, as she
stated, twentyfour years, and residing in the Calle de la Plata.

Questioned, if she knew or conjectured the cause of her being summoned
to appear by the Tribunal of the Holy Office.

Answered, that she supposed it to be on account of a letter which her
Confessor had written in her name to the Holy Office, in which letter
she had declared that she had some information to communicate. The
matter in question was as follows. About six months ago, Juan Picar, a
native of Lyons, in France, who visited at her house, uttered the
following heretical speeches; namely, that he did not believe in the
purity of the Most Holy Mary; that he did not believe Jesus Christ
descended to the Host after the words of consecration were uttered by
the Priest; that he did not believe in the Pope, inasmuch as he was a
man like ourselves; that those who died did not go to Hell, but to
Paradise; that he said 'Holy Mary' instead of 'Most Holy Mary;' that he
spoke ill of the Priests, declaring that he could not endure the sight
of them, and that they had ruined Spain; that the French had done well
in driving them all out of their country. The deponent stated further,
that she believed he did not attend mass on the days appointed,
although he professed to be a Christian.

She was then shown a letter beginning with 'Barcelona, March 20th,
1802,' and ending with 'Don Pedro Halegg, Captain in the Regiment of
Rutiman,' that she might examine and identify it, and declare it to have
been written by her, or by her direction in her name, and containing the
truth.

Answered, that it was the identical one which she had caused to be
written by her Father Confessor, and that she attested it for the truth;
that she had nothing to add or alter in relation to it, and that she had
not made her declarations out of malice or enmity against the
abovementioned person, nor from any counsel or instigation on the part
of any other person.

Questioned, why she had delayed to denounce these offences to the Holy
Office, thereby failing in her obligation to give notice of all such
matters immediately upon having knowledge of the same.

Answered, that she wished previously to consult her Father Confessor,
and that she obeyed upon receiving his orders.

Questioned, at what time and in what place he made the abovementioned
assertions; what persons were present; if he said them more than once,
and how many times; whether he spoke in his own language, or quoted
others who made the assertions referred to; whether he spoke in jest, in
dispute, or in a passion; whether he was accustomed to utter such words;
whether he was rebuked by any persons present, and by whom; whether,
after being rebuked, he persisted in his assertions, and whether at the
time of speaking he was in his right mind, or was insane or drunk.

Answered, that she had already specified the time, and that it happened
at her house; that there were present occasionally her husband
abovementioned; her brother-in-law, Don Martin Halegg, who resided
there, a servant named Francisca Garriga, living in the Callejon de
Santa Anna, and who went to be married at Tarragona, but her present
place of residence the deponent does not know, and another servant named
Antonia, who lives in a lane near La Trinidad Calzada, and is the
daughter of a schoolmaster in that lane; that he repeated the above
assertions many times, so often that she could not recollect the number;
that he spoke affirmatively, and seriously; that she did not think he
was accustomed to such talk, as he had not repeated it for more than two
months; that he was rebuked several times by the abovementioned persons
and the deponent, but took no heed; and that on most of these occasions
he was in his right mind, although a few times he was intoxicated.

Questioned, if she knew that any other person had said or done anything
which came within the cognizance of the Holy Office.

Answered, No.

Questioned, what was or appeared to be the age of the abovementioned
Juan Picar, also his personal appearance and condition.

Answered, that he was about fortyfour years of age, tall, thin, with a
light complexion, blue eyes, and red hair; and that he was a soldier in
the aforesaid regiment.

The above being read to her, she affirmed it to be recorded conformably
to her declaration; that she had nothing to add or alter respecting it,
as it was the truth; and that she did not utter it out of malice or ill
will against the said Juan Picar, but solely to discharge her
conscience. Secrecy was enjoined upon her, which she promised to
observe, and added her signature, which I certify.

After the declaration had been read, and before it was signed, the
deponent recollected that the abovementioned Juan Picar observed to her
husband, that a person, on dying, passed to the other world without
suffering any punishment. Also she had been informed by her
sister-in-law, Dona Rafaela Reymer, wife of a captain out of service,
named Don Joseph Reymer, who lives in the Calle de San Pablo, No. 14,
third story, that two officers of the said regiment, the one named
Martin Estinause, and the other unknown, uttered blasphemies respecting
a figure of Christ.

All which she denounces to the Holy Office in discharge of her
conscience, and under the oath of secrecy sworn by her. She added her
signature, which I certify.

MARIA BERNARDA HALLEGG.
DR ANDRES FERNANDEZ DE LA CUESTA,
_Presbyter and Commissary_,
CAYETANO TUCO, _Presbyter, Commissary,
and Notary_.

       *       *       *       *       *


MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SIR,

Francisco Prat, Subdeacon, native of Esponella, and a resident in the
Seminario del Senor, in the bishopric of Gerona, by counsel and order of
the Reverend Juan Salgueda his Confessor, gives information with due
respect to your Excellency, of the following matter.

About six months since, in this city, he heard Narcisa Catala y Pinsach,
the wife of a Frenchman, and reputed a woman of truth, and a native of
Gerona, dwelling in the Mercadal Parish of that city--declare that a
Frenchman who was a stocking weaver in the Hospicio of the same city,
whose name was Blaqueire, and whose age was about thirty years, had been
baptized since he was in Spain, but had prevaricated and embraced some
heresy.

Also that a certain Frenchman, named Avi Brich, aged about sixty years,
residing in the said city of Gerona, and likewise a stocking weaver in
the Hospicio, was a Jew, and the writer of this letter observing that
they ought to commune annually, otherwise they would be severely
punished, she replied that in order to deceive the spies, he took the
sacrament not merely once, but two or three times every year.

Which information I transmit to your Excellency for the necessary end.

Gerona, April 28th, 1791.

FRANCISCO PRAT, _Subdeacon_.

We herewith transmit to the Reverend Juan Salgueda, Presbyter Vicar of
the church of the Mercadal of Gerona, the extrajudicial denunciation of
Francisco Prat, Subdeacon, a resident in the Episcopal Seminario of that
city, and we grant a commission for examining him before another
Ecclesiastic as Notary, according to the formula adjoined, No. 1, in
order that the denunciation may be attested, and he may affirm, under
oath, that it is his, written and signed by him, and its contents true,
as also whether he has anything to add or alter respecting it, and from
what motive the said Narcisa Catala y Pinsach made the charges in
question against the two Frenchmen.

Having taken the deposition of Francisco Prat, you will take the
occasion and methods the most cautious and opportune to examine before
the same Notary, and according to the formula No. 2, the said Narcisa
Catala y Pinsach, respecting the matters referred to by Francisco Prat,
taking care not to mention to her the name of this person, nor the names
of the Frenchmen accused, inasmuch as she will state them herself should
her testimony corroborate the charge, in which case she will specify the
name, occupation, country, residence, age, and personal appearance of
each individual. Also if she knows whether one of them has been baptized
in Spain, when, in what Parish, and what heresy he embraced afterwards.
Also what reason she has for saying that one of them is a Jew, and in
order to deceive the spies, takes the communion not merely once, but two
or three times a year. You will also question her whether she has heard
or understood anything from these two Frenchmen or others, which is, or
appears to be, contrary to our Holy Catholic Faith, or within the
cognisance of the Holy Office, in which case she must declare whatever
she knows, with the utmost clearness and perspicuity.

These investigations being completed, you will forward the proceedings
to us, returning also all the papers. Our Lord preserve you.

Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, June 11th, 1791.

The Licentiate,
DON MANUEL DE MERRA Y PANIAGUA.
DR DON PEDRO DIAZ DE VALDES.
JUAN ANTONIO ALMONACID, _Secretary_.

       *       *       *       *       *


In the city of Gerona, Principality of Catalonia on the thirtieth day of
June, one thousand seven hundred and ninetyone, before us, Juan
Salgueda, Presbyter Vicar of the Mercadal and Commissary of the Holy
Office for this investigation, and Dr Marcial Llistorella, Presbyter
Notary, sworn to preserve secrecy, and perform faithfully our duties,
appeared according to summons, and made oath to declare the truth and
preserve secrecy, a person calling himself Francisco Prat, Subdeacon of
the village of Esponella in the bishopric of Gerona, aged twentyeight
years.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear.

Answered, that he supposed it to be on account of a denunciation he had
made, respecting something he had heard from Narcisa Catala y Pinsach.

He was then informed that a letter had been received in this Holy
Office, which appeared to be from him, which letter began with
'Francisco Prat, Subdeacon,' and ended with 'for the necessary ends.'
This letter was then produced, when he recognised it, and declared it to
be the one which he wrote to the Tribunal, and that its contents were
true.

Questioned, if he had anything to add thereto.

Answered, that in the conversation referred to, the abovementioned
Narcisa Catala y Pinsach stated that some other Frenchmen abused the
said Francisco Blaqueire on account of his prevarication respecting our
religion, and that this happened in her house. Also, (but of this he is
not certain) he believed she declared that the father and brother of the
said Blaqueire who reside in Montagut or Tortella, in the bishopric of
Gerona, refused to live with him by reason of his baptism, and that they
had not been baptized; at any rate she said something respecting this.

Furthermore he had been told by Maria, the sister of the aforesaid
Narcisa Pinsach, that Francisco Brich was a Jew. This she told the
deponent in his own house; the like assertion he had heard from some of
the common people, but did not recollect whom.

Questioned, what gave rise to the aforesaid conversation; why the
charges were made; and seeing that it was his duty to oppose and
denounce such matters, why he waited six months before he gave
information.

Answered, that he chanced to remark, while waiting for the husband of
the said Narcisa Pinsach, that the abovenamed Brich appeared to be an
honest man, to which she replied that he was not, when the rest of the
assertions followed; that the charges were made in compliance with the
dictates of his conscience; and that he had spoken of the matter before,
but had been told that it was women's tattle.

Questioned, what was the appearance of the persons in question.

Answered, that he had no knowledge of Francisco Blaqueire; and that the
said Brich is a man of middling stature, corpulent, somewhat florid, and
of a pacific temper; and that he knew nothing of his birthplace, except
that he was a Frenchman.

The above is the truth according to the oath of the deponent, who has
not made this declaration out of malice or ill will, but solely in
discharge of his conscience; he declared that it was correctly recorded,
and signed it in the city of Gerona, on the first day of July, one
thousand seven hundred and ninetyone.

FRANCISCO PRAT, _Subdeacon_.

Before me--

DR MARCIAL LLISTORELLA, _Presbyter Notary_.


In the city of Gerona, on the second day of July, one thousand seven
hundred and ninetyone, before us, Juan Salgueda, Presbyter, Vicar of the
Mercadal of Gerona, and Commissary of the Holy Office, and Dr Marcial
Llistorella, Presbyter Notary, sworn to preserve secrecy and perform
faithfully our duties, appeared, according to summons, and made oath to
declare the truth and preserve secrecy, Narcisa Catala y Pinsach, wife
of Joseph Fabrega, commonly called Catala, stocking weaver, a native and
inhabitant of Gerona, of age, as she stated, twentyeight years.

Questioned, if she knew the cause of her being summoned to appear.

Answered, No.

Questioned, if she knew that any person had said or done anything which
was, or appeared to be contrary to our Holy Catholic Faith, and
Evangelical Law.

Answered, that she had been told that Francisco Brich, _alias_ Lo Avi
Brich, and Francisco Blaqueire, stocking weavers, in the Hospicio of
this city, were Protestants; and that the said Blaqueire had been
baptized since his residence in Spain, but she knew not in what Parish.
Also, that he could not live with his parents because they were
Protestants. His parents live in France.

Questioned, if she knew whether the said Blaqueire had embraced any
heresy.

Answered, that she only knew he was a Protestant, according as she was
informed by her mother, now dead, who asserted that she was unwilling
to let her other daughter marry the said Blaqueire because he was a
Protestant. The same assertion she has heard from many other persons;
she could not remember whom, but believed they were people of the vulgar
sort.

Questioned, if she had told this to any other person.

Answered, that what had been told her, she had told to others, but to
whom she could not say.

Here closed the deposition of the second of July, and on the fourth of
the same month, the said Narcisa Fabra Catala y Pinsach appeared again.

Questioned, if she had anything to add to the declaration which she had
made against Francisco Blaqueire.

Answered, No.

Questioned, what was the personal appearance of this man.

Answered, that he was about thirty years of age, of a moderate stature,
and corpulent; that she did not know his birthplace, only that he was a
Frenchman; that he was desirous of marrying, and that he was a stocking
weaver, but in what factory he worked she did not know.

Questioned, why she supposed the abovenamed Brich to be a Protestant.

Answered, that she did not know it for certain, but had heard of it in
the same manner in which she learned the history of Francisco Blaqueire,
and that perhaps she had told it to others.

She was then informed that information had been received and sworn to in
the Holy Office, that in a certain conversation a certain person
observed that Avi Brich appeared to be an honest man, to which she
replied, 'He is not an honest man, but a Jew.' And it being remarked
that in Spain they must confess and partake of the communion once in
each year, she replied, that in order to deceive the spies, they did
this not merely once, but two or three times a year.

Therefore, in the name of God Our Lord and his Glorious and Blessed
Mother Our Lady the Virgin, she was exhorted to bethink herself and
declare the whole truth.

Answered, that she did not remember to have said so, but had heard say
that if he had died in the Hospital, where he lay very sick about two
years, he would not have been buried in consecrated grounds. At present
she could not recollect who made this assertion, but she believed they
were Frenchmen.

Questioned, what was his age and personal appearance.

Answered, she had known him about six years; that he was of a middling
stature, corpulent, of a pacific temper, and above fifty years old; that
she knew not his birthplace, but only that he was a Frenchman, and
resided in the parish of the Mercadal of Gerona.

Questioned, if she knew anything of any other person which was contrary
to our Faith.

Answered, that she had been told by Dona Manuela de Rodil, that Monsieur
Daniel, a Frenchman, living in the parish of the Mercadal, possessed a
mirror, which, on looking into it, exhibited the figures of devils.
Also, she had heard, from the vulgar, that he and his wife were not
Christians. Furthermore, she had been told by a certain Mallensa, a
French woman, that a certain Luis in her house was a Protestant, but she
believed this was said from hatred, and in order to get him out of the
house. Finally, she remembered to have heard that one of the sons,
Francisco Brich, now in France, was a Protestant. Who made this
assertion she could not tell.

The above is the truth according to the oath of the deponent, who has
not uttered it out of malice or ill will, but solely to discharge her
conscience; and having been read, she declared that it was correctly
recorded.

Done at Gerona on the fourth day of July, one thousand seven hundred and
ninetytwo.

The said Narcisa Catala Fabre y Pinsach not being able to write, I sign
the above.

JUAN SALGUEDA, _Presbyter, &c._

Before me--

DR MARCIAL LLISTORELLA, _Presbyter,
Notary in this Investigation_.

       *       *       *       *       *


MOST ILLUSTRIOUS SIR,

Being in company with Juan Bautista Viada, mason, on the twelfth day of
the present month, and discoursing of sermons upon the state of the
soul, I am very confident that he made this remark; that he had heard
sundry persons declare they believed nothing about hell or purgatory,
but as for himself, he believed. Which information I give your
Excellency in obedience to the dictates of my conscience.

Mataro, November 17th, 1819.

Your most humble servant,
FRANCH. PLANA, Carpenter.

On the road beyond the gate of Batlleix.[21]

       *       *       *       *       *

Let a commission be expedited for the examination of the above letter.

       *       *       *       *       *

To the Reverend Father Pedro Martir de S. Vicente, Capuchin and Ex
Lecturer of his order.

We hereby grant you a commission to summon before you, and another
ecclesiastic to act as Notary, first swearing secrecy, Francisco de Asis
Plana, carpenter, residing opposite the gate of Batlleix of this city.
You will subject him to a regular examination respecting a letter of his
which is herewith enclosed, and exact an oath from him that the letter
is his, written by himself and its contents true. You will ascertain
whether he has anything to add or alter respecting it, and after four
days you will ratify the same _ad perpetuam_, in the presence of two
other ecclesiastics sworn to secrecy. In the same manner you will
proceed to take separately the depositions of Juan Bautista Viada,
mason, and of the other persons whom he states were present when the
speeches in question were uttered; these depositions to be also
ratified. You will not omit to question him who these persons were,
according to the regular form. You will note in the margin of the paper
which shall contain the depositions, the degree of credit which they
deserve; and you will also transmit, separately, an account of the
lives, character, and behaviour of the persons denounced. With these you
will return this commission and the other papers. God preserve you many
years.

Royal Palace of the Inquisition of Barcelona, December 18th, 1819.

DR DON JOSE LLOZER.

The Licentiate,

DON SANTO DE BASARRATE.
D. D. JUAN DE CALVA Y MARTI, _Sec'y._

       *       *       *       *       *


In the city of Mataro, bishopric of Barcelona, on the twentyeighth day
of December, one thousand eight hundred and nineteen, before Father
Pedro Martir de San Vicente, Presbyter and Commissary, specially
appointed in virtue of a commission to this effect, and before me, P.
Bernardino de Barcelona, Presbyter Notary, having sworn to preserve
secrecy and perform faithfully our duties, appeared voluntarily and made
oath in the name of God our Lord, with the sign of the cross, to declare
the truth and preserve secrecy, with respect to everything demanded of
him which he knew, a person calling himself Francisco de Asis Plana,
carpenter, aged fiftyseven years.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear by the Holy Office.

Answered, Yes.

Questioned, if he had written, or caused to be written at any time, a
letter to the Tribunal of the Inquisition, giving an account of some
crime within his knowledge, and who was the person to whom he referred.

Answered, that he had written a letter against Juan Bautista Viada,
mason. The letter was then exhibited and the first clause of it read,
when the deponent declared it to be his, and that its contents were
true.

Questioned, if he had anything to add or alter in the said letter.

Answered, that if it were not for the apprehension of falling into an
error, he should alter, 'I am confident,' to 'I am certain.'

Questioned, if there were other persons present when Juan Bautista Viada
made the assertions in question.

Answered, No.

Questioned, if he knew that any other person had said or done anything
which came under the cognizance of the Holy Office.

Answered, No.

Questioned, what was the age, appearance, and habitation of the person
denounced.

Answered, that he was about fiftysix years old, and lived in the Calle
de Argentona, in Mataro.

The above having been read to the deponent was declared by him to be
correctly recorded. He stated further that he had nothing to add or
alter respecting it; and that he did not make the declarations therein
contained, out of malice, but solely from conscientious motives. Secrecy
was enjoined upon him, which he promised, and added his signature.

FRANCISCO DE ASIS PLANA.

FR. PEDRO MARTIR DE SAN VICENTE,
_Presbyter Capuchin_.

Before me--

P. BERNARDINO DE BARCELONA, _Presbyter,
Notary, and Commissary, appointed for
this Purpose_.

       *       *       *       *       *


In the city of Mataro, bishopric of Barcelona, on the sixteenth day of
January, one thousand eight hundred and twenty, before Father Pedro
Martir de San Vicente, Presbyter Capuchin, and Commissary, by a special
commission for this purpose, and me, Father Bernardino de Barcelona,
Notary, having sworn to preserve secrecy, and perform faithfully our
offices, appeared and made oath in the name of God our Lord, with the
sign of the cross, to declare the truth, and observe secrecy, a person
calling himself Juan Bautista Viada, a native of Mataro, in the
bishopric of Barcelona, by occupation a mason, aged fiftyfour years.

Questioned, if he knew or conjectured the cause of his being summoned to
appear.

Answered, No.

Questioned, if he knew that any person or persons had said there was no
Hell nor Purgatory, or made any other assertion which came under the
cognisance of the Holy Office.

Answered, that he had heard the above assertion uttered by Magin
Casanovas, or Barcelo, a person who died two years since.

Questioned, what persons were present when these words were spoken; and
if the said Magin Casanovas was in his right mind; also, whether the
assertion was made in a positive manner, or by referring to some other
person, and whether it was made in jest, or dispute, or passion.

Answered, that he did not recollect whether it was said in the presence
of others or not, but that it appeared to be said in a positive manner,
and not in the heat of passion; that the abovementioned Magin Casanovas
was a Marine Alguacil of this city, of which he was also a native, and
that his age was about seventy years.

Questioned, if he remembered how many times the assertion had been made,
and if he received any rebuke for it.

Answered, that he did not remember.

Questioned, why he had not denounced the speaker to the Holy Tribunal.

Answered, that the thought of this never occurred to him.

Questioned, if he knew that any other person had said or done anything
which belonged to the cognizance of the Holy Tribunal.

Answered, No.

The above having been read to the deponent, was declared by him to be
correctly recorded; and he further stated that he had nothing to add or
alter respecting it, and that he did not make the declaration through
malice, but solely in obedience to his conscience. Secrecy was enjoined
upon him, which he promised, and added his signature.

JUAN BAUTISTA VIADA.
FRAY PEDRO MARTIR DE SAN VICENTE,
_Presbyter Capuchin Commissary_.

Before me--

F. BERNARDO DE BARCELONA, _Notary_.

       *       *       *       *       *

[_The following is written in the margin of the above deposition._]

I know the deponent Juan Bautista Viada to be a person worthy of credit.
He supports his family by his labor; follows the precepts of the church,
confesses, and partakes of the sacrament; nor have I ever heard of
anything which can impeach his testimony. This is my opinion, salvo
meliori.

Mataro, January 28th, 1820.

FR. PEDRO MARTIR DE SAN VICENTE,
_Presbyter Capuchin Commissary_.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE END.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Fleury, Hist. Ecclesiast.

[2] Sismondi, Litterature du Midi de l'Europe.

[3] Sismondi, Hist. des Francais.

[4] Fleury, Hist. Ecclesiast.

[5] Daru, Hist. de Venise.

[6] Giannone, Storia di Napoli.

[7] Llorente, Hist. de la Inquisicion de Espana.

[8] Mariana, Hist. de Espana. Llorente.

[9] Schiller, Abfall der Niederlande.

[10] Llorente.

[11] Lafitau, Conquestes des Portugais.

[12] As soon as the crime of suspicion of heresy was established in the
preliminary accusation, the Inquisitors ordered the arrest of the
delinquent. From that moment there were neither privileges nor shelter
for him. Whatever might be his rank, he was seized in the midst of his
family and friends, and no one dared to offer the least resistance. From
the instant he was in the hands of the Inquisition not an individual was
allowed any communication with him, he was abandoned by all the world
and deprived of every species of consolation. Wo to the compassionate
mind that dared to show any sympathy for a victim of the Inquisition.
The accused was plunged into a frightful dungeon till the Inquisitors
saw fit to interrogate him.

In the mean time the officers of the Inquisition proceeded to the
dwelling of the accused, and drew up an inventory of all his goods,
which were immediately seized. His creditors lost their debts; his wife
and children were left in the most pitiable desertion; wives and
daughters the most virtuous and accomplished, have many times been seen
reduced to the horrible necessity of gaining a wretched existence by
prostitution, occasioned by their destitute state and the contempt
attached to them from being connected with a person apprehended by the
Holy Office. After he had passed many days and even months in prison,
the Inquisitors caused him to insinuate, by means of the jailor, that he
demanded audience; for it was a constant practice of this Tribunal to
contrive that the accused should be the person to demand. The prisoner,
appearing before his judges for the first time, they questioned him as
if they did not know him, and engaged him by the most crafty methods, to
acknowledge his crime. _Llorente Hist. de la Inquisicion._

[13] 'The least mixture of African, Indian, Moorish, or Jewish blood
taints a whole generation. Nor does the knowledge of such a fact die
away in the course of years, or become unnoticed from the obscurity and
humbleness of the parties. Not a child in this populous city (Seville)
is ignorant that a family, who, beyond the memory of man, have kept a
confectioner's shop in a central part of the town, had one of their
ancestors punished by the Inquisition for a relapse into Judaism. I well
recollect how, when a boy, I often passed that way, scarcely venturing
to cast a side glance on a pretty young woman, who constantly attended
the shop, for fear, as I said to myself, of shaming her. A person free
from tainted blood is defined by law, _'Christiano viejo, limpio de toda
mala raza.' An old Christian, free from all bad race and stain._ The
severity of this law, or rather of the public opinion enforcing it,
shuts out its victims from every employment in church or state, and
excludes them even from _fraternities_, or religious associations, which
are otherwise open to persons of the lowest ranks. I verily believe that
were St Peter a Spaniard, he would either deny admittance into heaven to
a people of tainted blood, or send them to a retired corner, where they
might not offend the eyes of the _old Christians_.'

_Doblado's Letters from Spain._

[14] Attorney General.

[15] Calificacion or _qualification_, a judgment pronounced upon the
character and tendency of any actions or speeches denounced before the
Inquisition. This was done by officers holding a special commission for
that purpose called _Calificadores_.

[16] There were three sorts of persons distinguished by the Tribunal as
suspected of heresy; those who were _lightly_ suspected, those who were
_seriously_ suspected, and those who were _violently_ suspected. The
lightly suspected were designated by the term _de levi_, and the
seriously and violently suspected, by the term _de vehementi_.

_Llorente Hist. de la Inquisicion._

[17] _Du bist ein narr das du dies glaubst._

[18] There were three methods of torture; the cord, fire, and water.

In the first method, they tied the hands behind the back of the patient
by means of a cord which passed through a pulley attached to the roof,
and the executioners drew him up as high as possible. After suspending
him for some time, the cord was loosened, and he fell within six inches
of the ground. This terrible shock dislocated all the joints and cut the
flesh even to the sinews. The process was renewed every hour and left
the patient without strength or motion. It was not until after the
physician had declared that the sufferer could no longer endure the
torture without dying, that the Inquisitors sent him back to prison.

The second was performed by means of water. The executioners stretched
the victim over a wooden instrument like a spout, fitted to receive the
body of a man, without any bottom but a stick passing across it. The
body falling backwards, came to such a position that the feet were
higher than the head. In this state the respiration became very painful,
and the patient suffered the most dreadful agonies in all his limbs from
the pressure of the cords, the knots of which cut into the flesh. In
this cruel position the executioners passed into the throat a piece of
fine linen, wet, a part of which covered the nostrils. They then turned
water into the mouth and nose and left it to filter so slowly that one
hour at least was consumed before the sufferer had swallowed a drop,
although it trickled without interruption. Thus the patient found no
interval for respiration. At every moment he made an effort to swallow,
hoping to give passage to a little air; but the wet linen prevented
this, and caused the water to enter by the nostrils. Thus it often
happened that when the torture was finished, they drew the linen from
the throat all stained with the blood of the vessels which had been
burst by the struggles of the unfortunate victim. It should be added,
that every instant, a powerful arm turned the fatal lever, and at each
turn the cords which bound the arms and legs penetrated to the very
bones.

If by this second torment they could obtain no confession, the
Inquisitors resorted to fire. For this purpose the executioners tied the
hands and feet in such a manner that the sufferer could not change his
position. They then rubbed the feet with oil and lard, and other
penetrating matter, and placed them before the fire, until the flesh was
so roasted that the bones and sinews appeared in every part.--_Llorente,
Hist. de la Inquisicion._

[19] When the crime imputed to the accused was not certain, and he had
not entangled himself in the interrogatories, he was acquitted, on the
condition that he should make a formal abjuration of his heresies and be
purged, after the canonical fashion, of the suspicion attached to him.
After this, he was absolved _ad cautelam_, or, in other words, as having
been suspected of heresy.--_Llorente, Hist. de la Inquisicion._

[20] One who makes a voluntary confession, and takes his trial on the
strength of the evidence which he gives against himself, rather than the
testimony of other witnesses.

[21] As a specimen of the modern Catalan dialect, the original of the
above letter is subjoined.

Mol Ille Sor

Estan en la Campana ab Juan Baptista Viada All, de Casas lo Dia 12 del
corren, parlan de Sermons de Animas: meapar mol, que el digue de esta
Manera; de que ell abia oyit a differens, que no creyan ab lo Infern, o
ab lo Purgatori, pero que ell si, que hi creya.

    lo que delate a V. S. per descarrch de la mia Consiencia.
    Mataro y Nbre 17 de 1819.
           S. M. hl--S.
       Franch. Plana Juster.
      al Carrer de fora de lo Portal de Batlleix.



Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

the the cause=> the cause {pg 13}

he was dimissed=> he was dismissed {pg 40}

make arrangments=> make arrangements {pg 71}

dawn up his defence=> drawn up his defence {pg 74}

excuting them=> executing them {pg 96}

conception of of the said Juan Antonio=> conception of the said Juan
Antonio {pg 136}

The excutioners=> The executioners {pg 150}

of of property=> of property {pg 175}

on the the thirtieth day=> on the thirtieth day {pg 196}

before the Revered Joseph=> before the Reverend Joseph {pg 184}

la Riera alta=> la Riera Alta {pg 217}

superstious acts=> superstitious acts {pg 236}






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Records of The Spanish Inquisition, by
Andrew Dickson White

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RECORDS OF THE SPANISH INQUISITION ***

***** This file should be named 41733.txt or 41733.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/7/3/41733/

Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)Attn: Chuck


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
