The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Old Pike, by Thomas B. Searight

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Old Pike
       A History of the National Road, with Incidents, Accidents,
       and Anecdotes thereon

Author: Thomas B. Searight

Release Date: January 7, 2013 [EBook #41799]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OLD PIKE ***




Produced by KD Weeks, Odessa Paige Turner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)





Transcriber's Note

There were a number of spelling and typographical errors in the original
text. The handling of each one is noted in the transcriber's note
at the end of this text. Footnotes have been located at the end of the
paragraphs where they appear. The underscore character indicates where
the original is in _italics_.




[Illustration: Yours truly
               T B. Searight]




                           THE OLD PIKE.

                           A HISTORY OF

                        THE NATIONAL ROAD,

                               WITH

               INCIDENTS, ACCIDENTS, AND ANECDOTES
                              THEREON.

                            ILLUSTRATED.

                                BY

                        THOMAS B. SEARIGHT.

                          UNIONTOWN, PA:
                     PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR.
                               1894.

               COPYRIGHT, 1894, BY T. B. SEARIGHT.

                            PRESSES OF
                         M. CULLATON & CO.,
                           RICHMOND, IND.




                    LETTER FROM JAMES G. BLAINE.

                               STANWOOD, BAR HARBOR, MAINE. }
                                       September 8th, 1892. }

HON. T. B. SEARIGHT,
                UNIONTOWN, PA.

MY DEAR FRIEND:--

I have received the sketches of the "Old Pike" regularly and have as
regularly read them, some of them more than once, especially where you
come near the Monongahela on either side of it, and thus strike the land
of my birth and boyhood. I could trace you all the way to Washington, at
Malden, at Centreville, at Billy Greenfield's in Beallsville, at
Hillsboro (Billy Robinson was a familiar name), at Dutch Charley
Miller's, at Ward's, at Pancake, and so on--familiar names, forever
endeared to my memory. I cherish the desire of riding over the "Old
Pike" with you, but I am afraid we shall contemplate it as a scheme
never to be realized.

            Very sincerely,
                          Your friend,
                                      JAMES G. BLAINE.

[Illustration]




                                CONTENTS.


                                CHAPTER I.
                                                                   PAGES
      Inception of the Road--Author's Motive in Writing its
         History--No History of the Appian Way--A Popular Error
         Corrected--Henry Clay, Andrew Stewart, T. M. T.
         McKennan, General Beeson, Lewis Steenrod and Daniel
         Sturgeon--Their Services in Behalf of the Road, etc.,
         etc.                                                      13-19

                                CHAPTER II.

      Origin of the Fund for Making the Road--Acts for the
         Admission of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois and Missouri,
         etc., etc.                                                20-24

                                CHAPTER III.

      The Act of Congress Authorizing the Laying Out and Making
         of the Road                                               25-27

                                CHAPTER IV.

      Special Message of President Jefferson--Communicating to
         Congress the First Report of the Commissioners--Uniontown
         left out, etc.                                            28-35

                                CHAPTER V.

      Pennsylvania grants Permission to make the Road through
         her Territory--Uniontown Restored, Gist left Out, and
         Washington, Pennsylvania, made a Point--Heights of
         Mountains and Hills--On to Brownsville and Wheeling,
         etc., etc.                                                36-40

                                CHAPTER VI.

      Albert Gallatin, Secretary of the Treasury, called upon
         for Information Respecting the Fund Applicable to the
         Roads mentioned in the Ohio Admission Act--His
         Responses                                                 41-43

                                CHAPTER VII.

      The Life of the Road Threatened by the Spectre of a
         Constitutional Cavil--President Monroe Vetoes a Bill
         for its Preservation and Repair--General Jackson has
         Misgivings--Hon. Andrew Stewart Comes to the Rescue       44-51

                                CHAPTER VIII.

      State Authority Prevails--The Road Surrendered by
         Congress--The Erection of Toll Gates Authorized--
         Commissioners Appointed by the States to Receive the
         Road, etc., etc.                                          52-56

                                CHAPTER IX.

      Plan of Repairs--The Macadam System Adopted--Mr. Stockton
         offers his services--Captain Delafield made
         Superintendent, etc., etc.                                57-63

                                CHAPTER X.

      Lieut. Mansfield superseded by Capt. Delafield--The
         Turning of Wills Mountain, etc., etc.                     64-76

                                CHAPTER XI.

      On with the Work--Wooden Bridges Proposed for the New
         Location up Wills Creek and Braddock's Run--The War
         Department holds that Wooden Superstructures would be
         a Substantial Compliance with the Maryland
         Law--Cumberland to Frostburg, etc.                        77-86

                                CHAPTER XII.

      Gen. Lewis Cass, Secretary of War, Transmits a
         Report--More about the Wooden Bridges for the New
         Location near Cumberland, etc.                            87-94

                                CHAPTER XIII.

      The Iron Bridge over Dunlap's Creek at Brownsville           95-99

                                CHAPTER XIV.

      Appropriations by Congress at Various Times for Making,
         Repairing, and Continuing the Road                      100-106

                                CHAPTER XV.

      Speech of Hon. T. M. T. McKennan                           107-108

                                CHAPTER XVI.

      Life on the Road--Origin of the Phrase Pike Boys--Slaves
         Driven like Horses--Race Distinction at the Old
         Taverns--Old Wagoners--Regulars and Sharpshooters--
         Line Teams                                              109-115

                                CHAPTER XVII.

      Old Wagoners continued--Broad and Narrow Wheels--A
         Peculiar Wagon--An Experiment and a Failure--Wagon
         Beds--Bell Teams                                        116-119

                                CHAPTER XVIII.

      Old Wagoners continued                                     120-126

                                CHAPTER XIX.

      Old Wagoners continued--The Harness they Used, etc.        127-133

                                CHAPTER XX.

      Old Wagoners continued--An Exciting Incident of the
         Political Campaign of 1840--All about a Petticoat--A
         Trip to Tennessee--Origin of the Toby Cigar--The
         Rubber--The Windup and Last Lay of the Old Wagoners     134-145

                                CHAPTER XXI.

      Stage Drivers, Stage Lines and Stage Coaches--The
         Postillion, etc.                                        146-155

                                CHAPTER XXII.

      Stages and Stage Drivers continued--Character of Drivers
         Defended--Styles of Driving--Classification of
         Drivers, etc.                                           156-163

                                CHAPTER XXIII.

      The First Mail Coaches--The Stage Yard at
         Uniontown--Names of Coaches--Henry Clay and the
         Drivers--Jenny Lind and Phineas T. Barnum on the Road,
         etc., etc.                                              164-174

                                CHAPTER XXIV.

       Stages and Stage Drivers continued--Gen. Taylor
         Approaching Cumberland--Early Coaches, etc.             175-183

                                CHAPTER XXV.

      Distinguished Stage Proprietors--Lucius W. Stockton,
         James Reeside, Dr. Howard Kennedy, William H.
         Stelle--Old Stage Agents--The Pony Express              184-191

                                CHAPTER XXVI.

      Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers from Baltimore to
         Boonsboro--Pen Picture of an Old Tavern by James G.
         Blaine                                                  192-196

                                CHAPTER XXVII.

      Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Boonsboro to
         Cumberland                                              197-203

                                CHAPTER XXVIII.

      Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Cumberland to
         the Little Crossings--The City of Cumberland            204-208

                                CHAPTER XXIX.

      Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Little
         Crossings to Winding Ridge--Grantsville                 209-213

                                CHAPTER XXX.

      Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Winding Ridge
         to the Big Crossings--The State Line--How it is
         Noted                                                   214-219

                                CHAPTER XXXI.

      Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Big Crossings
         to Mt. Washington                                       220-226

                                CHAPTER XXXII.

      Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Mt. Washington
         to Uniontown                                            227-233

                                CHAPTER XXXIII.

      Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Uniontown--The
         Town as it Appeared to Gen. Douglass in 1784--Its
         Subsequent Growth and Improvement, etc., etc.           234-243

                                CHAPTER XXXIV.

      Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Uniontown to
         Searights                                               244-249

                                CHAPTER XXXV.

      Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Searights to
         Brownsville                                             250-259

                                CHAPTER XXXVI.

      Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Brownsville to
         Beallsville                                             260-265

                                CHAPTER XXXVII.

      Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Beallsville to
         Washington                                              266-272

                                CHAPTER XXXVIII.

      Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Washington,
         Penn.--Washington and Jefferson College--The Female
         Seminary                                                273-282

                                CHAPTER XXXIX.

      Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Washington to
         West Alexander                                          283-289

                                CHAPTER XL.

      Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--West Alexander
         to Wheeling                                             290-297

                                CHAPTER XLI.

      West of Wheeling--Old Stage Lines Beyond the Ohio
         River--Through Indiana--The Road Disappears Among the
         Prairies of Illinois                                    298-310

                                CHAPTER XLII.

      Superintendents under National and State Control--Old
         Mile Posts, etc.                                        311-318

                                CHAPTER XLIII.

      Old Contractors--Cost of the Road--Contractors for
         Repairs, etc.                                           319-322

                                CHAPTER XLIV.

      Thomas Endsley, William Sheets, W. M. F. Magraw, etc.      323-328

                                CHAPTER XLV.

      Dumb Ike--Reminiscences of Uniontown--Crazy Billy, etc.    329-338

                                CHAPTER XLVI.

      The Trial of Dr. John F. Braddee for Robbing the U.S.
         Mails                                                   339-352

                                CHAPTER XLVII.

      Visit of John Quincy Adams to Uniontown in 1837--Received
         by Dr. Hugh Campbell--The National Road a Monument of
         the Past--A Comparison with the Appian Way              353-356

                                APPENDIX.

      Digest of the Laws of Pennsylvania Relating to the
         Cumberland Road--Unexpended Balances in
         Indiana--Accounts of Two Old Commissioners--Rates
         of Toll--Letters of Albert Gallatin, Ebenezer Finley
         and Thomas A. Wiley--Curiosities of the Old Postal
         Service
                                                                 357-384




                                  ILLUSTRATIONS.


    T. B. Searight                                          Frontispiece
    Old Mile Post                                                      5
    Stage House and Stables at Mt. Washington                         13
    Gen. Henry W. Beeson                                              15
    Hon. Daniel Sturgeon                                              16
    Hon. Andrew Stewart                                               47
    Old Toll House                                                    53
    Iron Bridge over Dunlap's Creek                                   95
    Hon. T. M. T. McKennan                                           107
    Road Wagon                                                       109
    John Thompson                                                    111
    Daniel Barcus                                                    112
    Henry Clay Rush                                                  114
    Harrison Wiggins                                                 116
    John Marker                                                      118
    Ellis B. Woodward                                                119
    John Deets                                                       121
    John Snider                                                      122
    William Hall                                                     124
    John Wallace                                                     126
    Alfred Bailes                                                    129
    German D. Hair                                                   130
    Ashael Willison                                                  135
    Jacob Newcomer                                                   137
    John Ferren                                                      138
    Morris Mauler                                                    140
    James Smith, of Henry                                            144
    Stage Coach                                                      146
    William Whaley                                                   151
    Redding Bunting                                                  152
    John Bunting                                                     156
    Samuel Luman                                                     158
    Joseph Whisson                                                   162
    Maj. William A. Donaldson                                        165
    William G. Beck                                                  168
    Henry Farwell                                                    171
    The Narrows                                                      176
    Hanson Willison                                                  178
    Matt. Davis                                                      180
    John McIlree                                                     182
    L. W. Stockton                                                   185
    James Reeside                                                    186
    William H. Stelle                                                189
    John Kelso                                                       204
    David Mahaney                                                    210
    John Risler                                                      215
    The Temple of Juno                                               217
    The Endsley House                                                218
    The Big Crossings                                                220
    Daniel Collier                                                   222
    Sebastian Rush                                                   225
    Ruins of John Rush House                                         226
    Hon. Samuel Shipley                                              229
    Stone House, Darlington's                                        230
    James Snyder                                                     232
    Gen. Ephraim Douglass                                            235
    Aaron Wyatt                                                      239
    The Brownfield House                                             240
    Col. Samuel Elder                                                242
    The Searight House                                               245
    Joseph Gray                                                      247
    William Shaw                                                     248
    Abel Colley                                                      250
    Hon. William Hatfield                                            252
    The Johnson-Hatfield House                                       254
    The Workman House                                                256
    Bridge over the Monongahela                                      259
    Old Tavern at Malden                                             261
    William Greenfield                                               263
    Charles Guttery                                                  265
    Billy Robinson                                                   267
    Daniel Ward                                                      268
    John W. McDowell                                                 270
    S. B. Hayes                                                      279
    George T. Hammond                                                281
    The Rankin House                                                 283
    The Miller House                                                 284
    The "S" Bridge                                                   286
    David Bell                                                       288
    Joseph F. Mayes                                                  291
    Mrs. Sarah Beck                                                  292
    Col. Moses Shepherd                                              294
    Mrs. Lydia Shepherd                                              295
    John McCortney                                                   296
    Bridge over Whitewater River                                     308
    Gen. George W. Cass                                              311
    William Searight                                                 313
    William Hopkins                                                  315
    Daniel Steenrod                                                  320
    W. M. F. Magraw                                                  327
    "Crazy Billy"                                                    333
    German D. Hair House                                             353
    Dr. Hugh Campbell                                                354
    The Big Water-Trough on Laurel Hill                              356

[Illustration: STAGE HOUSE AND STABLES AT MT. WASHINGTON.]




THE OLD PIKE.




CHAPTER I.

  _Inception of the Road--Author's Motive in Writing its History--No
     History of the Appian Way--A Popular Error Corrected--Henry Clay,
     Andrew Stewart, T. M. T. McKennan, Gen. Beeson, Lewis Steenrod and
     Daniel Sturgeon--Their Services in Behalf of the Road--Braddock's
     Road--Business and Grandeur of the Road--Old and Odd
     Names--Taverns--No Beer on the Road--Definition of Turnpike--An Old
     Legal Battle._


The road which forms the subject of this volume, is the only highway of
its kind ever wholly constructed by the government of the United States.
When Congress first met after the achievement of Independence and the
adoption of the Federal Constitution, the lack of good roads was much
commented upon by our statesmen and citizens generally, and various
schemes suggested to meet the manifest want. But, it was not until the
year 1806, when Jefferson was President, that the proposition for a
National Road took practical shape. The first step, as will hereinafter
be seen, was the appointment of commissioners to lay out the road, with
an appropriation of money to meet the consequent expense. The author of
this work was born and reared on the line of the road, and has spent his
whole life amid scenes connected with it. He saw it in the zenith of its
glory, and with emotions of sadness witnessed its decline. It was a
highway at once so grand and imposing, an artery so largely instrumental
in promoting the early growth and development of our country's wonderful
resources, so influential in strengthening the bonds of the American
Union, and at the same time so replete with important events and
interesting incidents, that the writer of these pages has long cherished
a hope that some capable hand would write its history and collect and
preserve its legends, and no one having come forward to perform the
task, he has ventured upon it himself, with unaffected diffidence and a
full knowledge of his inability to do justice to the subject.

It is not a little singular that no connected history of the renowned
Appian Way can be found in our libraries. Glimpses of its existence and
importance are seen in the New Testament and in some old volumes of
classic lore, but an accurate and complete history of its inception,
purpose, construction and development, with the incidents, accidents and
anecdotes, which of necessity were connected with it, seems never to
have been written. This should not be said of the great National Road of
the United States of America. The Appian Way has been called the Queen
of Roads. We claim for our National highway that it _was_ the King of
Roads.

Tradition, cheerfully acquiesced in by popular thought, attributes to
Henry Clay the conception of the National Road, but this seems to be
error. The Hon. Andrew Stewart, in a speech delivered in Congress,
January 27th, 1829, asserted that "Mr. Gallatin was the very first man
that ever suggested the plan for making the Cumberland Road." As this
assertion was allowed to go unchallenged, it must be accepted as true,
however strongly and strangely it conflicts with the popular belief
before stated. The reader will bear in mind that the National Road and
the Cumberland Road are one and the same. The road as constructed by
authority of Congress, begins at the city of Cumberland, in the State of
Maryland, and this is the origin of the name Cumberland Road. All the
acts of Congress and of the legislatures of the States through which the
road passes, and they are numerous, refer to it as the Cumberland Road.
The connecting link between Cumberland and the city of Baltimore is a
road much older than the Cumberland Road, constructed and owned by
associations of individuals, and the two together constitute the
National Road.

While it appears from the authority quoted that Henry Clay was not the
planner of the National Road, he was undoubtedly its ablest and most
conspicuous champion. In Mallory's Life of Clay it is stated that "he
advocated the policy of carrying forward the construction of the
Cumberland Road as rapidly as possible," and with what earnestness,
continues his biographer, "we may learn from his own language, declaring
that he had to _beg_, _entreat_ and _supplicate_ Congress, session after
session, to grant the necessary appropriations to complete the road."
Mr. Clay said, "I have myself toiled until my powers have been exhausted
and prostrated to prevail on you to make the grant." No wonder Mr. Clay
was a popular favorite along the whole line of the road. At a public
dinner tendered him by the mechanics of Wheeling, he spoke of "the great
interest the road had awakened in his breast, and expressed an ardent
desire that it might be prosecuted to a speedy completion." Among other
things he said that "a few years since he and his family had employed
the whole or greater part of a day in traveling the distance of about
nine miles from Uniontown to Freeman's,[A] on Laurel Hill, which now,
since the construction of the road over the mountains, could be
accomplished, together with seventy more in the same time," and that
"the road was so important to the maintenance of our Union that he
would not consent to give it up to the keeping of the several States
through which it passed."

  [Footnote A: Benjamin Freeman kept a tavern on the old Braddock
               Road, a short distance south of Mt. Washington.
               Locating his house on Laurel Hill, was an error of
               Mr. Clay, but of little consequence, and readily
               made under the circumstances. A monument was
               erected, and is still standing, on the roadside near
               Wheeling, commemorative of the services of Mr. Clay
               in behalf of the road.]

[Illustration: GEN. HENRY W. BEESON.]

Hon. Andrew Stewart, of Uniontown, who served many years in Congress,
beginning with 1820, was, next to Mr. Clay, the most widely known and
influential congressional friend of the road, and in earnestness and
persistency in this behalf, not excelled even by Mr. Clay. Hon. T. M. T.
McKennan, an old congressman of Washington, Pennsylvania, was likewise a
staunch friend of the road, carefully guarding its interests and
pressing its claims upon the favorable consideration of Congress. Gen.
Henry W. Beeson, of Uniontown, who represented the Fayette and Greene
district of Pennsylvania in Congress in the forties, was an indomitable
friend of the road. He stoutly opposed the extension of the Baltimore
and Ohio railroad west of Cumberland, through Pennsylvania, and was
thoroughly sustained by his constituents. In one of his characteristic
speeches on the subject, he furnished a careful estimate of the number
of horse-shoes made by the blacksmiths along the road, the number of
nails required to fasten them to the horses' feet, the number of bushels
of grain and tons of hay furnished by the farmers to the tavern keepers,
the vast quantity of chickens, turkeys, eggs and butter that found a
ready market on the line, and other like statistical information going
to show that the National Road would better subserve the public weal
than a steam railroad. This view at the time, and in the locality
affected, was regarded as correct, which serves as an illustration of
the change that takes place in public sentiment, as the wheels of time
revolve and the ingenuity of man expands. Lewis Steenrod, of the
Wheeling district, was likewise an able and influential congressional
friend of the road. He was the son of Daniel Steenrod, an old
tavernkeeper on the road, near Wheeling; and the Cumberland, Maryland,
district always sent men to Congress who favored the preservation and
maintenance of the road. Hon. Daniel Sturgeon, who served as a senator
of the United States for the State of Pennsylvania from 1840 to 1852,
was also an undeviating and influential friend of the road. He gave
unremitting attention and untiring support to every measure brought
before the Senate during his long and honorable service in that body,
designed to make for the road's prosperity, and preserve and maintain it
as the nation's great highway. His home was in Uniontown, on the line of
the road, and he was thoroughly identified with it alike in sentiment
and interest. He was not a showy statesman, but the possessor of
incorruptible integrity and wielded an influence not beneath that of any
of his compeers, among whom were that renowned trio of Senators, Clay,
Webster and Calhoun.

Frequent references will be made in these pages to the Old Braddock
Road, but it is not the purpose of the writer to go into the history of
that ancient highway. This volume is devoted exclusively to the National
Road. We think it pertinent, however, to remark that Braddock's Road
would have been more appropriately named Washington's Road. Washington
passed over it in command of a detachment of Virginia troops more than a
year before Braddock ever saw it. Mr. Veech, the eminent local
historian, says that Braddock's Road and Nemicolon's Indian trail are
identical, so that Nemicolon, the Indian, would seem to have a higher
claim to the honor of giving name to this old road than General
Braddock. However, time, usage and common consent unite in calling it
Braddock's Road, and, as a rule, we hold it to be very unwise, not to
say downright foolishness, to undertake to change old and familiar
names. It is difficult to do, and ought not to be done.

From the time it was thrown open to the public, in the year 1818, until
the coming of railroads west of the Allegheny mountains, in 1852, the
National Road was the one great highway, over which passed the bulk of
trade and travel, and the mails between the East and the West. Its
numerous and stately stone bridges with handsomely turned arches, its
iron mile posts and its old iron gates, attest the skill of the workmen
engaged on its construction, and to this day remain enduring monuments
of its grandeur and solidity, all save the imposing iron gates, which
have disappeared by process of conversion prompted by some utilitarian
idea, savoring in no little measure of sacrilege. Many of the most
illustrious statesmen and heroes of the early period of our national
existence passed over the National Road from their homes to the capital
and back, at the opening and closing of the sessions of Congress.
Jackson, Harrison, Clay, Sam Houston, Polk, Taylor, Crittenden, Shelby,
Allen, Scott, Butler, the eccentric Davy Crockett, and many of their
contemporaries in public service, were familiar figures in the eyes of
the dwellers by the roadside. The writer of these pages frequently saw
these distinguished men on their passage over the road, and remembers
with no little pride the incident of shaking hands with General Jackson,
as he sat in his carriage on the wagon-yard of an old tavern. A coach,
in which Mr. Clay was proceeding to Washington, was upset on a pile of
limestone, in the main street of Uniontown, a few moments after supper
at the McClelland house. Sam Sibley was the driver of that coach, and
had his nose broken by the accident. Mr. Clay was unhurt, and upon being
extricated from the grounded coach, facetiously remarked that: "This is
mixing the Clay of Kentucky with the limestone of Pennsylvania."

As many as twenty-four horse coaches have been counted in line at one
time on the road, and large, broad-wheeled wagons, covered with white
canvass stretched over bows, laden with merchandise and drawn by six
Conestoga horses, were visible all the day long at every point, and many
times until late in the evening, besides innumerable caravans of horses,
mules, cattle, hogs and sheep. It looked more like the leading avenue of
a great city than a road through rural districts.

[Illustration: HON. DANIEL STURGEON.]

The road had a peculiar nomenclature, familiar to the tens of thousands
who traveled over it in its palmy days. The names, for example, applied
to particular localities on the line, are of striking import, and
blend harmoniously with the unique history of the road. With these names
omitted, the road would be robbed of much that adds interest to its
history. Among the best remembered of these are, The Shades of Death,
The Narrows, Piney Grove, Big Crossings, Negro Mountain, Keyser's Ridge,
Woodcock Hill, Chalk Hill, Big Savage, Little Savage, Snake Hill, Laurel
Hill, The Turkey's Nest, Egg Nog Hill, Coon Island and Wheeling Hill.
Rich memories cluster around every one of these names, and old wagoners
and stage drivers delight to linger over the scenes they bring to mind.

The road was justly renowned for the great number and excellence of its
inns or taverns. On the mountain division, every mile had its tavern.
Here one could be seen perched on some elevated site, near the roadside,
and there another, sheltered behind a clump of trees, many of them with
inviting seats for idlers, and all with cheerful fronts toward the weary
traveler. The sign-boards were elevated upon high and heavy posts, and
their golden letters winking in the sun, ogled the wayfarer from the hot
road-bed and gave promise of good cheer, while the big trough,
overflowing with clear, fresh water, and the ground below it sprinkled
with droppings of fragrant peppermint, lent a charm to the scene that
was well nigh enchanting.

The great majority of the taverns were called wagon stands, because
their patrons were largely made up of wagoners, and each provided with
grounds called the wagon-yard, whereon teams were driven to feed, and
rest over night. The very best of entertainment was furnished at these
wagon stands. The taverns whereat stage horses were kept and exchanged,
and stage passengers took meals, were called "stage houses," located at
intervals of about twelve miles, as nearly as practicable.

The beer of the present day was unknown, or if known, unused on the
National Road during the era of its prosperity. Ale was used in limited
quantities, but was not a favorite drink. Whisky was the leading
beverage, and it was plentiful and cheap. The price of a drink of whisky
was three cents, except at the stage houses, where by reason of an
assumption of aristocracy the price was five cents. The whisky of that
day is said to have been pure, and many persons of unquestioned
respectability affirm with much earnestness that it never produced
delirium tremens. The current coin of the road was the big copper cent
of United States coinage, the "fippenny bit," Spanish, of the value of
six and one-fourth cents, called for brevity a "fip," the "levy,"
Spanish, of the value of twelve and a half cents, the quarter, the half
dollar, and the dollar. The Mexican and Spanish milled dollar were
oftener seen than the United States dollar. The silver five-cent piece
and the dime of the United States coinage were seen occasionally, but
not so much used as the "fip" and the "levy." In times of stringency,
the stage companies issued scrip in denominations ranging from five
cents to a dollar, which passed readily as money. The scrip was similar
to the postal currency of the war period, lacking only in the artistic
skill displayed in the engraving of the latter. A hungry traveler could
obtain a substantial meal at an old wagon stand tavern for a "levy," and
two drinks of whisky for a "fippenny bit." The morning bill of a wagoner
with a six-horse team did not exceed one dollar and seventy-five cents,
which included grain and hay for the horses, meals for the driver, and
all the drinks he saw proper to take.

The National Road is not in a literal sense a turnpike. A turnpike, in
the original meaning of the word, is a road upon which pikes were placed
to turn travelers thereon through gates, to prevent them from evading
the payment of toll. Pikes were not used, or needed on the National
Road. It was always kept in good condition, and travelers thereon, as a
rule, paid the required toll without complaining. At distances of
fifteen miles, on the average, houses were erected for toll collectors
to dwell in, and strong iron gates, hung to massive iron posts, were
established to enforce the payment of toll in cases of necessity. These
toll houses were of uniform size, angular and round, west of the
mountains constructed of brick, and through the mountains, of stone,
except the one six miles west of Cumberland, which is of brick. They are
all standing on their old sites at this date (1893), except the one that
stood near Mt. Washington, and the one that stood near the eastern base
of Big Savage Mountain. At the last mentioned point, the old iron gate
posts are still standing, firmly rooted in their original foundations,
and plastered all over with advertisements of Frostburg's business
houses, but the old house and the old gates have gone out of sight
forever.

It is curious to note how the word turnpike has been perverted from its
literal meaning by popular usage. The common idea is that a turnpike is
a road made of stone, and that the use of stone is that alone which
makes it a turnpike. The common phrase, "piking a road," conveys the
idea of putting stones on it, whereas in fact, there is no connection
between a stone and a pike, and a road might be a turnpike without a
single stone upon it. It is the contrivance to turn travelers through
gates, before mentioned, that makes a turnpike. We recall but one
instance of a refusal to pay toll for passing over the National Road,
and that was a remarkable one. It grew out of a misconception of the
scope of the act of Congress, providing for the exemption from toll of
carriages conveying the United States mails. The National Road Stage
Company, commonly called the "Old Line," of which Lucius W. Stockton was
the controlling spirit, was a contractor for carrying the mails, and
conceived the idea that by placing a mail pouch in every one of its
passenger coaches it could evade the payment of toll. Stage companies
did not pay toll to the collectors at the gates, like ordinary
travelers, but at stated periods to the Road Commissioner. At the time
referred to, William Searight, father of the writer, was the
commissioner in charge of the entire line of the road through the state
of Pennsylvania, and it was fifty years ago. Upon presenting his account
to Mr. Stockton, who lived at Uniontown, for accumulated tolls, that
gentleman refused payment on the ground that all his coaches carried the
mail, and were therefore exempt from toll. The commissioner was of
opinion that the act of Congress could not be justly construed to cover
so broad a claim, and notified Mr. Stockton that if the toll was not
paid the gates would be closed against his coaches. Mr. Stockton was a
resolute as well as an enterprising man, and persisted in his position,
whereupon an order was given to close the gates against the passage of
his coaches until the legal toll was paid. The writer was present,
though a boy, at an execution of this order at the gate five miles west
of Uniontown. It was in the morning. The coaches came along at the usual
time and the gates were securely closed against them. The commissioner
superintended the act in person, and a large number of people from the
neighborhood attended to witness the scene, anticipating tumult and
violence, as to which they were happily disappointed. The drivers
accepted the situation with good nature, but the passengers, impatient
to proceed, after learning the cause of the halt, paid the toll,
whereupon the gates were thrown open, and the coaches sped on. For a
considerable time after this occurrence an agent was placed on the
coaches to pay the toll at the gates. Mr. Stockton instituted
prosecutions against the commissioner for obstructing the passage of the
United States mails, which were not pressed to trial, but the main
contention was carried to the Supreme Court of the United States for
adjudication on a case stated, and Mr. Stockton's broad claim was
denied, the court of last resort holding that "the exemption from tolls
did not apply to any other property (than the mails) conveyed in the
same vehicle, nor to any persons traveling in it, unless he was in the
service of the United States and passing along the road in pursuance of
orders from the proper authority; and further, that the exemption could
not be claimed for more carriages than were necessary for the safe,
speedy and convenient conveyance of the mail." This case is reported in
full in 3d Howard U. S. Reports, page 151 _et seq._, including the full
text of Chief Justice Taney's opinion, and elaborate dissenting opinions
by Justices McClean and Daniel. The attorneys for the road in this
controversy were Hon. Robert P. Flenniken and Hon. James Veech of
Uniontown, and Hon. Robert J. Walker of Mississippi, who was Secretary
of the Treasury in the cabinet of President Polk. After this decision,
and by reason of it, the Legislature of Pennsylvania enacted the law of
April 14th, 1845, still in force, authorizing the collection of tolls
from passengers traveling in coaches which at the same time carried the
mail.




CHAPTER II.

  _Origin of the Fund for Making the Road.--Acts for the Admission of
     Ohio, Indiana, Illinois and Missouri--Report of a Committee of
     Congress as to the Manner of Applying the Ohio Fund--Distances from
     Important Eastern Cities to the Ohio River--The Richmond Route
     Postponed--The Spirit and Perseverance of Pennsylvania--Maryland,
     "My Maryland," not behind Pennsylvania--Wheeling the Objective
     Point--Brownsville a Prominent Point--Rivers tend to Union,
     Mountains to Disunion._


Act of April 30, 1802, for the admission of Ohio, provides that
one-twentieth part of the net proceeds of the lands lying within the
said State sold by Congress, from and after the 30th of June next, after
deducting all expenses incident to the same, shall be applied to laying
out and making public roads leading from navigable waters emptying into
the Atlantic to the Ohio, to the said State and through the same, such
roads to be laid out under the authority of Congress, with the consent
of the several States through which the road shall pass.

Act of April 19, 1816, for the admission of Indiana, provides that five
per cent. of the net proceeds of lands lying within the said territory,
and which shall be sold by Congress from and after the first day of
December next, after deducting all expenses incident to the same, shall
be reserved for making public roads and canals, of which three-fifths
shall be applied to those objects within the said State under the
direction of the Legislature thereof, and two-fifths to the making of a
road or roads leading to the said State under the direction of Congress.

Act of April 18, 1818, for the admission of Illinois, provides that five
per cent. of the net proceeds of the lands lying within the said State,
and which shall be sold by Congress from and after the first day of
January, 1819, after deducting all expenses incident to the same, shall
be reserved for the purposes following, viz: Two-fifths to be disbursed
under the direction of Congress in making roads leading to the State,
the residue to be appropriated by the Legislature of the State for the
encouragement of learning, of which one-sixth part shall be exclusively
bestowed on a college or university.

Act of March 6, 1820, admitting Missouri, provides that five per cent.
of the net proceeds of the sale of lands lying within the said Territory
or State, and which shall be sold by Congress from and after the first
day of January next, after deducting all expenses incident to the same,
shall be reserved for making public roads and canals, of which
three-fifths shall be applied to those objects within the State under
the direction of the Legislature thereof, and the other two-fifths in
defraying, under the direction of Congress, the expenses to be incurred
in making a road or roads, canal or canals, leading to the said State.


                                 No. 195.

                     NINTH CONGRESS--FIRST SESSION.

                            CUMBERLAND ROAD.

             Communicated to the Senate December 19, 1805.

Mr. Tracy, from the committee to whom was referred the examination of
the act entitled, "An act to enable the people of the eastern division
of the territory northwest of the river Ohio to form a Constitution and
State Government, and for the admission of such State into the Union on
an equal footing with the original States, and for other purposes;" and
to report the manner in which, in their opinion, the money appropriated
by said act ought to be applied, made the following report:

That, upon examination of the act aforesaid, they find "the
one-twentieth part, or five per cent., of the net proceeds of the lands
lying within the State of Ohio, and sold by Congress from and after the
30th day of June, 1802, is appropriated for the laying out and making
public roads leading from the navigable waters emptying into the
Atlantic to the river Ohio, to said State, and through the same; such
roads to be laid out under the authority of Congress, with the consent
of the several States through which the road shall pass."

They find that by a subsequent law, passed on the 3d day of March, 1803,
Congress appropriated three per cent. of the said five per cent. to
laying out and making roads _within_ the State of Ohio, leaving two per
cent. of the appropriation contained in the first mentioned law
unexpended, which now remains for "_the laying out, and making roads
from the navigable waters emptying into the Atlantic to the river Ohio,
to said State_."

They find that the net proceeds of sales of land in the State of Ohio,

  From 1st July, 1802, to June 30, 1803, both inclusive, were   $124,400 92
  From 1st July, 1803, to June 30, 1804                          176,203 35
  From 1st July, 1804, to June 30, 1805                          266,000 00
  From 1st July, 1805, to Sept. 30, 1805                          66,000 00
                                                                -----------
         Amounting, in the whole, to                            $632,604 27

Two per cent. on which sum amounts to $12,652. Twelve thousand six
hundred and fifty-two dollars were, therefore, on the 1st day of October
last, subject to the uses directed by law, as mentioned in this report;
and it will be discerned that the fund is constantly accumulating, and
will, probably, by the time regular preparations can be made for its
expenditure, amount to eighteen or twenty thousand dollars. The
committee have examined, as far as their limited time and the scanty
sources of facts within their reach would permit, the various routes
which have been contemplated for laying out roads pursuant to the
provisions of the act first mentioned in this report.

They find that the distance from Philadelphia to Pittsburg is 314 miles
by the usual route, and on a straight line about 270.

From Philadelphia to the nearest point on the river Ohio, contiguous to
the State of Ohio, which is probably between Steubenville and the mouth
of Grave creek, the distance by the usual route is 360 miles, and on a
straight line about 308.

From Baltimore to the river Ohio, between the same points, and by the
usual route, is 275 miles, and on a straight line 224.

From this city (Washington) to the same points on the river Ohio, the
distance is nearly the same as from Baltimore; probably the difference
is not a plurality of miles.

From Richmond, in Virginia, to the nearest point on the river Ohio, the
distance by the usual route is 377 miles; but new roads are opening
which will shorten the distance fifty or sixty miles; 247 miles of the
contemplated road, from Richmond northwesterly, will be as good as the
roads usually are in that country, but the remaining seventy or eighty
miles are bad, for the present, and probably will remain so for a length
of time, as there seems to be no existing inducement for the State of
Virginia to incur the expense of making that part of the road passable.

From Baltimore to the Monongahela river, where the route from Baltimore
to the Ohio river will intersect it, the distance as usually traveled is
218 miles, and on a straight line about 184. From this point, which is
at or near Brownsville, boats can pass down, with great facility, to the
State of Ohio, during a number of months in every year.

The above distances are not all stated from actual mensuration, but it
is believed they are sufficiently correct for the present purpose.

The committee have not examined any routes northward of that leading
from Philadelphia to the river Ohio, nor southward of that leading from
Richmond, because they suppose the roads to be laid out must strike the
river Ohio on some point contiguous to the State of Ohio, in order to
satisfy the words of the law making the appropriation; the words are:
"Leading from the navigable waters emptying into the Atlantic, to the
river Ohio, to the said State, and through the same."

The mercantile intercourse of the citizens of Ohio with those of the
Atlantic States is chiefly in Philadelphia and Baltimore; not very
extensive in the towns on the Potomac, within the District of Columbia,
and still less with Richmond, in Virginia. At present, the greatest
portion of their trade is with Philadelphia; but it is believed their
trade is rapidly increasing with Baltimore, owing to the difference of
distance in favor of Baltimore, and to the advantage of boating down the
Monongahela river, from the point where the road strikes it, about 70
miles by water, and 50 by land, above Pittsburg.

The sum appropriated for laying out and making roads is so small that
the committee have thought it most expedient to direct an expenditure to
one route only. They have therefore endeavored to fix on that which, for
the present, will be most accommodating to the citizens of the State of
Ohio; leaving to the future benevolence and policy of congress, an
extension of their operations on this or other routes, and an increase
of the requisite fund, as the discoveries of experience may point out
their expediency and necessity. The committee being fully convinced that
a wise government can never lose sight of an object so important as that
of connecting a numerous and rapidly increasing population, spread upon
a fertile and extensive territory, with the Atlantic States, now
separated from them by mountains, which, by industry and an expense
moderate in comparison with the advantages, can be rendered passable.

The route from Richmond must necessarily approach the State of Ohio in a
part thinly inhabited, and which, from the nature of the soil and other
circumstances, must remain so, at least for a considerable time; and,
from the hilly and rough condition of the country, no roads are or can
be conveniently made, leading to the principal population of the State
of Ohio.

These considerations have induced the committee to postpone, for the
present, any further consideration of that route.

The spirit and perseverance of Pennsylvania are such, in the matter of
road making, that no doubt can remain but they will, in a little time,
complete a road from Philadelphia to Pittsburg, as good as the nature of
the ground will permit. They are so particularly interested to
facilitate the intercourse between their trading capital, Philadelphia,
not only to Pittsburg, but also to the extensive country within that
State, on the western waters, that they will, of course, surmount the
difficulties presented by the Allegheny mountain, Chestnut Ridge and
Laurel Hill, the three great and almost exclusive impediments which now
exist on that route.

The State of Maryland, with no less spirit and perseverance, are engaged
in making roads from Baltimore and from the western boundary of the
District of Columbia, through Fredericktown, to Williamsport. Were the
Government of the United States to direct the expenditure of the fund in
contemplation upon either of these routes, for the present, in
Pennsylvania or Maryland, it would, probably, so far interfere with the
operations of the respective States, as to produce mischief instead of
benefit; especially as the sum to be laid out by the United States is
too inconsiderable, alone, to effect objects of such magnitude. But as
the State of Maryland have no particular interest to extend their road
across the mountains (and if they had it would be impracticable, because
the State does not extend so far), the committee have thought it
expedient to recommend the laying out and making a road from Cumberland,
on the northerly bank of the Potomac, and within the State of Maryland,
to the river Ohio, at the most convenient place between a point on the
easterly bank of said river, opposite to Steubenville, and the mouth of
Grave creek, which empties into said river Ohio a little below Wheeling,
in Virginia. This route will meet and accommodate the roads leading from
Baltimore and the District of Columbia; it will cross the Monongahela
river, at or near Brownsville, sometimes called Redstone, where the
advantage of boating can be taken; and from the point where it will
probably intersect the river Ohio, there are now roads, or they can
easily be made over feasible and proper ground, to and through the
principal population of the State of Ohio.

Cumberland is situated at the eastern foot of the Allegheny mountains,
about eighty miles from Williamsport, by the usual route, which is
circuitous, owing to a large bend in the river Potomac, on the bank of
which the road now runs, the distance on a straight line is not more
than fifty or fifty-five miles, and over tolerable ground for a road,
which will probably be opened by the State of Maryland, should the route
be established over the mountains, as contemplated by this report.

From Cumberland to the western extremity of Laurel Hill, by the route
now travelled, the distance is sixty-six miles, and on a straight line
about fifty-five; on this part of the route, the committee suppose the
first and very considerable expenditures are specially necessary. From
Laurel Hill to the Ohio river, by the usual route, is about seventy
miles, and on a straight line fifty-four or five; the road is tolerable,
though capable of amelioration.

To carry into effect the principles arising from the foregoing facts,
the committee present herewith a bill for the consideration of the
Senate. They suppose that to take the proper measures for carrying into
effect the section of the law respecting a road or roads to the State of
Ohio, is a duty imposed upon Congress by the law itself, and that a
sense of duty will always be sufficient to insure the passage of the
bill now offered to the Senate. To enlarge upon the highly important
considerations of cementing the union of our citizens located on the
Western waters with those of the Atlantic States, would be an indelicacy
offered to the understandings of the body to whom this report is
addressed, as it might seem to distrust them. But from the interesting
nature of the subject, the committee are induced to ask the indulgence
of a single observation: Politicians have generally agreed that rivers
unite the interests and promote the friendship of those who inhabit
their banks; while mountains, on the contrary, tend to the disunion and
estrangement of those who are separated by their intervention. In the
present case, to make the crooked ways straight, and the rough ways
smooth will, in effect, remove the intervening mountains, and by
facilitating the intercourse of our Western brethren with those on the
Atlantic, substantially unite them in interest, which, the committee
believe, is the most effectual cement of union applicable to the human
race.

All which is most respectfully submitted.




CHAPTER III.

_The Act of Congress Authorizing the Laying Out and Making of the Road._


  An Act to Regulate the Laying Out and Making a Road from Cumberland,
          in the State of Maryland, to the State of Ohio.

_Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States of America in Congress assembled_, That the President of the
United States be, and he is hereby authorized to appoint, by and with
the advice and consent of the Senate, three discreet and disinterested
citizens of the United States, to lay out a road from Cumberland, or a
point on the northern bank of the river Potomac, in the State of
Maryland, between Cumberland and the place where the main road leading
from Gwynn's to Winchester, in Virginia, crosses the river, to the State
of Ohio; whose duty it shall be, as soon as may be, after their
appointment, to repair to Cumberland aforesaid, and view the ground,
from the points on the river Potomac hereinbefore designated, to the
river Ohio; and to lay out in such direction as they shall judge, under
all circumstances the most proper, a road from thence to the river Ohio,
to strike the same at the most convenient place, between a point on its
eastern bank, opposite the northern boundary of Steubenville, in said
State of Ohio, and the mouth of Grave creek, which empties into the said
river a little below Wheeling, in Virginia.

SEC. 2. _And be it further enacted_, That the aforesaid road shall be
laid out four rods in width, and designated on each side by a plain and
distinguishable mark on a tree, or by the erection of a stake or
monument sufficiently conspicuous, in every quarter of a mile of the
distance at least, where the road pursues a straight course so far or
farther, and on each side, at every point where an angle occurs in its
course.

SEC. 3. _And be it further enacted_, That the commissioners shall, as
soon as may be, after they have laid out said road, as aforesaid,
present to the President an accurate plan of the same, with its several
courses and distances, accompanied by a written report of their
proceedings, describing the marks and monuments by which the road is
designated, and the face of the country over which it passes, and
pointing out the particular parts which they shall judge require the
most and immediate attention and amelioration, and the probable expense
of making the same passable in the most difficult parts, and through the
whole distance; designating the State or States through which said road
has been laid out, and the length of the several parts which are laid
out on new ground, as well as the length of those parts laid out on the
road now traveled. Which report the President is hereby authorized to
accept or reject, in the whole or in part. If he accepts, he is hereby
further authorized and requested to pursue such measures, as in his
opinion shall be proper, to obtain consent for making the road, of the
State or States through which the same has been laid out. Which consent
being obtained, he is further authorized to take prompt and effectual
measures to cause said road to be made through the whole distance, or in
any part or parts of the same as he shall judge most conducive to the
public good, having reference to the sum appropriated for the purpose.

SEC. 4. _And be it further enacted_, That all parts of the road which
the President shall direct to be made, in case the trees are standing,
shall be cleared the whole width of four rods; and the road shall be
raised in the middle of the carriageway with stone, earth, or gravel and
sand, or a combination of some or all of them, leaving or making, as the
case may be, a ditch or water course on each side and contiguous to said
carriageway, and in no instance shall there be an elevation in said
road, when finished, greater than an angle of five degrees with the
horizon. But the manner of making said road, in every other particular,
is left to the direction of the President.

SEC. 5. _And be it further enacted_, That said Commissioners shall each
receive four dollars per day, while employed as aforesaid, in full for
their compensation, including all expenses. And they are hereby
authorized to employ one surveyor, two chainmen and one marker, for
whose faithfulness and accuracy they, the said Commissioners, shall be
responsible, to attend them in laying out said road, who shall receive
in full satisfaction for their wages, including all expenses, the
surveyor three dollars per day, and each chainman and the marker one
dollar per day, while they shall be employed in said business, of which
fact a certificate signed by said commissioners shall be deemed
sufficient evidence.

SEC. 6. _And be it further enacted_, That the sum of thirty thousand
dollars be, and the same is hereby appropriated, to defray the expense
of laying out and making said road. And the President is hereby
authorized to draw, from time to time, on the treasury for such parts,
or at any one time, for the whole of said sum, as he shall judge the
service requires. Which sum of thirty thousand dollars shall be paid,
first, out of the fund of two per cent, reserved for laying out and
making roads _to_ the State of Ohio, by virtue of the seventh section of
an act passed on the thirtieth day of April, one thousand eight hundred
and two, entitled, "An act to enable the people of the eastern division
of the territory northwest of the river Ohio to form a constitution and
State government, and for the admission of such State into the Union on
an equal footing with the original States, and for other purposes."
Three per cent. of the appropriation contained in said seventh section
being directed by a subsequent law to the laying out, opening and
making roads _within_ the said State of Ohio; and secondly, out of any
money in the treasury not otherwise appropriated, chargeable upon, and
reimbursable at the treasury by said fund of two per cent. as the same
shall accrue.

SEC. 7. _And be it further enacted_, That the President be, and he is
hereby requested, to cause to be laid before Congress, as soon as
convenience will permit, after the commencement of each session, a
statement of the proceedings under this act, that Congress may be
enabled to adopt such further measures as may from time to time be
proper under existing circumstances.

     _Approved, March 29, 1806._       TH. JEFFERSON.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                        UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,     }
                                                  DEPARTMENT OF STATE.}

_To all to whom these presents shall come, Greeting_:

I certify that hereto annexed is a true copy of an Act of Congress,
approved March 29, 1806, the original of which is on file in this
Department, entitled: "An Act to regulate the laying out and making a
road from Cumberland, in the State of Maryland, to the State of Ohio."

In testimony whereof, I, James G. Blaine, Secretary of State of the
United States, have hereunto subscribed my name and caused the seal of
the Department of State to be affixed.

Done at the City of Washington, this seventh day of March, A. D. 1891,
and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and
fifteenth.

                                        JAMES G. BLAINE.




CHAPTER IV.

  _Special Message of President Jefferson--Communicating to Congress the
     First Report of the Commissioners--They View the Whole
     Ground--Solicitude of the Inhabitants--Points Considered--Cumberland
     the First Point Located--Uniontown Left Out--Improvement of the
     Youghiogheny--Distances--Connellsville a Promising Town--"A Well
     Formed, Stone Capped Road"--Estimated Cost, $6,000 per Mile, exclusive
     of Bridges._


                                 No. 220.

                     NINTH CONGRESS--SECOND SESSION.

                             January 31, 1807.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

In execution of the act of the last session of Congress, entitled, "An
act to regulate the laying out and making a road from Cumberland, in the
State of Maryland, to the State of Ohio," I appointed Thomas Moore, of
Maryland, Joseph Kerr, of Ohio, and Eli Williams, of Maryland,
commissioners to lay out the said road, and to perform the other duties
assigned to them by the act. The progress which they made in the
execution of the work, during the last season, will appear in their
report now communicated to Congress; on the receipt of it, I took
measures to obtain consent for making the road of the States of
Pennsylvania, Maryland and Virginia, through which the commissioners
propose to lay it out. I have received acts of the Legislatures of
Maryland and Virginia, giving the consent desired; that of Pennsylvania
has the subject still under consideration, as is supposed. Until I
receive full consent to a free choice of route through the whole
distance, I have thought it safest neither to accept nor reject,
finally, the partial report of the commissioners.

Some matters suggested in the report belong exclusively to the
legislature.

                                        TH. JEFFERSON.

       *       *       *       *       *

The commissioners, acting by appointment under the law of Congress,
entitled "An act to regulate the laying out and making a road from
Cumberland, in the State of Maryland, to the State of Ohio," beg leave to
report to the President of the United States, and to premise that the
duties imposed by the law became a work of greater magnitude, and a task
much more arduous, than was conceived before entering upon it; from
which circumstance the commissioners did not allow themselves sufficient
time for the performance of it before the severity of the weather
obliged them to retire from it, which was the case in the first week of
the present month (December). That, not having fully accomplished their
work, they are unable fully to report a discharge of all the duties
enjoined by the law; but as the most material and principal part has
been performed, and as a communication of the progress already made may
be useful and proper, during the present session of Congress, and of the
Legislatures of those States through which the route passes, the
commissioners respectfully state that at a very early period it was
conceived that the maps of the country were not sufficiently accurate to
afford a minute knowledge of the true courses between the extreme points
on the rivers, by which the researches of the commissioners were to be
governed; a survey for that purpose became indispensable, and
considerations of public economy suggested the propriety of making this
survey precede the personal attendance of the commissioners.

Josias Thompson, a surveyor of professional merit, was taken into
service and authorized to employ two chain carriers and a marker, as
well as one vaneman, and a packhorse man and horse, on public account;
the latter being indispensable and really beneficial in excelerating the
work. The surveyors' instructions are contained in document No. 1,
accompanying this report.

Calculating on a reasonable time for the performance of the instructions
to the surveyor, the commissioners, by correspondence, fixed on the
first day of September last, for their meeting at Cumberland to proceed
in the work; neither of them, however, reached that place until the
third of that month, on which day they all met.

The surveyor having, under his instructions, laid down a plat of his
work, showing the meanders of the Potomac and Ohio rivers, within the
limits prescribed for the commissioners, as also the road between those
rivers, which is commonly traveled from Cumberland to Charleston, in
part called Braddock's road; and the same being produced to the
commissioners, whereby straight lines and their true courses were shown
between the extreme points on each river, and the boundaries which limit
the powers of the commissioners being thereby ascertained, serving as a
basis whereon to proceed in the examination of the grounds and face of
the country; the commissioners thus prepared commenced the business of
exploring; and in this it was considered that a faithful discharge of
the discretionary powers vested by the law made it necessary to view the
whole to be able to judge of a preference due to any part of the
grounds, which imposed a task of examining a space comprehending upwards
of two thousand square miles; a task rendered still more incumbent by
the solicitude and importunities of the inhabitants of every part of the
district, who severally conceived their grounds entitled to a
preference. It becoming necessary, in the interim, to run various lines
of experiment for ascertaining the geographical position of several
points entitled to attention, and the service suffering great delay for
want of another surveyor, it was thought consistent with the public
interest to employ, in that capacity, Arthur Rider, the vaneman, who had
been chosen with qualification to meet such an emergency; and whose
service as vaneman could then be dispensed with. He commenced, as
surveyor, on the 22d day of September, and continued so at field work
until the first day of December, when he was retained as a necessary
assistant to the principal surveyor, in copying field notes and
hastening the draught of the work to be reported.

The proceedings of the commissioners are specially detailed in their
general journal, compiled from the daily journal of each commissioner,
to which they beg leave to refer, under mark No. 2.

After a careful and critical examination of all the grounds within the
limits prescribed, as well as the grounds and ways out from the Ohio
westwardly, at several points, and examining the shoal parts of the Ohio
river as detailed in the table of soundings, stated in their journal,
and after gaining all the information, geographical, general and
special, possible and necessary, toward a judicial discharge of the
duties assigned them, the commissioners repaired to Cumberland to
examine and compare their notes and journals, and determine upon the
direction and location of their route.

In this consultation the governing objects were:

1st. Shortness of distance between navigable points on the eastern and
western waters.

2d. A point on the Monongahela best calculated to equalize the
advantages of this portage in the country within reach of it.

3d. A point on the Ohio river most capable of combining certainty of
navigation with road accommodation; embracing, in this estimate, remote
points westwardly, as well as present and probable population on the
north and south.

4th. Best mode of diffusing benefits with least distance of road.

In contemplating these objects, due attention was paid as well to the
comparative merits of towns, establishments, and settlements already
made, as to the capacity of the country with the present and probable
population.

In the course of arrangement, and in its order, the first point located
for the route was determined and fixed at Cumberland, a decision founded
on propriety, and in some measure on necessity, from the circumstance of
a high and difficult mountain, called Nobley, laying and confining the
east margin of the Potomac so as to render it impossible of access on
that side without immense expense, at any point between Cumberland and
where the road from Winchester to Gwynn's crosses, and even there the
Nobley mountain is crossed with much difficulty and hazard. And this
upper point was taxed with another formidable objection; it was found
that a high range of mountains, called Dan's, stretching across from
Gwynn's to the Potomac, above this point, precluded the opportunity of
extending a route from this point in a proper direction, and left no
alternative but passing by Gwynn's; the distance from Cumberland to
Gwynn's being upward of a mile less than from the upper point, which
lies ten miles by water above Cumberland, the commissioners were not
permitted to hesitate in preferring a point which shortens the portage,
as well as the Potomac navigation.

The point on the Potomac being viewed as a great repository of produce,
which a good road will bring from the west of Laurel Hill, and the
advantages which Cumberland, as a town, has in that respect over an
unimproved place, are additional considerations operating forcibly in
favor of the place preferred.

In extending the route from Cumberland, a triple range of mountains,
stretching across from Jenings' run in measure with Gwynn's, left only
the alternative of laying the road up Will's creek for three miles,
nearly at right angles with the true course, and then by way of Jenings'
run, or extending it over a break in the smallest mountain, on a better
course by Gwynn's, to the top of Savage mountain; the latter was
adopted, being the shortest, and will be less expensive in hill-side
digging over a sloped route than the former, requiring one bridge over
Will's creek and several over Jenings' run, both very wide and
considerable streams in high water; and a more weighty reason for
preferring the route by Gwynn's is the great accommodation it will
afford travelers from Winchester by the upper point, who could not reach
the route by Jenings' run short of the top of Savage, which would
withhold from them the benefit of an easy way up the mountain.

It is, however, supposed that those who travel from Winchester by way of
the upper point to Gwynn's, are in that respect more the dupes of common
prejudice than judges of their own case, as it is believed the way will
be as short, and on much better ground, to cross the Potomac below the
confluence of the north and south branches (thereby crossing these
two, as well as Patterson's creek, in one stream, equally fordable in the
same season), than to pass through Cumberland to Gwynn's. Of these
grounds, however, the commissioners do not speak from actual view, but
consider it a subject well worthy of future investigation. Having gained
the top of Allegany mountain, or rather the top of that part called
Savage, by way of Gwynn's, the general route, as it respects the most
important points, was determined as follows, viz.:

From a stone at the corner of lot No. 1, in Cumberland, near the
confluence of Will's creek and the north branch of the Potomac river;
thence extending along the street westwardly, to cross the hill lying
between Cumberland and Gwynn's, at the gap where Braddock's road passes
it; thence near Gwynn's and Jesse Tomlinson's, to cross the big
Youghiogheny near the mouth of Roger's run, between the crossing of
Braddock's road and the confluence of the streams which form the Turkey
foot; thence to cross Laurel Hill near the forks of Dunbar's run, to the
west foot of that hill, at a point near where Braddock's old road
reached it, near Gist's old place, now Colonel Isaac Meason's, thence
through Brownsville and Bridgeport, to cross the Monongahela river
below Josias Crawford's ferry; and thence on as straight a course as the
country will admit to the Ohio, at a point between the mouth of Wheeling
creek and the lower point of Wheeling island.

In this direction of the route it will lay about twenty-four and a half
miles in Maryland, seventy-five miles and a half in Pennsylvania, and
twelve miles in Virginia; distances which will be in a small degree
increased by meanders, which the bed of the road must necessarily make
between the points mentioned in the location; and this route, it is
believed, comprehends more important advantages than could be afforded
in any other, inasmuch as it has a capacity at least equal to any other
in extending advantages of a highway, and at the same time establishes
the shortest portage between the points already navigated, and on the
way accommodates other and nearer points to which navigation may be
extended, and still shorten the portage.

It intersects Big Youghiogheny at the nearest point from Cumberland,
then lies nearly parallel with that river for the distance of twenty
miles, and at the west foot of Laurel Hill lies within five miles of
Connellsville, from which the Youghiogheny is navigated; and in the same
direction the route intersects at Brownsville the nearest point on the
Monongahela river within the district.

The improvement of the Youghiogheny navigation is a subject of too much
importance to remain long neglected; and the capacity of that river, as
high up as the falls (twelve miles above Connellsville), is said to be
equal, at a small expense, with the parts already navigated below. The
obstructions at the falls, and a rocky rapid near Turkey Foot,
constitute the principal impediments in that river to the intersection
of the route, and as much higher as the stream has a capacity for
navigation; and these difficulties will doubtless be removed when the
intercourse shall warrant the measure.

Under these circumstances the portage may be thus stated:

From Cumberland to Monongahela, 66-1/2 miles. From Cumberland to a point
in measure with Connellsville, on the Youghiogheny river, 51-1/2 miles.
From Cumberland to a point in measure with the lower end of the falls of
Youghiogheny, which will lie two miles north of the public road, 43
miles. From Cumberland to the intersection of the route with the
Youghiogheny river, 34 miles.

Nothing is here said of the Little Youghiogheny, which lies nearer
Cumberland; the stream being unusually crooked, its navigation can only
become the work of a redundant population.

The point which this route locates, at the west foot of Laurel Hill,
having cleared the whole of the Allegheny mountain, is so situated as to
extend the advantages of an easy way through the great barrier, with
more equal justice to the best parts of the country between Laurel Hill
and the Ohio. Lines from this point to Pittsburg and Morgantown,
diverging nearly at the same angle, open upon equal terms to all parts
of the Western country that can make use of this portage; and which may
include the settlements from Pittsburg, up Big Beaver to the
Connecticut reserve, on Lake Erie, as well as those on the southern
borders of the Ohio and all the intermediate country.

Brownsville is nearly equi-distant from Big Beaver and Fishing creek,
and equally convenient to all the crossing places on the Ohio, between
these extremes. As a port, it is at least equal to any on the
Monongahela within the limits, and holds superior advantages in
furnishing supplies to emigrants, traders, and other travelers by land
or water.

Not unmindful of the claims of towns and their capacity of reciprocating
advantages on public roads, the commissioners were not insensible of the
disadvantage which Uniontown must feel from the want of that
accommodation which a more southwardly direction of the route would have
afforded; but as that could not take place without a relinquishment of
the shortest passage, considerations of public benefit could not yield
to feelings of minor import. Uniontown being the seat of justice for
Fayette county, Pennsylvania, is not without a share of public benefits,
and may partake of the advantages of this portage upon equal terms with
Connellsville, a growing town, with the advantage of respectable
water-works adjoining, in the manufactory of flour and iron.

After reaching the nearest navigation on the western waters, at a point
best calculated to diffuse the benefits of a great highway in the
greatest possible latitude east of the Ohio, it was considered that, to
fulfill the objects of the law, it remained for the commissioners to
give such a direction to the road as would best secure a certainty of
navigation on the Ohio at all seasons, combining, as far as possible,
the inland accommodation of remote points westwardly. It was found that
the obstructions in the Ohio, within the limits between Steubenville and
Grave creek, lay principally above the town and mouth of Wheeling; a
circumstance ascertained by the commissioners in their examination of
the channel, as well as by common usage, which has long given a decided
preference to Wheeling as a place of embarcation and port of departure
in dry seasons. It was also seen that Wheeling lay in a line from
Brownsville to the centre of the State of Ohio and Post Vincennes. These
circumstances favoring and corresponding with the chief objects in view
in this last direction of the route, and the ground from Wheeling
westwardly being known of equal fitness with any other way out from the
river, it was thought most proper, under these several considerations,
to locate the point mentioned below the mouth of Wheeling. In taking
this point in preference to one higher up and in the town of Wheeling,
the public benefit and convenience were consulted, inasmuch as the
present crossing place over the Ohio from the town is so contrived and
confined as to subject passengers to extraordinary ferriage and delay,
by entering and clearing a ferry-boat on each side of Wheeling island,
which lies before the town and precludes the opportunity of fording when
the river is crossed in that way, above and below the island. From the
point located, a safe crossing is afforded at the lower point of the
island by a ferry in high, and a good ford at low water.

The face of the country within the limits prescribed is generally very
uneven, and in many places broken by a succession of high mountains and
deep hollows, too formidable to be reduced within five degrees of the
horizon, but by crossing them obliquely, a mode which, although it
imposes a heavy task of hill-side digging, obviates generally the
necessity of reducing hills and filling hollows, which, on these
grounds, would be an attempt truly Quixotic. This inequality of the
surface is not confined to the Allegheny mountain; the country between
the Monongahela and Ohio rivers, although less elevated, is not better
adapted for the bed of a road, being filled with impediments of hills
and hollows, which present considerable difficulties, and wants that
super-abundance and convenience of stone which is found in the mountain.

The indirect course of the road now traveled, and the frequent
elevations and depressions which occur, that exceed the limits of the
law, preclude the possibility of occupying it in any extent without
great sacrifice of distance, and forbid the use of it, in any one part,
for more than half a mile, or more than two or three miles in the whole.

The expense of rendering the road now in contemplation passable, may,
therefore, amount to a larger sum than may have been supposed necessary,
under an idea of embracing in it a considerable part of the old road;
but it is believed that the contrary will be found most correct, and
that a sum sufficient to open the new could not be expended on the same
distance of the old road with equal benefit.

The sum required for the road in contemplation will depend on the style
and manner of making it; as a common road cannot remove the difficulties
which always exist on deep grounds, and particularly in wet seasons, and
as nothing short of a firm, substantial, well-formed, stone-capped road
can remove the causes which led to the measure of improvement, or render
the institution as commodious as a great and growing intercourse appears
to require, the expense of such a road next becomes the subject of
inquiry.

In this inquiry the commissioners can only form an estimate by recurring
to the experience of Pennsylvania and Maryland in the business of
artificial roads. Upon this data, and a comparison of the grounds and
proximity of the materials for covering, there are reasons for belief
that, on the route reported, a complete road may be made at an expense
not exceeding six thousand dollars per mile, exclusive of bridges over
the principal streams on the way. The average expense of the Lancaster,
as well as Baltimore and Frederick turnpike, is considerably higher; but
it is believed that the convenient supply of stone which the mountain
affords will, on those grounds, reduce the expense to the rate here
stated.

As to the policy of incurring this expense, it is not the province of
the commissioners to declare; but they cannot, however, withhold
assurances of a firm belief that the purse of the nation cannot be more
seasonably opened, or more happily applied, than in promoting the speedy
and effectual establishment of a great and easy road on the way
contemplated.

In the discharge of all these duties, the commissioners have been
actuated by an ardent desire to render the institution as useful and
commodious as possible; and, impressed with a strong sense of the
necessity which urges the speedy establishment of the road, they have to
regret the circumstance which delays the completion of the part assigned
them. They, however, in some measure, content themselves with the
reflection that it will not retard the progress of the work, as the
opening of the road cannot commence before spring, and may then begin
with marking the way.

The extra expense incident to the service from the necessity (and
propriety, as it relates to public economy,) of employing men not
provided for by law, will, it is hoped, be recognized, and provision
made for the payment of that and similar expenses, when in future it may
be indispensably incurred.

The commissioners having engaged in a service in which their zeal did
not permit them to calculate the difference between their pay and the
expense to which the service subjected them, cannot suppose it the wish
or intention of the Government to accept of their services for a mere
indemnification of their expense of subsistence, which will be very much
the case under the present allowance; they, therefore, allow themselves
to hope and expect that measures will be taken to provide such further
compensation as may, under all circumstances, be thought neither profuse
nor parsimonious.

The painful anxiety manifested by the inhabitants of the district
explored, and their general desire to know the route determined on,
suggested the measure of promulgation, which, after some deliberation,
was agreed on by way of circular letter, which has been forwarded to
those persons to whom precaution was useful, and afterward sent to one
of the presses in that quarter for publication, in the form of the
document No. 3, which accompanies this report.

All which is, with due deference, submitted.

                                              ELI WILLIAMS,
                                              THOMAS MOORE,
  DECEMBER 30, 1806.                           JOSEPH KERR.




CHAPTER V.

  _Pennsylvania Grants Permission to Make the Road Through Her
     Territory--Uniontown Restored, Gist Left Out, and Washington,
     Pennsylvania, Made a Point--Simon Snyder, Speaker of the
     House--Pressly Carr Lane, a Fayette County Man, Speaker of the
     Senate, and Thomas McKean, Governor--A Second Special Message From
     President Jefferson, and a Second Report of the
     Commissioners--Heights of Mountains and Hills--On to Brownsville
     and Wheeling--An Imperious Call Made on Commissioner Kerr._


  An Act authorizing the President of the United States to open a road
     through that part of this State lying between Cumberland, in the
     State of Maryland, and the Ohio river.

WHEREAS, by an Act of the Congress of the United States, passed on the
twenty-ninth day of March, one thousand eight hundred and six, entitled
"An act to regulate the laying out and making a road from Cumberland, in
the State of Maryland, to the State of Ohio," the President of the
United States is empowered to lay out a road from the Potomac river to
the river Ohio, and to take measures for making the same, so soon as the
consent of the legislatures of the several States through which the said
road shall pass, could be obtained: And whereas, application hath been
made to this legislature, by the President of the United States, for its
consent to the measures aforesaid: Therefore,

SECTION 1. _Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in General Assembly met, and it is
hereby enacted by the authority of the same_, That the President of the
United States be, and he is hereby authorized to cause so much of the
said road as will be within this State, to be opened so far as it may be
necessary the same should pass through this State, and to cause the said
road to be made, regulated and completed, within the limits, and
according to the intent and meaning of the before recited Act of
Congress in relation thereto; _Provided, nevertheless_, That the route
laid down and reported by the commissioners to the President of the
United States, be so altered as to pass through Uniontown, in the county
of Fayette, and Washington, in the county of Washington, if such
alteration can, in the opinion of the President, be made, consistently
with the provisions of an act of Congress passed March 29th, 1806, but
if not, then over any ground within the limit of this State, which he
may deem most advantageous.

SEC 2. _And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid_, That such
person or persons as are or shall be appointed for the purpose of
laying out and completing the said road, under the authority of the
United States, shall have full power and authority to enter upon the
lands through which the same may pass, and upon any land near or
adjacent thereto, and therefrom to take, dig, cut and carry away such
materials of earth, stone, gravel, timber and sand as may be necessary
for the purpose of completing, and for ever keeping in repair, said
road; _Provided_, That such materials shall be valued and appraised, in
the same manner as materials taken for similar purposes, under the
authority of this Commonwealth are by the laws thereof, directed to be
valued and appraised, and a certificate of the amount thereof shall, by
the person or persons appointed, or hereafter to be appointed under the
authority of the United States for the purpose aforesaid, be delivered
to each party entitled thereto, for any materials to be taken by virtue
of this act, to entitle him, her or them to receive payment therefor
from the United States.

                              SIMON SNYDER,
                                 _Speaker of the House of Representatives_.
                              P. C. LANE,
                                    _Speaker of the Senate_.

_Approved, the ninth day of April, one thousand eight hundred and
seven._

                                        THOMAS M'KEAN.


                      TENTH CONGRESS--FIRST SESSION.

               Communicated to Congress February 19, 1808.

_To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States_:

The States of Pennsylvania, Maryland and Virginia having, by their
several acts consented that the road from Cumberland to the State of
Ohio, authorized by the act of Congress of March 29, 1806, should pass
through those States, and the report of the commissioners communicated
to Congress with my message of January 31, 1807, having been duly
considered, I have approved of the route therein proposed for the said
road as far as Brownsville, with a single deviation since located, which
carries it through Uniontown.

From thence the course to the Ohio, and the point within the legal
limits at which it shall strike that river, is still to be decided.

In forming this decision, I shall pay material regard to the interests
and wishes of the populous parts of the State of Ohio, and to a future
and convenient connection with the road which is to lead from the
_Indian_ boundary near Cincinnati, by Vincennes, to the Mississippi, at
St. Louis, under authority of the act of April 21, 1806. In this way we
may accomplish a continuous and advantageous line of communication from
the seat of the General Government to St. Louis, passing through several
very interesting points, to the Western country.

I have thought it advisable, also, to secure from obliteration the trace
of the road so far as it has been approved, which has been executed at
such considerable expense, by opening one-half of its breadth through
its whole length.

The report of the commissioners herewith transmitted will give
particular information of their proceedings under the act of March
29, 1806, since the date of my message of January 31, 1807, and will
enable Congress to adopt such further measures, relative thereto, as
they may deem proper under existing circumstances.

                                        TH. JEFFERSON.

FEBRUARY 19, 1808.

       *       *       *       *       *

The undersigned, commissioners appointed under the law of the United
States, entitled "An act to regulate the laying out and making a road
from Cumberland, in the State of Maryland, to the State of Ohio," in
addition to the communications heretofore made, beg leave further to
report to the President of the United States that, by the delay of the
answer of the Legislature of Pennsylvania to the application for
permission to pass the road through that State, the commissioners could
not proceed to the business of the road in the spring before vegetation
had so far advanced as to render the work of exploring and surveying
difficult and tedious, from which circumstance it was postponed till the
last autumn, when the business was again resumed. That, in obedience to
the special instructions given them, the route heretofore reported has
been so changed as to pass through Uniontown, and that they have
completed the location, gradation and marking of the route from
Cumberland to Brownsville, Bridgeport, and the Monongahela river,
agreeably to a plat of the courses, distances and grades in which is
described the marks and monuments by which the route is designated, and
which is herewith exhibited; that by this plat and measurement it will
appear (when compared with the road now traveled) there is a saving of
four miles of distance between Cumberland and Brownsville on the new
route.

In the gradation of the surface of the route (which became necessary) is
ascertained the comparative elevation and depression of different points
on the route, and taking a point ten feet above the surface of low water
in the Potomac river at Cumberland, as the horizon, the most prominent
points are found to be elevated as follows, viz.:

                                                             Feet.  10ths.
   Summit of Wills mountain                                   581     3
   Western foot of same                                       304     4
   Summit of Savage mountain                                 2022    24
   Savage river                                              1741     6
   Summit Little Savage mountain                             1900     4
   Branch Pine Run, first Western water                      1699     9
   Summit of Red Hill (after called Shades of Death)         1914     3
   Summit Little Meadow mountain                             2026    16
   Little Youghiogheny river                                 1322     6
   East Fork of Shade Run                                    1558    92
   Summit of Negro mountain, highest point                   2328    12
   Middle branch of White's creek, at the west foot of Negro
     mountain                                                1360     5
   White's creek                                             1195     5
   Big Youghiogheny river                                     645     5
   Summit of a ridge between Youghiogheny river and Beaver
     waters                                                  1514     5
   Beaver Run                                                1123     8
   Summit of Laurel Hill                                     1550    16
   Court House in Uniontown                                   274    65
   A point ten feet above the surface of low water in the
     Monongahela river, at the mouth of Dunlap's creek        119    26

The law requiring the commissioners to report those parts of the route
as are laid on the old road, as well as those on new grounds, and to
state those parts which require the most immediate attention and
amelioration, the probable expense of making the same passable in the
most difficult parts, and through the whole distance, they have to state
that, from the crooked and hilly course of the road now traveled, the
new route could not be made to occupy any part of it (except an
intersection on Wills mountain, another at Jesse Tomlinson's, and a
third near Big Youghiogheny, embracing not a mile of distance in the
whole) without unnecessary sacrifices of distances and expense.

That, therefore, an estimate must be made on the route as passing wholly
through new grounds. In doing this the commissioners feel great
difficulty, as they cannot, with any degree of precision, estimate the
expense of making it merely passable; nor can they allow themselves to
suppose that a less breadth than that mentioned in the law was to be
taken into the calculation. The rugged deformity of the grounds rendered
it impossible to lay a route within the grade limited by law otherwise
than by ascending and descending the hills obliquely, by which
circumstance a great proportion of the route occupies the sides of the
hills, which cannot be safely passed on a road of common breadth, and
where it will, in the opinion of the commissioners, be necessary, by
digging, to give the proper form to thirty feet, at least in the breadth
of the road, to afford suitable security in passing on a way to be
frequently crowded with wagons moving in opposite directions, with
transports of emigrant families, and droves of cattle, hogs, etc., on
the way to market. Considering, therefore, that a road on those grounds
must have sufficient breadth to afford ways and water courses, and
satisfied that nothing short of well constructed and completely finished
conduits can insure it against injuries, which must otherwise render it
impassable at every change of the seasons, by heavy falls of rain or
melting of the beds of snow, with which the country is frequently
covered; the commissioners beg leave to say, that, in a former report,
they estimated the expense of a road on these grounds, when properly
shaped, made and finished in the style of a stone-covered turnpike, at
$6,000 per mile, exclusive of bridges over the principal streams on the
way; and that with all the information they have since been able to
collect, they have no reason to make any alteration in that estimate.

The contracts authorized by, and which have been taken under the
superintendence of the commissioner, Thomas Moore (duplicates of which
accompany this report), will show what has been undertaken relative to
clearing the timber and brush from part of the breadth of the road. The
performance of these contracts was in such forwardness on the 1st
instant as leaves no doubt of their being completely fulfilled by the
first of March.

The commissioners further state, that, to aid them in the extension of
their route, they ran and marked a straight line from the crossing place
on the Monongahela, to Wheeling, and had progressed twenty miles, with
their usual and necessary lines of experiment, in ascertaining the
shortest and best connection of practical grounds, when the approach of
winter and the shortness of the days afforded no expectation that they
could complete the location without a needless expense in the most
inclement season of the year. And, presuming that the postponement of
the remaining part till the ensuing spring would produce no delay in the
business of making the road, they were induced to retire from it for the
present.

The great length of time already employed in this business, makes it
proper for the commissioners to observe that, in order to connect the
best grounds with that circumspection which the importance of the duties
confided to them demanded, it became indispensably necessary to run
lines of experiment and reference in various directions, which exceed an
average of four times the distance located for the route, and that,
through a country so irregularly broken, and crowded with very thick
underwood in many places, the work has been found so incalculably
tedious that, without an adequate idea of the difficulty, it is not easy
to reconcile the delay.

It is proper to mention that an imperious call from the private concerns
of Commissioner Joseph Kerr, compelled him to return home on the 29th of
November, which will account for the want of his signature to this
report.

All of which is, with due deference, submitted, this 15th day of
January, 1808.

                                                  ELI WILLIAMS,
                                                  THOMAS MOORE.

NOTE.--It will be observed that Keyser's Ridge, which is unquestionably
the highest point on the road, is not mentioned by the commissioners.
This is, no doubt, because, at the date of their report, the locality
did not bear the name Keyser's Ridge, and was known as a peak of Negro
mountain. Soon after the location of the road, one Keyser acquired the
property at the ridge, and it took its name from him. It will also be
observed that the measurement of heights by the commissioners was made
from "a point ten feet above the surface of low water in the Potomac at
Cumberland." A table of heights given in a subsequent chapter, the
authority for which is not ascertainable, differs from that in the
commissioners' report, but their report must be accepted as accurate
from their point of measurement. The other table referred to gives the
heights above the Atlantic and above Cumberland, and embraces more hills
than the commissioners' report.




                                CHAPTER VI.

  _Albert Gallatin, Secretary of the Treasury, called upon for
     Information respecting the Fund Applicable to the Roads mentioned
     in the Ohio Admission Act--His Responses._


                       TENTH CONGRESS--FIRST SESSION.

          Communicated to the House of Representatives March 8, 1808.

                              TREASURY DEPARTMENT. March 3, 1808.

_Sir_: In answer to your letter of the 1st instant, I have the honor
to state:

  1st. That the 5 per cent. reserved by the act of 30th April, 1802,
  on the net moneys received for public lands in the State of Ohio, sold
  since 1st July, 1802, has amounted to the following sums, viz:

       From 1st July, 1802, to 30th June, 1803                  $  6,220 00
       From 1st July, 1803, to 30th June, 1804                     8,810 17
       From 1st July, 1804, to 30th June, 1805                    13,994 30
       From 1st July, 1805, to 30th June, 1806                    31,442 20
       From 1st July, 1806, to 30th June, 1807                    28,827 92
       From 1st July, 1807, to 31st December, 1807 (estimated)    15,000 00
                                                                -----------
                                                                $104,294 59


  And that the said 5 per cent. will henceforth probably amount to
  $30,000 a year.


  2d. That, of the $30,000 appropriated by act of 29th March, 1806, there
  has been expended, in laying out the Cumberland road from Cumberland to
  Brownsville, about                                                $10,000
  That there may be wanted to complete the location, about            5,000
                                                                    -------
                                                                    $15,000


  3d. That contracts have been made for opening one-half of the breadth of
  said road, which, as verbally informed by one of the commissioners, will
   require about $3,000, leaving, probably, about $12,000 of the
  appropriation for the further improvement of the road.

  4th. That the portion of the road actually located and confirmed, no
  part of which exceeds an angle of five degrees, extends from the
  navigable waters of the Potomac, at Cumberland, to the navigable waters
  of the Monongahela, at Brownsville (Red Stone Old Fort), and it is
  stated, though no official report has been made to me, at about seventy
  miles.

  5th. That that road can be considered as a national object only if
  completed as a turnpike, whereby all the flour and other produce of the
  western adjacent countries may be brought to a market on the Atlantic
  shores; and the transportation of all the salt and other commodities and
  merchandise whatever, imported from the Atlantic ports to the western
  country generally, may be reduced probably one dollar per cwt.

  And, Lastly, that the expense of completing that part of the road in
  such manner, is estimated at $400,000.

  I have the honor to be, respectfully, sir, your obedient servant,

                                                  ALBERT GALLATIN.

  Hon. John Montgomery, of Maryland, Chairman, etc., in Congress.


                                         COMMITTEE ROOM, Dec. 22, 1808.

_Sir_: The committee appointed on the message of the President,
transmitting a report of the commissioners concerning a road from
Cumberland to Ohio, have directed me to request that you would cause to
be laid before them such information as may be in possession of the
Treasury Department respecting the fund applicable by law to "the laying
out and making public roads leading from the navigable waters emptying
into the Atlantic, to the Ohio," etc. (1) The unexpended balance of the
$30,000 appropriated by the act of the 29th of March, 1806; (2) The
amount of moneys, exclusive of the above, now in the treasury, and in
the hands of the receiver of public moneys, applicable to that object;
and (3) an estimate of the probable amount of moneys that will accrue to
the fund within the two succeeding years.

I have the honor to be, very respectfully, sir, your obedient servant,

                                                  JEREMIAH MORROW.

To the Hon. Secretary of the Treasury.


                    TENTH CONGRESS--SECOND SESSION.

                       _Cumberland Road._

     Communicated to the House of Representatives, February 16, 1809.

                                        TREASURY DEPARTMENT, Dec. 29, 1808.

_Sir_: In answer to your letter of the 22d instant. I have the honor
to state, for the information of the committee:

  1st. That the unexpended balance of the appropriation, made by the act
  of March 29, 1806, for opening a road from Cumberland, on the Potomac,
  to the river Ohio, amounts to $16,075.15; part of which sum will
  probably be wanted in order to complete the location and opening of the
  road. It is probable that about $13,000 will remain applicable to making
  the road.

  2dly. That the total amount received, either at the treasury, or by the
  receivers of public moneys on account of roads, and calculated at the
  rate of 5 per cent, of the net proceeds of the sales of lands in the
  State of Ohio, subsequent to the 30th day of June, 1802, was, on

     the 30th day of September last                                $104,692
     leaving, if that mode of calculating be correct, and after
     deducting the sum appropriated by the above mentioned act       30,000
                                                                   --------
     a sum applicable to the road of                               $ 74,692
     in addition to the above mentioned unexpended balance of        16,075
                                                                   --------
     and making together a sum of                                  $ 90,767
     But if the amount applicable to roads be calculated at the
     rate of 2 per cent. only, on the net proceeds of the sales of
     lands, this will, on the 30th of September last, have produced
     only                                                          $ 41,876
     from which, deducting the appropriation of                      30,000
                                                                   --------
     leaves an unappropriated balance of                           $ 11,876
     which, added to the unexpended balance of the appropriation     16,075
                                                                   --------
     makes an aggregate of only                                    $ 27,951


  3dly. That the probable receipts on account of that fund may, for the
  two ensuing years, be estimated at $22,500 a year, if calculated at the
  rate of 5 per cent., and at $9,000 a year, if calculated at the rate of
  2 per cent. on the sales of lands.

  I have the honor to be, respectfully, sir, your obedient servant,

                                                  ALBERT GALLATIN.

  Hon. Jeremiah Morrow, Chairman of the Land Committee.

  P.S.--Amount of the 2 per cent. of the net proceeds of the lands
  within the State of Ohio:

  From 1st July, 1802, to 30th June, 1803, 2 per cent.     $ 2,400.00
  From 1st July, 1803, to 30th June, 1804, 2 per cent.       3,524.06
  From 1st July, 1804, to 30th June, 1805, 2 per cent.       5,597.72
  From 1st July, 1805, to 30th June, 1806, 2 per cent.      11,243.55
  From 1st July, 1806, to 30th June, 1807, 2 per cent.       9,120.75
  From 1st July, 1807, to 30th June, 1808, 2 per cent.       9,902.80
  Estimated July, 1808, to 31st October, 1808, 2 per cent.   2,815.60
                                                           ----------
      Total                                                $44,692.48

  The sum of $30,000 appropriated per act of 29th of March to be
  paid therefrom; of which $13,924.85 seems to have been paid.

                                                            A. G.




                            CHAPTER VII.

  _The Life of the Road Threatened by the Spectre of a Constitutional
     Cavil--President Monroe Vetoes a Bill for its Preservation and
     Repair--General Jackson has Misgivings--Hon. Andrew Stewart comes
     to the Rescue._


                          SPECIAL MESSAGE.

                                                        MAY 4, 1822.
_To the House of Representatives_:

Having duly considered the bill, entitled "An act for the preservation
and repair of the Cumberland Road," it is with deep regret (APPROVING,
AS I DO, THE POLICY), that I am compelled to object to its passage, and
to return the bill to the House of Representatives, in which it
originated, under a conviction that Congress do not possess the power,
under the Constitution, to pass such a law. A power to establish
turnpikes, with gates and tolls, and to enforce the collection of the
tolls by penalties, implies a power to adopt and execute a complete
system of internal improvements. A right to impose duties to be paid by
all persons passing a certain road, and on horses and carriages, as is
done by this bill, involves the right to take the land from the
proprietor on a valuation, and to pass laws for the protection of the
road from injuries; and if it exist, as to one road, it exists as to any
other, and to as many roads as Congress may think proper to establish. A
right to legislate for one of these purposes, is a right to legislate
for the others. It is a complete right of jurisdiction and sovereignty
for all the purposes of internal improvement, and not merely the right
of applying money under the power vested in Congress to make
appropriations (under which power, with the consent of the States
through which the road passes, the work was originally commenced, and
has been so far executed). I am of opinion that Congress do not possess
this power--that the States individually cannot grant it; for, although
they may assent to the appropriation of money within their limits for
such purposes, they can grant no power of jurisdiction of sovereignty,
by special compacts with the United States. This power can be granted
only by an amendment to the Constitution, and in the mode prescribed by
it. If the power exist, it must be either because it has been
specifically granted to the United States, or that it is incidental to
some power, which has been specifically granted. If we examine the
specific grants of power, we do not find it among them, nor is it
incidental to any power which has been specifically granted. It has
never been contended that the power was specifically granted. It is
claimed only as being incidental to some one or more of the powers
which are specifically granted. The following are the powers from which
it is said to be derived: (1) From the right to establish post offices
and post roads; (2) From the right to declare war; (3) To regulate
commerce; (4) To pay the debts and provide for the common defence and
general welfare; (5) From the power to make all laws necessary and
proper for carrying into execution all the powers vested by the
Constitution in the government of the United States, or in any
department or officer thereof; (6) And lastly, from the power to dispose
of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting the territory
and other property of the United States. According to my judgment, it
cannot be derived from either of these powers, nor from all of them
united, and in consequence it does not exist. Having stated my
objections to the bill, I should now cheerfully communicate at large the
reasons on which they are founded, if I had time to reduce them to such
form as to include them in this paper. The advanced stage of the session
renders that impossible. Having, at the commencement of my service in
this high trust, considered it a duty to express the opinion that the
United States do not possess the power in question, and to suggest for
the consideration of Congress the propriety of recommending to the
States an amendment to the Constitution, to vest the power in the United
States, my attention has been often drawn to the subject since, in
consequence whereof, I have occasionally committed my sentiments to
paper respecting it. The form which this exposition has assumed is not
such as I should have given it had it been intended for Congress, nor is
it concluded. Nevertheless, as it contains my views on this subject,
being one which I deem of very high importance, and which, in many of
its bearings, has now become peculiarly urgent, I will communicate it to
Congress, if in my power, in the course of the day, or certainly on
Monday next.

                                                  JAMES MONROE.

General Jackson, in his famous veto of the Maysville Road bill (May 27,
1830), refers to the Cumberland Road, and to the above message of
President Monroe, in the following terms;

"In the administration of Mr. Jefferson we have two examples of the
exercise of the right of appropriation, which, in the consideration that
led to their adoption, and in their effects upon the public mind, have
had a greater agency in marking the character of the power than any
subsequent events. I allude to the payment of fifteen millions of
dollars for the purchase of Louisiana, and to the ORIGINAL APPROPRIATION
FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE CUMBERLAND ROAD; the latter act deriving
much weight from the acquiescence and approbation of three of the most
powerful of the original members of the confederacy, expressed through
their respective legislatures. Although the circumstances of the LATTER
CASE may be such as to deprive so much of it as relates to the actual
construction of the road of the force of an obligatory exposition of the
Constitution, it must nevertheless be admitted that so far as the mere
appropriation of money is concerned, they present the principle in its
most imposing aspect. No less than twenty-three different laws have been
passed through all the forms of the Constitution, appropriating upwards
of two millions and a half of dollars out of the national treasury in
support of that improvement, with the approbation of every president of
the United States, including my predecessor, since its commencement. The
views of Mr. Monroe upon this subject were not left to inference. During
his administration, a bill was passed through both houses of Congress,
conferring the jurisdiction and prescribing the mode by which the
federal government should exercise it in the case of THE CUMBERLAND
ROAD. He returned it with objections to its passage, and in assigning
them, took occasion to say that in the early stages of the government he
had inclined to the construction that it had no right to expend money
except in the performance of acts authorized by the other specific
grants of power, according to a strict construction of them; but that on
further reflection and observation his mind had undergone a change; that
his opinion then was: 'that Congress had an unlimited power to raise
money, and that in its appropriation they have a discretionary power,
restricted only by the duty to appropriate it to purposes of common
defence and of general, not local, National, not State benefit;' and
this was avowed to be the governing principle through the residue of his
administration."

[Illustration: HON. ANDREW STEWART.]

On the 27th of January, 1829, the Hon. Andrew Stewart, of Pennsylvania,
in a vigorous speech on the floor of Congress, repelled the proposition
that the general government was lacking in power and authority to make
and preserve the road, from which the following extracts are taken:

"Mr. Stewart expressed his regret that gentlemen had deemed this a fit
occasion to draw into discussion all the topics connected with the
general power over the subject of internal improvements. If repeated
decisions, and the uniform practice of the government could settle any
question, this, he thought, ought to be regarded as settled. The
foundation of this road (the National or Cumberland) was laid by a
report made by Mr. Giles, the present Governor of Virginia, in 1802, and
was sanctioned the next session by a similar report, made by another
distinguished Virginian (Mr. Randolph), now a member of this House--it
was the offspring of Virginia, and he hoped she would not now abandon it
as illegitimate. Commenced under the administration of Mr. Jefferson, it
had been sanctioned and prosecuted by every president, and by almost
every Congress, for more than a quarter of a century.* * * *

"Without roads and canals, of what avail was it to the people of the
West to possess a country, abounding with all the essential elements of
wealth and prosperity--of what avail was it to have a country abounding
with inexhaustible mines of coal and ore; to possess a fruitful soil and
abundant harvests, without the means of transporting them to the places
where they were required for consumption? Without a market, the people
of the West were left without a motive for industry. By denying to
this portion of the Union the advantages of internal improvements, you
not only deprive them of all the benefits of governmental expenditures,
but you also deprive them of the advantages which nature's God intended
for them. Possessing the power, how, he asked, could any representative
of the interior or western portions of this Union vote against a policy
so essential to the prosperity of the people who sent him here to guard
their rights, and advance their interests? * * * *

"The right of this government to construct such roads and canals as were
necessary to carry into effect its mail, military, and commercial
powers, was as clear and undoubted as the right to build a post office,
construct a fort, or erect a lighthouse. In every point of view the
cases were precisely similar, and were sustained and justified by the
same power." * * * *

The power, said Mr. S., "to establish post offices and post roads,"
involves the power and duty of transporting the mail, and of employing
all the means necessary for this purpose. The simple question, then, was
this: Are roads necessary to carry the mail? If they were, Congress had
expressly the right to make them, and there was an end to the question.
Roads were, he contended, not only necessary to carry into effect this
power, but they were absolutely and indispensably necessary; you cannot
get along without them, and yet we are gravely told that Congress have
no right to make a mail road, or repair it when made! That to do so
would ruin the States and produce consolidation--ruin the States by
constructing good roads for their use and benefit; produce consolidation
by connecting the distant parts of the Union by cheap and rapid modes of
inter-communication. If consolidation meant to confirm and perpetuate
the Union, he would admit its application, but not otherwise. But we are
told that the _States_ will make roads to carry the mails. This was
begging the question. If the States would make all the roads required to
carry into effect our powers, very well; but if they did not, then we
may undoubtedly make them ourselves. But it was never designed by the
framers of the Constitution that this government should be dependent on
the States for the means of executing its powers: "its means were
adequate to its ends." This principle was distinctly and unanimously
laid down by the Supreme Court in the case already referred to: "No
trace," says the Chief Justice, "is to be found in the Constitution of
an intention to create a dependence of the government of the Union on
the States for the execution of the powers assigned to it--its means are
adequate to its ends. To impose on it the necessity of resorting to
means it cannot control, which another government may furnish or
withhold, would render its course precarious, the result of its measures
uncertain, and create a dependence on other governments, which might
disappoint the most important designs, and is incompatible with the
language of the Constitution." And this was in perfect harmony with the
constant and uniform practice of the government. * * *

Mr. S. begged gentlemen to turn their attention for a moment to the
statute book, and see what the practice of the government had been; what
had been already done by Congress in virtue of this power of
"establishing post offices and post roads." In 1825 an act had been
passed, without a word of objection, which went infinitely further than
the bill under consideration. His colleague (Mr. Buchanan) was then a
member of this House, and, no doubt, voted for it. His eloquence was
then mute--we heard nothing about States rights, spectres, and sedition
laws. This bill, regulating the post office establishment, not only
created some thirty or forty highly penal offences, extending not only
over the Cumberland Road, but over every other road in the United
States, punishing with severest sanctions, even to the taking away the
liberty and the lives of the citizens of the States, and requiring the
State courts to take cognizance of these offences and inflict these
punishments. This was not all: this act not only extended over all the
mail roads, but all other roads running parallel with them, on which all
persons are prohibited, under a penalty of fifty dollars, from carrying
letters in stages or other vehicles performing regular trips; and
authorizing, too, the seizure and sale of any property found in them for
the payment of the fines. The same regulations applied to boats and
vessels passing from one town to another. Compare that bill with the one
under debate. This bill had two or three trifling penalties of ten
dollars, and was confined to one road of about one hundred and fifty
miles in extent, made by the United States, while the other act, with
all its fines and forfeitures, pains and penalties, extended not only to
all the mail roads in the United States, but also to all parallel roads;
yet no complaint was then heard about the constitutionality of this law,
or the dreadful consequences of carrying the citizens hundreds of miles
to be tried. Under it no difficulties had ever been experienced, and no
complaint had ever been heard. There had been no occasion for appointing
United States Justices and creating federal courts to carry this law
into effect, about which there was so much declamation on this occasion:
this was truly choking at gnats and swallowing camels. To take away
_life_ by virtue of the post office power for robbing the mail, is
nothing; but to impose a fine of ten dollars for wilfully destroying a
road which has cost the government a million of dollars, is a dreadful
violation of State rights! An unheard of usurpation, worse than the
sedition law; and went further towards a dissolution of the Union than
any other act of the government. Such were the declarations of his
colleague; he hoped he would be able to give some reason for thus
denouncing this bill, after voting for the act of 1825, which carried
this same power a hundred times further than this bill, both as regards
the theatre of its operations, and the extent of its punishments.

       *       *       *       *       *

Having thus established, and, as he thought, conclusively, the right to
construct roads and canals for mail and military purposes, he came next
to say a few words on the subject of those which appertained to the
express power of "regulating commerce with foreign nations and _among
the several States_." This power carried with it, as a necessary
incident, the right to construct commercial roads and canals. From this
grant Congress derived exactly the same power to make roads and canals
that it did sea-walls, light-houses, buoys, beacons, etc., along the
seaboard. If the power existed over the one it existed over the other in
every point of view; the cases were precisely parallel; it was
impossible to draw a distinction between them. This power was essential
to every government--there was no government under the sun without it.
All writers on national law and political economy considered the right
to construct roads and canals as belonging to the commercial power of
all governments. * * *

There were great arteries of communication between distant divisions of
this extensive empire, passing through many States or bordering upon
them, which the States never could and never would make. These works
were emphatically national, and ought to be accomplished by national
means.

He instanced the road now under consideration--it passed through
Maryland, Pennsylvania and Virginia, yet neither of these States would
have given a dollar to make it. It passed mostly through mountainous and
uninhabited regions. He adverted to the Potomac, Ohio, and Mississippi
rivers. Important as these were to all the States, yet they were the
internal concerns of none--they were mere boundaries to which the States
would give nothing, while they had so many objects exclusively internal
requiring all their means. For these reasons he was utterly opposed to
the project of dividing the surplus revenue of the general government
among the several States; this would be to surrender the national means
which the people had confided to this purpose to mere local and
sectional objects, while those truly national would remain forever
unprovided for. He did not claim for this government the power to make
roads and canals for all purposes. The powers of this government and of
the States were distinct and well defined. To the national government
belonged, under the Constitution, the power of making national roads and
canals for national purposes. To the States belonged the power of
providing for state and local objects. The roads and canals projected
and executed by the States and private companies were often highly
important in a national point of view; and to such, in his opinion, this
government ought always to afford aid in a proportion corresponding with
the interest the nation had in their accomplishment. When individuals
were willing to go before and vest millions of their private funds in
works strictly and truly national, connecting the remote sections of the
Union together (of which we had two distinct examples, one in this
district and the other in a neighboring city, Baltimore), could this
government, charged with the care and guardianship of all the great
interests of the nation, look on with cold indifference? Was it not our
duty to lend a helping hand to encourage, to cheer, and to sustain them
in their noble and patriotic efforts? * * * *

Mr. Stewart said he would now proceed to answer, as briefly as possible,
some leading arguments urged by gentlemen in opposition to the bill
under consideration. His colleague (Mr. Buchanan) had said that this
bill proposed a greater stretch of power than the sedition law. This was
an argument "ad captandum vulgus." He would not do his colleague the
injustice to suppose that he was so ignorant of the Constitution of his
country as seriously to address such an argument to the understanding of
this House. The bill under consideration was necessary to carry into
effect the express power of transporting the mail. What power of this
government was the sedition law intended to carry into effect? None. It
was therefore not only clearly unconstitutional on this ground, but it
went directly to abridge the freedom of the press, and, of course, was a
plain and palpable violation of that provision in the Constitution,
which declares that "Congress shall make no law abridging the freedom of
speech or of the press." Now, if his colleague could show any provision
in the Constitution in the slightest degree impugning the right of
Congress to pass this bill, then he might have some excuse for offering
such an argument, otherwise he had none. The gentleman had, in a very
labored effort, endeavored to prove that this government had no kind of
jurisdiction or control whatever over this road. Yet his own amendment
recognized the existence of the very power which he denies. By his
amendment he proposes what? That this government shall cede the roads to
the States, with the power to erect gates and collect as much toll as
was necessary to keep it in repair. But his whole argument went to prove
that Congress did not possess the very power which his amendment assumed
and proposed to the States. The gentleman's amendment, and his speech
therefore, were at open war with each other, and would perhaps both
perish in the conflict. Certainly, both could not survive--one or the
other must fall.

The gentleman, proceeding in his argument, had assumed premises which
nobody would admit, and then, with an air of great triumph, he drew
conclusions which even his own premises would not support. He takes for
granted that this government, with all its mail, military, and
commercial powers, has no more right to make a road to carry these
powers into effect, through a State, than any individual possessing none
of these powers would have. Thus, having assumed what was utterly
inadmissible, he triumphantly inquires whether an individual, having
obtained leave to make a road through another's land, could put up gates
and exact toll? The gentleman says, surely not. But he said, surely yes,
unless expressly prohibited by the contract. Suppose, by permission, I
build a mill, said Mr. S., upon that gentleman's estate, and construct a
bridge and turnpike road to get to it, have not I as much right to
demand toll at the bridge as at the mill? Most undoubtedly; so that the
gentleman's premises and his conclusions were alike fallacious and
unsound. This position had been taken by both the gentlemen from
Virginia (Mr. Barbour and Mr. Archer), to whom he would make the same
reply. A most extraordinary argument had been advanced against military
roads: the public enemy may get possession of them in war!! Was it
possible that an American statesman could, at this time of day, urge
such an argument? It might be addressed to a set of timid savages,
secure in the midst of the wilderness. The enemy get possession of our
roads, and therefore not make them! Such cowardly arguments would
deprive us of every possible means of defence. The enemy, it might be
said with equal propriety, may get our ships, our forts, our cannon, our
soldiers, and therefore we ought not to provide them. What would the
brave freemen of this country say to the men who would deny them roads
to travel on, lest the enemy might take them from us in war? They would
reply, with Spartan magnanimity, "Let them come and take them." * * *

A great deal has been said on the subject of jurisdiction; that, if it
existed at all, it must be exclusive; that it could not attach to soil,
and much metaphysical refinement of this sort, which had little to do
with the subject. On this point, the only sound and practical rule was,
that this government had a right to assume such jurisdiction over their
roads as was necessary for their preservation and repair by such means
as should be deemed most expedient, leaving everything beyond that to
the States. Thus far the Constitution declared the legislation of
Congress to be "the supreme law of the land, anything in the
constitution and laws of any State to the contrary notwithstanding."
This left to the laws of the States, the right to punish all offences
and other acts committed upon the road, in the same manner as though
they had occurred in any other part of their territory. Such had been
the uniform practice of the government in executing all its powers up to
the present time, and no complaint had ever been made or inconvenience
experienced.

It has been universally conceded on all hands in this debate, that the
consent of the States could not confer any jurisdiction or powers on
this government beyond what it had derived from the Constitution. This
was too clear a proposition to admit of doubt. Yet the names of
Jefferson, Madison, Monroe, and Gallatin, were introduced and relied on.
Did gentlemen forget that Mr. Gallatin was the very first man that ever
suggested the plan for making the Cumberland road, and that it had been
sanctioned and actually constructed under the administrations of
Jefferson, Madison, and Monroe? Their opinions were thus reduced to
practice, which was the best evidence in the world--"By their fruits
shall ye know them."




CHAPTER VIII.

  _State Authority prevails--The Road surrendered by Congress--The
     erection of Toll Gates authorized--Commissioners appointed by the
     States to receive the Road--They wrangle over its bad condition,
     and demand that it be put in thorough repair by Congress, before
     the States will accept it--Old and familiar names of the
     Commissioners--The Road accepted by the States._


At the session of the year 1831, the Pennsylvania Legislature passed a
bill, which was approved April 4th, of that year, by George Wolf,
governor, the preamble to, and the first, and part of the second, and
all of the tenth sections of which read as follows:

  "Whereas, that part of the Cumberland Road lying within the State of
  Pennsylvania is in many parts in bad condition for want of repairs,
  and as doubts have been entertained whether the United States have
  authority to erect toll gates on said road, and collect toll; and as a
  large proportion of the people of this commonwealth are interested in
  said road, and its constant continuance and preservation; therefore,

  SECTION 1. _Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives
  of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in general assembly met, and it
  is hereby enacted by authority of the same_; That as soon as the
  consent of the government of the United States shall have been
  obtained, as hereinafter provided, WILLIAM F. COPLAN, DAVID DOWNER, of
  Fayette county, STEPHEN HILL, BENJAMIN ANDERSON, of Washington county,
  and THOMAS ENDSLEY, of Smithfield, Somerset county, shall be, and they
  are hereby appointed commissioners, a majority of whom shall be
  sufficient to transact business, who shall hold their offices for
  three years after the passage of this act, after which the right of
  appointing said commissioners shall vest in the governor of this
  commonwealth, to build toll houses, and erect toll gates at suitable
  distances on so much of the Cumberland Road as lies within the State
  of Pennsylvania; _Provided_, that if any one or more of the
  commissioners should die, resign, or refuse to serve, the Governor
  shall appoint one or more other commissioners to fill the vacancies so
  happening; _And provided, also_, that nothing herein contained shall
  be construed to prevent the Governor from re-appointing the
  commissioners named in this act, if he thinks proper.

  SEC. 2. That for the purpose of keeping so much of the said road in
  repair as lies within the State of Pennsylvania, and paying the
  expense of collection and other incidental expenses, the
  commissioners shall cause to be erected on so much of the road as
  passes within this State at least six gates, and that as soon as said
  gates and toll-houses shall be erected, it shall be the duty of the
  toll collectors, and they are hereby required to demand and receive
  for passing the said gates, the tolls hereafter mentioned; and they
  may stop any person riding, leading or driving any horses, cattle,
  sulky, chair, phaeton, cart, chaise, wagon, sleigh, sled or other
  carriage of burden or pleasure from passing through the said gates,
  until they shall respectively have paid for passing the same, that is
  to say: (Here follow the rates).

  SEC. 10. That this act shall not have any force or effect, until the
  Congress of the United States shall assent to the same, and until so
  much of the said road as passes through the State of Pennsylvania, be
  first put in a good state of repair, and an appropriation made by
  Congress for erecting toll-houses and toll-gates thereon, to be
  expended under the authority of the commissioners appointed by this
  act: _Provided_, The legislature of this State may at any future
  session thereof, change, alter or amend this act, provided that the
  same shall not be so altered or amended, as to reduce or increase the
  rates of toll hereby established, below or above a sum necessary to
  defray the expenses incident to the preservation and repair of said
  road, for the payment of the fees or salaries of the commissioners,
  the collectors of tolls, and other agents. _And provided further_,
  That no change, alteration, or amendment, shall ever be adopted, that
  will in any wise defeat or affect, the true intent and meaning of this
  act."

Ohio was a little in advance of Pennsylvania in accepting the road, and
less exacting in her terms. The legislature of that State, on the 4th of
February, 1831, passed an act authorizing the acceptance, without
requiring that the road should be put in repair as a condition
precedent. On the 23d of January, 1832, Maryland, by an act of her
legislature, agreed to accept the road upon the same condition required
by Pennsylvania, and on the 7th of February, 1832, Virginia accepted in
an act similar to that of Ohio. On the 3d of July, 1832, Congress
declared its assent to the above mentioned laws of Pennsylvania and
Maryland in these words: "To which acts the assent of the United States
is hereby given, to remain in force during the pleasure of Congress,"
and on the 2d of March, 1833, assented to the act of Virginia with a
similar limitation.

[Illustration: TOLL HOUSE.]

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                  JANUARY 19, 1835.

            REFERRED TO THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE, TO
                WHICH IS COMMITTED BILL NO. 221.

  _To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States in
     Congress assembled:_

The undersigned beg leave to represent that they have been appointed
commissioners, under the act of the Legislature of Pennsylvania, to
accept from the general government so much of the Cumberland Road as
lies within the limits of that State, and erect toll gates as soon as
it is put in such a state of repair as is required by the provisions of
that act. That they have every disposition to relieve the government
from the burden of the road, so soon as they can feel themselves
justified, under the law, in doing so; but they beg leave to
respectfully represent that the road has not yet been put in that
condition that would enable them to accept of it.

On some parts no more than six inches, and west of the Monongahela
river, three inches only of metal have been put upon it, and it is
apparent that this will be totally insufficient to preserve it under the
heavy travel upon that road. Besides, the bridges throughout the whole
road remain untouched. Under these circumstances, it is impossible for
us, in the discharge of our duty, to accept of it; and we would most
earnestly but respectfully urge upon Congress the propriety of making
such an appropriation as will complete the repairs in a substantial
manner, as required by the act of our own legislature. We will not
undertake to prescribe the amount which may be necessary; but, to
satisfy your honorable bodies that we are disposed to go as far as the
faithful discharge of our duty will permit, we hereby pledge ourselves,
so soon as Congress shall make an appropriation of so much money as may
be estimated by the department as necessary for that purpose, to accept
of the road, and have toll gates erected without delay. We, therefore,
beg leave most respectfully to submit to the wisdom of your honorable
bodies to determine whether it will be better to make the necessary
appropriation to justify us in accepting the road, and relieving the
government from all future charge, or to keep it in its present state,
subject to annual appropriations for its preservation, as heretofore.

                                                  THO. ENDSLEY.
                                                  STEPHEN HILL.
                                                  DAVID DOWNER.
                                                  WILLIAM F. COPLAN.
          January 7, 1835.                        BENJAMIN ANDERSON.

       *       *       *       *       *

_To the Honorable the Senate and House of Representatives of the
     United States in Congress assembled_:

The undersigned beg leave to represent that they have been appointed
commissioners, under the act of Assembly of the State of Maryland, to
report to the Governor and Council of said State when that part of the
Cumberland Road which lies within the limits of said State shall have
been put in that state of repair contemplated by the act of Congress,
and the act of Assembly of the State of Maryland, agreeing to receive
the road and to keep it in repair; that they will with great pleasure
report the road to the Governor and Council the moment they can with
propriety do so. And they beg leave to represent that they feel
authorized to say that the Governor and Council will, with great
pleasure, authorize them to receive the road whenever it shall be put in
that condition which would justify the State in accepting it. They
further represent that the road has not yet been put in that condition
that would justify them in advising the State to receive it. On some
parts of the road no more than three and a half inches of metal has been
put, and it is evident that this covering will be totally insufficient
to preserve it in a fit state for use under the heavy travel which is
constantly passing over it. The bridges also, throughout the whole
distance, remain in a ruinous and dilapidated condition. They further
respectfully represent that the new location from Cumberland, through
the narrows of Wills creek and along Braddock's run, a distance of
upwards of six miles, has had but three and a half inches of metal upon
it; and the bridge over Wills creek and the bridges over Braddock's run
were to be permanent stone structures, by the act of Assembly of
Maryland, authorizing the President to change the location of the road.
The undersigned are also advised that it is contemplated by the
superintendent to put up wooden structures for bridges, in lieu of the
stone bridges required by the act of Assembly of Maryland, authorizing
the change in the location of the road, which would be in direct
violation of that act. They further represent that the floors of wooden
bridges must be removed every two or three years, and the whole
structure of the bridges themselves must be built every twenty or
twenty-five years.

Under these circumstances it would be impossible for the undersigned, in
the discharge of their duty, to recommend to the State the acceptance of
the road. And they would most earnestly but respectfully urge upon
Congress the propriety of making such an appropriation as will be
sufficient to complete the repairs on the old road, and to finish the
new location in a substantial manner, as contemplated and required by
the act of the Legislature of Maryland. The undersigned will not
undertake to prescribe the sum which may be necessary for this purpose;
but, to satisfy your honorable bodies that they are disposed to go as
far as the faithful discharge of their duty will permit, they hereby
pledge themselves that so soon as Congress shall make an appropriation
of so much money as may be estimated by the department as necessary for
the completion of the repairs of the old road, and the finishing of the
road on the new location, together with the construction of permanent
stone bridges, they will forthwith report to the Governor and Council
the state of the road, and recommend that the State receive such part of
the road as may be completed, and to collect tolls on it to keep it in
repair, thereby relieving the United States from any further expense for
repairs on such part. They further beg leave most respectfully to submit
to the wisdom of your honorable bodies to determine whether it will be
better to make the necessary appropriation to enable them to recommend
the road as in a fit condition to be received by the State, and thus
relieve the government from any further burden, or to let it remain in
its present state, subject to appropriations for its preservation, as
heretofore.

                                                  JOHN HOYE,
                                                  MESHECK FROST,
                                Commissioners of the State of Maryland.

On April 1, 1835, Pennsylvania accepted the road in the following
brief terms, embodied in the third section of an act of her legislature
of that date: "The surrender by the United States of so much of the
Cumberland Road as lies within the State of Pennsylvania is hereby
accepted by this State, and the commissioners to be appointed under
this act are authorized to erect toll gates on the whole or any part of
said road, at such time as they may deem it expedient to do so."

Maryland, Virginia, and Ohio also accepted the road, and thenceforth
it was, and remains under the control of the several States
through which it passes.




CHAPTER IX.

  _Plan of Repairs--The Macadam System adopted--Mr. Stockton offers his
     services--Capt. Delafield made Superintendent--The Road in a bad
     condition--Permission asked to deviate from instructions, and
     refused--Capt. Giesey lifted the old road bed indiscriminately--
     First defects to be remedied--Lieut. Mansfield at Uniontown--Plan
     emphasized in notices for contracts--Free passage for water a first
     consideration._


                                      ENGINEER DEPARTMENT,
                                           WASHINGTON, July 23, 1832.

_Lt. J. K. F. Mansfield, Corps of Engineers_:

SIR: By direction of the Secretary of War, you have been assigned,
temporarily, to the superintendence of the repairs of the Cumberland
Road east of the Ohio river; and in the discharge of your duties in this
capacity, you will be governed by the following instructions:

1st. Respecting the parts to be repaired. The extreme limits within
which your operations will be confined are, the point of intersection of
the road with the western boundary line of the State of Pennsylvania,
and Cumberland, in the State of Maryland; the dividing line between
these States will be considered as dividing the line of the road to be
repaired into two divisions, and the division within the State of
Pennsylvania will be subdivided into six equal sections, and that within
the State of Maryland, into two; then, having made a thorough
examination of each of these sections, with a view to make yourself
acquainted with their exact condition, you will classify them in the
order of their condition, placing the worst first, the next worst
second, and so on, making the best the last. You will then make an
estimate for the repairs of each of these sections, to ascertain how far
the appropriation, which is one hundred and fifty thousand dollars, will
go toward repairing the whole road. Separate contracts will then be made
for executing the repairs, commencing with No. 1, and passing regularly
through the sections, as classified, to the best section; and these
repairs will be prosecuted with as much despatch as the nature of the
case will allow. Should you deem it advisable, in letting out these
sections, to retain any portion of them which may seem to require but
slight repairs, and which repairs could be executed with greater economy
by having overseers and laborers to act under your immediate direction,
you are at liberty to do so, bearing in mind, however, that whenever the
repairs of the road can be made with equal economy, it is the wish of
the department that they should be made by contract. As soon as one or
more of these sections are finished, you will notify the commissioners
appointed to receive this road by the laws of Pennsylvania and Maryland,
approved, that of the former on the 4th day of April, 1831, and that of
the latter on the 4th day of January, 1832, that these sections are
ready to be turned over to the State, and you will accordingly turn them
over.

2d. Respecting the mode of repairs. In order to insure efficient and
permanent repairs, they are to be made on that which is called the
Macadam system; that is to say, the pavement of the old road must be
entirely broken up, and the stones removed from the road; the bed of
which must then be raked smooth, and made nearly flat, having a rise of
not more than three inches from the side to the center, in a road thirty
feet wide; the ditches on each side of the road, and the drains leading
from them, are to be so constructed that the water cannot stand at a
higher level than that which is eighteen inches below the lowest part of
the surface of the road; and, in all cases, when it is practicable, the
drains should be adjusted in such a manner as to lead the water entirely
from the side ditches. The culverts are to be cleared out, and so
adjusted as to allow the free passage of all water that may tend to
cross the road.

Having thus formed the bed of the road, cleaned out the ditches and
culverts, and adjusted the side drains, the stone, reduced to a size not
exceeding four ounces in weight, must be spread on with shovels, and
raked smooth. The old material should be used only when it is of
sufficient hardness, and no clay or sand must be mixed with the stone.

In replacing the covering of stone, it will be found best to lay it on
in strata of about three inches thick, admitting the travel for a short
interval on each layer, and interposing such obstructions from time to
time as will insure an equal travel over every portion of the road;
taking care to keep persons in constant attendance to rake the surface
when it becomes uneven by the action of the wheels of carriages. In
those parts of the road, if any, where materials of good quality cannot
be obtained from the road in sufficient quantity to afford a course of
six inches, new stone must be procured to make up the deficiency to that
thickness; but it is unnecessary, in any part, to put on a covering of
more than nine inches. None but limestone, flint or granite, should be
used for the covering, if practicable; and no covering should be placed
upon the bed of the road till it has become well compacted and
thoroughly dried. At proper intervals, on the slopes of hills, drains or
paved catch-waters must be made across the road, when the cost of
constructing culverts would render their use inexpedient. These
catch-waters must be made with a gradual curvature, so as to give no
jolts to the wheels of carriages passing over them; but whenever the
expense will justify the introduction of culverts, they will be used in
preference; and in all cases where the water crosses the road, either in
catch-waters or under culverts, sufficient pavements and overfalls must
be constructed to provide against the possibility of the road or banks
being washed away by it.

The masonry of the bridges, culverts, and side walls, must be repaired,
when it may be required, in a substantial manner, and care must be taken
that the mortar used be of good quality, without admixture of raw clay.
All the masonry to be well pointed with hydraulic mortar, and in no case
must the pointing be put on after the middle of October; all masonry
finished after this time will be well covered, and pointed early in the
following spring. Care must be taken, also, to provide means for
carrying off the water from the bases of walls, to prevent the action of
frost on their foundations; and it is highly important that all
foundations in masonry should be well pointed with hydraulic mortar to a
depth of eighteen inches below the surface of the ground.

As the laws on the subject of this road do not seem to justify a
deviation from the original location, you will be careful to confine
your operations to the road as you find it located; but, as it is
believed that its axis may be dropped without adding much to the expense
in those places where its inclination with the horizon exceeds four
degrees, you are authorized, under the exercise of a sound discretion,
to make this change.

In making your contracts, it must be understood that you are to have the
general supervision of their execution, and that it will be your duty to
see that all labor and materials (provided for by them) be applied in
the most faithful and substantial manner. These contracts must provide
in their specifications for all the work that can be anticipated, and
should it happen that additional stipulations are afterwards found to be
necessary for either workmanship or supplies not originally provided
for, the facts must be reported to this department, and, with its
approbation, if obtained, new contracts will be made for the additional
services and supplies required; and it must be distinctly understood by
the contractors that no payment will be made for work not provided for
by their contracts.

Mr. L. W. Stockton, of Uniontown, has been engaged on this road and is
intimately acquainted with every part of it, as well as with the
adjacent country; and, as he has offered his services, you would do well
to call upon him and avail yourself of them in any capacity that may
seem to you best.

As soon as it can be done, a drawing of the whole road, with details of
construction, will be forwarded, to be filed in this office.

You will take up your headquarters at any point on the road where your
services may appear to you to be most needed; and, as soon as you shall
have completed such an examination of the road as will place you in
possession of the information necessary to draw up the specifications to
your contracts, you will invite proposals for those contracts through
the public prints. These contracts will be closed with as little delay
as the interest of the road will allow, when the work will be commenced,
and the contracts, together with the proper estimates, forwarded to
this office. For the mode of making these estimates, keeping your
accounts, and conducting your correspondence with this office, you are
referred to the regulations of the Engineer Department.

Captain Delafield has been assigned to the permanent superintendence of
the repairs of this road, and has been directed to join you on or before
the 1st of October next. You will, therefore, immediately on his
arrival, turn over to him these instructions, together with all the
papers and public property that may be in your possession relating to
the road. As soon as you shall have completed the necessary examinations
on the road, you will commence and continue the repairs simultaneously
in both States.

You will make application for such instruments and funds as may appear
necessary to enable you to execute the foregoing instructions.

                                        I am, &c.,
                                                C. GRATIOT,
                                                        Brigadier General.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                        CUMBERLAND, MD., August 1, 1832.

_Sir_: I have this evening returned from a general reconnoissance
of the road in this State. I find the road in a shocking condition, and
every rod of it will require great repair; some of it is now almost
impassable. I purpose leaving here to-morrow, on a particular
measurement and survey of the road as it is, and the requisites to put
it in complete repair.

The object of this communication is to request to be permitted
to deviate, according to circumstances, from so much of my instructions
as requires the old bed in all cases to be lifted, and the rise in
the middle three inches; for there are parts of the road where the top
of the old bed is full low, and where it will be more expensive, and
less firm, to remove the old bed and fill in with earth, than to bring
stone and Macadamize on the top of the old bed to the thickness of
nine inches; and there are cases on the sides of the mountains where
a greater rise than three inches, such, for instance, as some parts of it
now have, which is more advantageous than a less one to confine the
water to the gutters in cases of torrents, and thereby preventing a
general sweep over the whole road, which would carry off the smallest
stuff of a Macadamized road.

The repairs made by Mr. Giesey, about two years since, have the
radical fault resulting from having lifted the old road indiscriminately,
and not giving sufficient rise to the center for a mountainous country.

     I have the honor to be, sir,
                 Very respectfully, your most obedient,
                                   J. K. F. MANSFIELD,
                                           Lieut. of Engineers.

Gen. Chas. Gratiot, Chief Engineer.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                        ENGINEER DEPARTMENT,
                                            WASHINGTON, August 9, 1832.

_Sir_: Your letter of the 1st instant, requesting permission to deviate,
according to circumstances, from so much of the instructions of the
department to you, on the subject of the repairs of the Cumberland Road,
as requires the old road in all cases to be lifted, and the rise in the
middle to be made three inches, has been under consideration, and I have
to inform you that this permission cannot be granted.

In withholding the sanction of the department to any deviation from the
prominent features of your instructions on the subject of these repairs,
it may, perhaps, be proper to state, for your information, the views of
the department on this subject.

By referring to the report of Mr. Weaver, a printed copy of which you
have in your possession, who made an examination of the Cumberland Road
in 1827, you will perceive that the mode of constructing it was that of
digging a trench, or of sinking the bed of the road below the natural
surface of the ground; that this trench was filled with large stones,
and that these were covered with stones a size smaller, and so on. By
this construction, it was intended that the weight of the carriages
passing over the road should be supported by the large stones, and that
the smaller stones were only intended to present an even surface for the
easy passage of vehicles over it. The great objections to this
construction are, that the bed being lower than the surface of the
ground on each side, the ditches can hardly ever be sunk sufficiently
deep to intercept the passage of water from the ground adjacent to the
road to the ditch or trench in which the road is made; this water, by
keeping the bed constantly wet, would cause the heavy stones of the
first layer to sink into the ground, and thus break up the surface of
the road, and allow the free passage of water through the covering
itself. In the winter, the frost acting upon the bed, rendered wet by
the free passage of water to it in every direction, would heave the
stones to such a degree that the road in a little time would be
perfectly impassable; and if any evidence, in addition to that presented
by the testimony of the most experienced and approved road builders,
were necessary to convince the department that the present dilapidated
state of the road under your charge is owing entirely to the operation
of the causes above alluded to, it is believed that that evidence is
found in the report made by Capt. Delafield, who inspected the repairs
of this road made by Mr. Giesey. By pursuing the course suggested in
your letter, it is believed that these objections and difficulties would
still obtain, and that in a little time, however faithfully the repairs
might be made on the top of the large stones, the road would be in as
bad order as it is at present, since the great cause of these evils
would remain, viz.: that of having the bed which supports the stones,
and which in fact should be the real support of the traffic on the
road, lower than the neighboring ground.

It is the intention of the department that the defects of the first
construction of the road shall be remedied in its repair, and as it is
believed that the adoption, as nearly as practicable, of the Macadam
system, in all its important features, presents the only means of
effecting this remedy, and as this system forms the basis of your
instructions, it is recommended that they be departed from as little as
possible.

It is by no means the intention of the department to take from you all
discretion in the discharge of your duties; such a course would defeat
the object had in view in sending an officer of engineers on the road;
but it is believed to be highly important that the exercise of this
discretion should be limited to an extent that will insure the adoption
of such principles and rules as cannot fail to render these repairs
permanent. For these principles and rules, you are referred to Mr.
Macadam's work on the construction and repairs of roads, a copy of which
is in your possession. In removing the metal from the old road, whenever
hollows present themselves in the old bed, it is recommended that they
be filled with earth; indeed, the whole bed of the road should be
elevated, and its form given to it, before any of the covering of stone
be replaced. The earth necessary for this may be taken from the ditches,
or even from the sides of the road, where it can be done without
encroaching upon the privileges of persons residing on the road.

                                        I am, &c., &c.,
                                                        C. GRATIOT.
  Lt. J. K. F. Mansfield,
            Corps of Engineers, Uniontown, Pa.


                 EXTRACTS FROM NOTICES FOR CONTRACTS.

                           PLAN OF REPAIRS.

The plan for repair is to lift the pavement of the old road in all
cases, and deposit the stone off the bed; then to repair the culverts,
clear the drains, ditches, and culverts, so as to admit the free passage
of water, and graduate the bed of the road, so that, when well packed by
travel or other means, it will be three inches higher in the middle than
at either side, for a bed of thirty feet. Having thus formed the bed of
the road, the hard stone (if there be any) of the old road, broken to a
size not exceeding four ounces, is to be placed on the bed of the road
to a breadth of twenty feet, and a thickness not exceeding nine inches,
and in cases where there is a deficiency of the old material, limestone
or whinstone is to be procured to supply the deficiency to the required
thickness of nine inches. Catch-waters and hollow-ways to be permanently
constructed on the sides of hills, and at other places where it will be
thought necessary by the superintending engineer, but in no case to
exceed one in every twelve rods. In those sections where pieces of
hitherto Macadamized road are included, the sand is to be taken off,
and, before new metal is added, the surface loosened with a pick. The
metal added to be three inches thick in the cases heretofore
Macadamized.

                                      JOS. K. F. MANSFIELD,
                                          Lieutenant Corps of Engineers.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                        ENGINEER DEPARTMENT,
                                            WASHINGTON, August 27, 1832.

_Sir_: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 24th
inst., inclosing two printed advertisements for proposals to contract
for the repairs of the Cumberland Road under your charge.

In answer, the department would call your attention to your remarks
under the head "Plan of Repairs," and would suggest that, instead of
removing the stones from the bed of the road before the drains, ditches,
and culverts are put in repair, to allow the free passage of water from
the road, this latter operation should be first attended to, to the end
that the removal of the stone from the road might be effected without
the fear of being annoyed by the accumulation of water from heavy rains.
Besides, thus preparing the drains, ditches, &c., in the first place,
would enable the bed to become perfectly dry by the time the stones are
prepared to be replaced.

                                        I am, &c.,
                                                  C. GRATIOT.

  Lt. J. K. F. Mansfield,
            Corps of Engineers, Uniontown, Pa.




CHAPTER X.

  _Lieut. Mansfield superseded by Capt. Delafield--The Turning of Wills
     Mountain--Contractors not Properly Instructed--Capt. Delafield
     suggests a Change of Plan, and enforces his Views by Copious
     Quotations from Macadam--He is Permitted to exercise his own
     Discretion--Too much sand between Uniontown and
     Cumberland--Operations at Wills Creek suspended--A Collision with
     the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal Company--The difficulty adjusted, and
     operations resumed._


                                        ENGINEER DEPARTMENT,
                                            WASHINGTON, October 5, 1832.

_Sir_: On the arrival of Captain Delafield, of the engineers, on the
Cumberland Road in Pennsylvania and Maryland, you will hand to him the
enclosed communication, which assigns to him the superintendence of the
repairs of that road which have heretofore been conducted under your
supervision. You will, also, turn over to him all the funds, books,
papers, and public property in your possession appertaining to this
road, and close your account with it.

                                        Very respectfully, &c.,
                          By order:         WM. H. C. BARTLETT,
                                    Lieut, and Assistant to Chief Engineer.

  Lieut. J. K. F. Mansfield,
            Corps of Engineers, Uniontown, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                        Uniontown, December 13, 1832.

_Sir_: The surveys of a route for turning Wills mountain by the valley
of Braddock's run and Wills creek are progressing, being retarded only
by the weather. I have examined the whole route, and can confirm the
most satisfactory account you may have heard of it. The ground over
which the road will pass is a uniform inclined plane, requiring very few
culverts, two small bridges over Braddock's run of about fifteen feet
span each, with side hill in no other part than about 300 yards in the
"Narrows" of Wills creek, where a most simple and expedient plan will be
to use the level and smooth bottom of the creek for the road, by
building a wall not to exceed ten feet in height, thus throwing the
stream on the opposite bank, peculiarly well formed for this
construction, being a low bottom of alluvion. The idea of cutting into
the mountain would be expensive, and no better than throwing the creek
from its present bed.

On the arrival of Mr. Pettit, I shall divide the road into four
sections, giving him one. The present condition of the road is most
unpromising. Nearly every contractor has formed his bed in the valley
made by the removal of the old pavement, the consequence of which is,
that, with the mild season and rainy weather, the bed is not drained,
nor can it be, until the side roads are cut down to the bottom of the
stone strata--a measure I directed as the only means of correcting the
evil. Time, and the headstrong obstinacy of some of the contractors,
have prevented much of the work being so attended to. All the contracts
made by Lieut. Mansfield distinctly specify that the road for 30 feet in
width shall be graded in such manner as to avoid this difficulty; yet in
carrying the contracts into effect, the superintendents have, in no
instance, instructed the contractors in the proper course. They have, in
most instances too, permitted the stone to be broken on the road; the
consequences of this are, much sand and dirt in the metal, and a bed
graded without proper attention. This is the more remarkable, as in my
report on the work executed two years since by one of the present
superintendents, these errors were pointed out as serious evils, yet
they are not corrected. It must be expected, therefore, that all that
part of the road now under construction will be very indifferently made,
and by no means such as the Macadam system calls for. By the time the
superintendents acquire a knowledge of their business, the present
contracts will be completed. Instead of giving out any more of the work
under the present system, as I had contemplated and advertised, I shall
postpone doing so until I am better assured that the work can be
properly executed. I look anxiously for Mr. Pettit, trusting his
intelligence may correct some of the defects in the section he will be
called upon to superintend.

To instruct the superintendents in their duties, I shall be compelled to
have printed a manual or primer, with a few lithographic sections, that
the sight may aid the mind in a proper understanding of the business. To
persevere in the present plan, where neither contractors,
superintendents, nor laborers, understand their business, is highly
inexpedient, and I shall forthwith commence maturing a system that must
be productive of more good with less money, or it were better to leave
the work undone, for I am satisfied that durability can not be looked
for under the present system.

My first business will be to draw the operations to a close, and then
endeavor to bring about the correction. You will be apprised of my views
before carrying any of them into effect, observing that, in anticipation
of a change, I have suspended making the contracts alluded to in my
communication of the 27th ultimo.

                          Respectfully, your obedient servant,
                                               RICH'D DELAFIELD,
                                                  Captain of Engineers.
  Brig. Gen. Charles Gratiot,
                 Chief Engineer.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                            BALTIMORE, May 6, 1833.

_Sir_: The instructions of the department of the 23d July last, relating
to the method of repairing the Cumberland Road east of the Ohio, are
founded upon principles upon which I differ in opinion, and beg leave to
request your reconsideration, involving, as they do, an expenditure of
not less than $250,000, when compared with what I judge to be the most
judicious method of making the repairs.

It is in relation to the propriety of breaking up the old bed of the
road in all cases. I apprehend the department was not aware that the bed
is a substantial, yet rough pavement, and not formed of loose, detached
masses of quarry stone thrown together, without order. It is important
to consider this particular when examining the authorities on road
making.

My own views are that it is decidedly preferable to retain the old
pavement in all cases where its continuity is unbroken, even mending
small parts that may be deranged, and Macadamizing over it. In this, I
think, I am borne out by Macadam, Dean, Telford, and Farey, whose ideas
on the subject are annexed, as extracted from "Macadam on Roads."

The only two arguments against the method I propose are, first, that the
metal will grind to dust by being placed over large stone. In answer to
which, I say, that the road passing through a rocky country, even after
removing the pavement, there still remains a rocky foundation; and where
the pavement is well bedded in sand or clay, we have all the elasticity
necessary from the clay or sand bed through the pavement. In support of
which, see the sample of metal taken from the road through Uniontown,
where the under strata have not worn or crushed an iota, presenting
angles as sharp as the day they were first placed there. Were the metal
placed upon an unyielding rock, it would doubtless soon grind to dust;
but placing it upon a pavement laid in sand or gravel, preserves the
elasticity so necessary for this kind of road. Second: That large stone,
placed under Macadam metal, will work to the surface. This is doubtless
true when detached pieces are surrounded by the metal, but with a
pavement the case is very different. I find pieces of this Cumberland
Road, repaired as far back as 1827, by Mr. Ewing, over the old pavement,
in perfect order to this day; as, also, some parts done in this way by
Giesey in 1829, that are much better than any of the repairs he made at
the same time; and a piece through Uniontown, by the authorities of the
place, in 1830, remains in perfect order.

I have been led to reflect upon this subject from learning that the Ohio
road had cut through and was impassable at certain places during the
months of February and March, and seeing the state of the road under my
supervision between Cumberland and Wheeling, comparing the parts
repaired last season, those under Giesey, Ewing, and the town
authorities, with the old pavement that has stood sixteen years without
a cent of money in repair, and to this day is a very good wagon road,
rough, it is true, yet never cutting through during the fall, winter,
or spring, where the pavement is continuous. To throw away so firm a
foundation I cannot think advisable, and beg you to reflect upon the
subject and favor me with your views.

The road in Ohio has worn six years (nearly) without repairs, and was
impassable this spring. The old Cumberland Road has worn sixteen years,
and mile after mile has never been known to cut through at any season.
Parts of it covered with Macadamized metal, and worn for five years, are
in fine order, and present a very smooth surface, never having cut
through. Other parts, where the old pavement has been removed and
Macadamized, were impassable during the spring after three years' wear.
We have to bear in mind the impossibility of keeping the ditches and
drains open in the mountains during the winter. Ice forming in the
drains will, of course, throw the melting snows on the surface of the
road, which is destructive to a Macadamized road on clay or sand,
whereas, if on the old pavement, it has strength enough to resist the
travel until either dried by frost, or sun. This is a consideration that
the English road-makers had not to consider with the same weight. As to
keeping the drains open, and the road surface free from water in the
winter, I conceive it impracticable in the mountains; hence the further
propriety of preserving a foundation that will secure a firm road at all
seasons, even if the wear should prove some five or ten per cent. more
rapid, which I do not even think will be the case on the plan suggested
of Macadamizing upon a pavement, and not on an unyielding, rocky bottom.

               Respectfully, your obedient servant,

                                        RICHARD DELAFIELD,
                                        Captain of Engineers.

  Brig. Gen. C. Gratiot,
              Chief Engineer.


  EXTRACTS FROM "MACADAM ON ROADS," MADE BY CAPTAIN DELAFIELD IN SUPPORT
     OF HIS VIEWS RELATING TO THE PAVEMENT FORMING THE BED OF THE
     "CUMBERLAND ROAD EAST OF THE OHIO."

Page 39.--"It would be highly unprofitable to lift and relay a road,
even if the materials should have been originally too large. The road
between Cirencester and Bath is made of stone too large in size. In this
case I recommend cutting down the high places," &c.

Page 40.--"A part of the road in the Bath district is made of freestone,
which it would be unprofitable to lift. Other cases of several kinds
have occurred where a different method must be adopted, but which it is
impossible to specify, and must be met by the practical skill of the
officer, and who must constantly recur to general principles."

Page 42.--"The price of lifting a road, &c., leaving the road in a
finished state, has been found in practice to be from 1d. to 2d. per
superficial yard, lifted four inches deep."

Page 47.--"It is well known to every skillful and observant road-maker,
that if strata of stone of various sizes be placed on a road, the
largest stones will constantly work up." (This is in no manner
applicable to a pavement, and a road made even in the manner he alludes
to was lifted only four inches deep.--R. D.)

Page 105.--"How deep do you go in lifting the roads? That depends upon
circumstances, but I have generally gone four inches deep. I take up the
materials four inches, and, having broken the large pieces, I put them
back again."

"Does the plan which you have mentioned, of breaking up the roads, apply
to gravel roads, or only to those roads composed of hard stones? In
gravel roads, and in some other roads, it would be impossible to break
them up to advantage; and, in several places, I should think it
unprofitable to lift a road at all. I did not order the road near
Reading to be lifted, but I directed, whenever a large piece of flint
was seen, it should be taken up, broken, and put down again. I am
speaking of a gravel road now."

Page 107.--"There are other cases besides that of gravel, in which I
should think it unprofitable to lift a road. The road between ---- and
---- is made of very soft stone, and is of so brittle a nature, that if
it were lifted it would rise in sand, and there would be nothing to lay
down again that would be useful. I should not recommend lifting of
freestone roads, for the same reason, because it would go so much to
sand that there would be very little to lay down again. I will explain
what I have done to the road between Cirencester and Bath. I was obliged
to lift a little of the sides of the road, in order to give it shape,
but in the center of the road we 'shoved it.' It was before in the state
which the country people call gridirons: that is, it was in large
ridges, with long hollows between, and we cut down the high part to a
level with the bottom of the furrows, and took the materials and sifted
them at the side of the road, and returned what was useful to the
center."

(So far we have the views of Mr. Macadam. From the same work I continue
to quote.--R. D.)

Page 153.--"Considering the very great traffic upon Whitechapel road, is
it your opinion (addressed to Mr. Farey) that it would be advantageous
to pave any part of that road? I think it would be desirable to pave it
within some feet of the footpath," &c.

Page 158.--"In the neighborhood of London the materials that are to be
procured are of too tender and brittle a nature to endure the wear of
the heavy carriages. I, therefore, am of the opinion that it would be
proper to pave the sides of all the principal entrances into London."

Page 166.--"James Walker says, 'The traffic upon the Commercial rail
road, both up and down, is very great. I am quite sure that the expense
of this road would have been very much greater, probably much more than
doubled, if it had not been paved. The road has been paved for about
sixteen years, and the expense of supporting it has been small. During
the thirteen years that the East India dock branch has been paved, the
paving has not cost L20.'"

Page 167.--"But as the paving is always preferred for heavy carriages,"
&c.

Page 172.--"The thickness ought to be such, that the greatest weight
will not effect more than the surface of the shell, in order to spread
the weight which comes upon a small part only of the road over a large
portion of the foundation."

Page 173.--"If the foundation is bad, breaking the bottom stone into
small pieces is expensive and injurious, upon the principle I have above
described, for the same reason that an arch formed of whole bricks, or
deep stones, is preferred to one of the same materials broken into
smaller pieces, for, in some countries, the materials will admit of the
foundation of the road being considered as of the nature of a flat arch,
as well as being supported by the strata directly under it. But the
error of laying stones in large pieces upon the surface is more common
and more injurious."

Page 183.--"James Dean says, 'Near to great towns it would be highly
advantageous if the center of the road, for about twelve feet in width,
were to be paved with hard, well-squared stones, nine inches deep.'"

Page 188.--"Thomas Telford, Esq., says, 'The improvements made in North
Wales I beg leave to submit as models for the roads through hilly
countries. Great pains have been taken in constructing firm and
substantial foundations for the metallic part of the roadway.'"

Page 189.--"There has been no attention paid to constructing a good and
solid foundation for the roadway."

Page 192.--"Are you of the opinion that it would be advisable or
practicable to procure, from any particular part of the country, better
materials, so as to form perfect roads without the necessity of paving
them? That these materials could be procured, is evident; but I am
satisfied that the most economical and preferable mode would be by the
means of paving."

       *       *       *       *       *

                                  ENGINEER DEPARTMENT.
                                        WASHINGTON. May 8, 1833.

_Sir_: Your communication of the 6th instant, submitting your views in
regard to lifting the old bed in prosecuting the repairs of the
Cumberland road east of the Ohio, and requesting a reconsideration of so
much of the instructions of the department of the 23d July last as
relates to this matter, has just been received. That part of the
instructions alluded to, which requires that the old bed shall, in all
cases, be taken up, will be considered as suspended, and you are hereby
authorized to exercise your discretion in this particular.

                             Very respectfully, &c.,
                                       C. GRATIOT, Brig. General.
  Capt. R. Delafield,
    Corps of Engineers, Uniontown, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *

                              UNIONTOWN, PA., June 11, 1833.

_Sir_: I find upon an examination of the National Road, under your
superintendence, from Cumberland to this place, that too great a portion
of sand and other perishable stone has been allowed to be put on it. In
almost the whole distance, little or no regard has been paid to the
keeping the side drains open, at least sufficiently so to carry the
water freely from the road. The culverts are too few and small,
particularly on the long slopes; and the manner of constructing the
hollow-ways and catch-waters is defective. These errors of construction
cause the water, in many places, to pass over the road, to its rapid
destruction. I am aware of the difficulties you have to contend with
under the contract system, and that to this cause most of the evils
complained of may be traced. As it is all important that they should be
remedied, as soon as practicable, you will enforce the early completion
of the several contracts, according to their conditions, after making
due allowance for the stoppage arising from your order for suspending
operations during last winter. On the completion of the road, should it
be found not to possess the requisite properties to secure its
permanency, you will make such additions under your own agency as will
place it in the condition contemplated by the government, before turning
it over to the States. Not less than six inches of lime or sandstone
should be put upon the surface, and where lime is exclusively used, the
thickness should not be less than nine inches. The side ditches should,
when practicable, be at least eighteen inches below the bed of the road;
and when this cannot be done, culverts, 2'x3', should be constructed at
convenient distances to carry off the water, which, in no instance,
should be allowed to rise above the level of the bed of the road. The
catch-waters should be constructed in such a manner, that while they
subserve the purposes for which they are intended, they should admit the
passage of vehicles without jolting; and, in every case, with a view to
prevent their being washed into deep gullies. As this frequently happens
when they are constructed with broken stone, it will be proper to pave
them with shingle stones, if to be had; or, when this cannot be
obtained, with limestone firmly imbedded in the road. It should
especially be observed that, before breaking up the road for the
reception of the metal, the ditches should be first prepared, and then
the culverts. This will keep the roadway dry for travel, and better
prepare it for the reception of its covering. As it is found
impracticable to keep the travel from the center of the road, and the
deep ruts that are formed, then, as a consequence, I would recommend,
instead of the present system of blocking, that rakers should be
constantly employed to preserve the transverse profile. If it does not
come within the spirit of the contract, that this labor should be
performed by the contractors, you will hire men to do it yourself. This
operation, in addition to the draining system before recommended, will,
it is presumed, preserve the road from further ruin, and place it in a
condition to receive its last coat of limestone. Finally, while
studying due economy in your administration of the affairs of the road,
you should constantly bear in mind that the wishes of the government are
to have a superior road, both as regards workmanship, and the quality of
the materials used in its construction. With this understanding, it is
expected that you will avail yourself of all the facilities within your
reach to effect, in a satisfactory manner to yourself and the public at
large, the great end proposed--the construction of a road unrivaled in
the country. These are the views and special instructions of the
Secretary of War.

                              I am, respectfully, &c.,
                                          C. GRATIOT, Brig. General.
  Capt. R. Delafield,
            Corps of Engineers, Uniontown, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *
                                        ENGINEER DEPARTMENT,
                                        WASHINGTON, July 16, 1833.

_Sir_: You will forthwith cause all operations to cease on that
part of the new location of the Cumberland Road on the east of Wills
creek. You shall in a few days receive further instructions on this
subject.

                    Very respectfully, &c.,
                                  WM. H. C. BARTLETT,
                              Lieut. and Assistant to Chief Engineer.

  Capt. R. Delafield,
            Corps of Engineers, Uniontown, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                        ENGINEER DEPARTMENT,
                                              WASHINGTON, July 20, 1833.

_Sir_: On the 16th you were advised to delay any further action as to
the location of the Cumberland Road until you were again written to.

Mr. Purcell reports to the Board of the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal
Company that the road being at the site now chosen will occasion an
increased cost to the Canal Company of upwards of $16,000. It is very
desirable to avoid this state of things, for, as their charter claims
precedence, it would necessarily create a demand upon the government
commensurate with the injury sustained.

Major Eaton, president of the Canal Company, will direct Mr. Purcell,
the engineer, to proceed forthwith to Cumberland, with you, to ascertain
the best mode of making the location by which to avoid any injury or
increased expense to the Canal Company. You are instructed to confer
freely with Mr. Purcell, holding the object suggested steadily in view,
and give such direction to the location of the road as may best attain
this object. This done, you will forward a plan of the route agreed on,
and a minute detail of everything, particularly what increased expense
to the Canal Company will probably be occasioned. On receiving your
report, the case will be considered here, and you be advised immediately
of the course to be pursued.

                         Very respectfully, &c., &c.,
        By order:                     WM. H. C. BARTLETT,
                           Lieut. and Assistant to Chief Engineer.

  Capt. R. Delafield,
            Corps of Engineers, Uniontown, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                              PHILADELPHIA, July 26, 1833.

_Sir_: The order of your department of the 16th instant was received by
me at Cumberland, and its injunctions forthwith carried into effect. The
communication of the 20th has since been received, explanatory of that
order. In relation to locating that part of the National Road that might
probably interfere with the Canal Company, measures were taken to
procure from the Company such information as would enable me to locate
the road without coming in contact with any part of the Canal route;
and, so far as the information was furnished, I have endeavored so to
do. I enclose copies of the letter and information received from the
president of the company, in reply to a request for such information as
would enable me to "ascertain at what point the Chesapeake and Ohio
Company contemplate erecting their dam across Wills creek, and to what
height it will be raised above low water. The information desired is for
enabling me to locate the bridge for the road at a point, and elevate
its arches to such a height that the interest of the Canal Company will
not be effected; and that I may at the same time, fulfill the objects
contemplated by the law authorizing the new location."

In reply to which you will perceive "the location of the canal is that
recommended by General Bernard, and the Board of Internal Improvement,
over which he presided," and that it was proposed to feed the canal at
Cumberland, and below by a dam to be erected across the Potomac about a
mile above Cumberland. The water of the Potomac was to be carried over
Wills creek twenty-one or two feet above ordinary water in the creek.

Such is the information furnished me by the president of the Canal
Company, and by which I have been governed in the location of the road.
On the eastern side of Wills creek the grading is finished to the site
of the bridge; on the western side I have directed no work to be
executed that can have any bearing upon this point.

You perceive it has been my study to avoid conflicting with the
interests of the Canal Company; but, from the want of knowing the exact
location of their works, will occasion to them an increased expense, as
reported by Mr. Purcell, of 16,000 dollars if the bridge is constructed
at the point now chosen. If, then, the Company will cause the Canal to
be located through the gap of Wills mountain, and give me bench marks
from which to ascertain the cuttings and embankments they propose
making, I will then locate the road on such ground as not to interfere
in any manner with their operations, and such as shall be most
advantageous for the public interest. I judge the communication of the
department was written under the impression that an interference with
the works of the Canal Company was unavoidable, and that some compromise
of advantages and disadvantages would necessarily have to be made. Such,
however, I do not conceive to be the case.

I have located as high up the creek as would give room for a six horse
team to turn off and on a bridge at right angles with the stream with
facility. If the Canal Company make choice of this ground, I have but to
make a bridge oblique with the current, and thus avoid the work of the
Canal Company. To ascertain this, it is essential that the Canal Company
should make choice of the ground and locate their works; after having so
done, if they will favor me with plans and sections, with bench marks of
reference of the part in the valley of the creek, the road shall be made
not to interfere with their interest, which has always been looked upon
by me as claiming precedence.

I have here pointed out a course for the consideration of the
department, differing materially from the one ordered by the letter of
the 20th instant. First, in consideration of its not being acquainted
with the nature of the case, and, next, with its requiring me to perform
a service in no way necessary to a proper understanding of the interests
of the Government connected with the road; to do which, surveys, levels,
calculations of excavation and embankment must be made, that the time of
neither myself nor the officers associated with me could accomplish.

What I ask is, information from the Company as to their own works
solely. It will suffice for all purposes connected with the location of
the road.

Be pleased to address me at New Castle, and on any matter relating to
the section of the road near Cumberland requiring immediate attention, a
copy of the communication forwarded to Lieutenant Pickell, at that
place, would prevent any delay; Lieutenant P. being the officer to whom
I have assigned this particular section of the road.

                        Respectfully, your obedient servant,
                                        RICH'D DELAFIELD.
                                            Captain of Engineers.
  Brig. Gen. Charles Gratiot.
                      Chief Engineer.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                    WASHINGTON, D. C., May 10, 1832.

_Sir_: Your letter to Mr. Ingle, the clerk of the Chesapeake and Ohio
Canal Company, has been handed over to me, and I am authorized, on the
part of the president and directors, to express to you our thanks for
the considerate regard you have paid to the location adopted by the
Chesapeake and Ohio Canal Company, for the part of their work which
will pass through Cumberland. The location adopted is that recommended
by General Bernard, and the Board of Internal Improvement, over which he
presided.

When the proposed change of the Cumberland Road immediately above the
town was under consideration of the Committee on Roads and Canals, I
suggested the very precaution you now practice, which was to see that no
conflict would arise in hereafter conducting the canal over its long
established route, by a conflict with the location of the improved road,
the value of which I know well how to appreciate. The hill above
Cumberland, which it is proposed to avoid, was the worst between that
place and Wheeling, if reference be had to the inclination of its
surface. General Bernard proposed to feed the canal at Cumberland, and
for some distance below it, as far, at least, as the mouth of the South
branch, by means of a dam to be erected at a ledge of rocks crossing the
Potomac about a mile above Cumberland. The dam was to be elevated so
high as to conduct the canal over Wills creek at Cumberland, with an
elevation of twenty-one or twenty-two feet above ordinary water in the
creek. This was to be effected by an aqueduct across the creek. I
presume at this season of the year the ledge of rocks is visible above
Cumberland. Enclosed I send you extracts from General Bernard's report,
which accompanied the President's message to Congress of December 9,
1826, and is now a congressional record. From that you may perhaps infer
all that is essential to your purpose of avoiding a collision with the
rights of the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal Company, who have adopted for
the location of the canal General Bernard's report.

                                                  C. F. MERCER,
                    President of the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal Company.


   EXTRACTED--PAGE 55, DOC. NO. 10, 19TH CONGRESS,
               2D SESSION.--EXECUTIVE PAPERS.

"The difficulties of this passage (down Wills creek) are great, and
continue for more than a mile. The ground then becomes favorable
(_i.e._, in descending Wills creek from the west), permitting the canal
to pass at the outskirts of Cumberland, to join with the eastern
section. Adjoining Cumberland, the canal will receive a feeder from the
Potomac for a supply below, and more especially to complete what is
necessary in relation to the first subdivision of the eastern section.

"This feeder is proposed to be made navigable, in order to accommodate
the trade of the Potomac above Cumberland. Its length is one mile, its
width at the water line thirty feet, its depth four feet. At its point
of departure from the Potomac, a basin is formed in the bed of the
river, by means of a dam erected at the first ledge above Cumberland.

"This basin, comprehending an extent of about eight miles, will afford a
constant supply of water, and also accommodate the canal trade of the
Potomac. The levees around the basin, the dam, the guard lock of the
feeder, and its aqueduct over Wills creek, are included in the estimate
of this subdivision.

"In the table of quantities and cost, this feeder is made to cost a very
large sum (two or three words illegible in the MS.) if the dam above
Cumberland is supposed to be ever changed from the above location. The
aqueduct over Wills creek is computed to cost $41,601; the length of the
aqueduct, seventy yards; the number of arches, three; the span of the
arch, thirty feet; the height of the piers, sixteen feet."

The above is a true copy.
                                                  C. F. MERCER.
May 10, 1833.

       *       *       *       *       *
                                        ENGINEER DEPARTMENT,
                                            WASHINGTON, August 10, 1833.

_Sir_: The Secretary of War has just returned to this place, having
passed over the Cumberland Road east of the Ohio. He feels great
interest in this road, and is anxious that the operations on it shall be
so directed as to obtain the best possible results. His confidence in
your ability induced him to select you as its superintendent, knowing
that under your management his wishes would be realized; and deeming it
a work of much greater importance than that with which you are occupied
on the Delaware, he has expressed a wish that by far the greater portion
of your time should be passed upon the road. You will, therefore, repair
to Cumberland without loss of time, ascertain the exact location of the
Chesapeake and Ohio canal along the valley of Wills creek, and so adjust
that of the road as shall remove the present difficulties, and avoid any
interference with the interests of the Canal Company. This being done,
you will communicate to the department the result.

                          Very respectfully, &c.,
                                        WM. H. C. BARTLETT,
                                             Lt. and Ass't to Ch. Eng'r.
  Capt. R. Delafield,
            Corps of Engineers, New Castle, Del.

       *       *       *       *       *
                                      ENGINEER DEPARTMENT,
                                          WASHINGTON, September 12, 1833.

_Sir_: Your letter of the 9th instant, enclosing a plan and sections of
part of Wills' creek, exhibiting the location of the National Road "as
now constructed;" the ground selected by the engineer of the Chesapeake
and Ohio Canal Company for its canal, and the new location of the
National Road, in consequence of the Canal Company having made choice of
the route upon which the road was constructed, has been received. The
plan has been submitted, with the approval of this department, to the
Secretary of War, and by him adopted; and the construction of the road
on the new location will, therefore, be proceeded with.

                                          I am, sir, &c.,
                                                    C. GRATIOT,
                                                          Brig. General.
  Capt. R. Delafield,
            Corps of Engineers, Cumberland, Md.

       *       *       *       *       *
                              CUMBERLAND ROAD, AT STODDARD'S, MD.,
                                                  September 17, 1833.

_Sir_: I enclose herewith plan and sections of part of the Cumberland
Road between Cumberland and Frostburg, where an alteration has just been
made in the location, by which a very steep hill is avoided, and the
distance decreased.

By the new route there is a slope of 18-2/10 feet in a distance of
1,600; by the old road the slope was 53.9' in 700 feet on one side of
the hill, and 35.7' in 900 feet on the other side.

This is now undergoing construction. The foundation of the center pier
of the bridge over Wills creek is raised above water. Respectfully, your
obedient servant,

                                              RICH'D DELAFIELD,
                                                      Captain of Engineers.
  Brig. Gen. Charles Gratiot.
                    Chief Engineer.

       *       *       *       *       *
                                        ENGINEER DEPARTMENT.
                                            WASHINGTON, September 25, 1833.

_Sir_: Your letter of the 17th inst., enclosing a plan and sections of
part of the Cumberland Road between Cumberland and Frostburg, where you
had made an alteration in the location, thereby avoiding a steep hill,
and decreasing the distance, was duly received; and I have to inform you
that the alteration referred to has been approved. I am, &c.,

                                              C. GRATIOT,
                                                    Brig. General.
  Capt. R. Delafield,
            Corps of Engineers, Cumberland, Md.




CHAPTER XI.

  _On with the work--Wooden Bridges proposed for the new location up
     Wills Creek and Braddock's Run--The War Department holds that
     Wooden Superstructures would be a Substantial Compliance with the
     Maryland law--New instructions issued from Wheeling--The old bed to
     be retained--Two classes of work--Frauds by Contractors--Form for
     Contracts forwarded from Brownsville--Report and Estimate called
     for by the Senate--The law of Congress renders a change of plan
     necessary--The Secretary of War greatly interested in the
     Road--Cumberland to Frostburg._


                                          ENGINEER DEPARTMENT,
                                              WASHINGTON, June 25, 1834.

_Sir_: In addition to the views of the department, communicated to you
this morning, I now have to request that you will proceed to apply the
funds available for the Cumberland Road east of the Ohio, with the
utmost despatch consistent with the public interest. It is greatly to be
desired that the repairs of this road may be completed before the
termination of the coming fall.

                                        I am, &c  .,
                                                  C. GRATIOT,
                                                      Brigadier General.
  Capt. R. Delafield,
           Corps of Engineers, New Castle, Del.


                                        CUMBERLAND, Md., July 23, 1834.

_Sir_: I beg leave to call your attention to the act of the Legislature
of Maryland, giving its consent to change the location of the National
Road near this place, to turn Wills mountain by the route of Wills creek
and Braddock's run, in which it is provided that certain bridges shall
be constructed of stone, and to compare this act with that of the last
session of Congress, and inform me whether or not I will be justified in
constructing the bridges with stone abutments and wing-walls, and
_wooden_ superstructures. There is a necessity growing out of the cost,
the law requiring the road to be finished with $300,000.

From the most advantageous offers received, the bridge over Wills creek
will not cost less than $15,000, constructed of stone, and if built of
wood, planed, and painted with three coats of white lead, roofed with
shingles, will cost not to exceed $7,000. There are two other bridges on
the same new route to be constructed, the ratio of expense of which will
not materially vary. * * *

                    Respectfully, your obedient servant,
                                        RICH'D DELAFIELD,
                                              Captain of Engineers.
  Brig. Gen. Charles Gratiot,
                      Chief Engineer.


                                              CUMBERLAND, July 24, 1834.

_Sir_: I have just finished comparing the numerous offers for work to be
done on the 16 miles of road immediately west of this place. There is
great competition among very excellent and responsible men of the
country, as well as from the railroad and canal below us.

The offers for the bridge render its construction with stone next to
impracticable, under the law, to finish the road with $300,000. They are
as follows: $22,000, $21,930, $23,323, $22,680, $24,000.

To construct the abutments I have offers at $3.80 cents per perch; that
would, with the superstructure of wood, make the whole cost not to
exceed $6,500 to $7,000. We cannot with propriety expend so large a sum
for a stone bridge, with such limited means. I strongly recommend a
wooden superstructure if compatible with existing laws under which we
act, and beg to be advised as requested in my letter of yesterday.

                    Respectfully, your obedient servant,
                                        RICH'D DELAFIELD,
                                              Captain of Engineers.
  Brig. Gen. Charles Gratiot,
                      Chief Engineer.


                                        ENGINEER DEPARTMENT.
                                            WASHINGTON, July 29, 1834.

_Sir_: It has just been determined by the War Department that the
substitution of wood for stone, in the superstructures of the bridges on
the new piece of road around Wills hill would be deemed by the State of
Maryland a substantial compliance with the requirements of her law
giving assent to the change from the old to the present location of that
part of the road. You will, therefore, build the abutments of those
bridges in a good and durable manner, of the best stone to be had in
your immediate neighborhood, and make the superstructure of wood. These
last, when completed, must be well covered, and painted in the best
manner. This is communicated in answer to your two letters of the 23d
and 24th instant, on the subject, which are at hand.

                                              I am, &c.,
                                                        C. GRATIOT.
  Capt. R. Delafield,
  Corps of Engineers. Cumberland, Md.


  COPY OF INSTRUCTIONS SENT BY THE SUPERINTENDENT OF THE CUMBERLAND
     ROAD, EAST OF THE OHIO, TO EACH OF HIS ASSISTANTS ON THE LINE OF
     THE ROAD.
                                              WHEELING, May 29, 1834.

_Sir_: In conducting the operations for repairing the section of the
road under your supervision, during the present season, two very
important alterations will be made in the system of last year.

The first is to retain, in all cases, the old bed or pavement, breaking
down with sledges the prominent or projecting pieces into the ruts and
holes, and smoothing the grade with quarry chips, or stone broken on the
face of the road with sledge-hammers, slightly covering the bed so
prepared with the earth from the ditches, observing to put no more earth
than is barely sufficient to prevent the metal coming in contact with
the large stone of the bed.

Where there is no stone in the old bed, restore the grade with the best
and hardest material to be found in the vicinity, making it a point to
have stone to fill the large holes. This formation of the bed for the
metal on top of the old bed will enable large and sufficient ditches to
be formed for carrying off the water. The most particular attention must
be given to these ditches, as upon them depends the preservation of the
road.

All the earth taken from the ditches, side roads, and slopes, not
required to make good the grade and side roads, must be thrown down the
hill side, and on no account whatever upon the slope of a side hill
cutting, from whence it soon washes back into the ditches. The minimum
size of the ditches should not be less than three feet wide on top, one
foot deep, and one foot wide in the bottom; the whole depth to be below
the bed of the road. Rock and peculiar side slopes can alone prevent
this being practiced.

The side slopes must be cut to a slope of 45, with berms, as a minimum;
and as low as 60 wherever it is practicable.

Wherever earth is required for a filling to make good the side roads,
require that it be taken from some near side slope or other point that
will improve such part of the road. The minimum side road is to be five
feet; wherever the natural ground will permit, cause it to be increased
to admit of summer roads, placing the ditches outside of such increased
side road.

The second alteration is, to have the whole work done by contract,
instead of job work and day labor, as was practiced last year.

To effect this, the greatest precaution is necessary to specify what
work has to be done on each chain of four rods of the road, the
particular grade for such portion, the depth and size of the ditches,
the side roads and slopes, and from whence the required earth is to be
taken to restore the grade, and where the surplus earth is to be taken
from the ditches, drains, side slopes, &c.

In the delivery of stone for the metal, the contract must provide that
the stone be delivered and broken on the side roads in rectangular piles
or strings of such dimensions as you require on the several parts of the
road, and the measurement made of the cubic contents of the stone thus
prepared; from which measurement you will ascertain the number of
perches, by previously having a mass, containing five perches of stone,
as it comes from the quarry, as compactly piled as can be without the
use of a hammer, taking large and small indiscriminately. Have this mass
broken to the size of four ounces; ascertain the cubic contents of the
bulk it shall produce, the fifth part of which you will take as a perch,
and the unit of measurement for paying for the number of perches to be
delivered.

The metal is to be thrown on the road at such favorable periods as you
shall designate, after it has been measured, and not until the
contractor has prepared the required quantity for half a mile at a time.

You will require the contractor to commence the grade at one end of the
piece he is to repair, and continue regularly through, not permitting
him to seek the parts requiring least work to execute first; and when
delivering stone, to commence the delivery at a point giving a mean
distance for hauling from the quarry; a mean rate of payment is then
equitable, otherwise it would not be.

The work on your section may be divided into two distinct classes: the
one, where nothing has as yet been done; and the other, the part graded
and stone prepared for the metal during the past season.

On the first class, you will make contracts to grade, deliver, and put
on three perches of limestone where the old bed remains firm, and four
perches where the old bed has disappeared, requiring the grade to be
finished by the 15th of October; and if the metal is all prepared by
that date, to be put on by the 1st of November, the contractor
continuing to rake the road, change the travel, and preserve the whole
work in order, until the succeeding 1st of April. Should the contractor,
however, not be able to prepare the metal to put it on the road by the
1st of November, then he is to preserve the grade of the road in order
until the first favorable state of the weather after the 15th of March
ensuing, when he is to put on the metal, raking and smoothing the
surface for twenty days after the whole metal shall have been put on the
road.

You will observe that the contract is to call for preserving the road in
either case during the winter; in one case, by adding metal, raking,
&c., and in the other, by breaking with a sledge stone to fill the ruts,
covering such stone in the spring lightly before putting on the metal.

The second class of work is the unfinished part of last year's
operations, upon which there will be time to put three and a half
additional perches per rod on such parts as were covered last year, and
four perches per rod on such as had none, requiring that it be put on by
the 1st of November, and be preserved, raked, &c., until the succeeding
1st of April, during the winter filling ruts made by travel with
additional metal, to be prepared and ready at convenient points on the
road.

For the culverts you will make a contract with one person for all that
may be necessary on half your section, and with a second person for the
other half, the work to be paid by the perch of twenty-five cubic feet,
measured by the plan and dimensions you shall designate for each
locality, and according to which plan the work must be constructed. For
this work you will require the stone to be of good proportions, with
parallel beds and faces, and not smaller than two cubic feet in each
piece, in no case ever permitting a stone to be placed "on edge," a very
common practice, destructive of good masonry. The covering stone to be
of such additional dimensions as you shall judge necessary for each
locality. The bottoms of the culverts to be paved or flagged with stone,
and such an apron constructed at each end as to guard against the ends
being undermined by the passage of the water.

The repairs of the masonry of the bridges and walls on Wheeling Hill it
is very desirable to effect by contract, if practicable. On Wheeling
Hill the object may be effected by requiring the masonry to conform with
that already executed, particularly in regard to the size and quality of
the stone, paying for it by the perch measured in the wall when
finished, reserving the one-fifth of the value from monthly payments as
security for the faithful execution of the whole work. The repairs of
the bridge may be executed in like manner, specifying the masonry of the
bridge now building over Wheeling Creek as the standard, excepting
stones placed on edge.

It is desirable to postpone the repair of all masonry to the latest
date, excepting only such parts as are necessary to perfect the grade;
you will make your contracts accordingly. The masonry of the culverts
and some of the bridges must be finished in time, including the filling
to make good the roadway, to permit the contractor for grading to comply
with his agreement. The usual one-fifth of the value of work done being
retained until the expiration of the time for completing the whole work,
when this sum is to be applied either to carry into effect the remaining
provisions of the agreement, as stipulated to be executed, or paid to
the contractor, if the work has been faithfully executed according to
the tenor of the agreement.

You will make all your payments by checks drawn on the bank through
which I shall make your remittances, taking duplicate receipts for
moneys thus paid, attached to a bill giving the quantity rate, cost, and
date of the receipt of the article clearly and distinctly expressed.

Your check book must be added up, and the balance in bank ascertained
every Saturday evening, which balance must be reported in the weekly
reports to be forwarded to me, as required last season.

The balance of your account, as appears by your ledger account with me,
must also form an item in the weekly report. The assistant engineer
will make an inspection of these books, and report to me whenever he
comes on your section of the road.

The receipted vouchers you will forward to the office at Brownsville, of
all payments made during the week at the end of such week, reserving the
duplicate until called for by myself or the assistant engineer.

So soon as you are apprised by me of funds being available you will
immediately advertise by hand bills, and through the public prints, that
contracts will be made for repairing the section of road under your
supervision, and that proposals for executing the work will be received
for twenty days from the date of your advertisement, for repairing each
mile of the road according to stipulations and particular information,
to be had on enquiring of you on or after such date as you are enabled
to collect it. Let the advertisements express that the repairs consist
principally in grading the road over the old bed, cleaning out the
ditches and drains, restoring the side roads to their width of five feet
and covering the road thus prepared with limestone broken to four ounce
pieces, in such quantities as shall be specified for each rod, varying
from two to four perches per rod, and keeping the whole in order until
the first of April next, by which date the contracts are to be
completed.

To ascertain the work to be done on the different mile sections, and on
the particular parts of each mile, you will, the instant funds are
available, make a measurement of the road, noting the work to be done on
each chain (as specified in the previous parts of this communication) in
the most minute detail.

This statement, reduced as much as practicible to a tabular form, you
will cause to be printed, as the information to be given to persons upon
which to make their proposals, and it will be embodied in or attached to
the articles of agreement as a specification of the work to be done.

As you will find it convenient to have the prepared metal piled in
uniform masses, admitting of the application of a gauge to ascertain
whether or not the required quantity is in the pile, you will cause such
gauges to be made with slopes of 45 degrees and in no instance permit a
measurement of stone to be made without having previously verified the
dimensions of the gauge. The necessity for this you will perceive by
reflecting that the end of the gauge may be cut off and the angles
altered to make a material difference in the quantity, without being
perceptible to the eye.

The following are some of the frauds heretofore practiced, and now
enumerated that you may look cautiously to their not being practiced
upon your section of the road: i 1st. Diminishing the size and altering
the angle of the gauge.

2d. Loosening the pile of metal just before the measurement, to increase
its bulk.

3d. Concealing or covering up in the piles of metal large masses of
stone or other matter.

4th. Breaking stone of a softer or otherwise inferior quality than the
sample agreed upon.

5th. Breaking the metal to a larger size than that agreed upon.

6th. Removing the prepared metal from one point to another after it has
been measured.

7th. Taking metal from the face of the road, of the first or second
stratum, to make it appear the desired quantity has been broken to fill
the gauge.

8th. On parts of the road where limestone has already been delivered,
wagoners, with a partial load, passing from the quarries to the point of
delivery, have been detected in stealing a piece from several piles,
thus making a full load from what has already been paid for.

Very many other frauds have been detected upon receiving and paying for
stone perches before breaking. No corrective offers for the many that
may be practiced under this system. It is, therefore, in no case, to be
adopted. Always measuring the stone after it is broken, and reserving
one-fifth of its value until the whole agreement has been fully and
faithfully complied with, are the best securities against fraudulent
practices.

Immediately after concluding the contracts on your section for the
season, you will forward me a statement of the funds required to carry
them into effect, and the times such funds will probably be required.

                    Respectfully, your obedient servant,
                                        RICH'D DELAFIELD,
                                                Captain of Engineers.


                                          PHILADELPHIA, December 28, 1834.

_Sir:_ The enclosed letter of the 29th May was prepared as the
instructions for Lieutenant Vance, conducting the operations on the
seventh division of the road, and a copy thereof was forwarded to the
officer of each division, with directions to conform thereto on their
respective sections, suiting the phraseology to their divisions.

On the 27th June, on being made acquainted with the particulars of the
act of Congress making the appropriation for the year's service, the
following instructions were communicated to the officers of the several
divisions, slightly changed to suit each particular division:

  "_Sir:_ Funds having been made available for continuing the repairs of
  the Cumberland Road, east of the Ohio, you will cause the preparatory
  measures to be taken immediately, and notice given as required by my
  letter of the 29th of May, a copy of which has been forwarded to you
  from Brownsville.

  "The act of Congress grants a specific sum for finishing the repairs
  of the road; you will, therefore, in your arrangements, provide for
  the stone bridges on the new road, and three and a half perches of
  stone to the rod on the surface of the road as metal; the latter to be
  furnished by the 31st of December, and kept raked and additional metal
  put on until the 15th day of February ensuing; the masonry of the
  bridges to be finished by the 15th of October, with proposals of the
  terms for finishing the same work by the 30th day of June, 1835.

  "The form of a contract has also been forwarded to you from
  Brownsville, which, with the letter of instructions accompanying it,
  connected with the tenor of this communication, you will make your
  guide in the management of the section of road confided to your
  supervision.

  "You will observe the form of the contract provides for work that may
  not occur in your division. You will, in preparing the form to be
  printed, be cautious to suit the same to your particular division, as
  to distance, &c., &c. Mile sections are desirable for subdividing the
  road, and as the portion to be given under contract to an individual:
  on your division other subdivisions will be found more convenient, and
  your attention must, in consequence, be given to make the phraseology
  of the instrument conform with the facts of the case.

  "Hereafter, you will commence and continue your weekly reports to me.
  Apprise me of the date you limit the reception of proposals, that I
  may be with you at the time.

                    "RICH'D DELAFIELD, Captain of Engineers."

The instructions to the officer of the third division required him
to provide for the work to be done on his division not exceeding three
and a half perches of stone to a rod on the surface of the road as metal,
reducing the quantity to two or one perch, as might be requisite to
keep the whole in repair until finally completed.

For a copy of the form of contract forwarded to the officers of the
several divisions, see the contracts on file in your office, for the
_fourth_ division of the road.

I enclose the statement called for by the letter of your department
of the 9th instant.


                                 Respectfully, your obedient servant,
                                              RICH'D DELAFIELD,
                                                Captain of Engineers.
  Brig. Gen. Charles Gratiot,
                    Chief Engineer.


  REPORT AND ESTIMATE FOR THE CUMBERLAND ROAD EAST OF THE OHIO, UNDER A
     RESOLUTION OF THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES, CALLING FOR THE
     CONDITION OF THE MASONRY, THE THICKNESS OF METAL ON VARIOUS PARTS,
     &c., &c., DECEMBER, 1834.

The plan of repair adopted and continued for this road to July, 1834,
was that of Macadam, with nine inches of metal in three strata.

The provisions of the act of Congress of the last session made a change
in the plan of operation necessary. The sum of $300,000 was appropriated
to finish the repairs of the road from Cumberland to Wheeling, a
distance of one hundred and thirty-two miles, of which fifty-four miles
had not been commenced.

To conform with the provisions of the law, it became necessary to
confine the expenditure of this sum to the most indispensable parts of
the system, and adopt a less expensive and less permanent repair;
abandoning the plan of finishing the mountain division with limestone
throughout, and to a width of twenty feet; confining the metal on the
more expensive parts of these divisions to a width of from twelve to
fifteen feet, instead of twenty; abandoning further repairs to the
masonry of the parapets of the bridges; depositing the stone that had
been prepared for this purpose on the side roads, and leaving the side
walls on Wheeling Hill in their unfinished state; limiting the stratum
of metal to be put on this season to three perches and a half, on an
average, per rod, on the whole line of the road; transporting the stone
that had previously been collected for an additional thickness of metal
to parts that had not been supplied with any; substituting wooden
bridges for stone over Wills creek and Braddock's run, and abandoning
altogether the construction of any bridge over Dunlap's creek. The
repairs thus modified are fast drawing to a close, when the road will
present parts covered with thicknesses of metal varying from three to
nine inches, as follows:

First division, in Maryland, sixteen miles, one hundred and sixty rods,
including new location, is covered with three inches of metal.

Second division, in Maryland, sixteen miles, one hundred and ninety-four
rods, is covered with six inches of metal.

Third division, in Pennsylvania, two hundred rods, is covered with four
inches and a half of metal.

Third division, in Pennsylvania, twenty-five miles, one hundred rods, to
a width of from twelve to fifteen feet, is covered with nine inches of
metal.

Fourth division, in Pennsylvania, one mile, seven rods, is covered with
three inches of metal.

Fourth division, in Pennsylvania, fourteen miles, one hundred and
twenty-three rods, to a width of from twelve to fifteen feet, is covered
with six inches of metal.

Fifth division, in Pennsylvania, eighteen miles, nine rods, is covered
with three inches of metal.

Sixth division, in Pennsylvania, twenty-one miles, two hundred and
seventy-three rods, is covered with three inches of metal.

Seventh division, in Virginia, five miles, is covered with three inches
of metal.

Seventh division, in Virginia, nine miles, two hundred and sixteen rods,
is covered with six inches of metal.

The number of inches of metal put on that part which has been located
anew, the first six miles of the first division, being three inches, and
the number of inches of metal put upon that part of the road which lies
between the Monongahela and the Ohio, the fifth, sixth, and seventh
divisions, being three inches of metal on forty-four miles and two
hundred and eighty-two rods, and six inches of metal on nine miles and
two hundred and sixteen rods.

To make this a permanent and substantial road, such that the heavy
transportation wagons shall not force their wheels through the metal
into the bed, not less than the original contemplated thickness of three
strata of three inches each, or the same number of strata of three
perches and a half of stone each, appears sufficient. That three inches
of metal will not suffice to bear up the travel passing over this road,
is proved by the experience of the last two years. Nor will six inches
answer the purpose on all parts of the road, during a long or continued
wet spell of weather, when, from absorption alone, the solidity and
contiguity of the metal has become weakened and lessened. On the crests
of the hills it will be solid, with a thickness of six inches, when, in
the valley and grades under one degree, the evidence of its
insufficiency are apparent. Nothing less than the three strata of three
inches each has been found sufficient; the last stratum being unequally
applied according to the firmness and dryness, and the slope or grade of
the bed. Such was judged necessary for a Macadam road from Cumberland to
Wheeling, and the results tend to confirm the necessity of a thickness
of nine inches on an average, to secure the object contemplated by the
instructions of the Chief Engineer.

The condition of the masonry on the whole line of the road is in an
unfinished state, so far as regards many of the parts upon which repairs
have been commenced; and where nothing had been done toward repairing
the bridges, many of their side-walls or parapets are in a dilapidated
state, or torn down to the level of the roadway. In repairing the road
under the last act of Congress, no more masonry was undertaken than the
construction of culverts to drain the road, and repairing such parts as
were necessary to perfect the roadway twenty feet in width; all other
parts were left in the unfinished and decayed state in which they were
when the appropriation of the year caused an abandonment of further
repairs to this part of the work.

To carry into effect the repairs originally contemplated, and to secure
the uniform strength throughout the whole line of the road equivalent to
nine inches of metal, the following sums will be necessary, after
applying the means now on hand, and which are pledged for the work
commenced and contracted for in July last.

By reference to the annexed statement, it will be perceived the price
per perch for delivered stone prepared as metal on the road varies from
ninety-three cents to $2.50, and is stated for each section throughout
the whole line of the road. Three quarries supply upward of twenty miles
of the road, there being none nearer or accessible. Quarries of the best
limestone are numerous and not remote from the road between Wheeling and
the eastern base of Laurel hill; from thence to Frostburg they are few
in number, situated in deep ravines, and remote from the road; from
Frostburg to Cumberland they are comparatively numerous and of easy
access. It will be seen that the price agrees with the difficulty of
procuring the stone, and in the ratio above stated, from ninety-three
cents to $2.50 per perch.




CHAPTER XII.

  _Gen. Lewis Cass, Secretary of War, transmits a Report--More about the
     Wooden Bridges for the New Location near Cumberland--The War
     department thinks they will do--John Hoye stoutly Objects--The
     Governor of Maryland takes a hand against Wooden Bridges--John Hoye
     to the Front Again--The Pennsylvania Commissioners make another
     demand that the Road be put in Repair._


                                          WAR DEPARTMENT, January 3, 1835.

_Sir_: Herewith I have the honor to transmit a report from the Chief
Engineer, which furnishes the information called for by the resolution
of the House of Representatives of the 12th ultimo, respecting the
Cumberland Road east of the Ohio.

                Very respectfully, your most obedient servant,
                                                            LEW. CASS.
  Hon. John Bell,
        Speaker of the House of Representatives.

       *       *       *       *       *

                    ENGINEER DEPARTMENT,
                        WASHINGTON, January 3, 1835.

_Sir_: I have the honor to hand you the information called for by the
House of Representatives on the 12th ultimo, relating to the Cumberland
Road east of the Ohio,

     And remain, sir, very respectfully, your obedient servant,
                                        C. GRATIOT,
                                           Chief Engineer.
  The Hon. Lewis Cass,
           Secretary of War.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                        ENGINEER DEPARTMENT,
                                            WASHINGTON, July 28, 1834.

_Sir_: In making the repairs of the Cumberland Road east of the Ohio
river, it was deemed expedient, in the fall of 1832, to change that part
of the old location which is immediately west of Cumberland, in the
State of Maryland, for the purpose of turning Wills hill. By this an
abrupt rise of several hundred feet would be avoided. A survey,
preparatory to this change, was made, and the result submitted to
Congress, in the session of 1832-'33; the proposed change was
authorized, and the location, as exhibited on the drawing of the survey,
adopted. This change of location involved the construction of a bridge
over the mill-race in the town of Cumberland, and another over Wills
creek, as well as other bridges of minor importance, with several
culverts. The Legislature of the State of Maryland passed an act giving
assent to the change in question, with the proviso, however, "that the
part of the road embraced in this change should be made of the best
material, upon the Macadam plan, and that a good, substantial stone
bridge should be made over the mill-race, in the town of Cumberland, and
over Wills creek at the place of crossing, and that substantial stone
bridges and culverts should be made wherever the same may respectively
be necessary along the line of said road."

In the estimates which were prepared, and submitted at the commencement
of the last session of Congress for its action, the sum proposed for the
completion of the repairs of the entire road from Cumberland to the Ohio
river, contemplated the erection of the bridges on the new location, in
conformity to the requirements of the law of Maryland just referred to.
But, as is known to you, more than one-half of this sum was stricken
from the bill, which embodied the whole amount of the estimate. The act
appropriating the remainder requires that the whole of the repairs shall
be completed for this diminished sum. Under these circumstances, it
becomes necessary to change the plan upon which it was proposed to
execute the work, and the object of this communication is to ascertain
the extent to which the department may be allowed to carry this change
on the new part of the road embraced by the law of Maryland. If the
bridges alluded to be built of stone, the expense will be much greater
than the sum allotted to that section would bear: whereas, if the
abutments be built of stone, and the superstructure of wood, the same
ends would be attained as would result from bridges built entirely of
stone, but the letter of the Maryland law would be departed from. Good
wooden superstructures, well covered and painted, would last, with a
little care, at least forty years, and perhaps longer. To abandon this
new location, and return to the old road, would be to sacrifice a large
amount of money already expended on the former, which is now in a state
of forwardness, and would soon be finished. Besides, a bridge must, in
any event, be constructed over Wills creek, and every consideration of
convenient and easy traveling conspires to render its location on the
new line of the road desirable.

The officer charged with the repairs of the road is now engaged in
giving out the work to contract, and making other arrangements necessary
to a speedy application of the funds. It is, therefore, very desirable
that an early decision may be had of this question, and it is
accordingly respectfully requested.

                              I have the honor to be, &c.,
                                                  C. GRATIOT, Brig. Gen.
  Hon. Secretary of War.

       *       *       *       *       *

I approve of the course recommended by General Gratiot with
regard to the bridges--the abutments to be of stone, and the superstructure
of wood--believing that such a course would be deemed by
Maryland a substantial compliance with the law, under the circumstances
of the case.

                                        JOHN FORSYTH,
                                                  Act. Sec'y of War.
July 28, 1834.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                        CUMBERLAND, August 5, 1834.

_Sir_: I was this day informed that the bridge across Wills creek, on
the new location of the Cumberland road up Braddock's run, is to be
built of wood. By the act of the Legislature of Maryland, authorizing
the President to change the location of the road, it is enacted that the
road may be located up Wills creek through the narrows, provided the
bridges were all built of stone. I am decidedly of the opinion that, by
the provisions of that law, the President had no right to change the
location of the road unless he strictly complied with every provision
and requisition of said law. You will, on examination of the act of
Maryland, passed at December session, 1832, chapter 55, see that the
bridges are to be all built of stone. I sincerely hope you will, on
examining the law, and reflecting on the subject, direct the bridges to
be built in strict compliance with the law authorizing the change in
location; it would, in all probability, save money and time.

I am sure the State will not receive the road without the stone bridges.
I shall be gratified to hear from you on this subject by return mail.

                                        Your most obedient,
                                                            JOHN HOYE.
  General C. Gratiot.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                        ENGINEER DEPARTMENT,
                                            WASHINGTON, August 14, 1834.

    _Sir_: Your communication in behalf of the citizens of Cumberland,
    remonstrating against the erection of bridges of wooden
    superstructures over Wills creek, &c., addressed to me under date of
    6th instant, is received. The measure to which the citizens of
    Cumberland object, grows, of necessity, out of existing
    circumstances; and the bridges will have to be built in the manner
    and of the materials named in the instruction of the department to
    the superintendent of the road, or the new location to turn Wills
    hill must be abandoned. The people of Cumberland are doubtless aware
    that estimates were submitted to Congress last fall for funds
    sufficient to put up the structures in conformity with the law of
    Maryland, to which you refer; and it is hoped that they are also
    aware that these funds were reduced more than one-half in amount,
    and that the act appropriating the residue imposes the task of
    completing all the repairs on the whole road east of the Ohio, with
    the sum rendered available by it. You will perceive, sir, that
    there was no other course left to the department than to change the
    plan and system of repairs.

    The bridges which it is proposed to construct will, with care, last
    at least forty years.

                        Very respectfully, &c.,
                                          C. GRATIOT,
                                    Brig. Gen. and Chief Engineer.
  B. S. Pigman, Esq., Cumberland, Md.

       *       *       *       *       *

                              EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT,
                                  ANNAPOLIS, September 10, 1834.

_Sir_: By an act of the General Assembly, passed at December session,
1832, (of which, at your request, an authenticated copy was transmitted
to you on the 29th day of March, 1833), the consent of this State was
given to a change of the location of a part of the Cumberland or
National Road within our limits, upon certain conditions; among which,
"that a good and substantial stone bridge shall be made over the
mill-race in the town of Cumberland, and over Wills creek at the place
of crossing, and that substantial stone bridges or culverts shall be
made wherever the same may respectively be necessary along the line of
said road."

By the same act, John Hoye and Meshach Frost, Esqrs., and the
superintendent for the time being of the said road, appointed by the
President of the United States, were appointed commissioners "to report
the said National Road, when finished and repaired within the limits of
this State, to the Governor and Council."

A communication has been received from John Hoye, Esq., in which he
states that "the War Department has now directed and contracted to have
all the bridges on said new location built of wood."

I beg leave to call your attention to this subject, in the fullest
confidence that there has been some mistake or misapprehension on the
part of some of the agents or persons employed upon the work in
question, and that you will cause the terms and conditions upon which
the consent of the State was given to the proposed improvements to be
respected and carried into effect.

                    With great respect, I have the honor to be,
                                            Your obedient servant,
                                                        JAMES THOMAS.
  Hon. Lewis Cass,
                 Secretary of War.

       *       *       *       *       *

                              WAR DEPARTMENT,
                                  WASHINGTON, September 12, 1834.

_Sir_: I have had the honor to receive your letter of the 10th instant,
respecting the construction of the bridge on the National Road near
Cumberland, and for your information I beg leave to enclose the
accompanying report from the Engineer Department, which explains the
course which has been taken, and the necessity of it. I trust that you
will find that the act of the State of Maryland has been substantially
complied with, and certainly so far as the means within this department
permitted.

                              Very respectfully, &c.
                                    LEW. CASS.
  His Excellency James Thomas,
    Governor of Maryland, Annapolis.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                      ENGINEER DEPARTMENT,
                                          WASHINGTON, September 12, 1834.

_Sir_: In answer to your inquiries of this morning respecting certain
bridges on the Cumberland Road, in the State of Maryland, I have the
honor to submit the following statement:

In applying the money appropriated by Congress at the session of 1831
and '32, for the repairs of the Cumberland Road east of the Ohio river,
it was deemed highly important to change the location of that part of
the road immediately west of Cumberland to turn Wills mountain, as, by
that means, a rise of several hundred feet, within a few miles, would be
avoided. A survey was accordingly made, and submitted to Congress, and
the change was approved. The State of Maryland assented, provided the
part of the road embraced in the change should be "made of the best
materials, upon the Macadam plan, and that a good and substantial stone
bridge should be made on the mill-race, in the town of Cumberland, and
over Wills creek at the place of crossing, and that substantial stone
bridges and culverts should be made wherever the same may respectively
be necessary along the line of said road."

Estimates were prepared last fall for the entire completion of the
repairs of the road from Cumberland to the Ohio. These estimates, which
contemplated the construction and erection of bridges, in strict
conformity with the law of Maryland giving her consent to the change of
location, were submitted to Congress at the commencement of its recent
session, and amounted to six hundred and fifty-two thousand one hundred
dollars. Full and ample explanations accompanied these estimates, so
there could have been no misunderstanding respecting them. A bill of
appropriation was introduced, embracing their entire amount. This
amount, after much discussion, was reduced to less than one-half,
to-wit: $300,000, and the bill became a law, containing a section which
requires that as soon as the sum of $300,000, or as much thereof as is
necessary, shall be expended on the road agreeably to the provisions of
this act, the same shall be surrendered to the States, respectively,
through which the road passes; "and the United States shall not
thereafter be subject to any expense for repairing said road." Under
these circumstances, it was plain that the system of repairs upon which
the estimates were predicated could not be executed, and a change
became necessary. The stone bridges referred to in the law of Maryland
constituted a heavy item in the estimates, and it was entirely out of
the question to build them without absorbing more of the appropriation
than the absolute requirements of other sections of the road would
admit. There being no obligation to finish the new location further than
that imposed by the very great advantage resulting from its adoption,
the question arose whether it would be best to abandon it, and return to
the old road or not. After adopting every expedient, consistent with a
faithful execution of the law, to diminish the expenses on other
portions of the road, it was found that a sufficient sum would be left
to construct this new portion of the best material, on the Macadam plan,
and to build the abutments and piers of all the bridges on it of good
stone, and in the best manner, provided the superstructures were made of
wood. This was the best that could be done; and when it was considered
that these superstructures, being made of the best materials, would,
when covered and well painted, last, with a little care, from thirty to
forty years, it was recommended to the acting Secretary of War, during
your absence, to adopt them in preference to surrendering all the
benefits that will result from the new road. The acting Secretary,
considering that the approval of the measure would, under this state of
things, be a substantial compliance with the law of Maryland, directed
instructions to that effect to be issued to the superintendent of the
road, which was accordingly done.


                                         With great respect, &c.,
        By order:                              WM. H. C. BARTLETT,
                                     Lieut. and Assist. to Chief Engineer.
  The Hon. Secretary of War.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                        CUMBERLAND, December 12, 1834.

_Sir_: As one of the commissioners appointed by the Legislature of
Maryland to report to the Governor and Council of said State when that
part of the National Road within the limits of this State shall have
been repaired agreeably to the provisions of the law of the State
agreeing to receive that part of the road lying within the limits of
this State; and a further act of the Legislature of Maryland,
authorizing the President of the United States to change the location of
a part of said road within the limits of Maryland, the change of
location was authorized to be made on certain and positive conditions
that the bridges over Wills creek and Braddock's run should all be
permanent stone bridges; and the road to be constructed with the best
materials, on the Macadam plan (see the law of Maryland, passed December
session, 1832, chapter 55). The plan of the bridges has been changed by
the superintendent to wooden bridges, in direct violation of the
engagements with this State. The President had no right to change the
location of the road, unless the law of this State authorizing the
change was fully complied with.

The "metal" on the new location is not more than three and a half
inches, and every wagon that passes over it, when the road is wet, cuts
entirely through the stone, and turns up the clay. I am advised that
there is a part of the road, fourteen miles west of Cumberland, which
has had but three and a half inches of metal put on it over the original
pavement. I am gratified to have it in my power to state that, from
observation, and the best information I have been able to collect, the
last appropriation for the road has been most judiciously expended. I
believe that it is the first that has been well laid out.

I must say that we cannot report in favor of this State receiving the
road until the permanent stone bridges are erected, and the road in that
state of repair contemplated by the law.

I beg leave to refer you to my letter to General C. Gratiot, dated in
August last, which, with my communication to his excellency James
Thomas, Governor of Maryland, a copy of which, I presume, he
communicated to your department during the last summer, you will please
to consider a part of this communication. I should have addressed you at
an earlier period, but was prevented by severe indisposition.

                    I remain, with respect, your most obedient,
                                                         JOHN HOYE.
  Hon. Lewis Cass,
     Secretary of War, Washington City.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                  NOVEMBER 17, 1834.

_Sir_: The undersigned commissioners, appointed by the Governor of
Pennsylvania to erect gates and superintend the collection of tolls on
the Cumberland Road "after it shall be put in a good state of repair by
the United States," respectfully represent:

That, from a full and careful examination of the subject, they are
satisfied that they are not authorized, by the terms of the law under
which they are appointed, to accept the road from the United States, or
erect gates for the collection of tolls, until provision is made by
Congress for completing the repairs on the plan already adopted by the
agents of the United States, and sanctioned by several appropriations to
carry it into effect. Without this it is evident that a considerable
portion of the road, which has received but a single stratum of stone,
will be left in a condition so weak and imperfect as soon to become
again totally impassable for a considerable portion of the year.

The law of Pennsylvania expressly requires that, before the road is
accepted by the Commissioners, it must be put in good and complete
repair by the United States. To this act and all its provisions,
Congress, on the 3d of July, 1832, gave its assent; an appropriation was
made, and a plan of repair was accordingly adopted by the agents of the
government, and two subsequent appropriations made by Congress to carry
this plan and compact into effect. The complete repair of the road is
made by the compact a condition precedent to be performed by the United
States. It is not performed, as appears by the report of the agents of
the United States, and, until it is, the Commissioners appointed by the
State cannot be justified in accepting the road or exacting tolls.
Besides, it is evident that the tolls established, even if raised to the
maximum, will be totally inadequate to the preservation and repair of
the road, unless first put in a state of complete and substantial
repair. This, a statement of a single fact will fully demonstrate. It
appears by a report lately received from the superintendent of that part
of the road which lies between Hagerstown and Cumberland, that the tolls
there collected amount to $312 per mile per annum; of this $45 is
required to pay gate keepers and superintendents, leaving $267 for
repairs. The tolls on that part of the road are more than three times as
high as those proposed on this, so that the amount of tolls applicable
to the repair of this road will not exceed $89 per mile per annum, a sum
barely sufficient to preserve the road after it is put in the best
possible state of repair. The undersigned do not presume to prescribe a
plan of repair; they are satisfied with that adopted and partly executed
by the agents of the United States; and they now distinctly declare and
pledge themselves, that so soon as Congress shall appropriate the sum
required by the Secretary of War to complete the repair of the road on
the plan adopted in his report at the last session, we will, with all
possible despatch, proceed to erect the gates, and relieve the United
States from all further charge or expense on account of said road, after
the appropriation so made shall be expended.

                Very respectfully, your most obedient servants,
                                                THOMAS ENDSLEY.
                                                DANIEL DOWNER.
                                                WILLIAM F. COPLAN.
                                                STEPHEN HILL.
                                                BENJAMIN ANDERSON.
  Hon. Lewis Cass,
        Secretary of War.

     NOTE.--The bridges near Wills creek were in the end built of
     stone.

[Illustration: IRON BRIDGE.]




CHAPTER XIII.

  _The Iron Bridge over Dunlap's Creek at Brownsville--Interesting
     facts relating to its projection and construction--The first
     step--Several respectable Gentlemen of Brownsville call the
     attention of the Government's Agent to the subject._


                  NATIONAL ROAD, 85-5/8 MILES FROM CUMBERLAND,
                                                        August 15, 1832.

_Sir_: Yesterday, as I passed through Brownsville, I was waited on by
several of the most respectable gentlemen of that place, who were
anxious to have me examine the bridge over Dunlap's creek, between
Brownsville and Bridgeport, to see its condition, and to give my opinion
as to its renewal. Accordingly, I observed that I thought the bridge
would not stand a twelve-month, and that I did not feel myself
authorized to renew it, as the bridge had never been made by the
government, but recommended that they write to the department for a
decision; and, agreeably to their request, observed that I would
likewise report the actual condition of the bridge. Consequently, I
enclose to the department a leaf from my note book, giving a rough
sketch of the bridge, and pointing out its defects. The reason why this
bridge was not originally constructed by the government, as well as a
bridge over the Monongahela river, are better known to the department
than I am able to conjecture.

I have to observe that a company is now constructing a substantial
bridge over the Monongahela river, across from Bridgeport, thereby
making the bridge over Dunlap's creek an important link in the road; and
that a bridge, to ensure the purpose of a common highway, would not be
suitable for the only connecting point between two important and
increasing towns.

                    I have the honor to be, sir,
                        Very respectfully, your most obedient servant,
                                              J. K. F. MANSFIELD,
                                     Lieutenant Corps of Engineers.
  Gen. C. Gratiot,
        Chief Engineer.


                   THE SUBJECT TO BE EXAMINED.

                              ENGINEER DEPARTMENT,
                                  WASHINGTON, August 20, 1832.

_Sir_: Your letter of the 15th inst., informing the department that you
had, at the request of the citizens of Brownsville, made an examination
of the bridge over Dunlap's creek, with a view to an opinion on the
question of its removal, and transmitting a rough sketch of the bridge
as it at present exists, is received.

In consequence of the views presented in your letter, it will be
necessary to make a thorough examination of this bridge to ascertain
whether it is sufficiently substantial to answer all the purposes of the
road, by putting proper repairs upon it, or whether it will be necessary
to remove it entirely, and to build a new one.

You will accordingly make this examination, and with your report on the
subject you will transmit such drawings and explanatory notes as may be
necessary to present a full and clear view of the repairs, or new
bridge, as the case may be, accompanied by the proper estimates for
their execution.

You will also ascertain, by the best oral testimony that can be obtained
in the vicinity of the bridge, whether it is on the line of the road as
originally located, and make known the fact in your report.

The Secretary of War has been written to on the subject, and, as soon as
his decision is known at the department, you will be instructed
accordingly.

                                        I am, &c., &c.,
                                            C. GRATIOT.
  Lieut. J. K. P. Mansfield,
          Corps of Engineers, Uniontown, Pa.


          AN EXAMINATION MADE, AND AN ADVERSE DECISION RENDERED.

                                        UNIONTOWN, PA., August 24, 1832.

_Sir_: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the letter of the
department on the subject of the bridge over Dunlap's creek, at
Brownsville, and to state that I have completed the examination of the
road to the Virginia line, and have already given out notices for
contracts, two of which are enclosed for the perusal of the department.

                                        I am, &c.,
                                            J. K. F. MANSFIELD,
                                            Lieutenant Corps of Engineers.
  Gen. Charles Gratiot,
          Chief Engineer.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                        ENGINEER DEPARTMENT,
                                            WASHINGTON, October 11, 1832.

_Sir_: You were informed by letter from the department, under date of
20th August last, that the Secretary of War had been written to on the
subject of building a new bridge over Dunlap's creek in the place of
that which is at present in the line of the Cumberland Road, between
Brownsville and Bridgeport, and which was referred to in your
communication to the Chief Engineer of the 15th of August last. I now
have to inform you that the Secretary of War has decided that the bridge
in question cannot be built at the expense of the government, under the
law making appropriation for the repairs of the Cumberland Road east of
the Ohio river.

                              Very respectfully, &c.,
        By order:                         WM. H. C. BARTLETT,
                     Lieut. of Engineers, and Assistant to Chief Engineer.

  Lieut. J. K. F. Mansfield,
        Corps of Engineers, Uniontown, Pa., or Capt. Delafield.


           THE DECISION REVERSED, AND THE BRIDGE TO BE BUILT.

                                        ENGINEER DEPARTMENT,
                                            WASHINGTON, May 13, 1833.

_Sir_: The Secretary of War has determined that a new bridge shall be
built across the mouth of Dunlap's creek, in the line of the Cumberland
Road; you will, therefore, be pleased to submit a plan, and estimate,
with as little delay as practicable, with the view to the erection of
this bridge during the present year.

                                        I am, sir, &c.,
                                              C. GRATIOT,
                                            Brig. General.
  Capt. R. Delafield,
         Corps of Engineers, Uniontown, Pa.


  A SERIOUS QUESTION AS TO LOCATION ARISES--A REQUEST THAT BARRIERS BE
                          USED ON THE ROAD.

Extract from a letter dated BROWNSVILLE, May 14, 1834.

_Sir_: To establish the location of Dunlap's creek bridge, I desire the
field notes of the commissioners, if on file in your office, and Mr.
Shriver's notes of location. From these, I am inclined to believe it
will appear that the most favorable route for the bridge was pointed out
by the commissioners, and the route over the bridge now used, no part of
the National Road, but a county bridge, that we have no right to
interfere with. May I request such information as is within your reach
on this subject?

The road may be called a very excellent turnpike between this and
Frostburg, at the present time; so smooth that already the stage
proprietors have commenced the use of a "rough lock," that materially
injures the surface. Some defects are clearly observable, growing out of
the constant travel and wear of the center of the road from the
prohibition to use barriers to change the travel.

Without being permitted to use barriers of logs, stumps and stones, it
is out of our power ever to make a perfect Macadamized road, and far
from being as good as the expenditure should produce. Such a system has
been resorted to on every road I have seen made, and every officer
associated with me concurs in the opinion that we cannot succeed without
using them. Permit me to ask a reconsideration of the order prohibiting
their use.

                                      Respectfully, your obedient servant,
                                                RICH'D DELAFIELD,
                                                Captain of Engineers.
  Brig. Gen. Charles Gratiot,
          Chief Engineer.


THE USE OF BARRIERS PERMITTED--A ROAD BEGINNING AT UNIONTOWN, AND
                          ENDING AT WASHINGTON.

                                        ENGINEER DEPARTMENT,
                                            WASHINGTON, May 20, 1834.

_Sir_: Your communication, dated the 14th instant, was duly received. In
conformity with your request, a detail of two officers, as your
assistants on the Cumberland Road, has been applied for. Herewith is
transmitted a book containing, as stated, "the notes of a location of
the United States western road, beginning at Uniontown, and ending at
the turnpike near Washington," which is the only document among the
papers transferred from the Treasury Department to this office, relating
to the Cumberland Road, embraced in the notes, required to be forwarded
to you.

(On the subject of regulating the travel so as to preserve the surface
of the road from injury mentioned in your letter, you will again resort
to the use of barriers, wood only, to be used for the purpose, and
placed only on one side of the road at the same time, provided the
object can thus be accomplished, and so elevated as to be very
conspicuous, that the travel by night may not be endangered by the
barriers.)

                                        I am, &c.,
                                              C. GRATIOT,
                                            Brig. General.
  Capt. R. Delafield,
          Corps of Engineers, Brownsville, Pa.


A BIG APPROPRIATION, BUT THE BRIDGE ABANDONED.

                                        ENGINEER DEPARTMENT,
                                            WASHINGTON, June 25, 1834.

_Sir_: Three hundred thousand dollars have just been appropriated for
the repairs of the Cumberland Road east of the Ohio. You will perceive
by the law, a printed copy of which is herewith enclosed, that the
intention is that this sum shall complete the repairs. You will,
therefore, take your measures accordingly, and put the road in as good
condition as this sum will admit of. The new section to turn Wills hill
will be completed on the plan already commenced, but the plan of
operations on the other sections must be modified to suit the
requirements of the law. The iron bridge over Dunlap's creek will be
abandoned. Your project, when matured, will be transmitted for the
approval of the department.

                                  Very respectfully, &c.,
                      By order:        WM. H. C. BARTLETT.
                                 Lieut. and Assistant to Chief Engineer.
  Capt. R. Delafield,
          Corps of Engineers, New Castle, Del.


ANOTHER AND FINAL CHANGE--THE BRIDGE TO BE BUILT ON THE SITE OF THE
                           OLD ONE.

                                        ENGINEER DEPARTMENT,
                                            WASHINGTON, August 14, 1834.

_Sir_: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your communication, dated
31st ultimo, in reference to the bridge over Dunlap's creek, on the
Cumberland Road, east of the Ohio. The subject of rebuilding this bridge
was brought to the notice of the Secretary of War during the summer of
1832, when he refused to take any action in the matter, on the ground
that it was a county bridge, which should be repaired or rebuilt by the
county authorities, as the United States, in adopting a system of
repairs, had undertaken to repair only that which they had originally
constructed. It was thought on the other side, that notwithstanding the
United States had not built this bridge, yet, as they had enjoyed the
free benefit of it, and as it lay on the tacitly acknowledged line of
the road, they were bound, under the act of Congress authorizing the
repairs of the road to work on every part of it without reference to
original constructors or proprietors. In this state of the case, it was
submitted to Mr. Taney, then Attorney General, who decided verbally in
favor of the latter view, and instructions in conformity thereto were
issued to the superintendent of the road, requiring him to cause the
bridge to be either repaired or rebuilt. This question having been
settled, the next is, whether Dunlap's creek can be crossed at any other
point than where the county bridge now stands. It is the opinion of the
department that it cannot. It would seem there is no evidence on record
that any location was ever finally fixed upon by the commissioners, and
reported by them to the President, for the part of the road in the
immediate vicinity of this creek; but the fact that the road was
actually made in its present location, and used ever since its original
construction, without any opposition, is strong proof that this route
was adopted by the Government; at all events, in the absence of all
other evidence, the department feels constrained to act upon this. Now,
the appropriations having been made for the repairs of the road, and not
for constructing any part of it, except the new section to turn Wills
hill, it is not perceived how any part of the funds can be applied to
the new location proposed by you. These views having been submitted to
the acting Secretary of War, he concurs in them. Your operations will,
therefore, be confined to the old road on which the bridge must be
located.

                                        Very, &c.,
                                              C. GRATIOT,
  Capt. Richard Delafield,
          Corps of Engineers, Brownsville, Pa.




CHAPTER XIV.

  _Appropriations by Congress at various times for Making, Repairing,
     and Continuing the Road--Aggregate of Appropriations,
     $6,824,919.33._


  1. Act of March 29, 1806, authorizes the President to
      appoint a commission of three citizens to lay out
      a road four rods in width "from Cumberland or a
      point on the northern bank of the river Potomac in
      the State of Maryland, between Cumberland and the
      place where the main road leading from Gwinn's to
      Winchester, in Virginia, crosses the river, * * *
      to strike the river Ohio at the most convenient
      place between a point on its eastern bank,
      opposite to the northern boundary of Steubenville
      and the mouth of Grave creek, which empties into
      the said river a little below Wheeling, in
      Virginia." Provides for obtaining the consent of
      the States through which the road passes, and
      appropriates for the expenses, to be paid from the
      reserve fund under the act of April 30, 1802            $ 30,000 00

  2. Act of February 14, 1810, appropriates to be
      expended under the direction of the President, in
      making the road between Cumberland and Brownsville,
      to be paid from fund act of April 30, 1802                60,000 00


  3. Act of March 3, 1811, appropriates to be expended
      under the direction of the President, in making the
      road between Cumberland and Brownsville, and
      authorizes the President to permit deviations from
      a line established by the Commissioners under the
      original act as may be expedient; _Provided_, that
      no deviation shall be made from the principal
      points established on said road between Cumberland
      and Brownsville, to be paid from fund act of April
      30, 1802                                                 50,000 00

  4. Act of February 26, 1812, appropriates balance of
      a former appropriation not used, but carried to
      surplus fund                                              3,786 60
                                                            ------------
     _Carried forward_                                      $ 143,786 60

     _Brought forward_                                      $ 143,786 60

  5. Act of May 6, 1812, appropriates to be expended
      under direction of the President, for making the
      road from Cumberland to Brownsville, to be paid
      from fund act of April 30, 1802                          30,000 00

  6. Act of March 3, 1813 (General Appropriation Bill),
      appropriates for making the road from Cumberland to
      the State of Ohio, to be paid from fund act of
      April 30, 1802                                          140,000 00

  7. Act of February 14, 1815, appropriates to be
      expended under the direction of the President, for
      making the road between Cumberland and Brownsville,
      to be paid from fund act of April 30, 1802              100,000 00

  8. Act of April 16, 1816 (General Appropriation Bill),
      appropriates for making the road from Cumberland to
      the State of Ohio, to be paid from the fund act,
      April 30, 1802                                          300,000 00

  9. Act of April 14, 1818, appropriates to meet claims
      due and unpaid                                           52,984 60

      Demands under existing contracts 260,000 00 from money
      in the treasury not otherwise appropriated.

  10. Act of March 3, 1819, appropriates for existing
      claims and contracts                                    250,000 00

      Completing road 285,000 00 To be paid from reserved
      funds, acts admitting Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois.

  11. Act of May 15, 1820, appropriates for laying out
      the road between Wheeling, Va., and a point on the
      left bank of the Mississippi river, between St.
      Louis and the mouth of the Illinois river, road to
      be eighty feet wide and on a straight line, and
      authorizes the President to appoint Commissioners.
      To be paid out of any money in the treasury not
      otherwise appropriated                                   10,000 00

  12. Act of April 11, 1820, appropriates for completing
      contract for road from Washington, Pa., to
      Wheeling, out of any money in the treasury not
      otherwise appropriated                                  141,000 00

  13. Act of February 28, 1823, appropriates for repairs
     between Cumberland and Wheeling, and authorizes the
     President to appoint a superintendent at a
     compensation of $3.00 per day. To be paid out of
     money not otherwise appropriated                          25,000 00
                                                           -------------
    _Carried forward_                                        $1,737,771 20

    _Brought forward_                                        $1,737,771 20

  14. Act of March 3, 1825, appropriates for opening and
      making a road from the town of Canton, in the State
      of Ohio, opposite Wheeling, to Zanesville, and for
      the completion of the surveys of the road, directed
      to be made by the act of May 15, 1820, and orders
      its extension to the permanent seat of government
      of Missouri, and to pass by the seats of government
      of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, said road to
      commence at Zanesville, Ohio; also authorizes the
      appointment of a superintendent by the President,
      at a salary of $1,500 per annum, who shall make all
      contracts, receive and disburse all moneys, &c.;
      also authorizes the appointment of one
      commissioner, who shall have power according to
      provisions of the act of May 15, 1820; $10,000 of
      the money appropriated by this act is to be
      expended in completing the survey mentioned. The
      whole sum appropriated to be advanced from moneys
      not otherwise appropriated, and replaced from
      reserve fund, acts admitting Ohio, Indiana,
      Illinois, and Missouri                                  150,000 00

  15. Act of March 14, 1826 (General Appropriation
      Bill), appropriates for balance due superintendent,
      $3,000; assistant superintendent, $158.90;
      contractor, $252.13                                       3,411 03
      from moneys not otherwise appropriated.

  16. Act of March 25, 1826 (Military Service),
      appropriates for continuation of the Cumberland
      Road during the year 1825                               110,749 00

  17. Act of March 2, 1827 (Military Service),
      appropriates for construction of road from Canton
      to Zanesville, and continuing and completing the
      survey from Zanesville to the seat of government of
      Missouri, to be paid from reserve fund, acts
      admitting Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Missouri         170,000 00
      For balance due superintendent, from moneys not
      otherwise appropriated 510 00

  18. Act of March 2, 1827, appropriates for repairs
     between Cumberland and Wheeling, and authorizes the
     appointment of a superintendent of repairs, at a
     compensation to be fixed by the President. To be
     paid from moneys not otherwise appropriated. The
     language of this act is, "For repairing the public
     road from Cumberland to Wheeling"                         30,000 00
                                                           -------------
     _Carried forward_                                $2,202,441 23

     _Brought forward_                                $2,202,441 23

  19. Act of May 19, 1828, appropriates for the
      completion of the road to Zanesville, Ohio, to be
      paid from fund, acts admitting Ohio, Indiana,
      Illinois, and Missouri                                  175,000 00

  20. Act of March 2, 1829, appropriates for opening
      road westwardly, from Zanesville, Ohio, to be paid
      from fund, acts admitting Ohio, Indiana, Illinois,
      and Missouri                                            100,000 00

  21. Act of March 2, 1829, appropriates for opening
      road eighty feet wide in Indiana, east and west
      from Indianapolis, and to appoint two
      superintendents, at $800 each per annum, to be paid
      from fund, acts admitting Ohio, Indiana, Illinois,
      and Missouri                                             51,600 00

  22. Act of March 3, 1829, appropriates for repairing
      bridges, &c., on road east of Wheeling                  100,000 00

  23. Act of May 31, 1830 (Internal Improvements),
      appropriates for opening and grading road west of
      Zanesville, Ohio, $100,000; for opening and grading
      road in Indiana, $60,000, commencing at
      Indianapolis, and progressing with the work to the
      eastern and western boundaries of said State; for
      opening, grading, &c., in Illinois, $40,000, to be
      paid from reserve fund, acts admitting Ohio,
      Indiana, Illinois, and Missouri; for claims due and
      remaining unpaid on account of road east of
      Wheeling, $15,000; to be paid from moneys in
      the treasury not otherwise appropriated                 215,000 00

      To this act is appended the following note:

      "I approve this bill, and ask a reference to my
      communication to Congress of this date in relation
      thereto.
                                      "ANDREW JACKSON."[B]

                                                            ------------
      _Carried forward_                                    $2,844,041 23

  [Footnote B: The following is the communication referred to by
               President Jackson:

                            SPECIAL MESSAGE.

                  MAY 30, 1830. _To the Senate of the United States_:

               _Gentlemen_: I have approved and signed the bill entitled
               "An act making appropriations for examinations and
               surveys, and also for certain works of internal
               improvement," but as the phraseology of the section,
               which appropriates the sum of eight thousand dollars for
               the road from Detroit to Chicago, may be construed to
               authorize the application of the appropriation for the
               continuance of the road beyond the limits of the
               territory of Michigan, I desire to be understood as
               having approved this bill with the understanding that the
               road, authorized by this section, is not to be extended
               beyond the limits of the said territory.

                                                          ANDREW JACKSON.]

      _Brought forward_                                    $2,844,041 23

  24. Act of March 2, 1831, appropriates $100,000 for
      opening, grading, &c., west of Zanesville,
      Ohio; $950 for repairs during the year 1830;
      $2,700 for work heretofore done east of Zanesville;
      $265.85 for arrearages for the survey from
      Zanesville to the capital of Missouri; and $75,000
      for opening, grading, &c., in the State of Indiana,
      including bridge over White river, near Indianapolis,
      and progressing to eastern and western boundaries;
      $66,000 for opening, grading, and bridging in
      Illinois; to be paid from the fund, acts admitting
      Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Missouri                   244,915 85

  25. Act of July 3, 1832, appropriates $150,000 for
      repairs east of the Ohio river; $100,000 for
      continuing the road west of Zanesville; $100,000
      for continuing the road in Indiana, including
      bridge over east and west branch of White
      river; $70,000 for continuing road in
      Illinois; to be paid from the fund acts admitting
      Ohio, Indiana and Illinois,                             420,000 00

  26. Act of March 2, 1833, appropriates to carry on
      certain improvements east of the Ohio river,
      $125,000; in Ohio, west of Zanesville, $130,000;
      in Indiana, $100,000; in Illinois, $70,000; in
      Virginia, $34,440                                       459,440 00

  27. Act of June 24, 1834, appropriates $200,000 for
      continuing the road in Ohio; $150,000 for
      continuing the road in Indiana; $100,000 for
      continuing the road in Illinois, and $300,000 for
      the entire completion of repairs east of Ohio, to
      meet provisions of the Acts of Pennsylvania (April
      4, 1831), Maryland (Jan. 23, 1832), and Virginia
      (Feb. 7, 1832), accepting the road surrendered to
      the States, the United States not thereafter to be
      subject for any expense for repairs. Places
      engineer officer of army in control of road
      through Indiana and Illinois, and in charge of all
      appropriations. $300,000 to be paid out of any
      money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated,
      balance from acts admitting Ohio, Indiana and
      Illinois                                                750,000 00

  28. Act of June 27, 1837, (General Appropriation) for
      arrearages due contractors                                1,609 36
                                                             -----------
     _Carried forward_                                     $4,720,006 44

      _Brought forward_                                    $4,720,006 44

  29. Act of March 3, 1835, appropriates $200,000 for
      continuing the road in the State of Ohio; $100,000
      for continuing road in the State of Indiana; to be
      out of fund acts admitting Ohio, Indiana and Illinois,
      and $346,186.58 for the entire completion of
      repairs in Maryland, Pennsylvania and Virginia;
      but before any part of this sum can be expended
      east of the Ohio river, the road shall be
      surrendered to and accepted by the States through
      which it passes, and the United States shall not
      thereafter be subject to any expense in relation
      to said road. Out of any money in the Treasury not
      otherwise appropriated                                  646,186 58

  30. Act of March 3, 1835, (Repair of Roads)
      appropriates to pay for work heretofore done by
      Isaiah Frost on the Cumberland Road, $320; to pay
      late Superintendent of road a salary, $862.87
                                                                1,182 87

  31. Act of July 2, 1836, appropriates for continuing
      the road in Ohio, $200,000; for continuing road in
      Indiana, $250,000, including materials for a
      bridge over the Wabash river; $150,000 for
      continuing the road in Illinois, provided that the
      appropriation for Illinois shall be limited to
      grading and bridging, and shall not be construed
      as pledging Congress to future appropriations for
      the purpose of macadamizing the road, and the
      moneys herein appropriated for said road in Ohio
      and Indiana must be expended in completing the
      greatest possible continuous portion of said road
      in said States so that said finished part thereof
      may be surrendered to the States respectively; to
      be paid from acts admitting Ohio, Indiana,
      Illinois and Missouri                                   600,000 00

  32. Act of March 3, 1837, appropriates $190,000 for
      continuing the road in Ohio; $100,000 for
      continuing the road in Indiana; $100,000 for
      continuing road in Illinois, provided the road in
      Illinois shall not be stoned or graveled, unless
      it can be done at a cost not greater than the
      average cost of stoning and graveling the road in
      Ohio and Indiana, and provided that in all cases
      where it can be done the work to be laid off in
      sections and let to the lowest substantial bidder.
      Sec. 2 of the act provides that Sec. 2 of act of
      July 2, 1836, shall not be applicable to
      expenditures hereafter made on the road, and
      $7,183.63 is appropriated by this act for repairs
      east of the Ohio river; to be paid from the acts
      admitting Ohio, Indiana and Illinois                    397,183 63
                                                           -------------
      _Carried forward_                                    $6,364,559 52

      _Brought forward_                                    $6,364,559 52

  33. Act of May 25, 1838, appropriates for continuing
      the road in Ohio, $150,000; for continuing it in
      Indiana, including bridges, $150,000; for
      continuing it in Illinois, $9,000; for the
      completion of a bridge over Dunlap's creek at
      Brownsville; to be paid from moneys in the
      Treasury not otherwise appropriated and subject to
      provisions and conditions of act of March 3, 1837       459,000 00

  34. Act of June 17, 1844, (Civil and Diplomatic)
      appropriates for arrearages on account of survey
      to Jefferson, Mo.                                         1,359 81
                                                           -------------
                  Total                                    $6,824,919 33

     NOTE--The appropriation of $3,786 60, made by act of Feb. 26, 1812,
     is not included in the above total for the reason that it was a
     balance from a former appropriation.

     The act of March 3, 1843, appropriates so much as is necessary to
     settle certain claims on contract for building bridges over
     Kaskaskia river and constructing part of Cumberland Road.

[Illustration: HON. T. M. T. McKENNAN.]




CHAPTER XV.

  _Speech of Hon. T. M. T. McKennan, delivered in Congress, June 6,
     1832--The Road a Monument of National Wealth and Greatness--A Bond
     of Union--Business of the Road--Five Thousand Wagons unload in
     Wheeling in a single year--Facilities afforded by the Road for
     transporting the Mails and Munitions of War._


This road, Mr. Speaker (the National Road), is a _magnificent
one_--magnificent in extent; it traverses seven different States of this
Union, and its whole distance will cover an extent of near eight hundred
miles. Magnificent in the difficulties overcome by the wealth of a
nation, and in the benefits and advantages and blessings which it
diffuses, east and west, far and wide, through the whole country. It is,
sir, _a splendid monument of national wealth and national greatness, and
of the deep interest felt by the government in the wealth and prosperity
and happiness of the people_.

It is not, sir, like the stupendous monuments of other countries and of
other times, which have been erected merely for the purpose of show and
of gratifying the pride of some despotic monarch; but this and all
similar national improvements are _works of utility; they tend to cement
the bond of union; they bring together the distant parts of this exalted
republic; they diffuse wealth and happiness among a free people, and
will be a source of never failing prosperity to millions yet unborn_.

It is, sir, _a great commercial, military, mail, national work_. To give
the House, or those of its members who are unacquainted with the fact,
some idea of the immense commercial advantages which the eastern as well
as the western country has derived from the construction of this road,
let me call their attention to the amount of merchandise transported to
the Ohio river in a single year after its completion; and here, sir, I
avail myself of an estimate made by an honorable member of the other
House on another occasion, when he strongly urged the propriety and
importance of the extension of the road through the State of Ohio.

In the year 1822, shortly after the completion of the road, a single
house in the town of Wheeling unloaded 1,081 wagons, averaging about
3,500 pounds each, and paid for the carriage of the goods $90,000. At
that time there were five other commission houses in the same place, and
estimating that each of them received two-thirds the amount of goods
consigned to the other, there must have been nearly 5,000 wagons
unloaded, and nearly $400,000 paid as the cost of transportation. But,
further, it is estimated that at least every tenth wagon passed through
that place into the interior of Ohio, Indiana, &c., which would
considerably swell the amount. These wagons take their return loads and
carry to the eastern markets all the various articles of production and
manufacture of the West--their flour, whisky, hemp, tobacco, bacon, and
wool. Since this estimate was made, the town of Wheeling is greatly
enlarged; its population has nearly doubled; the number of its
commercial establishments has greatly increased; and the demand for
merchandise in the West has increased with the wealth and improvement
and prosperity of the country.

But, further, sir, before the completion of this road, from four to six
weeks were usually occupied in the transportation of goods from
Baltimore to the Ohio river, and the price varied from six to ten
dollars per hundred. Now they can be carried in less than half the time
and at one-half the cost, and arrangements are making by some
enterprising gentlemen of the West to have the speed of transportation
still increased, and the price of carriage diminished.

Equally important are the benefits derived by the government and the
people from the rapid, regular, and safe transportation of the mail on
this road. Before its completion, eight or more days were occupied in
transporting the mail from Baltimore to Wheeling; it was then carried on
horseback, and did not reach the western country by this route more than
once a week. Now it is carried in comfortable stages, protected from the
inclemency of the weather, in forty-eight hours; and no less than
twenty-eight mails weekly and regularly pass and repass each other on
this road. To show this fact, and the absolute necessity and importance
of keeping the road in a good state of repair, in order to enable the
postoffice department to fulfill the expectations of the public, I will
ask the favor of the clerk to read to the House a communication received
from the Postmaster General on the subject. [Here the clerk read an
extract from a letter of the Postmaster General]. The facilities
afforded by such a road in time of war for the transportation of the
munitions of war, and the means of defence from one point of the country
to another, need scarcely be noticed; they must be palpable and plain to
every reflecting mind, and I will not take up the time of the House in
detailing them.

As I said before, the road traverses seven different States of this
Union, and in its whole extent will cover a distance of near 800 miles.
Who, then, can doubt its nationality? Who can question the allegation
that it is an immensely important national work? _Who can reconcile it
to his conscience and his constituents to permit it to go to
destruction?_

[Illustration: ROAD WAGON]




CHAPTER XVI.

  _Life on the Road--Origin of the Phrase Pike Boys--Slaves Driven Like
     Horses--Race Distinction at the Old Taverns--Old Wagoners--Regulars
     and Sharpshooters--Line Teams--John Snider, John Thompson, Daniel
     Barcus, Robert Bell, Henry Clay Rush, and other Familiar Names._


As the phrase "Pike Boys" is frequently used in this volume, it is
considered pertinent to give its origin. When first used, it was
confined in its application to boys--sons of wagoners, stage drivers,
tavern keepers, farmers, and in fact the sons of persons of every
occupation who lived on or adjacent to the road, in the same sense that
the boys of a town are called "town boys." Its meaning and import,
however, expanded in course of time, until it embraced, as it now does,
all persons in any manner and at any time identified with the road,
whether by residence or occupation, and without "regard to age, race,
color or previous condition of servitude," as the statute puts it, for
be it remembered that negro slaves were frequently seen on the National
Road. The writer has seen them driven over the road arranged in couples
and fastened to a long, thick rope or cable, like horses. This may seem
incredible to a majority of persons now living along the road, but it is
true, and was a very common sight in the early history of the road and
evoked no expression of surprise, or words of censure. Such was the
temper of the times. There were negro wagoners on the road, but negro
stage drivers were unknown. Stage driving was quite a lofty calling, and
the acme of many a young man's ambition. The work was light and the
whirl exciting and exhilarating. Wagoners, white and black, stopped over
night at the same taverns, but never sat down together at the same
table. A separate table was invariably provided for the colored
wagoners, a custom in thorough accord with the public sentiment of the
time, and seemingly agreeable to the colored wagoners themselves.
Country life in the olden time was enlivened by numerous corn huskings,
balls, spelling matches, school exhibitions and frolics of all kinds.
Young men and boys along the road, were in the habit of attending these
gatherings, going as far as three miles and more in the back country, to
reach them, some on foot and others on horseback. A young man would
think nothing of getting a girl up behind him on a horse, and hieing
away after nightfall, four and five miles to a country dance, and many
of the girls of the period considered it but pleasant recreation to walk
two or three miles with their lovers, to a spelling match or a revival
meeting. A feeling of jealousy always existed between the young men and
boys, living along and near the road, and those in the back country, and
the occasions before mentioned furnished opportunities from time to time
for this feeling to break out, as it often did, in quarrels and fights.
The country boys would get together in anticipation of an approaching
gathering at some school house, and organize for offense or defense, as
the exigencies might require, always calling their rivals and imaginary
enemies, "Pike Boys," and this was the origin of that familiar phrase.

The men who hauled merchandise over the road were invariably called
wagoners, not teamsters, as is the modern word, and they were both,
since Webster defines wagoner as one who conducts a wagon, and teamster
as one who drives a team. The teams of the old wagoners consisting, as a
rule, of six horses, were very rarely stabled, but rested over night on
the wagon yards of the old taverns, no matter how inclement the weather.
Blankets were used to protect them in the winter season. Feed troughs
were suspended at the rear end of the wagon bed, and carried along in
this manner, day after day all the year round. In the evening, when the
day's journey was ended, the troughs were taken down and fastened on the
tongues of the wagon to which the horses were tied, three on a side,
with their heads to the trough. Wagoners carried their beds, rolled up,
in the forepart of the wagon, and spread them out in a semi-circle on
the bar room floor in front of the big bar room fire upon going to rest.
Some of the old bar room grates would hold as much as six bushels of
coal, and iron pokers from four to six feet in length, weighing eight
and ten pounds, were used for stirring the fires. To get down an icy
hill with safety, it was necessary to use an ice cutter, a rough lock,
or a clevis, and sometimes all combined, contingent upon the thickness
and smoothness of the ice, and the length and steepness of the hill. The
ice cutter was of steel or iron, in appearance like a small sled, fitted
on the hind wheels, which were first securely locked. The rough lock was
a short chain with large, rough links, and the clevis was like that used
on an ordinary plow, except that it was larger and stronger. These
instruments were essential parts of the wagoners' "outfit." There were
two classes of wagoners, the "regular" and the "sharpshooter." The
regular was on the road constantly with his team and wagon, and had no
other pursuit than hauling goods and merchandise on the road. The
sharpshooters were for the most part farmers, who put their farm teams
on the road in seasons when freights were high, and took them off when
prices of hauling declined; and there was jealousy between the two
classes. The regular drove his team about fifteen miles a day on the
average, while the sharpshooter could cover twenty miles and more. Line
teams were those controlled by an association or company. Many of the
regular wagoners became members of these companies and put in their
teams. The main object of the combination was to transport goods more
rapidly than by the ordinary method. Line teams were stationed along
the road, at distances of about fifteen miles, and horses were exchanged
after the manner of the stage lines. Many of the old wagoners had
bull-dogs tied at the rear of their wagons, and these dogs were often
seen pressing with all their strength against the collar about their
necks, as if to aid the horses in moving their load; and this is
probably the origin of the common form of boast about a man being equal
in strength to "a six-horse team with a cross dog under the wagon."

[Illustration: JOHN THOMPSON.]

The whip used by old wagoners was apparently five feet long, thick and
hard at the butt, and tapering rapidly to the end in a silken cracker.
Battley White, of Centerville, Washington county, Pa., made more of
these whips than any other man on the road. The interior of his whip was
a raw hide. John Morrow, of Petersburg, Somerset county, Pa., also made
many whips for the old wagoners. There was another whip, much used by
old wagoners, known as the "Loudon Whip." The inner portion of this whip
was an elastic wooden stock, much approved by the wagoners. It was
manufactured in the village of Loudon, Franklin county, Pa., and hence
its name. It was used almost exclusively on what was called the "Glade
Road," from Philadelphia to Pittsburg, _via_ Chambersburg and Bedford.

Some of the old wagoners of the National Road became rich. John Snider
was one of these. He drove a six-horse team on the road for twenty
years, and died on his farm near Uniontown in December, 1889, much
lamented. Few men possessed more of the higher attributes of true
manhood than John Snider. The author of this volume gratefully and
cheerfully acknowledges his indebtedness to John Snider for many of the
facts and incidents it contains. He was a clear-headed, intelligent,
sober, discreet, and observing man, whose statements could be relied on
as accurate.

It would be an impossible task to collect the names of all the old
wagoners of the National Road. They number thousands, and many of them
left the road long since to seek fortunes in new and distant sections of
our widely extended country. The most of them have gone to scenes beyond
the boundaries of time. It is the author's aim to collect as many of
their names as is practicable and write them down in history. The names
of John Thompson, James Noble, and John Flack are recalled. These worthy
old wagoners are still living in the vicinity of Taylorstown, Washington
county, Pa., and highly respected by all their neighbors. The point at
which they first entered upon the road was the famous "S" bridge.
Thompson drove his father's team when quite young, in fact, a mere boy.
The first trip he made over the road was in the spring of 1843, in
company with the veteran wagoner, George Hallam, of Washington, Pa.
Thompson's father was a pork packer, and the youthful wagoner's "down
loads," as those moving eastwardly were called, consisted for the most
part of bacon. His recollections of the road are vivid, and warmly
cherished. He can sit down in a room, at his comfortable home, and "in
his mind's eye" see every mile post along the road and recall the
distances to points inscribed thereon. In the year 1852, he went to
California, engaged in mining, and was successful. With the instinct
planted in every human breast, he returned to his native land, and with
his accumulations bought his father's homestead farm. The old farm
enhanced in value by reason of the oil developments, and landed the old
wagoner in the ranks of the rich.

The name Noble is a familiar one on the National Road, and suggestive of
rank. "Watty" and William Noble were stage drivers. James Noble, the old
wagoner, drove a team for the late Hon. Isaac Hodgens, who was at one
time a pork salter. He remained on the road as a wagoner until its tide
of business ceased, and retired to Taylorstown to take his chances in
the on-moving and uncertain affairs of life. He seemed possessed of the
idea that there was undeveloped wealth in the vicinity of Taylorstown,
and made up his mind to gain a foothold there and wait the coming of
events. He managed by the exercise of industry and economy to become the
owner of a farm, and the discovery of oil did the rest for him. He is
rich.

John Flack's career is similar to those of Thompson and Noble,
culminating in like good fortune. "He struck oil, too."

We have in the story of these old wagoners, examples of the
possibilities for achievement, under the inspiring genius of American
institutions. Poor boys, starting out in life as wagoners, with wages
barely sufficient for their subsistence, pushing on and up with
ceaseless vigilance, attaining the dignity of farmers, in all ages the
highest type of industrial life, and now each bearing, though meekly,
the proud title of "freeholder," which Mr. Blaine said in his celebrated
eulogium of Garfield, "has been the patent and passport of self-respect
with the Anglo-Saxon race ever since Horsa and Hengist landed on the
shores of England."

[Illustration: DANIEL BARCUS.]

Otho and Daniel Barcus, brothers, were among the prominent wagoners of
the road. They lived near Frostburg, Md. Otho died at Barton, Md., in
1883. Daniel is now living in retirement at Salisbury, Somerset county,
Pa. In 1838 he engaged with John Hopkins, merchant at the foot of Light
and Pratt streets, Baltimore, to haul a load of general merchandise,
weighing 8,300 pounds, to Mt. Vernon, Ohio. "He delivered the goods in
good condition" at the end of thirty days from the date of his departure
from Baltimore. His route was over the National Road to Wheeling, thence
by Zanesville and Jacktown, Ohio, thence thirty-two miles from the
latter place to the point of destination, the whole distance being 397
miles. He received $4.25 per hundred for hauling the goods. At Mt.
Vernon he loaded back with Ohio tobacco, 7,200 pounds in hogsheads, for
which he received $2.75 per hundred. On the return trip he upset,
between Mt. Vernon and Jacktown, without sustaining any damage, beyond
the breaking of a bow of his wagon bed, and the loss caused by
detention. The expense of getting in shape for pursuing his journey, was
the price of a gallon of whisky. Mt. Vernon is not on the line of the
road, and Mr. Barcus writes that "when he reached the National Road
at Jacktown, he felt at home again." Mr. Barcus also states in a letter
to the writer of these pages, that the first lot of goods shipped over
the Baltimore and Ohio railway, after its completion to Cumberland,
destined for Wheeling, was consigned to Shriver and Dixon, commission
merchants of Cumberland, and by that firm consigned to Forsythe and Son,
of Wheeling. This lot of goods aggregated 6,143 pounds, an average load
for a six-horse team, and Mr. Barcus contracted with Shriver and Dixon
to haul it through to Wheeling in six days for fifty cents a hundred,
which he accomplished. He further states that a delegation of wholesale
and retail merchants of Wheeling met him at Steenrod's tavern, east of
Wheeling Hill, and escorted him to town, then a place of 4,000 or 5,000
inhabitants, and in the evening there was public rejoicing over the
unprecedented event of goods reaching Wheeling from Baltimore in the
short space of seven days. Mr. Barcus concludes his letter as follows:
"I stayed many nights at Hopwood with Wilse Clement, and many with Natty
Brownfield, in Uniontown. I often stayed with Arthur Wallace, five miles
east of Brownsville. I remember one night at Wallace's, after caring for
my team, I accompanied his two fine and handsome daughters to a party
about a mile distant in the country, where I danced all night, till
broad daylight, and then walked home with the girls in the morning."

John Grace was another old wagoner, who became wealthy. The old pike
boys will remember him as the driver of a black team. He was a Maryland
man. When the old road yielded its grasp on trade, to the iron railway,
Grace settled in or near Zanesville, Ohio, where he still lives, or was
living a few years ago, worth a hundred thousand dollars. He transported
his family to Ohio in his big road wagon.

Jesse Franks, and his son Conrad, of High House, Fayette county, Pa.,
were old wagoners. Conrad's team ran off near Cumberland, on one of his
trips, overthrowing the wagon, and causing an ugly dislocation of
Conrad's thigh, from which he suffered great pain for many weeks.

John Manaway, late owner of the Spottsylvania House, Uniontown, drove a
team on the road for many years, and no man enjoyed the business more
than he.

There was an Ohio man of the name of Lucas, called Gov. Lucas, because a
man of like name was an early Governor of Ohio, who was an old wagoner,
and his team consisted of but five horses, yet he hauled the biggest
loads on the road. He was the owner of the team he drove. In the year
1844, one of his loads weighed twelve thousand pounds--"one hundred and
twenty hundred," as the old wagoners termed it, and the biggest load
ever hauled over the road up to that date.

William King, of Washington county, Pa., an old wagoner, was noted for
his steady habits. On one of his trips over the road, and going down the
eastern slope of Laurel Hill, when it was covered with ice, his wagon
slipped from the road and fell over the bank near the old Price
residence, dragging the team after it. Strange to say, the horses were
uninjured and but little damage done to the wagon. The contents of the
load were Ohio tobacco and bacon. After getting things restored, King
drove to Jimmy Snyder's, stayed all night, and the next morning
proceeded on his journey to Baltimore. He was the owner of a farm in
Washington county.

Joseph Thompson, an old wagoner on the road, is now and has been for
many years in charge of the large and valuable coal farm belonging to
the estate of the Hon. James G. Blaine, on the Monongahela river, near
Pittsburg. A trusty old wagoner, he has approved himself the trusty
agent of the great statesman.

Jacob Probasco was an old wagoner, and also kept a tavern at Jockey
Hollow. He went west and founded a fortune.

Joseph Lawson, an old wagoner, kept tavern for many years in West
Alexander, Washington county, Pa., and died the possessor of a valuable
estate. The author of this book took dinner, in 1848, at Lawson's
tavern, in company with James G. Blaine, the late distinguished
Secretary of State.

Matthias Fry, an old wagoner, kept the Searight House in 1840, and
subsequently presided as landlord over several houses at different times
in Hopwood. He was one of the best men on the road. His large and well
proportioned form will be readily recalled by the old pike boys. He was
a native of Old Virginia, and died in Hopwood.

David Hill was one of the most noted wagoners of the road. He was an
active, bustling man, and given to witty sayings. He belonged to
Washington county, Pa., and was the father of Dr. Hill, of Vanderbilt,
and the father-in-law of the Rev. J. K. Melhorn, who preached for many
years in the vicinity of McClellandtown, Fayette county, Pa.

Andrew Prentice, who died recently in Uniontown, the possessor of
considerable money, drove a team on the old road in his early days.

Henry Clay Rush, a prominent citizen of Uniontown, and ex-jury
commissioner, was once the proud driver of a big six-horse team. He
drove through from Baltimore to Wheeling, and can recount incidents of
every mile of the road to this day. None of the old pike boys enjoys
with keener relish a recital of the stories of the old pike than Rush.

William Worthington, who died not long since in Dunbar township, Fayette
county, Pa., aged upwards of ninety years, was one of the earliest
wagoners on the road. When he made his first trip he was only thirteen
years old, and the road was then recently opened for travel. He
continued as a wagoner on the road for many years, and located in Dunbar
township, where he purchased property, which subsequently became very
valuable by reason of the coal development.

William Chenriewith, who recently, and probably at the present time,
keeps a hotel near Bedford Springs, was an old wagoner of the National
Road.

[Illustration: HENRY CLAY RUSH.]

John Thomas, who kept a hotel and livery stable in Baltimore, was an old
wagoner, and is well remembered along the road.

George Buttermore, father of Dr. Smith Buttermore, of Connellsville, was
at one time a wagoner on the National Road.

John Orr, now a prosperous and well-known farmer of the vicinity of West
Newton, Westmoreland county, Pa., was an old wagoner of the road.

James Murray, an old wagoner, is remembered for his extravagance of
speech. One of his sayings was, that "he saw the wind blow so hard on
Keyser's Ridge, that it took six men to hold the hair on one man's
head."

E. W. Clement, of Hopwood, was an old wagoner, and invariably used bells
on his horses. He subsequently kept a tavern in Hopwood, and built the
house there known as the "Shipley House."

Robert Bell was an old wagoner with quaint ways. He was rich, and owned
his team, which was the poorest equipped of any on the road. Horses in
his team were not infrequently seen without bridles. He was a trader,
and often bought the goods he hauled and sold them out to people along
the road. His reputation for honesty was good, but he was called "Stingy
Robert."

George Widdle, an old wagoner of the age of eighty and upwards, still
living in Wheeling, drew the single line and handled the Loudon whip
over a six-horse team for many years, between Wheeling and Baltimore,
and accounts the days of those years the happiest of his existence. He
was also a stage driver for a time. Nothing affords him so much pleasure
as a recital of the incidents of the road. He says there never were such
taverns and tavern keepers as those of the National Road in the days of
its glory, and of his vigorous manhood.

James Butler, like Bell, was a trader. Butler drove a "bell team," as
teams with bells were called. He was a Virginian, from the vicinity of
Winchester. It was the tradition of the road that he had a slight
infusion of negro blood in his veins, and this assigned him to the side
table of the dining room. When he quit the road he returned to
Winchester, started a store, and got rich.

Neither tradition or kindred evidence was necessary to prove the race
status of Westley Strother. He showed up for himself. He was as black as
black could be, and a stalwart in size and shape. He was well liked by
all the old wagoners, and by every one who knew him. He was mild in
manner, and honest in purpose. He had the strongest affection for the
road, delighted in its stirring scenes, and when he saw the wagons and
the wagoners, one after another, departing from the old highway, he
repined and prematurely died at Uniontown.




CHAPTER XVII.

  _Old Wagoners continued--Harrison Wiggins, Morris Mauler, James
     Mauler, John Marker, John Bradley, Robert Carter, R. D. Kerfoot,
     Jacob F. Longanecker, Ellis B. Woodward--Broad and Narrow Wheels--A
     peculiar Wagon--An experiment and a failure--Wagon Beds--Bell
     Teams._


Harrison Wiggins, widely known as a lover of fox hunting, and highly
respected as a citizen, was one of the early wagoners. His career as a
wagoner ceased long before the railroad reached Cumberland. He hauled
goods from Baltimore to points west. His outfit, team and wagon, were
owned by himself and his father, Cuthbert Wiggins. Harrison Wiggins was
born in the old Gribble house, two miles east of Brownsville, on the
30th of April, 1812. About the year 1817 his father moved to Uniontown,
and kept a tavern in a frame building which stood on the lot adjoining
the residence of P. S. Morrow, Esq. He remained here until 1821, when he
went to the stone house at the eastern base of Chalk Hill, and was its
first occupant. His house at Uniontown numbered among its patrons, Hon.
Nathaniel Ewing, Samuel Cleavenger, Mr. Bouvier, John A. Sangston, John
Kennedy, John Lyon, and other eminent men of that period. In 1832 or
'33, Harrison Wiggins married a daughter of John Risler, a noted tavern
keeper of the road, one of the very best, a talent which descended to
his children. At the date of the marriage Mr. Risler was keeping the
stone house at Braddock's run, and the wedding occurred in that house.
In 1839 Harrison Wiggins went to Iowa, with a view of locating in that
State, but returned the next year and leased the property on which he
now lives from Charles Griffith. In ten years thereafter he bought this
property, and it has been his home for more than half a century. Under
the careful and sagacious management of Mr. Wiggins, it has become one
of the prettiest and most valuable properties in the mountains. It has
been a long time since he was a wagoner, but he enjoys a recital of the
stirring scenes he witnessed on the old road in the days of its glory.

[Illustration: HARRISON WIGGINS.]

There is not a more familiar name among the old pike boys than that of
Morris Mauler. He was an old wagoner, stage driver and tavern keeper. He
was born in Uniontown in the year 1806. The house in which he first
beheld the light of day, was a log building on the Skiles corner, kept
as a tavern by his father. Before he reached the age of twenty-one he
was on the road with a six-horse team and a big wagon, hauling goods
from the city of Baltimore to points west. He continued a wagoner for
many years, and afterward became a stage driver. He drove on Stockton's
line. From stage driving he went to tavern keeping. His first venture as
a tavern keeper was at Mt. Washington, when the old tavern stand at that
point was owned by the late Hon. Nathaniel Ewing. He subsequently and
successively kept the old Probasco house at Jockey Hollow, the old
Gaither house, the Yeast house, and a house in Hopwood. He always
furnished good entertainment for strangers and travelers, as well as for
friends and acquaintances, and as a consequence, was well patronized. He
died about seven years ago at Fairchance, and when his light went out a
shadow of sorrow passed over the hearts of all the old pike boys.

James Mauler, a son of Morris, above mentioned, is also an old wagoner.
He went on the road with a team in the year 1830, and remained on it as
long as he could obtain a load of goods to haul over it. He is still
living and in robust health, at Brownfield station, four miles south of
Uniontown.

[Illustration: JOHN MARKER.]

John Marker, now residing in the east end of Uniontown, is an old
wagoner. He was born at the Little Crossings in the State of Maryland,
in the year 1816, and while yet a lad began to drive a team on the road
for Joseph Plucker. In 1839 he quit the service of Plucker and came to
Wharton township, Fayette county, Pa., and soon thereafter began driving
again, first for Sebastian Rush and next for Nicholas McCartney. He is a
near relative of the Shipley, McCollough and McCartney families, all of
the old pike. Marker says he never suffered an "upset" himself, but saw
a great many "upsets" on the road. He also states that he saw a stage
driver killed near Little Crossings in 1835 by the "running off" of his
team and the "upsetting" of the coach. The name of this unfortunate
stage driver was James Rhodes, and he drove on Stockton's line. John
Marker, in his prime, was one of the stoutest men on the road, upwards
of six feet in height, and rounded out in proportion, but, being of an
amiable temperament, he never engaged in broils, realizing, no doubt,
and acting upon the poetic sentiment that:

     "It is excellent to have a giant's strength,
     But tyrannous to use it as a giant."

He still clings to the old road, breaking stone to repair it, when his
health will permit. He is in the 76th year of his age.

John Bradley, brother of Daniel, of Jockey Hollow, is an old wagoner. He
drove a team for Benjamin Brownfield, Jr., now residing near Newark,
Ohio., son of Col. Ben., the centennarian of South Union township, and
grand marshal of Democratic processions of the olden time. John Bradley
also worked on the construction of the Baltimore and Ohio railroad in
1839, near Oldtown, Md., fifteen miles east of Cumberland. His employer
on this work was the late Zalmon Ludington, of Uniontown, who had a
contract at the point mentioned. John Bradley is now living in the city
of Pittsburg.

Robert Carter was a well known old wagoner, a native of Washington
county, Pa., a "regular," and a very energetic, persevering and keen
sighted man. He took a prominent part in many of the festivities of the
old road, but never lost his head. He was a money maker, and unlike most
of that class, kind hearted and generous. He married the eldest daughter
of Thomas Moxley, the old tavern keeper, whose house was three miles
west of Uniontown. After his marriage he bought a small farm, known as
the Solomon Colley farm, near Hatfield's, in Redstone township, Fayette
county, Pa., subsequently merged in the Hatfield estate. He operated
this farm for a short time, but while engaged as a farmer, kept his team
on the road in charge of a hired driver. He sold his farm and leased the
Bar house in Bridgeport, and kept tavern there for some time. When
business ceased on the road, he gave up his team and his tavern, and
moved with his family to Iowa, where he engaged extensively in farming
and stock raising.

R. D. Kerfoot, the well known miner and labor leader of Everson, was at
one time a wagoner on the National Road. He was born in Lancaster
county, Pa., and before reaching the full stature of manhood in point of
age, went to Washington county, Md., where he engaged as a driver for
one J. B. Bear, a farmer of that county and State, and was put in charge
of a fine six-horse team, and a broad wheeled wagon, with which he
hauled goods, wares and merchandise to and from Baltimore and Wheeling.
He enjoyed the stirring scenes of the old road, and recalls with a keen
relish the bounteous tables of the old taverns.

Jacob F. Longanecker, who served as county commissioner of Fayette
county, Pa., from 1854 to 1857, was an old wagoner. He owned a farm in
German township, and was a good practical farmer, but spent much of his
time, for many years, on the road with his team. He enjoyed life on the
road, and seemed loath to relinquish the occupation of a wagoner.

[Illustration: ELLIS B. WOODWARD.]

Ellis B. Woodward, of Menallen township, Fayette county, Pa., is an old
wagoner with experience hardly sufficient to entitle him to be classed
as a "regular," and yet almost enough to take him from the list of
"sharp-shooters." He kept his big road wagon on his farm for many years
after the road ceased to be a profitable avenue of transportation, and
felt a pride in exhibiting it as a reminder of his identification with
the great highway, in the days of its prosperity. He still lives and
warmly cherishes the memories of the old road.

The first wagons used on the National Road were made with narrow rimmed
wheels, like those in use at the present day on farms and country roads.
It was not long, however, after the opening of the road, until the broad
wheeled, or "broad tread wagon," as it was called, was introduced, and
came into general use by the "regulars." The "sharpshooters," as a rule,
retained the narrow tread, as their wagons were designed mainly for farm
service. The width of the broad tread was about four inches, and lighter
tolls were exacted at the gates from broad than from narrow tread
wagons for the obvious reason that narrow wheels cut deeper into the
road than broad wheels.

A gentleman of Wheeling interested in the transportation business at one
time, conceived the idea of constructing a wagon that would make so wide
a track as to be allowed to pass over the road for a very low rate of
toll, if not entirely exempt. His model was a wagon with the rear axle
four inches shorter than the front one, so that a track was made of
eight inches in width. To this wagon nine horses were attached--three
abreast. It passed over the road several times, with Joseph Sopher as
driver, attracting much attention, but turning out a failure as well in
the matter of saving toll as in being an impracticable vehicle of
transportation.

The bed of the regular road wagon was long and deep, bending upward at
the bottom in front and rear. The lower broad side was painted blue,
with a movable board inserted above, painted red. The covering was of
white canvas stretched over broad wooden bows, so that the old road
wagon, probably more as a matter of taste than design, disclosed the
tri-colors of the American escutcheon, red, white and blue.

An average load was 6,000 pounds, but loads weighing 10,000 pounds, "a
hundred hundred," as all old wagoners boastfully put it, were frequently
hauled over the road.

The reader who never saw the endless procession on the old pike, in the
days of its glory, may have the impression that the bells used by some
of the old wagoners on their teams were like sleigh bells, or those of
the milk wagon of the present day, and in like manner strapped around
the horses. But that was not the way of it. The bells of the old
wagoners were cone shaped, with an open end, not unlike a small dinner
bell, and were attached to a thin iron arch, sprung over the tops of the
hames. The motion of the horses caused a quiver in the arch, and the
bell teams moved majestically along the road attracting attention and
eliciting admiration. The great majority of wagoners did not use bells.




CHAPTER XVIII.

  _Old Wagoners continued--John Deets--His story told by himself--David
     Church--John Snider loads up with Butter--Billy Ashton, John
     Bradfield, Frank Bradfield--An Escapade--William Hall, Henry
     Puffenberger and Jacob Breakiron--Collision between a "regular" and
     a "sharpshooter"--Joseph Lawson, Jeff. Manypenny, Joseph Arnold,
     The Sophers, Robert Beggs, Thomas Gore, and John Whetsel._


John Deets was a wagoner on the road as early as 1826, before the
invention of the rubber, or at least before its application to wagons on
the National Road. He had a brother, Michael, who preceded him as a
wagoner on the road. John Deets located in Guernsey county, Ohio, in
1835, whence he went from Menallen township, Fayette county, Pa. He is
still living. The following from his own pen furnishes a graphic account
of life on the road in his day:

MR. SEARIGHT: I will try to give you as much information as I can at
this time. My brother, Michael Deets, about four years older than
myself, was among the first that wagoned on the pike. That was about the
year 1822. He first drove his father's team, and the first load of goods
he hauled from Baltimore was to Uniontown for Isaac Beeson or Isaac
Skiles, I am not certain which. After that he drove for Abram Beagle,
who lived in the west end of Uniontown. After that he bought a team, and
a few years after bought two more, so that he owned three teams at one
time. He drove one of the teams himself and hired drivers for the other
two. The team he drove himself was a bell team. One of his drivers was
George Richards, and the other, Jesse Barnet, a colored man, who lived
in the east end of Uniontown. When they took up the old bed of the road,
and macadamized it, my brother took a contract and put his teams to
hauling stones. After finishing his contract, he resumed the hauling of
merchandise on the road and continued until about 1837, when he moved to
Ohio, thence to Illinois, and thence to Missouri, where he died.

[Illustration: JOHN DEETS.]

The pike boys had some hard times and they had some good times. They
were generally very fond of sport, and mostly tried to put up where the
landlord was a fiddler, so that they could take a hoe-down. Every one
carried his own bed, and after they had all the sport they wanted they
put their beds down on the floor in a circle, with their feet to the
fire, and slept like a mouse in a mill. They were generally very
sociable and friendly with each other, but I must note one thing just
here: Two of the boys met at David Barnett's, some three miles east of
Hancock, and got into a dispute, which was not often the case. Elias
Meek and Abner Benley were the two. Meek was for fight, Benley was for
peace. But Meek pushed on Benley and Benley run, but Meek caught him.
Then Benley knew he had to fight, and turned on Meek and gave him a
wonderful thrashing, so that he was not able to drive his team for some
time. And now with regard to getting up and down the hills. They had no
trouble to get up, but the trouble was in getting down, for they had no
rubbers then, and to tight lock would soon wear out their tires. They
would cut a small pole about 10 or 11 feet long and tie it to the bed
with the lock chain and then bend it against the hind wheel and tie it
to the feed trough, or the hind part of the wagon bed, just tight enough
to let the wheel turn slow. Sometimes one driver would wear out from 15
to 20 poles between Baltimore and Wheeling. Sometimes others would cut
down a big tree and tie it to the hind end of the wagon and drop it at
the foot of the hill. When there was ice, and there was much of it in
winter, they had to use rough locks and cutters, and the wagon would
sometimes be straight across the road, if not the hind end foremost. The
snow was sometimes so deep that they had to go through fields, and
shovel the drifts from the fences, and often had to get sleds to take
their loads across Nigger Mountain, and on as far as Hopwood. Those of
us who had to go through the fields were three days going nine miles.
This was in the neighborhood of Frostburg, Md. There were no bridges
then across the Monongahela or the Ohio rivers. Wagoners had to ferry
across in small flat-boats, and sometimes to lay at the rivers for some
days, until the ice would run out or the river freeze over. A small
bridge across Dunlap's creek, at Brownsville, broke down with one of the
pike boys and did a great deal of damage. Sometimes a barrel of coffee
would spring a leak and the coffee would be scattered along the road,
and women would gather it up and be glad for such a prize. The writer
has scattered some in his time. Some of the old citizens of Uniontown,
no doubt, well remember the time, when scores of poor slaves were driven
through that place, handcuffed and tied two and two to a rope that was
extended some 40 or 50 feet, one on each side. And thousands of droves
of hogs were driven through to Baltimore, some from Ohio. Sometimes they
would have to lay by two or three days on account of the frozen road,
which cut their feet and lamed them. While the writer was wagoning on
the old pike, the canal was made from Cumberland to Harper's Ferry. The
pike boys were bitterly opposed to railroads and so were the tavern
keepers. The writer heard an old tavern keeper say "he wished the
railroad would sink to the lower regions." That great phenomenon that
occurred the 13th of November, 1833, or, as it is often called, the
Shooting stars. That circumstance caused a great deal of excitement.
Some became very much alarmed, and it was reported that some went crazy,
and thought the world was coming to an end. The writer was at Hopwood
that night with his team and wagon. The phenomenon was also seen in
Ohio. It was reported in Ohio that there was a box of money hid on the
old Gaddis farm, near the pike, about two miles west of Uniontown,
supposed to have been hid there by Gen. Braddock. It was sought for but
never found. The taverns we mostly put up at in Baltimore were the
Maypole, on Paca street, south of Gen. Wayne, and at Thomas Elliott's,
near the Hill market; and where we mostly loaded our goods was at J.
Taylor & Sons and at Chauncey Brook's, on Baltimore and Howard streets.
Our first day's drive out of Baltimore was 19 miles, to Enoch Randall's,
or 20, to John Whalon's. The second day to Frank Wathers--who could
almost outswear the world. And one thing more: Before this writer became
a pike boy he plowed many a day with a wooden mold-board plow, and after
being engaged on the road for about ten years, he left the road and went
to Ohio, and then made a public profession of religion and united with
the Baptist church. In conclusion, will say to make as good a history as
you possibly can, and I hope you shall be well rewarded for your labor,
and above all never forget your Creator, as in Him we live, move and
have our being.

                              Yours respectfully,
                                                  JOHN DEETS.

David Church was an old wagoner, a native of Wheeling, and when the old
pike ceased to ring with the clatter of travel and trade, he purchased a
farm in Wharton township, near Farmington, Fayette county, Pa., took up
his residence thereon, and died a mountain farmer. He was a large, fat
man, of ruddy complexion and reddish hair. The leader in his team was of
a dun color, and as it approached the old taverns and the big
water-troughs, was recognized as the team of David Church by the color
of the leader. Charley Rush often invited Church to take a chair and be
seated when he visited the store at Farmington, but he invariably
declined, remarking that he could rest as well standing as sitting. He
felt like nearly all the old wagoners, that his occupation was gone when
transportation ceased on the old road, and could never fully adapt
himself to the new order of things.

[Illustration: JOHN SNIDER.]

In the year 1842 John Snider hauled a load of butter from Wheeling to
Washington, D. C. The owner of this butter was a man by the name of
Oyster, a butter dealer of Wheeling. He could have shipped his butter
from Cumberland to its destination by rail, as the Baltimore & Ohio road
had just then been finished to Cumberland; but his animosity against
railroads was so deep-seated that he engaged Snider to haul it all the
way through with his big team. On his way to Washington with this load
he struck off from the National Road at Frederick City, Maryland. He
reached that city on Christmas night and "put up" at Miller's tavern.
The guests of that old tavern danced all of that night, and early in the
morning of the day after Christmas, Snider "pulled out" on a strange
road for the city of Washington with his load of butter. He was three
days on a mud road between Frederick and Washington, but, nevertheless,
delivered his butter in "good condition" to the consignee. This butter
was bought up in small quantities in the vicinity of Wheeling for ten
cents per pound, and Snider got two dollars and fifty cents per hundred
pounds for hauling it to Washington.

William Ashton, a well-known old wagoner, was an Englishman by birth. He
was also an old tavern keeper. He was noted for his mental vivacity, and
for his achievements as an athlete. At Petersburg he once bounded over
the top of one of the big road wagons with the aid of a long pole. He
kept a tavern at Funkstown, seventy miles west of Baltimore, and was
largely patronized by wagoners. While keeping tavern he had two teams on
the road in charge of hired drivers. This was as early as 1835. His
drivers were Samuel Kelly and William Jones, and they hauled goods from
Hagerstown, Maryland (then the terminus of the railroad), to Terre
Haute, Indiana, and to Springfield, Illinois, involving a trip of four
months duration, and the compensation was six dollars per hundred
pounds.

John Bradfield was one of the most prominent old wagoners on the road.
He was the general agent of the first transportation company on the
road. He was also a tavern keeper. He kept the brick house west of, and
a short distance from, Petersburg, and owned it. He was a native of
Virginia.

Frank Bradfield, son of John, before mentioned, was also a wagoner.
Fifty years ago, when but a boy, he drove one of his father's teams to
Baltimore, "pulled up" on the wagon yard of the old Maypole tavern, in
that city, attended to his team, remained over night, and the next day
mysteriously disappeared. Search was instituted, but he could not be
found. He had enlisted as a soldier in the regular army. His friends
thought he was dead. He served through the Mexican war, and yet his
relatives knew not of his existence. When that war was over he stepped
one morning from a steamboat to the wharf at Brownsville. Nobody
recognized him. He took a seat in a coach at Brownsville, and in a few
hours thereafter entered his father's house, near Petersburg. He called
for supper and lodging, and the person he addressed was his father, who
did not recognize him, and to whom he did not make himself known. Supper
was announced, and his father showed him to the dining room and
withdrew. His mother, who was attending at the table, immediately after
he was seated, recognized him, and fell fainting in his arms, and there
was joy in that household, although inaugurated by a great shock. Frank
Bradfield subsequently became a clerk in the Adams Express Company, and
entered the Pittsburg office when it was first established in that city,
and remained in its service until his death, a few years ago. He has a
brother at this time in the office of the Adams Express Company at
Pittsburg, where he has been employed for many years, and esteemed as a
faithful and efficient clerk.

William Hall was a fine specimen of the old wagoner in the palmy days
of the road--a regular of regulars, zealous in his calling, and jealous
of his rights. Robert Bell, the quaint old wagoner before referred to,
was his uncle and his friend, who, it is said, rendered him substantial
aid in securing a foothold on the great National highway. There was a
certain kind of _esprit de corps_ among the old regular wagoners, and
William Hall possessed it in a high degree. He was well attired, and
clean in person and conversation. He was born in Adams county,
Pennsylvania, and his first appearance on the road was in the year 1838.
He was a great admirer of Thomas Corwin, and was in Ohio with his team
on the day that old-time statesman and orator was chosen Governor, a
circumstance he frequently referred to in after years with feelings of
pride and pleasure. He married a daughter of Aaron Wyatt, and
granddaughter of Major Paul, old tavern keepers, and this formed a
silken cord that bound him to the destinies of the old pike. In the
declining years of the road he became a stage proprietor, and in
conjunction with Redding Bunting (not a stranger to these pages),
operated a line of coaches between Cumberland and Washington,
Pennsylvania. This line had nothing of the whirl and dash of the older
lines of coaches. When wagons and stages ceased to enliven the road,
William Hall located in Cumberland, and is living there at this time,
one of the leading citizens of that place. Soon after he cast his lot in
Cumberland he was appointed Superintendent of the Maryland Division of
the road by Governor Hicks, and served in that office for a number of
years previous to the late war. He had a brother, Robert, who was also
an old wagoner, and subsequently, and for several years, a postal clerk
on the Baltimore & Ohio railroad between Cumberland and Pittsburg.

Henry Puffenberger, a "regular," given to blustering, but not a vicious
man, and Jacob Breakiron, a "sharpshooter" and a fat man, met one day on
the road and indulged in a wrangle about the right of way. Strings of
fresh broken stone on either side of the road, as was often the case,
left but a narrow passage where the meeting occurred, and this led to
the difficulty. "Old Puff," as he was called, demanded of Breakiron,
with an air of authority, that he should "turn out." Breakiron declined
to obey, and showed a determined spirit of resistance. After an exchange
of angry words Puffenberger inquired of Breakiron his name, and he
answered, "my name is Breakiron." "That," said Puffenberger, "is a hard
name, but you look harder than your name." "I am as hard as my name,"
said Breakiron, "and what is your name?" "Puffenberger," was the reply.
"That," said Breakiron, "is a windy name." "Yes," rejoined Puffenberger,
"but there is thunder with it." After this explosion of wit the
contestants compromised, shook hands, and passed without colliding.
Puffenberger was a Maryland man, became a Confederate soldier, and was
killed in battle. Breakiron was a farmer of Georges township, Fayette
county, Pennsylvania, and died on his farm a number of years ago.

[Illustration: WILLIAM HALL.]

Turner Brown, brother of Henry, famous for the big loads he hauled, was
an old wagoner. After a number of years' experience as a wagoner he
moved to Ohio and settled in Guernsey county, where he became wealthy
and was elevated to the office of Probate Judge. Persons who remember
him say he was "pompous" in manner, but honest in his dealings. He was a
native of Fayette county, Pa., born and reared in the vicinity of
Brownsville, and of the family of Browns prominently identified with the
National Road in its early days. He had a number of sons, three of
whom--Samuel, Turner and Levi--were Union soldiers in the late war.
Another, Thomas, published for a time _The Ohio Farmer_, at Cleveland;
and another, William, took to theology, and is engaged in missionary
work in some remote quarter of the globe.

Joseph Lawson was, like his fellow teamster, John Galwix, considered a
fancy wagoner. He took pride in his calling, and his team consisted of
six stallions, well mated and of gigantic size. The gears he used were
the very best of the John Morrow pattern, and his "outfit" attracted
attention and evoked words of praise from the throngs that lined the
road in that day. There was a regulation tread and an air about the old
wagoner, especially of the regular line, that rose almost, if not
altogether, to the standard of dignity.

Jeff. Manypenny was an old wagoner, and a son of the old tavern keeper
of Uniontown, referred to in a subsequent chapter.

Joseph Arnold is said to have hauled the first "eighty hundred load"
ever hauled on the road, and it gave him great fame. It was in 1837.

Joseph Sopher tried the experiment of using nine horses in his team,
driven three abreast. It did not prove practicable or profitable, and he
soon abandoned it and returned to the ordinary six-horse team. There
were four Sophers on the road and they were brothers, viz: Joseph,
Nimrod, Jack and William, and they were stage drivers as well as
wagoners.

Robert Beggs, an old wagoner, prosecuted Jacob Probasco for perjury. The
prosecution grew out of an affidavit made by Probasco alleging that
Beggs, who was indebted to him, was about to remove his goods from the
State with intent to defraud his creditors. This prosecution gave
Probasco much trouble and involved him in considerable expense, and is
said to have been the cause of his removal from Fayette county,
Pennsylvania.

Thomas Gore was one of the first wagoners on the road, and a regular. He
lived in Hopwood when that village was known as Woodstock. He drove a
"bell team," and owned it. He was well known all along the road, but it
is so long ago that but few of the pike boys of this day remember him.
He gave up wagoning long before business ceased on the road, and settled
in Franklin township, Fayette county, Pennsylvania, where he died thirty
years ago. Robinson Addis, a well known and much esteemed citizen of
Dunbar township, Fayette county, Pennsylvania, married a daughter of
Thomas Gore; and a grandson of the old wagoner, bearing the name Thomas
Gore Addis, is one of the trusted and trustworthy superintendents of the
H. Clay Frick Coke Company, with headquarters at Brownfield Station, on
the Southwest Railway.

John Whetzel, called "Johnny," a regular old wagoner, was small in
stature, quiet in disposition, and of swarthy complexion. He talked but
little, rarely using a word beyond the size of a monosyllable, and was
well known and highly esteemed all along the road. When the career of
the road as a great National highway ended, "Johnny" Whetzel retired to
a farm in Saltlick township, Fayette county, Pennsylvania, where he
still lives, bending under the weight of many years, but enjoying the
confidence and respect of all his neighbors.

[Illustration: JOHN WALLACE.]




CHAPTER XIX.

  _Old Wagoners continued--The Harness they Used--John Morrow a maker of
     Harness--Capt. Elias Gilmore encounters a Man Eater--Perry Gaddis,
     William G. Patterson, Alfred Bailes, the Scarboroughs and
     McLaughlins--Hill, who respected Sunday--James Riley and Oliver
     Pratt, Robert Carr, Robert Allison, David Herr, William Keefer,
     Abram Beagle, Samuel Youman, Robert Cosgrove, James Brownlee, John
     Collier, Darius Grimes, Fielding Montague, James Smith, Elisha
     Maxon, Jacob Marks, Thomas Starr, Thomas Hastings, Henry Foster,
     John Smasher, Maj. Jesse B. Gardner, McWilliams, Pixler, Riley and
     Hankins._


John Morrow, of Petersburg, mentioned herein before as a manufacturer of
the wagoner's whip, was likewise a saddle and harness maker, and had the
reputation of making the best harness on the road. He was a man of thin
visage and energetic habit.

Gears was the name old wagoners applied to harness. The gears used on
the team of the regular wagoner were of immense proportions. The back
bands were fifteen and the hip straps ten inches wide, and heavy black
housing covered the horses' shoulders down to the bottom of the hames.
The traces used were iron chains with short and thick links. It required
a strong man to throw these heavy gears on the back of a big horse.
Heavy and broad as they were, these gears were not out of proportion to
the large fat horses of the old teams, and looked well on their broad
and shining backs. The wagoner's saddle was unique. It was made over an
ordinary wooden model, covered with thick, black leather, and had long
and wide skirts or aprons, cut straight on the edges and ends. Daniel P.
Gibson, the well known capitalist of Uniontown, learned the trade of
saddle and harness making with John Morrow in Petersburg, and worked
many a day on the big gears and odd saddle, above described.

Capt. Elias Gilmore was not strictly an old wagoner, but a pike boy to
all intents and purposes, yet his home was not immediately on the road.
He had a team which he employed for the most part in hauling stones for
repairs on the road. He was a contractor, and an energetic one. He was
an amiable man, in a general way, but given at times to pugilistic
encounters, and it is said that no man along the road could outdo him in
a fight. A stage driver once came upon the road who was called "the man
eater." He drove from Uniontown to Mt. Washington on the Good Intent
line. Gilmore, hearing of this famous "man eater," was desirous of
meeting him, and calling one day at Mt. Washington, inquired where he
was. Upon being introduced, Gilmore said to him: "You are a pretty
stout looking man, but I can lick you," and at it they went, without
further ceremony, and Gilmore did lick him. At another time Gilmore was
in Uniontown with a load of lumber, and stood his team across the
street, which caused John P. Sturgis, who was constable then, to take
him to task for obstructing the street, whereupon Gilmore fell upon
Sturgis and gave him a tremendous beating, for which he was fined by the
burgess. Gilmore was born in Wharton township, Fayette county, Pa., and
owned and lived on a farm near "Sugar Loaf," in the vicinity of
Ohiopyle. His wife was a sister of Boss Rush, "the prince of landlords."
Captain Gilmore moved, with his family, to Illinois thirty years ago,
and subsequently to York county, Nebraska, where he is still living in
comfortable circumstances, a farmer and stock dealer. He long since
abandoned the profitless pastime of sowing wild oats, and is esteemed as
one of the most respectable and influential citizens of Nebraska. John
Rush, a brother of Boss, and brother-in-law of Gilmore, an old wagoner
and tavern keeper, went west with Gilmore, and lives near him now, in
Nebraska.

Perry Gaddis, who died a few years ago at Dunbar, Pennsylvania, was an
old wagoner. His first service on the road as driver was for Isaac
Bailey, who kept a tavern near the old red house east of Brownsville,
subsequently postmaster at Brownsville, and a member of the Fayette
county, Pennsylvania, bar. Gaddis married a daughter of Robert Shaw, an
old tavern keeper, and many years ago steward of the county home near
Uniontown. She was a schoolmate of the author of these pages, as was
also her sister, who became the wife of Robert S. McDowell, another well
known pike boy. William D. Beggs, father-in-law of the late Dr. Smith
Fuller, blessed be his memory, was our faithful old teacher. Mrs.
Gaddis, Perry's widow, is still living at Dunbar.

[C]William G. Patterson, of Jefferson township, Fayette county,
Pennsylvania, an old wagoner, has a record worthy of special mention.
When on the road he was called "Devil Bill," and this name followed him
to his farm, and adhered to him for many years. To see him now at his
ancestral home, bending beneath his four score years and more, gentle in
manner and intelligent and entertaining in conversation, surrounded by
all the needful comforts of this life, one wonders how he ever got the
name of "Devil Bill." His first appearance on the National Road as a
driver was in the year 1820, when he assisted in driving a lot of hogs
for his father to Baltimore. It required almost a month to drive a lot
of hogs from the vicinity of Brownsville to the city of Baltimore. He
made his first trip over the road as a wagoner in 1823, going clear
through to Baltimore. The first team he drove was his father's, but it
was not long until he became the owner of a team himself. He was on the
road many years as a wagoner. The farm on which he now resides descended
from his grandfather to his father, and then to himself. His father died
on this farm on Christmas day of the year 1827. His grandfather came
out from Dauphin county, Pennsylvania, at an early day.

[Footnote C: Died in Iowa in 1892.]

[Illustration: ALFRED BAILES.]

Alfred Bailes, of Dunbar, Pennsylvania, is probably the oldest man
living who drove a team on the National Road. He was first a wagoner,
and subsequently and for many years a stage driver. He was born in
Loudon county, Virginia, and came upon the road about the year 1830, at
the solicitation of John Bradfield, who was also a native of Virginia,
and agent of the first line of wagons on the road. Alfred Bailes was
born in 1804, and although closely approaching his ninetieth year, his
eye is undimmed and his natural vigor unabated. Samuel Luman, of
Cumberland, is two years younger than Bailes, but two years his senior
as a stage driver. Bailes was one of the most commanding figures on the
road, upwards of six feet in height, with broad chest and shoulders, and
long arms. Noted for great strength, he was never quarrelsome. As a
driver he performed his functions faithfully and carefully. He is a most
interesting relic of the road, and his memory is well stored with
interesting reminiscences of its faded glory.

Samuel and William Scarborough were old wagoners. They lived on the old
William Elliott farm, in Jefferson township, Fayette county, Pa., and
were brothers. William Hogg, the pioneer merchant of Brownsville, was
the owner of the William Elliott farm at the time referred to, and the
Scarboroughs paid their rent by hauling a load of merchandise for Mr.
Hogg once a year, from Baltimore to his store in Brownsville.

George McLaughlin, still living near Uniontown, but now, and for a long
time, a sufferer from rheumatism, is an old wagoner. It may be that
exposure, when a wagoner, to the snow storms of the mountains, is the
source of the rheumatism which now afflicts him. His brother, Abraham,
who lives at Mt. Braddock, is also an old wagoner, and, when a boy,
broke stone on the pike at a "levy" a perch.

There was an old wagoner whose name was Hill, and he lived at
Triadelphia, now West Virginia, then "Old Virginia never tire," who
never drove his team on Sunday. He seems not to have lost anything by
resting his team and himself on Sunday, for he made as good time on his
trips as any other wagoner, and in the end became rich.

Michael Teeters, a spluttering old wagoner, was noted for his profanity.
He was possessed with the fatal delusion that hard swearing was evidence
of superior intelligence. He, of course, had some good traits, as the
worst of men have; but when age and infirmity came upon him, he
exchanged the tramp over the hills of the old pike for a "walk over the
hills to the poor house," and died in the county home of Washington
county, Pennsylvania. Had he followed the example of Hill, who rested on
Sunday, it may not be said that he would have grown rich, but it is
pretty certain that the surroundings of his dying hours would have been
different from what they were.

James Riley and Oliver Pratt were among the oldest of the old
wagoners--veterans in every sense. Riley was a large man, with florid
face and very white hair, and was called "Old Whitey." He lived and died
in Hopwood. Pratt was also a large man, and stout, a steady drinker,
with red-rimmed eyes. He was a good driver, and devoted to his calling.
He married a Miss Bird, of the old family of that name, in Henry Clay
township, Fayette county, Pennsylvania, and when flush times ended on
the road, went west and died, far from the scenes of the grand old
highway.

Robert Carr, who died in Uniontown about two years ago, was an old
wagoner. He was on the road as early as 1825. He drove first for
Benjamin Miller, grandfather of Ben, Sam and Jeff Miller, of Uniontown.
He subsequently married a daughter of Abner Springer, of North Union
township, Fayette county, who owned a road team which was placed in
charge of Carr, and he drove it several years. He was also a stage
driver.

Robert Q. Fleming, now residing in Uniontown, is an old wagoner. He
hauled whiskey from the old Overholt distillery, near Mt. Pleasant, to
Baltimore for many years, and loaded back with merchandise to various
points in the west. One of his earliest back loads consisted of oysters
for Pittsburg, _via_ Brownsville. The oyster boxes were piled up to the
canvass covering, and upon reaching Brownsville he was required to drive
down the wharf to the steamboat landing, which was "sidling," and at the
time icy. Some of the top boxes fell out and were broken, whereupon the
bystanders helped themselves to fresh shell oysters. They were not
carried away, but the eager oyster lovers picked them up, cracked open
the shells on the wagon wheels and gulped down the juicy bivalves on the
ground. Fleming was "docked," as they termed the abating of loss, from
the freight charges.

Robert Allison, one of the best known of the old wagoners, was a
fighting man. He did not seem to be quarrelsome, yet was often, as by
some sort of untoward destiny, involved in pugilistic encounters along
the road. In one of these at Fear's tavern, on Keyser's Ridge, he bit
off the nose of a stage driver.

David Harr was a good fiddler, and William Keefer was a good dancer, and
these two old wagoners warmed the bar room of many an old tavern between
Baltimore and Wheeling, in the good old days when every mile of the
National Road bristled with excitement.

Abram Beagle was a widely known old wagoner. He lived with David
Moreland in Uniontown as early as 1820, and probably before that time,
and subsequently became a tavern keeper. The house he kept was twelve
miles east of Wheeling, and he married it. That is to say: The Widow
Rhodes owned the tavern stand, and he married _her_. He kept a good
house, and was largely patronized. Old citizens of Uniontown who
remember Abram Beagle, and there are not many of them living, speak of
him as a good and worthy citizen of the olden time.

[Illustration: GERMAN D. HAIR.]

Samuel Youman, of Washington county, Pa., was an old wagoner, stage
driver and tavern keeper. He drove stage from Hillsboro to Washington,
and subsequently kept tavern in Hillsboro. He had the distinction of
being next to the largest man on the road, "Old Mount" being admittedly
the largest. Youman was a man full of zeal, as to all pursuits and
interests relating to the National Road. He understood the art of
driving horses to perfection, was kindly in disposition, and attracted
attention by reason of his immense size. He had a son, Israel, who was
also a stage driver and a lively fellow. Father and son are presumably
both dead, but the marks they made on the memories of the old pike are
indelible.

Poor old Robert Cosgrove, who once traversed the road with all the pride
and pomp of a "regular," finally succumbed to the adverse tides of life
and time, and to avoid "the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,"
took refuge in the "county home," where he remains, indulging the
memories of better days and awaiting the summons to rejoin the
companionship of old wagoners who have passed over the dark river.

James Brownlee was one of the old wagoners who suffered the experience
of a genuine "upset." It occurred near Hagen's tavern, east of
Cumberland. He had a high load, and encountered a big snow drift which
he thought he could overcome by pulling out and around, but he failed,
and his wagon capsized. His main loss was in time, which was "made up"
by the good cheer at Hagen's old tavern.

John Collier, father of Daniel Collier, was a wagoner on the road when
it was first opened up for travel. He had been a wagoner on the Braddock
road for years before the National Road was made. He lived in Addison,
Somerset county, Pa., as early as 1795, and was one of the foremost
wagoners of his day. He was the grandfather of Mrs. Amos S. Bowlby, of
Fayette street, Uniontown.

Darius Grimes was among the first crop of wagoners, and gave up the whip
and line long before the termination of the road's prosperous era. When
the writer first knew him he was living a retired life on the roadside
at the foot of Graham's lane, three miles west of Uniontown. He was one
of the earliest tavern keepers on the road, beside being a wagoner. He
kept the old Abel Colley house, west of and near Searight's, before Abel
Colley owned that property, and that was a long time ago. William
Johnson, farmer and dealer in fruits and vegetables, well known to the
people of Uniontown, married a daughter of Darius Grimes.

Fielding Montague, an old wagoner and stage driver, is still living on
the road. His residence is in Henry Clay township, Fayette county,
Pennsylvania, where his sleep is undisturbed by the clatter which in
other years was heard at all hours of the night as well as day. Montague
was not a driver on the old stage lines, but after they were withdrawn
from the road, drove the mail hack for a considerable length of time
between Uniontown and Somerfield. He was, however, a regular wagoner in
the palmy days of the road.

[D]James Smith, now living in Wharton township, Fayette county,
Pennsylvania, well and favorably known, is an old wagoner. He enjoyed
the grand march along the old road, and was deeply grieved when
stillness took the place of the bustling activity that marked its palmy
days. The old veteran is bending to the storms of time, but glows with
enthusiasm when recounting the scenes he witnessed on the old highway
"in the days of yore."

[Footnote D: Deceased.]

Elijah Maxon was an old wagoner. His home was near the Charlestown
school house, in Luzerne township, Fayette county, Pennsylvania. He
owned the team he drove, and made money on the road. He moved west many
years ago, and in all probability has gone to that bourne whence no
traveler returns.

Jacob Marks was an old wagoner, and subsequently, like so many of his
fellows, became a tavern keeper. He first kept the stone house at
Malden, between Brownsville and Centreville, and afterward the old
Workman House at Brownsville. The glory of the old road had departed
before he took charge of the Workman House, and business was dull; but
the road was flush when he entertained the public at Malden, and he did
a thriving business there.

Thomas Starr was an old wagoner, and drove for John Riley, an old tavern
keeper of Bridgeport, Fayette county, Pa. The old citizens of Bridgeport
and Brownsville will remember Starr and Riley, as they were conspicuous
pike boys in their day.

Thomas Hastings was an old wagoner and tavern keeper. He kept the house
well known and well patronized in his day about four miles east of
Washington.

Henry Foster, late of North Union township, Fayette county, Pa., a well
known farmer in his day, was an old wagoner. He drove a six-horse team
to Baltimore in 1837, when but nineteen years old. His first load was
bacon, consigned to a Baltimore house by Edward Gavin, of Uniontown. His
return load was merchandise, consigned to William Bryson, a merchant of
that day at Uniontown.

David Blakely was an old wagoner and became a tavern keeper. He kept a
tavern in Washington in 1838, and subsequently in Wheeling. He was a
prominent man, well known all along the road. He was also an agent of
one of the transportation lines, and a very competent man for that
business.

John Smasher, an old wagoner, was noted as a nimble and expert dancer,
and had many opportunities to display his talent in this line on the old
road. It frequently happens that a good dancer makes a ready "smasher."

Major Jesse B. Gardner, of Uniontown, ex-jury commissioner and
ex-soldier of two wars, drove a team several trips on the old road for
Archibald Skiles, who kept a tavern at Monroe, and was a thorough pike
boy.

Huston McWilliams, Joseph Pixler and John Riley were old wagoners who
retired to farms in German township when the steam railway usurped the
functions of the old pike.

William Hankins, a well known farmer of North Union township, still
living, is an old wagoner, and made many a dollar on the road. He is
a son of James Hankins, who owned the farm at Frost's Station, and was
reputed to have a barrel of money. One Hook, P. U., merchant and
auctioneer of Uniontown, and member of the Legislature, was accustomed
to speak of ready cash as "Hankins' Castings," in allusion to the
Hankins barrel. He had a small store in an old frame house near the
store room and residence of the late Col. Ewing Brownfield, on which he
nailed a rough board for a sign, bearing the legend: "Hook and Hankins
versus Boyle and Rankin." Boyle and Rankin kept a rival store further up
town. Hook also frequently advertised his business under the firm name
of "Hook and Wife." He was well known and is well remembered by the old
citizens of Uniontown.

James Ambrose was a regular. He drove from Baltimore to Wheeling. He was
a strong driver, and well known on the road. He married the youngest
daughter of Robert Shaw, the old tavern keeper near Braddock's Grave.
After business ceased on the road, he engaged in mining coal in the
Connellsville coke district, and died near Vanderbilt, in January, 1892.
His wife survives him.

Isaac Hurst was a sharpshooter, and appeared on the road near the close
of its prosperous era. He hauled flour from his father's mill on
George's Creek, Fayette county, Pennsylvania, to Cumberland, and "loaded
back" with merchandise to Brownsville. His experience on the road as a
wagoner was confined between the points named. He subsequently became
first, Treasurer, and afterward, Commissioner of Fayette county,
Pennsylvania. He is still living in Uniontown, pursuing the calling of a
contractor, and taking an active interest in public affairs.




CHAPTER XX.

  _Old Wagoners continued--An Exciting Incident of the Political
     Campaign of 1840--All about a Petticoat--Neri Smith, Isaac Stuck,
     John Short, William Orr, Ashael Willison--A Wagoner
     Postmaster--Robert Douglas--A Trip to Tennessee--Abram Brown,
     William Long, Samuel Weaver--A Quartet of Bell Teams--A Trio of
     Swearing Men--A Peculiar Savings Bank--William C. McKean and a Long
     List of other Old Wagoners--Graphic Description of Life on the Road
     by Jesse J. Peirsol, an Old Wagoner--Origin of the Toby Cigar--The
     Rubber--The Windup and Last Lay of the Old Wagoners._


The political campaign of 1840, as is well known, was one of the most
spirited and exciting contests ever witnessed in the United States. It
was a campaign made memorable by log cabins, hard cider, coon skins and
glee clubs. William Henry Harrison, the hero of Tippecanoe, and
grandfather of the late chief executive, Benjamin Harrison, was the Whig
candidate for President, and John Tyler, of Virginia, was his running
mate, and the whole country resounded with shouts for "Tippecanoe and
Tyler too." Martin Van Buren was the Democratic candidate for President,
and his associate on the ticket was Col. Richard M. Johnston, of
Kentucky. Harrison and Tyler were triumphantly elected. One day during
this exciting campaign Neri Smith, an old wagoner, drove his big
six-horse team through Uniontown, exhibiting from the front of his wagon
a petticoat, in allusion to a partisan and groundless charge of
cowardice made against General Harrison, the Whig candidate. The coming
of the wagon with the petticoat was made known to the Whigs of Uniontown
before it reached the place, and a delegation met Smith a short distance
east of town and requested him to take down the offensive symbol, but he
stubbornly refused. Upon reaching Uniontown an attempt was made by some
of the muscular Whigs, led by John Harvey, to "tear down the dirty rag,"
but an equal number of muscular Democrats rallied to the support of the
old wagoner, and the attempt failed. The affair caused great excitement
in Uniontown, leading to violence and almost to the shedding of blood.

Isaac Stuck, now residing in Perryopolis, Fayette county, Pennsylvania,
in service on the extensive Fuller estate, near that place, was an old
wagoner, and is not forgotten and never will be forgotten by the old
pike boys. He drove a fine "bell team," which was notice to all the
world that he was on the road in earnest and to stay. The team belonged
to William Stone, the well remembered old farmer of Menallen, and tanner
of Uniontown.

[Illustration: ASHAEL WILLISON.]

John Short, an old wagoner, retired from the road at an early day and
took up his abode in Franklin township, Fayette county, Pennsylvania.
Before going on the road he learned the trade of a cooper, and upon
leaving it resumed work at his trade. He was a good mechanic, and made
most of the barrels used at Cook's and Sharples' mills, on Redstone
creek, for many years. His team on the road was a good one, and he owned
it. He met with an accident while working at his trade by cutting his
knee with an adze, which crippled him for life. He died in Franklin
township about eight years ago, aged nearly eighty. The old citizens of
Franklin township all knew and respected him.

William Orr, a well known old wagoner, died of cholera at Keyser's Ridge
in 1853. He left three sons. One of them died a soldier of the Northern
army in the late war, leaving a widow surviving him, now residing in
Cumberland and drawing a pension. Another son of the old wagoner is a
watchman at the rolling mill in Cumberland, and the third is on the
police force of that city.

Ashael Willison, another of the old wagoners, is still living in
Cumberland, and one of the most prominent citizens of that place. He was
postmaster at Cumberland during the first administration of President
Cleveland. From the saddle horse of a six-horse team on the old pike to
the control of a city postoffice is distinctively an American idea, and a
good one. The old wagoner made a capital postmaster. Mr. Willison is now
deputy collector of Internal Revenue for the State of Maryland.

Robert Douglas, father of the well known real estate dealer of
Uniontown, was an old wagoner. He owned his team and wagon, and hauled
between Baltimore and Wheeling at an early day. He resided near West
Newton, Westmoreland county, Pennsylvania, and died there in 1861. He
was esteemed as an honest man, and was one of the few pike boys who
never took a drink of liquor.

In the year 1839 John Snider, Isaac Browning and Black Westley, made a
trip with their teams from Baltimore to Jonesboro, Tennessee, a distance
of six hundred miles. They were loaded with goods for Jonesboro
merchants, and were paid six dollars a hundred for hauling them. On
their return they drove with empty wagons to Lynchburg, Virginia, a
distance of two hundred miles, where they loaded up with pig lead, and
got two dollars a hundred for hauling it to Baltimore.

Abram Brown, the wealthy land owner of the vicinity of Uniontown, was an
old wagoner, a "sharpshooter," and always lucky in avoiding losses while
pushing over the mountains. While on the road as a wagoner he formed the
acquaintance of the girl who subsequently became his wife. She was
Hannah, now deceased, the eldest daughter of Abel Colley, who kept the
old tavern a short distance west of Searights. His wife was a good
woman, and her seemingly premature death was much lamented by a wide
circle of friends.

William Long, an old wagoner, after quitting the road, went to Beaver
county, Pennsylvania, and died there; and Samuel Weaver, a well
remembered old wagoner, died about seven years ago in New Cumberland,
West Virginia.

John Galwix, Black Wesley, Wilse Clement and James Pelter used bells on
their teams. Galwix was called a "crack" wagoner, "swell," as it would
be termed at this day.

Stephen Golden, an old wagoner, drove a team for John Gribble, who for
many years kept the red tavern two miles east of Brownsville.

John Strong, one of the earliest regular wagoners, is still living in
Cumberland, and has been Coroner at that place for many years.

John Kelso, a steady old regular, well remembered and well liked, died
at Cumberland about two years ago.

Robert Nelson was run over by his wagon many years ago, and died from
injuries inflicted by the accident.

Col. James Gardner was an old wagoner and an old soldier. He was a
native of Winchester, Virginia, but spent the greater portion of his
life in Uniontown.

John Phillips, of Washington county, Pennsylvania, an old wagoner, was
noted for using the heaviest gears on the road. When in need of new ones
he ordered them an inch wider than the widest in use. The gear pole boys
at the old taverns groaned under the weight of Phillips' gears.

William C. McKean, nine years a deputy Sheriff of Fayette county,
Pennsylvania, was in early life a regular wagoner of the road. He was a
native of German township, Fayette county, Pennsylvania, and died in the
Sheriff's house, at Uniontown, in 1859. He was noted for his energy and
habit of pushing things. The prominent young attorney of Uniontown of
the same name is a nephew of the old wagoner.

Peter Skiles, an old wagoner of the vicinity of Uniontown, died in
Cumberland of typhoid fever, while at that place with his team and
wagon.

Christian Herr, an old wagoner, was a very profane man, going to show
that there is nothing in a name. He, Wilse Clement and Michael Teeters
were the hardest swearers on the road.

Wyney Hunter, still living, an octogenarian, and rich, was an old
wagoner. His residence is on the roadside five miles east of Hagerstown,
Maryland.

Charles Allum and James Brownlee drove for Leonard Vail, an old
pork-packer of the vicinity of Prosperity, Washington county,
Pennsylvania. Lott Lantz, of Willow Tree, Greene county, Pennsylvania,
had a pork-packing establishment in the olden time, and sent his produce
over the road to Baltimore by the regular broad wheeled wagons in charge
of hired drivers.

Isaac Browning, an old wagoner, at one time owned the "Browning farm,"
near Uniontown, whence its name is derived. This farm now belongs to
Robert Hogsett.

John Wright, an old wagoner, is still living in Salisbury, Somerset
county, Pennsylvania, and has passed the ninetieth mile-post of his age.

[Illustration: JACOB NEWCOMER.]

Capt. James Gilmore was a sharpshooter. He owned a little farm in
Menallen township, Fayette county, Pennsylvania, which he sold long ago
and went West.

Noble McCormick, a regular old wagoner, was, while on the road, the
owner of the Semans farm, near Uniontown. He sold his farm to Thomas
Semans and went West. He is remembered as an habitual wearer of the
broad-rimmed, yellow, long-napped regulation hat.

John Christy, an old wagoner, was eccentric as to his apparel, and
careful of his money. He wore a full suit of buckskin, and improvised a
savings bank by boring holes in blocks in which he placed his money, and
secured it by plugging up the holes.

Charles Guttery, who recently died at an advanced age in Beallsville,
Washington county, Pennsylvania, was one of the best known and most
esteemed old wagoners of the road. After many years experience as a
wagoner, he devoted the remainder of his life to tavern keeping.

John Yardley, as the saying goes, was a natural born wagoner. He loved
the occupation, and was faithful in it, for many years. He was born in
Maryland, but lived a long time at Searights, where he died. He was the
father of William and Gus Yardley, of Uniontown.

David Newcomer, a farmer of German township, Fayette county,
Pennsylvania, who served a term as County Commissioner, belongs to the
long list of wagoners. His father, Jacob Newcomer, and Jacob F.
Longanecker went to Loudon, Franklin county, Pennsylvania, in the year
1849, and each bought a new wagon and a new whip at that place. Jacob
Newcomer soon thereafter became afflicted with rheumatism, and turned
over his team and wagon to his son David, who traversed the road until
the close of its busy era. Jacob Newcomer died in 1866, on the farm now
owned and occupied by his son David.

John Ferren drove a six-horse team on the road many years for William
Searight, and is remembered as a careful and discreet driver and an
honest and industrious man. At the close of active business on the road,
and while yet under the influence of its ancient grandeur, he married a
daughter of "Wagoner Billy Shaw," and with his newly-wedded wife went to
Iowa to work out his destiny, where he has achieved success as a farmer.

James E. Kline, a driver for Jacob A. Hoover, was a soldier in the late
war between the States, and died in German township, Fayette county,
Pennsylvania, after the conflict ended.

Robert Hogsett, the millionaire farmer, stock dealer, manufacturer, and
coke operator of Fayette county, Pennsylvania, was a sharpshooter, and
hauled many a load of goods from Cumberland to Brownsville at
remunerative rates per hundred. His "down loads" consisted for the most
part of corn of his own raising, which he sold out through the mountains
at good prices.

Hiram Hackney, for many years a prosperous farmer of Menallen township,
Fayette county, Pennsylvania, now a retired resident of Uniontown, and a
director in the First National Bank of that place, was a sharpshooter
and a drover.

Samuel Flowers was one of the earliest wagoners on the road, and of the
regular order. He was a tall man, of quiet demeanor. His home was on Egg
Nog Hill, where he lived until called away by the last summons.

John Means, an old wagoner, was killed by an accident on the road near
Wheeling.

John Munce, of Washington, Pennsylvania, who became rich through the oil
development in the vicinity of that place, is an old wagoner. He is
still living.

John Olwine was an old wagoner, and by his union with the Widow Metzgar
became a tavern keeper. He died at Chalk Hill a few years ago.

John Neff, an old wagoner, subsequently became a member of the Maryland
Legislature, and played the role of statesmanship as gracefully as he
drove a six-horse team on the old pike.

Abner and David Peirt, brothers, were natives of Lancaster county,
Pennsylvania--steady-going straightforward, honest "Pennsylvania Dutch,"
and wagoners on the road with teams of the genuine Conestoga strain.

John McIlree, called "Broadhead," was an old wagoner and a native of
Adams county, Pennsylvania; and James Bell, William and Robert Hall were
natives also of Adams county.

Arthur Wallace, an old wagoner devoted to the road, and esteemed for
many good qualities of head and heart, subsequently became a tavern
keeper. He was the father-in-law of Peter Frasher, the adamantine
Democrat of 1844, and up to the date of his death, in 1893. Charles
Wallace, a brother of Arthur, and an old wagoner, was killed by an
accident on Laurel Hill many years ago.

William Reynolds, mentioned under the head of old tavern keepers, was
likewise an old wagoner. He was on the road with a team as early as
1832. His son, John, present postmaster at Confluence, Somerset county,
Pennsylvania, was also a wagoner.

Samuel Trauger, an old wagoner, fell from his lazy board while
descending Laurel Hill, and was killed, the hind wheel of his wagon
running over him.

John Curtis, who drove for William King, was accounted one of the best
drivers on the road. His companions called him a "strong driver,"
meaning that he was skillful and careful. He followed the tide of
emigration, and became a stage driver west of the Ohio river.

James and Benjamin Paul, sons of Major William Paul, were old wagoners.

Joseph Doak, of Washington county, Pennsylvania, was an old wagoner,
subsequently a tavern keeper, and later a superintendent of the road.

[Illustration: JOHN FERREN.]

Martin Horn, a native of Washington county, Pennsylvania, was known as
the "swift wagoner." He made the trip from Cumberland to Wheeling with
his six-horse team and a big load, in five days.

The following old wagoners were residents, when at home, and citizens of
Fayette county, Pennsylvania: Harvey Grove, Adam Yeast, Solomon Bird,
Louis Langley, James Paul, Joseph Wells, Isaiah Fouch, Ellis Campbell,
William Sullivan, George Miller, William Bird, Barney Neiman, Jesse
Hardin, John Hardin, James Marshall, Samuel Sidebottom, John Rutledge,
Robert Hogsett, Samuel Milligan, Thomas Cook, Benjamin Paul, Jeff Nixon,
George Miller, Moses Richer, John Rankin, Peter Fowler, William Ball,
James Henshaw, William McShane, Henry Frasher, Peter Frasher, Jacob
Wolf, West Jones, Daniel Turney, Eli Marlow, William Turney, William
Cooper, Dawson Marlow, Robert Henderson, John Ferren, Robinson Murphy,
Parker McDonald, William Betts, Rezin Lynch, Joseph Bixler, Moses
Husted, William Pastoris, John McClure, Thomas Cochran, William Peirsol,
Robert Lynch, Morgan Campbell, Martin Leighty, John Stentz, Philip D.
Stentz, William Bosley, Charles McLaughlin, J. Monroe Bute, John Canon,
Levi Springer, George Dearth, John McCurdy, Calvin Springer, Zachariah
Ball, Michael Cochran, Caleb Hibbs, Jacob Newcomer, John Rinehart,
Benjamin Goodwin, Harvey Sutton, Clark Hutchinson, James Ebbert, Mifflin
Jeffries, Jacob Vance, William Ullery, Abram Hall, George Tedrick,
Alexander Osborn, James Abel, Harper Walker, Jerry Fouch, Elias Freeman,
George Wilhelm, father of Sheriff Wilhelm, of Uniontown, Caleb Langly,
Jacob Wagoner, Oliver Tate, Jacob Strickler, George Shaffer, John
Newcomer, Jesse J. Peirsol, James Shaffer, Samuel Harris, Caleb Antrim,
William Cooper, Andrew Prentice, Ira Strong, William Gray, William
Kennedy, Samuel Hatfield, Bernard Dannels, Stewart Henderson, David
Dunbar, George Grace, Dicky Richardson, Reuben Woodward, John King, John
Williams, George McLaughlin, Darlington Jeffries, John Nelson, John
Moore, Bazil Sheets, Isaac Young, Jerry Strawn, Samuel Renshaw, Reuben
Parshall, Hiram Hackney, James Martin.

The following were of Washington county, Pennsylvania, and there were
many others from that county, as well as from Fayette and the other
counties mentioned, whose names, very much to the writer's regret, are
unascertainable: Eberon Hurton, James Bradley, Jerome Heck, James
Dennison, James Bard, Thomas Bailes, Charles Thurston, William Kirkman,
Otho Hartzell, Seldon King, William King, Zeph Riggle, John Guttery,
Samuel Charlton, George Hallam, Lewis Hallam, David Hill, Charles
Reddick, John Reddick, Joseph Arnold, Moses Kline, James Brownlee,
Elisha Brownlee, Charles Allen, Philip Slipe, John Valentine, Daniel
Valentine, John Quinter, Robert Magee, William Robinson, Arthur
Robinson, John Cook, William Darlington, Griffith Darlington, Joseph
Whisson, David Blakely, Samuel Boyd, Joseph King, Joseph Sopher, Nimrod
Sopher, Jack Sopher, Peter Shires, John Smith, James Smith, Thomas
Flack, James Blakely, William Darr, Robert Beggs, Josiah Brown, called
"Squire" Brown, James Arthur, George Munce, Joseph Lawson, Robert
Judson, John A. Smith, Elisha Ely, Charles Bower, William Dennison, John
Phillips, Joseph Doak, Moses Little, Samuel Guttery, William Shouse,
William Jones, Robert Sprowl, William Hastings, James Thompson, Robert
Doak, James Doak, Charles Allen, John Hastings (called Doc).

The following were of Allegheny county, Maryland: Isaac Browning, James
Browning, Michael Humbert, George McGruder, Peter Hager, Nathan Tracy,
Thomas Plumer, Richard Gray (colored), Ben Carter, James McCartney,
Joseph Brooks, John Carlisle, Joseph Turner, William Yeast, John Curtis,
Louis Smith, John Smith, Fred Shipley, Alex. Greer, John Keener, David
Swaggart, George Lehman, Andrew Lehman, William McClintock, Jacob
Albright, Thomas Ashbel, Charles McAleer, Caleb Madden, William Lowry,
Augustus Butler, John Sheeres, Edward Finch, James Clary, Daniel Barcus,
Ashael Willison, Hanson Willison, Joseph Strong, Thomas Plumer, Josiah
Porter, John Kelso, John Magraw, Ira Ryan, John Ryan, Moses McKenzie,
Moses Porter, Henry Porter, John Porter, George Huff, Lewis Lachbaus,
Neil Connor, John Long, George Long, Upton Long, William Dixon, Hanson
Clary, James Porter, Josiah McKenzie.

The following were of Washington county, Maryland: Abram Herr, Fred
Herr, David Herr, John Coffman, Samuel Kelly, William Jones, Joseph
Watt, John Brentlinger, James Ambrose, James Dowler, William Ford,
Robert Fowler, Peter Hawes, Samuel Emert, Michael Welty, John Duvall,
Andrew Arnett, John Reinhart, Hiram Sutton, John Thomas, William Thomas,
Barney Hitchin, Emanuel McGruder, William Orr, Emanuel Griffith, Michael
Miller, John Makel, John Neibert, Samuel Brewer, Henry Stickle, Ezra
Young, Joshua Johnson, Samuel Boyd, Joseph Myers, William Keefer, Peter
Urtz, Jonas Speelman, Thomas Flack, David Connor, Eli Smith, John
Galwix, Henry Urtz, Henry Puffenberger. John Snider, was born in
Washington county, Maryland.

The following were of Somerset county, Pennsylvania: Michael Deets,
Samuel Wable, Clem Engle, Samuel Thompson, John Livengood, Isaac Light,
John Sloan, Joseph Light, Abram Hileman, Joseph Hileman, William
Lenhart, Daniel Augustine, Andrew Hebner, James Klink, Andrew Bates,
Robert Duncan, Robert Allison, John Dunbar, Alex. Dunbar, Joseph Skelly,
James Irvin, John Fleck, William Moonshire, Thomas Collier, Frank
Bradfield, Samuel Shoaf, John Bradfield, Eli Marble, Henry Renger,
Michael Longstaff, John Mitchell, William McClintock, still living at
Salisbury, nearly ninety years old.

[Illustration: MORRIS MAULER.]

The following were from the State of Ohio: James Gregory, William
Hoover, David Hoover, Christian Hoover, Gov. Lucas, William Morely,
Philip Slife, Samuel Breakbill, John Carroll, William Lefevre, John
Lefevre, Alby Hall, Solomon Mercer, Jacob Breakbill, Joseph McNutt, John
Scroggins, William Archie, Elias Petticord, Harvey Hamilton, Pryn
Taylor, Alex. McGregor, Westley McBride, William George, Michael Neal,
Tim Taylor, Joseph Vaughn, William Whittle, Daniel Kildo, Marion
Gordon, Martin Kildo, George Clum, Oliver Mahon, William Chaney, Abner
Bailey, Matthias Meek, John A. Smith, George Zane, Samuel Paxon,
Benjamin McNutt, Knox Keyser, B. F. Dillon, Valentine Mann, Jacob Mann,
Benjamin Corts, John Whittle, John Johnson (Old Sandy), William
McDonald, John Moss, William Tracy, Joseph Watson, George Schaffer,
William Reynolds, not the old tavern keeper.

Ohio county, Virginia, contributed the following names to the list of
old wagoners: Wash. and Hiram Bennett, John Frasher, John Moss, John
Weyman, Joseph Watson, Michael Detuck, James Johnson, David Church,
William Brooks, Robert Boyce, Allen Davis, Thomas McDonald, James Jones,
Charles Prettyman, John Christy, John Curtis, William, Adam, and David
Barnhart, George Weddel, and William Tracy.

Greene county, Pennsylvania, contributed the following well remembered
veterans: Christian and Washington Adams, John Snyder (not the old
regular), Philip Snyder, George Miller, Samuel Milligan, Caldwell
Holsworth, Joseph Milligan, Joseph Craft, Jack Dunaway, Otho W. Core,
Thomas Chambers, Samuel Minor, Jacob Hart.

Frederic county, Maryland, contributed the following: John Crampton,
Joseph Crampton, Samuel Brewer, Ross Fink, Grafton Shawn, Henry Smith,
Jacob Wagoner, John Fink, John Miller, William Miller, and Henry
McGruder.

Jacob and James Tamon were of Baltimore.

James Walker, Daniel Keiser, John Keiser, and Sharp Walker were of
Franklin county, Pennsylvania.

The home of the regular wagoner was on the road, and a good home it was,
in so far as mere subsistence and stimulus to the senses were concerned,
and it is his nativity, that the author has endeavored to note. Regulars
and sharpshooters are listed herein indiscriminately, but a majority of
the names given as of Fayette county, Pennsylvania, are those of
sharpshooters. The residences and homes of the following old wagoners
could not be accurately ascertained, but they are familiar names, all
well remembered by old inhabitants of the roadside, viz: William Kieger
(a lively fellow, and a "regular"), James Dunbar, William Keefer, Rafe
Rutlege, Samuel Jackson, Benjamin Hunter, David Greenland, John
Strauser, Jacob Cox, Jonathan Whitton, Gus Mitchell, Samuel Dowly, James
Patton, Joseph Freeman, James Hall, William Purcell, Samuel Rogers, John
Nye, Israel Young, James Davis, Jacob Beem, Isaac Young, Martin Irwin,
James Parsons, James Kennedy, Isaac Shaffer, John Lynch, Michael
Longstaff, George Nouse, Peter Penner, James Shaffer, John McClure, John
Cox, William Cox, Joseph Cheney, Frank Mowdy, Caldwell Shobworth, James
Jolly, Andrew Sheverner, Jacob and James Layman, John Crampton, Henry
Smith, William Miller, John Miller, Henry McGruder, Elias McGruder,
Michael Miller, John Seibert, Henry Stickle, Ezra Young, Jonas Speelman,
David Connor, Eli Smith, Jacob Everson, Nathaniel Everson. Joseph Shaw,
James Irvin, John Chain, William Wiglington, Doug. Shearl, Marion
Ritchie, John Vandyke, John Alphen, Daniel Carlisle, George Burke,
Thomas Ogden, Michael Abbott, Charles Genewine, Herman Rolf, Isaac
Manning.

The following letters from Jesse J. Peirsol, now a prosperous farmer of
Franklin township, Fayette county, Pennsylvania, of vigorous health and
unimpaired memory, furnish a graphic description of life on the road in
its palmy days:

                                                  December 3, 1892.
MR. T. B. SEARIGHT:

_Dear Sir_: I have stayed over night with William Sheets, on Nigger
mountain, when there would be thirty six-horse teams on the wagon yard,
one hundred Kentucky mules in an adjacent lot, one thousand hogs in
other enclosures, and as many fat cattle from Illinois in adjoining
fields. The music made by this large number of hogs, in eating corn on a
frosty night, I will never forget. After supper and attention to the
teams, the wagoners would gather in the bar room and listen to music on
the violin, furnished by one of their fellows, have a "Virginia
hoe-down," sing songs, tell anecdotes, and hear the experience of
drivers and drovers from all points on the road, and when it was all
over, unroll their beds, lay them down on the floor before the bar room
fire, side by side, and sleep, with their feet near the fire, as soundly
as under the paternal roof. Coming out from Cumberland in the winter of
1851 or 1852, we stopped one night with Hiram Sutton, at Sand Springs,
near Frostburg. The night was hazy, but not cold. We sat on our buckets,
turned bottom up, and listened to a hundred horses grinding corn. One of
our number got up in the night and complained that snow was falling on
his face. This aroused us all, and we got up, went to the door and
witnessed the most blinding snow storm I ever saw. Some of the horses
broke loose from the tongue, and we had difficulty in finding them. We
stayed up till morning, when the snow had risen to the hubs of the front
wheels. We hitched eight or ten horses to a wagon, pulled out to
Coonrod's tavern, one mile west, and returned to Sutton's for another
wagon, and in this way all reached Coonrod's. The next morning we pulled
out again, and on little Savage mountain found the snow deeper than
ever, and a gang of men engaged in shoveling it from the road. I got
stuck and had to be shoveled out. We reached Tom Johnson's that night,
making three miles in two days. The next day John Ullery, one of our
number upset at Peter Yeast's, and a barrel of Venetian Red rolled out
from his wagon, which painted the snow red for many miles, east and
west. We stayed with Yeast the third night after the storm. In the
winter of 1848 a gang of us went down, loaded with tobacco, bacon, lard,
cheese, flour, corn, oats and other products. One of our number was an
Ohio man, named McBride. His team consisted of seven horses, the seventh
being the leader. His load consisted of nine hogsheads of tobacco, five
standing upright in the bed of his wagon, and four resting crosswise on
top of the five. The hogsheads were each about four feet high and three
and a half feet in diameter at the bulge, and weighing from nine to
eleven hundred pounds each. This made a "top-heavy load," and on the
hill west of Somerfield, and near Tom Brown's tavern, the road icy,
McBride's load tumbled over, the tobacco in the ditches, and the horses
piled up in all shapes. The work of restoring the wreck was tedious, and
before we got through with it we had the aid of thirty or forty wagoners
not of our company. Of course the occasion brought to the ground a
supply of the pure old whisky of that day, which was used in moderation
and produced no bad effects. After we had righted up our unfortunate
fellow wagoner, we pushed on and rested over night at Dan Augustine's,
east of Petersburg.

                                        Yours truly,
                                        JESSE J. PEIRSOL.


ANOTHER LETTER FROM THE SAME PERSON ON THE SAME SUBJECT.

                                                  February 2, 1893.

In September, 1844 or 5, my father came home from Uniontown late at
night, and woke me up to tell me that there had been a big break in the
Pennsylvania Canal, and that all western freights were coming out over
the National Road in wagons. The stage coaches brought out posters
soliciting teams. By sunrise next morning, I was in Brownsville with my
team, and loaded up at Cass's warehouse with tobacco, bacon, and wool,
and whipped off for Cumberland. I drove to Hopwood the first day and
stayed over night with John Wallace. That night Thomas Snyder, a
Virginia wagoner, came into Hopwood with a load of flour from a back
country mill. When we got beyond Laurel Hill, Snyder retailed his flour
by the barrel to the tavern keepers, and was all sold out when we
reached Coonrod's tavern, on Big Savage. I was a mere boy, and Snyder
was especially kind and attentive to me. After we pulled on to Coonrod's
yard Snyder told me to unhitch and feed, but leave the harness on. At
midnight we rose, hitched up, Snyder lending me two horses, making me a
team of eight, pulled out, and reached Cumberland that night. On leaving
Coonrod's the night was dark, and I shall never forget the sounds of
crunching stones under the wheels of my wagon, and the streaks of fire
rolling out from the horses' feet. In Cumberland, we found the
commission houses, and the cars on sidings filled with goods, and men
cursing loudly because the latter were not unloaded. Large boxes of
valuable goods were likewise on the platform of the station, protected
by armed guards. After unloading my down load I re-loaded at McKaig &
Maguire's commission house for Brownsville, at one dollar and
twenty-five cents a hundred. We reached Brownsville without incident or
accident, made a little money, and loaded back again for Cumberland. On
my return I found plenty of goods for shipment, and loaded up at
Tuttle's house for Wheeling, at two dollars and twenty-five cents a
hundred. In coming back, it looked as if the whole earth was on the
road; wagons, stages, horses, cattle, hogs, sheep, and turkeys without
number. Teams of every description appeared in view, from the massive
outfit of Governor Lucas down to the old bates hitched to a chicken
coop. The commission merchants, seeing the multitude of wagons, sought
to reduce prices, whereupon the old wagoners called a meeting and made a
vigorous kick against the proposed reduction. It was the first strike I
ever heard of. Nothing worried a sharpshooter more than lying at expense
in Cumberland waiting for a load. Two of the "sharps," unwilling to
endure the delay caused by the strike, drove their four-horse rigs to a
warehouse to load at the reduction. This excited the "regulars," and
they massed with horns, tin buckets, oyster-cans and the like, and made
a descent upon the "sharps," pelting and guying them unmercifully. An
old wagoner named Butler commanded the striking regulars with a pine
sword, and marched them back and forth through the streets. Finally the
police quelled the disturbance, and the "sharps" loaded up and drove out
sixteen miles, to find their harness cut and their axles sawed off in
the morning. In this dilemma an old regular, going down empty for a
load, took the contract of the "sharps," and made them promise to never
return on the road, a promise they faithfully kept.

                                                  Yours truly,
                                                      JESSE J. PEIRSOL.

Many old wagoners wore a curious garment called a hunting shirt. It was
of woolen stuff, after the style of "blue jeans," with a large cape
trimmed with red. It was called a hunting shirt because first used by
hunters in the mountains.

The origin of Pennsylvania tobies is worth recording, and pertinent to
the history of the old wagoners. The author is indebted to J. V.
Thompson, esq., president of the First National bank of Uniontown, for
the following clipping from a Philadelphia paper concerning the "toby:"
"It appears that in the old days the drivers of the Conestoga wagons, so
common years ago on our National Road, used to buy very cheap cigars. To
meet this demand a small cigar manufacturer in Washington, Pennsylvania,
whose name is lost to fame, started in to make a cheap 'roll-up' for
them at four for a cent. They became very popular with the drivers, and
were at first called Conestoga cigars; since, by usage, corrupted into
'stogies' and 'tobies.' It is now estimated that Pennsylvania and West
Virginia produce about 200,000,000 tobies yearly, probably all for home
consumption."

[Illustration: JAMES SMITH, OF HENRY.]

It is probable that the manufacturer referred to in the above was George
Black, as that gentleman made "tobies" in Washington at an early day,
and continued in the business for many years, and until he became quite
wealthy. In his later days his trade was very large and profitable. Old
wagoners hauled his "tobies" over the road in large quantities, as they
did subsequently the Wheeling "tobies," which were, and continued to be,
a favorite brand. Many habitual smokers prefer a Washington or a
Wheeling "toby" to an alleged fine, high priced cigar, and the writer
of these lines is one of them. As has been noted, the "rubber," called
brake at this day, was not in use when the National Road was first
thrown open for trade and travel. Instead, as related by John Deets,
sapplings, cut at the summit of the hills, were shaped and fashioned to
answer the ends of the "rubber," and at the foot of the hills taken off
and left on the roadside. E. B. Dawson, esq., the well known, well
posted and accurate antiquarian of Uniontown, and, by the way, deeply
interested in the history of the National Road, is authority for the
statement that one Jones, of Bridgeport, Fayette county, Pennsylvania,
claimed to be the inventor of the "rubber." He, however, never succeeded
in obtaining letters patent, if, indeed, he ever applied. There were
other claimants, among them the Slifers, of Maryland, mentioned
elsewhere in these pages. The real and true inventor seems to be
unknown, and yet it is an invention of vast importance, and with legal
protection would have yielded the inventor an immense fortune.

Old wagoners, as a class, were robust, hardy, honest and jovial. But one
of the long list is remembered as a criminal. His name was Ben Pratt,
and he belonged to Philadelphia. He turned out to be a counterfeiter of
coin and currency, and suffered the punishment that all counterfeiters
deserve. Many old wagoners were fond of fun and frolic, but very few of
them were intemperate, although they had the readiest opportunities for
unrestrained drinking. Every old tavern had its odd shaped little bar,
ornamented in many instances with fancy lattice work, and well stocked
with whiskey of the purest distillation, almost as cheap as water. In
fact all kinds of liquors were kept at the old taverns of the National
Road, except the impure stuff of the present day. The bottles used were
of plain glass, each marked in large letters with the name of the liquor
it contained, and the old landlord would place these bottles on the
narrow counter of the little bar, in the presence of a room filled with
wagoners, so that all could have free access to them. None of the old
tavern keepers made profit from the sales of liquor. They kept it more
for the accommodation of their guests, than for money making purposes.
There was probably a tavern on every mile of the road, between
Cumberland and Wheeling, and all combined did not realize as much profit
from the sales of liquor in a year as is realized in that time by one
licensed hotel keeper of Uniontown, at the present day.

When, at last, the Conestoga horse yielded up the palm to the Iron
horse, and it became manifest that the glory of the old road was
departing, never to return, the old wagoners, many of whom had spent
their best days on the road, sang in chorus the following lament:

     "Now all ye jolly wagoners, who have got good wives,
     Go home to your farms, and there spend your lives.
     When your corn is all cribbed, and your small grain is good,
     You'll have nothing to do but curse the railroad."




CHAPTER XXI.

  _Stage Drivers, Stage Lines and Stage Coaches--The Postilion--Changing
     Horses--He comes, the Herald of a Noisy World--Pioneer
     Proprietors--Peter Burdine and his Little Rhyme--Anecdote of Thomas
     Corwin--Johny Ritter--Daniel Brown, his sad Ending--Soldier
     Drivers--Redding Bunting--Joseph and William Woolley--Andrew J.
     Wable--James Burr._


     "My uncle rested his head upon his hands and thought of the busy
     bustling people who had rattled about, years before, in the old
     coaches, and were now as silent and changed; he thought of the
     numbers of people to whom once, those crazy, mouldering vehicles
     had borne, night after night, for many years, and through all
     weathers, the anxiously expected intelligence, the eagerly looked
     for remittance, the promised assurances of health and safety, the
     sudden announcement of sickness and death. The merchant, the lover,
     the wife, the widow, the mother, the school boy, the very child who
     tottered to the door at the postman's knock--how had they all
     looked forward to the arrival of the old coach! And where were they
     all now?"--_Charles Dickens._

[Illustration: STAGE COACH]

Stage drivers as a class did not rank as high morally as wagoners, but
despite this there were among them men of good sense, honest intentions
and steady habits. As typical of the better class, the reader who is
familiar with the old road will readily recall Redding Bunting, Samuel
Luman, Elliott Seaburn, Watty Noble, James Carroll, Aquila and Nat
Smith, William Scott, David Gordon, James Burr, William Robinson, John
Huhn, David Bell, John Guttery, John Ritter, Joseph Henderson and Peter
Null. Others will be instantly recognized as their names shall appear on
these pages. It is the sincere belief of all old pike boys that the
stage lines of the National Road were never equalled in spirit and dash
on any road, in any age or country. The chariots of the Appian Way,
drawn by the fastest horses of ancient Italy, formed a dismal cortege in
comparison with the sprightly procession of stage coaches on the old
American highway. The grandeur of the old mail coach is riveted forever
in the memory of the pike boy. To see it ascending a long hill,
increasing speed, when nearing the summit, then moving rapidly over the
intervening level to the top of the next hill, and dashing down it, a
driver like the stately Redding Bunting wielding the whip and handling
the reins, revealed a scene that will never be forgotten. And there was
another feature of the old stage lines that left a lasting mark on
memory's tablet. It was the "Postilion." A groom with two horses was
stationed at the foot of many of the long hills, and added to the
ordinary team of four horses to aid in making the ascent. The summit
gained, the extra horses were quickly detached and returned to await and
aid the next coming coach, and this was the "Postilion." Nathan Hutton
is a well remembered old postilion. He was a tall, spare man, and lived
in a small log house on the roadside, a short distance west of the old
Johnson tavern, and four and a half miles east of Brownsville. At the
foot of the hill below his house, he re-enforced the coaches with his
postilion both ways, east and west, up Colley's hill, going west, and
the equally long hill, coming east from that point. When he wanted a man
or horse to be faithful to duty he exhorted him to "stand by his 'tarnal
integrity." The old postilion bade adieu to the scenes of earth long
ago, and nothing is left to indicate the spot where his lowly dwelling
stood except a few perishing quince bushes.

Hanson Willison, of Cumberland, when a boy rode postilion for Samuel
Luman, and for Alfred Bailes. John Evans and Jacob Hoblitzell rode
postilion through the mountains, east of Keyser's Ridge. Martin Massey
rode out from Brownsville, and Thomas M. Fee, now crier of the courts of
Fayette county, Pennsylvania, rode out from Uniontown, over Laurel Hill.

Excitement followed in the wake of the coaches all along the road. Their
arrival in the towns was the leading event of each day, and they were so
regular in transit that farmers along the road knew the exact hour by
their coming, without the aid of watch or clock. They ran night and day
alike. Relays of fresh horses were placed at intervals of twelve miles,
as nearly as practicable. Ordinarily a driver had charge of one team
only, which he drove and cared for. Mail drivers, however, in many
instances, drove three or four teams and more, which were cared for by
grooms at the stations. Teams were changed almost in the twinkling of an
eye. The coach was driven rapidly to the station, where a fresh team
stood ready harnessed and waiting on the roadside. The moment the team
came to a halt the driver threw down the reins, and almost instantly the
incoming team was detached, the fresh one attached, the reins thrown
back to the driver, who did not leave his seat, and away again went the
coach at full speed, the usual group of loafers, meanwhile, looking on
and enjoying the exciting scene. The horses used were showy and superb,
the admiration of all who beheld them. Mr. Stockton had a strain called
the "Murat," and another known as the "Winflower," which have become
extinct, but many expert horsemen contend that they have not, in later
days, been surpassed for nerve, beauty or speed. A peculiar affliction
came upon many of the "wheel horses," expressed by the phrase "sprung in
the knees." It is said to have been produced by the efforts of the
horses in "holding back," while descending the long and steep hills.

There was one mail coach that was especially imposing. On its gilded
sides appeared the picture of a post boy, with flying horse and horn,
and beneath it in gilt letters this awe inspiring inscription:

     "He comes, the herald of a noisy world,
     News from all nations lumbering at his back."

No boy who beheld that old coach will ever forget it. The coaches were
all handsomely and artistically painted and ornamented, lined inside
with soft silk plush. There were three seats furnished with luxurious
cushions, and three persons could sit comfortably on each, so that nine
passengers made a full load as far as the interior was concerned. A seat
by the side of the driver was more coveted in fair weather than a seat
within. During the prosperous era of the road it was not uncommon to see
as many as fifteen coaches in continuous procession, and both ways, east
and west, there would be thirty each day.

James Kinkead, Jacob Sides and Abraham Russell put on the first line of
passenger coaches west of Cumberland, and as early as 1818 John and
Andrew Shaffer, Garrett Clark, Aaron Wyatt, Morris Mauler, John Farrell,
Quill and Nathan Smith, and Peter Null, were drivers on this line. The
Smiths and Null drove in and out from Uniontown. One of the Smiths
subsequently became the agent of a stage line in Ohio. James Kinkead,
above mentioned, was the senior member of the firm of Kinkead, Beck and
Evans, who built most of the large stone bridges on the line of the
road. This early line of stages was owned and operated in sections.
Kinkead owned the line from Brownsville to Somerfield; Sides, from
Somerfield to the Little Crossings, and thence to Cumberland Russell was
the proprietor. Kinkead sold his section to George Dawson, of
Brownsville, and Alpheus Beall, of Cumberland, bought out Russell's
interest. This line was subsequently purchased by, and merged in, the
National Road Stage Company, the principal and most active member of
which was Lucius W. Stockton. The other members of this company were
Daniel Moore, of Washington, Pennsylvania, Richard Stokes and Moore N.
Falls, of Baltimore, and Dr. Howard Kennedy, of Hagerstown, Maryland.
After the death of Mr. Stockton, in 1844, Dr. Kennedy and Mr. Acheson
were the active members of the firm. John W. Weaver put a line of stages
on the road at an early day, known as the People's Line. After a short
run it was withdrawn from the road east of Wheeling, and transferred to
the Ohio division. Previous to 1840, James Reeside put on a line which
Mr. Stockton nick-named the "June Bug," for the reason, as he alleged,
it would not survive the coming of the June bugs. Mr. Stockton
subsequently bought out this line and consolidated it with his own.
There was a line of stages on the road called the "Good Intent," which
came to stay, and did stay until driven off by the irresistible force of
the Steam King. This line was owned by Shriver, Steele & Company, and
was equal in vim, vigor and general equipment to the Stockton line. The
headquarters of the Good Intent line at Uniontown was the McClelland
house. There passengers took their meals, and the horses were kept in
the stables appurtenant. The "old line" (Stockton's) had its
headquarters at the National house, on Morgantown street, now the
private residence of that worthy and well known citizen, Thomas Batton.
This little _bon mot_ is one among a thousand, illustrative of the
spirit of the competition between these rival lines. There was one Peter
Burdine, a driver on the Good Intent line, noted for his dashing
qualities, who was accustomed to give vent to his fidelity to his
employers, and his confidence in himself in these words:

     "If you take a seat in Stockton's line,
     You are sure to be passed by Pete Burdine."

And this became a popular ditty all along the road.

On authority of Hanson Willison, the old stage driver of Cumberland, the
first line of stages put on the road east of Cumberland, in opposition
to the Stockton line, was owned, from Frederic to Hagerstown, by
Hutchinson and Wirt; from Hagerstown to Piney Plains, by William F.
Steele; from Piney Plains to Cumberland, by Thomas Shriver.

Thomas Corwin, the famous Ohio statesman and popular orator of the olden
time, was not a stage driver, but he was a wagoner, and one of the
rallying cries of his friends, in the campaign that resulted in his
election as governor, was: "Hurrah for Tom Corwin, the wagoner boy."
The introduction of his name, in connection with stages and stage
drivers, becomes pertinent in view of the following anecdote: Corwin was
of very dark complexion, and among strangers, and in his time, when race
distinction was more pronounced than now, often taken for a negro. On
one occasion, while he was a member of Congress, he passed over the road
in a "chartered coach," in company with Henry Clay, a popular favorite
all along the road, and other distinguished gentlemen, en route for the
capital. A chartered coach was one belonging to the regular line, but
hired for a trip, and controlled by the parties engaging it. The party
stopped one day for dinner at an old "stage tavern," kept by Samuel
Cessna, at the foot of "Town Hill," also known as "Snib Hollow,"
twenty-five miles east of Cumberland. Cessna was fond of entertaining
guests, and particularly ardent in catering to distinguished travelers.
He was, therefore, delighted when this party entered his house. He had
seen Mr. Clay before, and knew him. The tall form of Mr. Corwin
attracted his attention, and he noted specially his swarthy complexion,
heard his traveling companions call him "Tom," and supposed he was the
servant of the party. The first thing after the order for dinner was a
suggestion of something to relieve the tedium of travel, and excite the
appetite for the anticipated dinner, and it was brandy, genuine old
cogniac, which was promptly brought to view by the zealous old landlord.
Brandy was the "tony" drink of the old pike--brandy and loaf sugar, and
it was often lighted by a taper and burnt, under the influence of a
popular tradition that "if burnt brandy couldn't save a man" in need of
physical tension, his case was hopeless. When the brandy was produced,
the party, with the exception of Corwin, stepped up to the bar and each
took a glass. Corwin, to encourage the illusion of the old landlord,
stood back. In a patronizing way the landlord proffered a glass to
Corwin, saying: "Tom, you take a drink." Corwin drank off the glass, and
in an humble manner returned it to the landlord with modest thanks.
Dinner was next announced, and when the party entered the dining room, a
side table was observed for use of the servant, as was the custom at all
old taverns on the road at that time. Corwin, at once recognizing the
situation, sat down alone at the side table, while the other gentlemen
occupied the main table. The dinner was excellent, as all were at the
old taverns on the National Road, and while undergoing discussion, Mr.
Clay occasionally called out to the lone occupant of the side table:
"How are you getting on, Tom?" to which the modest response was, "Very
well." After dinner the old landlord produced a box of fine cigars, and
first serving the distinguished guests, took one from the box and in his
hand proffered it to Mr. Corwin, with the remark: "Take a cigar, Tom?"
When it was announced that the coach was in readiness to proceed on the
journey, Mr. Clay took Corwin's arm, and, approaching the old landlord,
said: "Mr. Cessna, permit me to introduce the Hon. Thomas Corwin, of
Ohio." Cessna was thunder-struck. His mortification know no bounds.
Observing his mental agony, Mr. Corwin restored him to equanimity by
saying: "It was all a joke, Mr. Cessna; do not, I beg you, indulge in
the slightest feeling of mortification. I expect to be back this way
before long, and will call again to renew acquaintance, and take another
good dinner with you."

John Ritter, affectionately and invariably, by his acquaintances, called
"Johnny," was noted for his honesty and steady habits. For many years
after staging ceased on the road, he was a familiar figure about
Washington, Pennsylvania. He assisted Major Hammond for thirty years in
conducting the Valentine house, and acted as agent for Brimmer's line of
mail hacks, and other similar lines, after the great mail and passenger
lines were withdrawn. He was a bachelor, and a soldier of 1812, and drew
a small pension. He died at the Valentine house, in Washington, on
January 28th, 1879, in the eightieth year of his age, leaving behind him
a good name and many friends.

The first line of passenger coaches put on the road between Brownsville
and Wheeling was owned, organized and operated by Stephen Hill and Simms
and Pemberton. This was in 1818, and a continuation of the early line
before mentioned from Cumberland to Brownsville. Stephen Hill, while a
stage proprietor, was also a tavern keeper in Hillsboro, Washington
county, a small town, but an old town, which probably derived its name
from his family. Under the inspiration of modern reformation, so called,
the name of this old town has been changed and languishes now under the
romantic appellation of Scenery Hill. When it was Hillsboro, and a stage
station of the old pike, it was a lively little town. Under its
present picturesque name it remains a little town, but not a lively one.
The change of name, however, has not yet penetrated the thinned ranks of
the old pike boys, and they still refer to it as Hillsboro.

[Illustration: WILLIAM WHALEY.]

The next station west of Hillsboro, where stage horses were changed,
twelve miles distant, was Washington, where passengers also took meals.
The Good Intent line stopped at the Mansion house, situate at the upper
end of the town, and the "Old Line" stopped at the National, in the
lower end. The next changing place west of Washington was Claysville,
the next Roneys Point, and thence to Wheeling. About the year 1846 the
Good Intent line stopped its coaches, or a portion of them, at the
Greene house in Washington, kept by Daniel Brown, who, previous to that
date, had, for a time, been a road agent of that line. Of all the good
taverns on the road there were none better than Brown's. He had his
peculiarities, as most men have, but he knew how to keep a hotel. He
enjoyed the occupation of entertaining guests, and glowed with good
feeling while listening to the praises bestowed upon his savory spreads.
This popular old landlord came to a sad and untimely end by being cut to
pieces in a mill by a buzz saw, on what was once called the plank road,
leading from Washington through Monongahela City, West Newton, Mt.
Pleasant, Somerset and Bedford to Cumberland. Stages ran on that road,
and at the time of the accident, Mr. Brown was in the service of a stage
company and at the saw mill to urge forward the work of getting out
plank for the road.

David Sibley, an old driver on Stockton's line, went with the Fayette
county "boys in blue" to Mexico in 1847, a member of Co. H, 2d regiment
of Pennsylvania volunteers. He participated in the engagement at Cerro
Gordo, emerged from that conflict unscathed, but died soon after at
Pueblo from ailments incident to an inhospitable climate.

William Whaley, a soldier of the war between the States, and a son of
Capt. James Whaley, a soldier of 1812, was an old stage driver. He was
born in Connellsville, but spent the prime of his life in Uniontown, and
on the road. He used to tell the boys that one of the horses of his team
died coming down Laurel Hill, but that he held him up until he reached
the McClelland house in Uniontown. Whaley drove for a time on the
Morgantown route from Uniontown, and died in the latter place twenty
years and more ago.

James Turner, a Somerset county man, an old stage driver, also
volunteered as a soldier in the Mexican war, and started out a member of
Co. H, above mentioned. In crossing the Gulf he fell down a hatchway of
the vessel and was killed, and the mortal remains of the old driver were
buried in the deep sea.

James Gordon, a well remembered old stage driver, went with Co. H to
Mexico, and died in the capital city of that Republic. He was the
father-in-law of Peter Heck, a former postmaster of Uniontown.

Samuel Sibley, probably a brother of David, before mentioned, was a
well-known driver. He was small in stature, but alert in movement. It
was he who drove the coach that upset on a stone pile in the main street
of Uniontown with Henry Clay as a passenger, the details of which have
elsewhere been given.

Ben Showalter is remembered as an old driver, who sang little songs and
performed little tricks of legerdemain for the amusement of the boys. He
went to the war between the States as a private in Major West's cavalry
of Uniontown, and died in the service.

[Illustration: REDDING BUNTING.]

Redding Bunting, mentioned before, was probably more widely known and
had more friends than any other old stage driver on the road. His entire
service on the road, covering many years, was in connection with the
"old Line." He was a great favorite of Mr. Stockton, the leading
proprietor of that line. His commanding appearance is impressed upon the
memories of all who knew him. He stood six feet six inches high in his
stockings, and straight as an arrow, without any redundant flesh. His
complexion was of a reddish hue and his features pronounced and
striking. His voice was of the baritone order, deep and sonorous, but he
was not loquacious and had a habit of munching. He was endowed with
strong common sense, which the pike boys called "horse sense," to
emphasize its excellence. He was affable, companionable and convivial.
He was a native of Fayette county, Pa., and born in Menallen township.
He was not only a stage driver, but a trusted stage agent, stage
proprietor, and also a tavern keeper. He once owned the property now
known as the "Central Hotel," in Uniontown, and if he had retained it
would have died a rich man. Despondency and depression of spirits seemed
to have encompassed him, when business ceased on the road, and he
appeared as one longing for the return of other and better days. During
the presidency of Mr. Van Buren, it was deemed desirable by the
authorities that one of his special messages should be speedily spread
before the people. Accordingly arrangements were made by the Stockton
line, which had the contract for carrying the mails, to transmit the
message of the President with more than ordinary celerity. The Baltimore
and Ohio railroad at the time was not in operation west of Frederic
City, Maryland. Mr. Bunting, as agent of the company, repaired to that
point to receive the coming document and convey it to Wheeling. He sat
by the side of the driver the entire distance from Frederic to Wheeling
to superintend the mission and urge up the speed. The distance between
the points named is two hundred and twenty-two miles, and was covered in
twenty-three hours and thirty minutes. Changes of teams and drivers were
made at the usual relays, and the driver who brought the flying coach
from Farmington to Uniontown was Joseph Woolley, who made the sparks fly
at every step, as he dashed down the long western slope of Laurel Hill.
Homer Westover drove the coach from Uniontown to Brownsville, covering
the intervening distance of twelve miles in the almost incredible
compass of forty-four minutes. The coach used on this occasion was
called the "Industry," one of the early mail coaches with "monkey box"
attachment, and it literally woke up the echoes in its rapid transit
over the road. The Pittsburg _Gazette_ had arranged for an early copy of
the important message and agreed to pay Robert L. Barry and Joseph P.
McClelland, of Uniontown, connected in various subordinate capacities
with the stage lines, the sum of fifty dollars for a speedy delivery of
the document at the office of that journal in Pittsburg. Brownsville was
then the distributing point for all mail matter sent west over the
National Road, consigned to Pittsburg, and Barry and McClelland went
down to Brownsville on the "Industry" to obtain the message there and
transmit it thence to Pittsburg by special convoy overland to the
_Gazette_; but when the mail was opened it was discovered that it did
not contain a package for the _Gazette_, and Barry and McClelland
returned home disappointed, while the _Gazette_ suffered still greater
disappointment in not being able to lay an early copy of the message
before its readers. The reader will bear in mind that at the time
referred to the telegraph was unknown as an agency for transmitting
news, and the railroad, as has been seen, had not advanced west of
Frederic City, Maryland.

In the year 1846, after the railroad was completed to Cumberland,
Redding Bunting rivaled, if he did not surpass, the feat of rapid
transit above described. He drove the great mail coach from Cumberland
to Wheeling, which carried the message of President Polk, officially
proclaiming that war existed between the United States and Mexico.
Leaving Cumberland at two o'clock in the morning, he reached Uniontown
at eight o'clock of the same morning, breakfasted there with his
passengers, at his own house (for he was then the proprietor of the
National), and after breakfast, which was soon disposed of, proceeded
with his charge, reaching Washington at eleven A. M. and Wheeling at two
P. M., covering a distance of one hundred and thirty-one miles in twelve
hours. He was not at that time an ordinary driver, but an agent of the
line, and took the reins in person for the avowed purpose of making the
highest speed attainable. Redding Bunting has been dead about ten years.
His wife, who was a daughter of Capt. Endsley, the old tavern keeper at
the Big Crossings, survived him about three years. He left two sons and
two daughters. One of his sons, Henry Clay, is at present postmaster of
Dunbar, Pa., and the other, William, is a printer, and at this writing
foreman of the composing force of the Pittsburg _Times_. One of the
daughters is the wife of Milton K. Frankenberry, a prominent citizen of
Fayette county, Pa., and the other is the wife of Armor Craig, a leading
merchant of Uniontown. The old driver has gone to his last home, but his
memory remains fresh and fragrant all along the road.

Joseph Woolley, above mentioned, had a brother, William, who was also a
well known stage driver. When the staging days on the road were ended,
and the exciting incidents thereof relegated to the domain of history,
Joseph and William Woolley sought and obtained employment in the service
of the Baltimore and Ohio railroad company, and both ultimately became
competent and trustworthy locomotive engineers.

Andrew J. Wable commenced driving stage in 1840, and continued
uninterruptedly until 1851. He went to Illinois in 1867, and is still
living, in good health and spirits. He frequently visits his old home in
the mountains of Fayette county, where he was reared, and is there now,
or was very recently. He drove first on the "Shake Gut," which was not a
passenger line, but a line put on the road to carry light freights with
rapidity. He drove next on the "Good Intent" line, and subsequently on
the old, or Stockton line. He was a driver on the Good Intent line when
William Scott was its agent, and on the old line during the agencies of
Granger and Bunting. He drove on the Good Intent line from Somerfield to
Keyser's Ridge, and on the old line from Keyser's Ridge to Piney Grove.
He also drove between Washington and Wheeling, and from Uniontown to
Farmington. His recollections of the old road are vivid, and he is fond
of recounting incidents of its palmy days.

James Burr drove out westward from Washington. He was reputed to be a
man of great muscular power, but with it all, a man of quiet demeanor. A
Cincinnati man, name not given, had achieved the reputation of "licking"
everybody in and around Cincinnati, and like Alexander of old, sighed
for more victories. Hearing of Jim Burr, he resolved to encounter him,
and struck out for Claysville, where he had been informed Burr could be
found. He traveled by steamboat to Wheeling, thence by stage coach to
Claysville. The Cincinnati man "put up" at the tavern of William Kelley,
the stopping place of Burr's line at Claysville. Upon entering, the
stranger inquired for Jim Burr, and was politely informed by Mr. Kelley,
the old landlord, that Mr. Burr was at the stable looking after his
team, and would soon be in. In a little while Burr came in, and Mr.
Kelley remarked to the stranger, "this is Mr. Burr." The stranger, who
was a somewhat larger man than Burr, saluted him thus: "Burr, I have
been told that you are the best man in all this country, and I have come
all the way from Cincinnati to fight you, and lick you, if I can."
"Well," said Burr, "you have come a long distance for a job like that,
and besides I don't know you, and there is no reason why we should
fight." "But," rejoined the stranger, "you must fight me, I insist on
it, and will not leave here until you do." Burr persisted in declining
the proffered combat, and finally went upstairs to bed, and after a nap
of half an hour's duration, came down without a thought of again meeting
his aggressive visitor. To his utter surprise the Cincinnati bluffer met
him at the foot of the stairs, and again demanded a trial of strength.
This was more than Burr's good nature could withstand, and stepping
back, he drew up in the attitude of a striker, warning his assailant at
the same time to "look out," when with one blow of his fist, he felled
him stone dead on the floor. Burr then went to the water stand in a
rear room of the tavern, washed his face and hands, and upon returning
saw the victim of his deadly blow still lying prostrate upon the floor,
and exclaimed: "My God, has that man not got up yet?" But the vanquished
bully did, after a while, get up, and in rising discovered that he was a
wiser, if not a better man. News of this singular encounter spread
rapidly through the town of Claysville, and nearly every inhabitant
thereof rushed to the scene to learn how it happened, and all about it.
The facts were minutely and carefully made known to all inquirers by
William Kelley, the old landlord, and cheers went up and out for Jim
Burr, the hero of Claysville. At the time of this occurrence David
Gordon was also driving out westwardly from Washington. Tradition has it
that these two men had a reciprocal fear of each other, but they never
collided, and it is a mooted question as to which of them was the better
man in a physical sense. It is a long time since Burr and Gordon were
seen on the front boot of a handsome Concord coach, wielding the reins
and flourishing the whip over the backs of four dashing steeds with a
grace and dignity befitting a more pretentious calling; and presumably
they have answered the last summons, but living or dead, their names are
indelibly stamped on the history of the National Road.

David Gordon was sent out from the east by James Reeside, and drove
first on the "June Bug Line." Going out west from Claysville soon after
he commenced driving his team ran off, with a full load of passengers.
Discerning in a moment that the flying team could not be checked by
ordinary methods, he pulled it off the road and turned the coach over
against a high bank. The passengers were badly frightened, but none were
hurt, and attributed their escape from injury to the skillfulness of the
driver. After "righting up," the coach but little damaged, proceeded to
Roney's Point without further casualty. This incident, or rather
accident, gave Gordon a wide reputation as a cool and skillful driver,
and he rapidly advanced to the front rank of his calling. The "June Bug
Line" did not remain long on the road, and when it was withdrawn Gordon
took service in the Good Intent line, and continued with it until all
through lines of coaches were taken from the road. Gordon was a very
stout man, six feet in height, and weighing about two hundred pounds,
without any surplus flesh. It was said that he could fight, but was not
quarrelsome. His motto seemed to be "_non tangere mihi_." On one
occasion, as tradition has it, he was compelled to engage in a
knock-down, in self defense. It was at Triadelphia, Virginia. Three
"toughs" fell upon him at that place, with the intention, as they stated
it, of "doing him up," but they failed ignominously. Gordon repulsed and
routed them completely and decisively, and they never thereafter coveted
a rencounter with Gordon, and the example of their fate rendered others
with pugilistic proclivities a little shy about encountering him.




CHAPTER XXII.

  _Stages and Stage Drivers continued--Character of Drivers
     Defended--Styles of Driving--Classification of Drivers--Samuel
     Luman, old mail driver--His thrilling encounter with
     Robbers--George Fisher dashes into a Whig procession--Daniel
     Leggett--Accident to Black Hawk--Tobias Banner, Jerry McMullin,
     George McKenna, Paris Eaches, Jack Bailiss, Henry A. Wise, and
     other familiar names._


Mr. A. J. Endsley, of Somerset, an intelligent, educated and observing
gentleman, who was born and reared on the National Road, gives it as his
judgment that old stage drivers, as a class, were better, morally, than
old wagoners. He says that while some of the stage drivers were given to
blaspheming and drinking, there were wagoners who would "discount them,
especially in the matter of profanity." He names, as types of orderly,
well behaved stage drivers, Thomas Grace, William and Alexander
Thompson, John Mills, Charley Howell, John High, William Robinson, Isaac
Frazee (still living in Markleysburg), Isaac Denny, Samuel Halsted,
William White, Samuel Jaco, Thomas Moore, James A. Carroll, William
Bishop and John Bunting. William Robinson and Pate Sides were expert
penmen.

John E. Reeside, a son of Commodore James Reeside, the old stage
proprietor, now residing in Baltimore, who had a general supervision of
his father's lines on the National Road, gives three styles of stage
driving, as follows, viz: (1) The Flat Rein (English); (2) the Top and
Bottom (Pennsylvania); (3) the Side Rein (Eastern). In the first style
Mr. Reeside says that John Bennett and Watty Noble excelled, and in the
second, Jack Bailiss, Frank Lawson and Joe Bowers carried off the palm.
He adds that the third mode was the one adopted by a majority of the
best drivers, and in this, Isaac Page, Luda Adams, Peyton R. Sides,
David Gordon, John Lanning, Abram Dedrick and David Johnson excelled all
other drivers.

Mr. Endsley, before mentioned, divides the old stage drivers in four
classes, as follows: "(1) Awkward, slovenly, careless drivers, such as
handled the whip and 'ribbons' so clumsily, and kept their teams so
unseemly together, up hill, down grades and on the level, that it was
painful to see them on the box. Typical of this class were Tom Frantz,
Dan Boyer, Pete Null and Abe Halderman. (2) Cruel men--their cruelty
amounting almost to brutality. This class seemed to take a fiendish
delight in whipping, lashing and gashing horses. Wash Alridge and a big,
burly driver by the name of Robinson, were types of the cruel class. (3)
Careful, easy-going, common, every day kind of drivers--men who never
made pretensions to fancy styles. They were such as John Bunting (Old
Judy), Jim Reynolds, James Carroll (Flaxey), Blanchard (Hatchet Face),
Billy Armor and Josh. Boyd. (4) Well dressed drivers, clean and neat in
person, and men who regarded sitting down to a meal in shirt sleeves as
_contra, bonos mores_. This class manipulated the whip and 'ribbons'
scientifically, and sat on the box in a way that showed they were
masters of the situation. Prominent in this class were John High, Pate
Sides, Peter Halderman, 'Yankee' Thompson, Sam Jerome, Jim Moore," &c.
In this latter class might be ranked David Gordon, James Burr, and
others of the western end of the road.

[Illustration: JOHN BUNTING.]

Samuel Luman, still living in Cumberland, and in good health, was one of
the best equipped stage drivers on the road. His experience covers many
of the most exciting and interesting events in the road's history. He
commenced his career as a stage driver in 1832, the same year that
Alfred Bailes began as a wagoner. He tells of a collision with
highwaymen in the mountains, which was attended by thrilling details. On
the 12th of August, 1834, he was on the road between Piney Grove and
Frostburg, with a mail and passenger coach going east. After nightfall,
and at a point studded by a thick growth of pine trees, he was
confronted by a party of foot-pads, five in number, and strange to
relate, one a woman, bent on felony. The outlook was alarming. Luman
carried no fire-arms, and there was but one weapon among his passengers,
a small, brass pistol, not brought into requisition, as the sequel
shows. The assailants had thrown across the road an obstruction like a
rude fence, made of logs, stumps and brush. As Luman's trusty leaders
approached the obstruction, one of the highwaymen stepped out from his
cover and seized a bridle, and the coach was stopped. The assailant
ordered Luman to descend from his seat and surrender his charge. This he
very politely, but very decidedly declined to do. "What do you want?"
queried Luman, with seeming innocency. "We are traders," was the
response. "Well," rejoined Luman, coolly, "I have nothing to trade; I am
satisfied with my trappings, and not desirous of exchanging them."
During this little parley the wood-be robber, who held a leader by the
bridle, cried out to a partner in crime, who was near at hand, though
under cover of darkness, to shoot the driver, and denounced him as a
coward for not firing. The party thus addressed then leveled a pistol at
Luman and pulled the trigger, but the result was nothing more than a
"snap," the night air being damp and the powder failing to explode.
These favorable surroundings, no doubt, saved Luman's life. The
foot-pads at the heads of the leaders had, in the confusion and
excitement of the moment, turned the horses squarely around, so that the
leaders faced west, while the wheel horses stood to the east. In this
conjuncture the party in charge of the leaders undertook to unhitch
them, and to guard against the movements of Luman, wrapped a driving
rein tightly around one of his arms. This was Luman's opportunity, and
summoning all his resources, he poured a volley of stinging lashes upon
his antagonist, smiting him on the face and arm, alternately, and most
vigorously. The bandit winced, and soon relinquished his grasp, when,
almost in the twinkling of an eye, the team under Luman's skillful hands
started up on a full run, leaping the improvised fence, and speeding on,
leaving the foot-pads behind to lament their discomfiture. Mr. Luman
relates that in crossing the improvised fence, he fairly trembled for
the fate of himself and passengers, as the coach was within an ace of
capsizing. He also states that the ruffian who seized his leader wore a
gown that covered his whole person, tied around the middle of his body
with a belt, and that another of his assailants wore a white vest, dark
pantaloons, and covered his face with a black mask. The other three kept
in the back ground during the attack, so that he is unable to recall
their appearance. Mr. Luman further relates that when the first assault
was made on him, he apprized his passengers of the impending danger and
besought their assistance, but they crouched in their seats and made no
effort to aid him or defend themselves. They were western merchants
going east to buy goods, and had among them as much as sixty thousand
dollars in cash. When the coach arrived safely at the Highland house,
Frostburg, George Evans at that time proprietor thereof, the grateful
passengers "took up" a collection for the benefit of their courageous
and faithful driver and deliverer, but Luman says the sum proffered was
so ludicrously small that he declined to receive it, and ever thereafter
regarded that lot of passengers as a "mean set." Samuel Luman drove four
teams between Cumberland and the Big Crossings. In 1839 he concluded to
give up stage driving and try tavern keeping. His first venture in this
line was at Piney Plains, east of Cumberland and near Cessna's old
stand. He approved himself a popular landlord, and was well patronized.
From Piney Plains he went to Frostburg, and took charge of the Franklin
House. His next and last experience in tavern keeping was at the
National House, in Cumberland. Luman interested himself in the detection
and punishment of mail robbers, which drew upon him the animosity of
suspected persons, and Mr. Stockton, fearing that the suspected ones
might waylay and murder him, advised him to take service east of
Cumberland, which he did. He is altogether one of the most interesting
characters of the road.

[Illustration: SAMUEL LUMAN.]

George Fisher was a stage driver, who left his footprints very plainly
on the limestone dust of the road. He was noted for his daring in the
manipulation of fiery steeds. A fractious team was stationed at
Claysville, which was the terror of all the drivers on that section of
the road. It "ran off" several times, once killing a passenger outright,
and seriously injuring others. This occurred on Caldwell's Hill, seven
miles west of Washington, Pennsylvania. George Fisher was sent down from
Washington to take charge of this team, and soon had it under complete
control. He drove it many years without an accident. Fisher was a large,
well proportioned, and fine looking man. He was driving the team
mentioned in 1844, the year in which the celebrated political contest
occurred, wherein James K. Polk and Henry Clay were opposing
candidates for the presidency. Fisher was an ardent supporter of Polk,
and quite bitter in his enmity against the Whigs. On the day of a large
Whig meeting in Washington, an extra coach, not on regular time, but
filled with passengers, passed over the road, going west. It fell to
Fisher's lot to haul this coach from Claysville to Roney's Point, a
relay beyond the State line, in Virginia. A delegation of Whigs, with
banners and music, from West Alexander and vicinity, went up to
Washington to attend the meeting, and on their return homeward in the
evening, were overhauled by Fisher, who ran his team and coach into the
Whig procession at several points, doing damage to buggies, carriages,
and light wagons, and inflicting some quite serious personal injuries.
Colin Wilson, a prominent citizen of Washington county at that date, was
one of the persons injured by Fisher's inroad, and was seriously hurt.
Fisher, in extenuation of his apparently criminal conduct, pleaded the
irritability of his team, that it became frightened by the banners and
music, was unmanageable, and the injuries inflicted were not intentional
on his part, but purely accidental. The reputation of the team for
pettishness was well known in the neighborhood of the occurrence, and
served as a plausible excuse, and really saved Fisher from prosecution,
and probably consequent punishment, but all the Whigs of that
neighborhood went to their graves under the solemn belief that Fisher
"did it a purpose." The following account of an accident, furnished by
John Thompson, the old wagoner, no doubt relates to Fisher's team
previous to the date at which he took charge of it: In the month of
October, 1843, a stage team started to run from the locust tree near
Caldwell's tavern. The driver lost control, and the team dashed down the
long hill at a terrific gait. They kept in the road until Wickert's
bridge was reached, at which point the coach, team, passengers, driver
and all were violently thrown over the bridge. A Mr. Moses, a Kentucky
merchant, and his nephew, were sitting by the side of the driver, and
all remained firmly in their seats until the collapse occurred. The
Kentucky merchant had a leg badly crushed, and in two days after the
accident died, and was buried in the old graveyard at Washington.
Doctors Stevens and Lane, of Washington, were promptly summoned and did
all that medical and surgical skill could devise to aid the unfortunate
sufferer, but gangrene ensued and baffled it all. The driver was
severely hurt, and nursed at the Caldwell House until the spring of
1844, when he recovered. The nephew of Mr. Moses and all the other
passengers escaped without injury. The remains of Mr. Moses were
subsequently removed from Washington by his relatives, and interred near
his home in Kentucky. Wickert's bridge is so called because a man of
that name was murdered many years ago near it, and for a long time
thereafter, according to neighborhood superstition, returned to haunt
the bridge.

Daniel Leggett was an old stage driver, well known, and will be long
remembered. He once had the distinction of hauling the celebrated
Indian chief, Black Hawk, and his _suite_. The party ascended the Ohio
river by steamboat, and took stage at Wheeling. Upon entering the coach
at that point, Black Hawk showed shyness, fancying it might be a trap
set for him by his pale faced enemies, and it required some persuasion
by an interpreter, who accompanied his party, to induce him to enter and
take a seat. The coach passed over the road without unusual incident
until it reached Washington, Pennsylvania. Going down the main street of
Washington, from the postoffice, which was in the neighborhood of the
court house, the breast strap of one of the wheel horses broke, causing
a precipitation of the coach upon the leaders, and the team becoming
frightened, dashed down the street at fearful speed. One of the party of
Indians was seated by the driver, and thrown off, carrying down with him
the driver. The team, thus left without a driver, rushed headlong for
the stable of the National House, and at the corner of Main and Maiden
streets, the coach upset. It contained nine passengers, eight Indians
and one half-breed. The first one to show up from the wreck was Black
Hawk, who stood upright in the middle of the street, disclosing a single
drop of blood on his forehead, and manifesting much excitement and
indignation, as he uttered "Ugh! Ugh! Ugh!" The interpreter had an arm
broken, which was the only serious casualty attending the accident.
Black Hawk now became almost wholly irreconcilable. The interpreter
tried to explain to him the true situation, and to assure him that no
harm was aimed at him, but the dusky warrior repelled the approaches of
the friendly mediator, and refused to be reconciled. He was now certain
that the white men intended to kill him. After a little while the
excitement abated, and with it the temper of the unfortunate Indian
chieftain. He was persuaded to enter the tavern, and observing that the
surroundings were not hostile, threw off his sullenness, and became
somewhat sensible of the situation, and apparently reconciled to it.
Another coach of the line was provided, and the party proceeded on their
journey to parley with the Great Father of the White House. The occasion
marked an era in the life and career of the old driver, Daniel Leggett,
which he referred to with intense interest on frequent occasions
throughout the remainder of his life. The Black Hawk incident occurred
in 1837, when Van Buren was president.

Tobias Banner, as if to do justice to his name, was an imposing driver.
He was a chum of Jerry McMullin, another old driver, and the two
together enjoyed many a game of bluff, while their teams were quietly
resting in the well furnished old stables. They were both mail drivers
in and out from Washington. McMullin at one time to vary the monotony of
stage life, made a trip to Stockton's lane, in Greene county, to see the
races, which occurred at regular periods at that place in that day. He
engaged in a game of seven up, with a stalwart native of Greene county,
for five dollars a side, and while he really won the game, his overgrown
adversary claimed the stakes on an allegation of foul play. A quarrel
and a fight ensued, and Jerry McMullin returned to Washington with a
blackened eye and diminished purse, vowing that he would never venture
upon mud roads again.

George McKenna drove first on the Oyster line and afterwards a stage
team. He was a Greene county man, and brother-in-law of Morgan R. Wise.
After he quit driving he set up an oyster saloon in Waynesburg, and
finally engaged with a travelling menagerie and lost his life in a
railroad accident between New York and Philadelphia.

Paris Eaches, a strangely sounding name now, but once familiar to the
ear of every pike boy, was a well known and well liked driver. He
radiated from Washington, Pennsylvania, but left his mark all along the
line. He was a jolly fellow and enjoyed the excitement of the road. He
was always a favorite at social parties of young folks, and entertained
them with songs. He had a good voice and sang well. "I have left
Alabama," was one of his best songs, and he always sang it to the
delight of his hearers.

Jack Bailiss was a widely known and popular driver, a married man, and a
resident of Washington, Pennsylvania. He was accounted a reckless
driver, and delighted in exciting the apprehension of his passengers,
often filling them with terror by specimens of what they considered
reckless driving. He knew the danger line however, and always kept
within it. He drove the coach from Claysville to Washington,
Pennsylvania, in which Gen. Taylor traveled on his way to the Capital to
assume the Presidency.

Henry A. Wise, an old driver, is well remembered by the old people of
the road on account of the quaintness of his character. He was not a
driver on the National Road, but drove the mail coach from Uniontown to
Morgantown, Virginia. Mr. Stockton had the contract for carrying the
mail between these points, and Wise was his chief driver, and pursued
this calling for many years. His headquarters in Uniontown were at the
Old Hart tavern, Jackson's favorite stopping place, now the Hotel
Brunswick. He was driving on this route as early as 1836. He was an odd
genius, as Mr. John E. Reeside says of him, a "typical tide water
Virginian." He claimed to be descended from blue blood, and simply drove
stage for amusement. He always had plenty of slack in his reins, and as
a consequence rarely kept his team straight in the road. It is said that
on one occasion, while half asleep on the box, his team turned from the
road through an open gap into a field, and commenced eagerly to graze on
the growing clover. Wise was tall and spare, and habitually wore a high
silk hat.

John Huhn was a driver west of Washington, Pennsylvania. He married a
daughter of John McCrackin, a well known and prosperous farmer of the
vicinity of Claysville. When stage lines dissolved and stage coaches no
longer rattled over the old pike, John Huhn engaged in the tanning
business at Claysville, and was successful.

Peter Payne, an old driver east and west from Keyser's Ridge, was noted
as an expert hand at a game of poker. He was usually a winner, and being
a man of economic habits, saved his small accumulations from time to
time and ultimately became rich. He often sat down to a game with Joseph
Dilly, an old blacksmith of the mountain division of the road, a
skillfull player, who, like Payne, also grew rich.

Frank Lawson, who subsequently kept tavern in Triadelphia, was a stage
driver. He first drove on Weaver's Ohio line, next on a line in
Kentucky, where he upset a coach causing the death of one or more of his
passengers, and afterward came to the National Road and drove between
Wheeling and Washington. He is mentioned by Mr. Reeside as an expert
driver of the "Top and Bottom," or Pennsylvania mode of driving.

John Stotler was among the drivers on the first line of stages. He was
stoutly built, a good reinsman and a popular driver. He drove out east
and west from Cumberland. John Whitney, an Englishman, was an early
driver, and noted for his caution in handling his team and caring for
the comfort and safety of passengers.

Joseph Whisson drove from Washington to Claysville, and is well
remembered and highly spoken of by all old citizens living on that
section of the road. He is still living at Triadelphia, West Virginia.

Jason Eddy was one of the many drivers sent out on the road in an early
day from New Jersey by "Commodore" Reeside, as James, the old stage
proprietor, was frequently called. Eddy was an expert driver, and it was
said of him that "he could turn his team and coach on a silver dollar."
He was likewise a good musician, and played well on the bugle. He often
entertained his passengers with stirring bugle blasts.

William Walker was a careful old driver, and so economical that he
acquired property from the savings of his scanty wages.

William Craver, Edward Hays and the two Welches were old stage drivers,
whose names were familiar along the road in its early history.

Isaac Page, first named by Mr. Reeside as a good driver in the Eastern
style, was a Uniontown man, and died in that place before the glories of
the old road had waned. He left a widow and a son, Charles, who went to
New York, where the son engaged in business, prospered and became rich.
His mother was highly esteemed by all who knew her, and to her example
is attributed the success of the son.

Dr. Thayer, who subsequently became a circus proprietor, commenced
driving stage on the National Road when eighteen years of age. He drove
from Uniontown to Farmington on the "old line" previous to 1840. He was
a skillful driver, and subsequently achieved success as a circus owner.

Gideon Bolton (nicknamed "Hoop-pole," from the circumstance of his
coming from a hoop-pole region in Preston county, West Virginia), drove
many years on the mountain division of the road, and is well
remembered.

[Illustration: JOSEPH WHISSON.]

James McCauley, an old driver, before reaching the dignity of the box,
was a "postilion" for Redding Bunting on the mail coaches from
Somerfield to Woodcock Hill, and to Winding ridge.

Jack Lee was a spirited driver, and would have been called a "dude" if
he had not died before that term was applied to persons of fanciful and
fashionable apparel. He drove in and out from Cumberland and was
contemporaneous with Whitney.

David Bell, an old stage driver, subsequently kept a tavern in
Claysville. His daughter became the wife of Calvin King, an officer of
one of the Claysville banks.

William Corman, an old stage driver, is remembered as a _pal_ of Dr.
John F. Braddee in the celebrated mail robberies of 1840, at Uniontown.
Braddee's office adjoined Stockton's stage yard. Corman drove the mail
coach, and handed over the mail bags to Braddee, who rifled them. A full
account of these mail robberies is given elsewhere in this volume.

John Bennett and James and John Bailiss drove out west from Washington,
Pennsylvania, for many years, and were among the most careful and
skillful drivers. Bennett died in Hillsboro.

Joshua Johnson, a Canadian, and an old stage driver, married a Miss
Slicer, of Flintstone, Maryland, and subsequently kept a tavern in
Cumberland.




CHAPTER XXIII.

  _The first Mail Coaches--The stage yard at Uniontown--Employees
     therein--Mr. Stockton goes back on John Tyler--Names of
     Coaches--Henry Clay and the drivers--Anecdote of Clay, and Humes,
     of Claysville--Jenny Lind and Phineas T. Barnum on the
     road--Exciting race between an old liner and a Good Intent
     driver--Old Mount, the Giant of the road--Sim Houser, Archie
     McNeil, Watty Noble, the Nestor of stage drivers, and other
     familiar names._


The first mail coaches were arranged to carry but three passengers,
in addition to the mail pouches, upon a model furnished by the
postoffice department. Drivers and residents along the road called
the passenger compartment of the early mail coach a "monkey box."
This was at the front end of the vehicle, and rested on springs, and
the mail pouches were placed behind it, on a lower plane, and in a
long, tight, wooden box or bed, resting on the axles of the wagon,
without springs. It made a loud noise when passing over the road,
was altogether a curious contrivance, and after a short term of usage
was abandoned, and the ordinary passenger coach substituted in its
stead. Mr. Stockton established a coach factory in Uniontown, where
many of the coaches of his line were made, and as necessity from time
to time existed, repaired. Blacksmith shops were also set up in connection
with this factory, where the stage horses of the Stockton line
were shod. It was called the "stage yard," and located on Morgantown
street, on the lot now covered by the residence and grounds of
the Hon. Nathaniel Ewing. Many mechanics in different lines of
work were employed in the "stage yard," and some of them still
linger on the shores of time, and in Uniontown. [E]Philip Bogardus is
probably the oldest of the surviving employees of the old stage yard,
and is a well known and respected citizen of Uniontown. He was
born in Dutchess county, New York, September 25, 1811, and came
to Uniontown in 1838. On his journey to that place he halted for a
season and worked at his trade, that of a coach trimmer, at Bloody
Run, Bedford county, Pennsylvania, and there first met and formed
the acquaintance of Henry Nycum, the well remembered and respected
old blacksmith, who lived many years in Uniontown, and died there
about a year ago. Soon after his arrival in Uniontown, Bogardus
obtained employment in the stage yard. The foreman of the yard
at the time was William Gaddis.

[Footnote E: Died recently.]

[Illustration: MAJ. WILLIAM A. DONALDSON.]

Next in seniority, among the surviving employees of the stage yard, is
[F]Maj. William A. Donaldson, one of the best known citizens of
Uniontown. He is a painter. He was born in Emmettsburg, Frederic county,
Maryland, a village situate ten miles south of Gettysburg, on February
14, 1818, and came to Uniontown February 15, 1839. He located first at
Brownsville, and remained there a year and upwards before going to
Uniontown. His first engagement in Uniontown was with Col. William B.
Roberts, in whose service he continued about a year, after which he
entered the stage yard as a painter and ornamenter of coaches. He is not
only a skillful artisan, but a gentleman well read in history,
philosophy, theology, and politics, in short a good and useful citizen.
When Dr. Braddee was first lodged in the Uniontown jail for robbing the
mails, Maj. Donaldson called in the evening to see him. The accused was
placed in charge of a special police force, which consisted of Zadoc
Cracraft, George Martin, and Stewart Speers, who "stood guard" over the
noted prisoner. Soon after Maj. Donaldson entered the jail the guardsmen
informed him that they were very hungry, and desired to go down town to
get some oysters, and requested him to remain in charge of the prisoner
until they returned. To this Maj. Donaldson assented, provided the
hungry guardsmen would speedily return. They went out for oysters and
did not get back until one o'clock in the morning. The Major and the
Doctor, being old acquaintances, spent the intervening time as
pleasantly as circumstances would admit of, but it was not exactly the
thing the Major had bargained for. Mr. Stockton had one of his coaches
named John Tyler, in honor of the vice-president of the first Harrison
administration. When Tyler, by the death of Harrison, succeeded to the
presidency, and vetoed the United States bank bill, Mr. Stockton was
very much angered thereat, and going into the stage yard, soon after the
veto was announced, accosted Maj. Donaldson thus: "Donaldson, can't you
erase that name (pointing to the Tyler coach) and substitute another? I
won't have one of my coaches named for a traitor." "Certainly I can,"
replied Donaldson, "what shall the new name be?" "Call it Gen.
Harrison," said Stockton. "All right," said Donaldson, and the change
was made. Maj. Donaldson was a Democrat, and much amused by the
incident.

[Footnote F: Died July 27th, 1893.]

Robert L. Barry, the well remembered old merchant of Uniontown,
was, in his younger days, a painter in the old stage yard. Other
painters in the stage yard were William McQuilken, William McMullin,
William Crisfield, ---- Mathiot, Ebenezer Matthews, George Starr,
Alex. Fowler and Harrison Wiggins. Lewis Mobley was also a painter in
the stage yard. He subsequently moved to Luzerne township, Fayette
county, Pennsylvania, became a farmer and local politician. He had
many good points of character and many warm friends. He died in
Luzerne township a number of years ago. The Belfords, father and
three sons, were of the stage yard force, workers in wood. They came
from New Jersey, and were near relatives of the old and distinguished
Presbyterian preacher, Rev. A. G. Fairchild, D.D. The Belfords went
west, and in all probability have passed from earth to scenes beyond.

Armstrong Hadden, the old postmaster and banker, of Uniontown
worked a number of years in the stage yard on harness and
"thorough braces." He learned his trade with Westley Frost, of
Brownsville. Thorough braces were the leather springs, thick and
wide, upon which the coach body was placed. Alex. McLean, the
old clerk of the county commissioners, also worked on harness and
braces.

Charles Brower was a trimmer. He came from Baltimore, and
went from the stage yard in Uniontown to the State of Louisiana,
since which time he has made no sign so far as known.

Abram Rogers was a worker on "thorough braces." Other workers in wood
were Isaac and Simon Sampsell, Israel Hogue, and Frank Wilkinson. Among
the blacksmiths of the old stage yard were James Rush, who subsequently
went to Washington, Pennsylvania, where he lived many years, and until
his death, which occurred recently, Thomas Haymaker, and his son, Leroy,
Thomas Stewart, Michael Claybaugh, Jesse King, Thomas King, James
Keenan, Fred Reamer, Abram Haldeman, Seth White, Hugh Rogers, and Jacob,
Isaac and Robert Prettyman.

The inevitable company store was connected with the stage yard, but it
was not so odious then as now. It was located on Morgantown street, in
the building now occupied by the Ellis music store, and managed by John
Keffer, who is well remembered by all the old citizens of Uniontown.
George Martin was a clerk in the company store. Coaches were all named
after the manner of steamboats, and more recently, sleeping cars on the
leading railroads. The name of every State of the Union was utilized for
this purpose, and the realms of fancy were likewise explored. The coach
named for Pennsylvania bore the legend Keystone State; Ohio was honored
under the name Buckeye State, New Hampshire, the Granite State,
Massachusetts, the Bay State, and so on. Among the fancy names employed,
the old pike boy will readily recall the following: Fashion, Palmetto,
Central Route, Jewess, Beauty, Pathfinder, Samaratan, Highlander,
Ivanhoe, Herald, Industry, National, Republic, Protection, Brilliant,
Atlas, Sultana, Clarendon, Chancellor, Moravian, Miantonoma, Loch
Lomond. Warriors, statesmen and old stagers were remembered and honored
in the names following: Washington, Lafayette, General Wayne, General
St. Clair, General Jackson, General Harrison, Rough and Ready, meaning
General Taylor, General Worth, General Cass, Colonel Benton, Madison,
Monroe, Henry Clay, The President, James K. Polk, Purviance, Daniel
Moore, L. W. Stockton, General Moorehead, David Shriver, William H.
Stelle, James C. Acheson, Columbus, Pocahontas, Santa Anna. Countries
and cities were honored in the names that follow: Yucatan, Green Bay,
Oronoco, Tampico, Bangor, Mexico, Buena Vista, New Orleans, Erie,
Lexington, Vicksburg, Natchez, Trenton, San Francisco, Mobile, Troy,
Wyandott, Idaho, Ashland, Westmoreland, Allegany, Raritan,
Youghiogheny, Gautemala, Panama, Hungarian, Montgomery, Paoli,
Tuscaloosa. One coach took in a hemisphere, and was called America.
Another was named Queen Victoria in the old stage days, as now, the
reigning sovereign of England, while another rendered homage to dear old
Ireland, by bearing the legend, Erin Go Bragh. When Harrison, the first,
Polk and Taylor passed over the road to the capital, to be installed in
the presidential office, a splendid new coach was provided for each
occasion, called the President, in which the President-elect and his
immediate family were conveyed. The presidential parties did not travel
in the night time, but rested at stations along the road until morning.
At Uniontown, President Harrison and party stopped over night at the
Walker house, now called the Central. Polk lodged at the National and
Taylor at the Clinton. The Walker and Clinton were not stage houses, but
the distinguished passengers were quartered therein, respectively, for
the purpose, probably, of conciliating some local political influences.

Henry Clay knew many of the old stage drivers personally, and
would call them by name when he met them at different points along
the road. He not only made acquaintances and friends of the drivers, but
of the tavern keepers and persons in other employments on the road.
David Mahaney, now living in Dunbar, kept tavern at various points
on the mountain division of the road, and often entertained Mr. Clay,
and became well acquainted with him. One Humes, of Claysville,
was wont to boast of the familiarity with which he was recognized by
Mr. Clay. While the teams were being changed at stations, Mr. Clay
was in the habit of getting out of the coach and going in to the taverns.
On occasion of one of these short stops, Humes was introduced to Mr.
Clay. On the return trip, less than a year afterward, Humes heard
of his coming, and hastened to the station to greet him. The coach
was driven up and Mr. Clay got out, but before entering the tavern
espied Humes approaching, and when near enough to be heard, said:
"There comes my friend Humes," and gave him a cordial hand-shaking.
Humes was delighted, and never wearied in telling the story of
his acquaintance with Clay.

When Jennie Lind, the world renowned songstress, made her
first professional visit to the United States, she returned east from her
western tour by way of the National Road, in company with her
troupe, and in "chartered" coaches of the Stockton line. This was
at least forty years ago, probably a little more than that. P. T.
Barnum, the celebrated showman, was the great singer's manager,
and was with her on the occasion referred to. The party remained
over night at Boss Rush's tavern, twelve miles east of Uniontown.
The people along the road heard of the coming of the distinguished
travelers, and a number assembled at the tavern in the evening to
get a glimpse of them. William Shaffer drove the coach in which
Barnum was seated, and when he halted in front of the tavern one
of the curious called up to the driver on the box and inquired: "Which
is Barnum?" Shaffer answered gruffly: "I don't know Barnum
from the devil." Barnum, meanwhile, had emerged from the coach,
and standing by its side overheard the inquiry and the driver's reply,
and stepping up to the inquisitor said to him: "I am Barnum; the
driver is right, it is hard to distinguish me from the devil." The
party entered the good old tavern and were entertained and lodged
in the handsome style for which Boss Rush was greatly and justly
distinguished. Fresh trout were served for breakfast, which had been
taken the day before in a near by mountain stream by F. B. Titlow
and young Boss Rush, then a lad of sixteen. Titlow, now one of the
best known citizens of the vicinity of Uniontown, and still a lover
of fishing and hunting, was then an apprentice to the tailoring trade
at Farmington, under the guidance of John Hair. Young Boss,
grown gray, still lingers about the portals of his father's old tavern,
musing over the memories of the old pike.

William G. Beck, an old stage driver, still living in Fairfield,
Iowa, has vivid recollections of the road. In a letter he states
that, "if there is anything in the world that makes him, at the age of
seventy-four, jump up and crack his heels together and wish he was
a boy again, it is reading about the men and things of the National
Road." He is a son of James Beck, of the old bridge building firm,
and commenced to drive stage on the Old line when in his minority.
He was born in Uniontown in 1819, went to Iowa in 1847, and was
on the National Road as a stage driver as late as 1846. In his letter
he states that in 1846 the Old line and the Good Intent both carried
the mails. There was a "Lock mail" in leather pouches, and a "Canvass
mail," the latter very frequently called "the second mail," carried
in alternate months by the respective lines. In December, 1846, he
says the Old line carried the "Lock mail." The details of an exciting
race on the road he furnishes as follows: "A Good Intent coach was
driven by Jacob Cronch to the railway station, immediately upon the
arrival of the train at Cumberland, loaded up with the 'Canvass
mail,' and started off under full speed for the West. The 'Lock
mail,' which fell to me, was taken to the postoffice and overhauled,
causing a considerable detention. While waiting in front of the postoffice
for the mail bags, Jacob Shuck and other Good Intent drivers
chided me with the fact that the 'Canvass' had such a start that I
could not get near it. I made up my mind that if it was in the hides
of my two teams I would catch him, and pass him. It was after
nightfall, and in crossing a water way in Cumberland my lamps went
out, and what I deemed a calamity turned out in the end to be an
advantage. As soon as I crossed the Wills creek bridge, I put my
team in a full run and never pulled them up until I reached Rock
Hill, seven miles out of Cumberland. At that point, in the winding
of the road, I espied the lights on the coach of my rival, while he,
by reason of the going out of my lights, was unable to see me,
although, on the long stretches, he was constantly watching for a
glimpse of me. Much to his surprise I drew up along side of him,
and side by side we drove into Frostburg, lashing our tired teams at
every jump. The grooms at the Frostburg station had my second
team hitched to the coach by the time I was fairly stopped. A
friendly driver ran with the way mail to the Frostburg postoffice, while
another re-lit my lamps. I did not leave my seat. The reins over
the fresh team were thrown up to me, and I was off again in a full
run. The way mail bag was thrown into the front boot as I dashed
past the postoffice. At Sand Spring (foot of Big Savage) I passed
the 'Canvass' and held the lead, trotting my team every inch of the
road to Piney Grove, the end of my route, which I reached twenty-two
minutes in advance of my competitor. Lem Cross kept the tavern
where our line stopped at Piney Grove. I made my route of twenty-two
miles with two teams in two hours and ten minutes, fourteen
miles of the distance, to the top of Big Savage, being ascending
grade. James Reynolds relieved me at Piney Grove, and my competitor
was relieved at that point by Joshua Boyd."

[Illustration: WILLIAM G. BECK.]

Among old stage drivers there was one conspicuous above all others, on
account of his immense size. It was Montgomery Demmings, known as "Old
Mount." He was six feet and upward in height, and his average weight was
four hundred and sixty-five. It was a common remark, in the days of
staging on the National Road, that "Old Mount on the front boot of a
coach balanced all the trunks that could be put in the rear boot." As he
grew old his weight increased, and at his death, upon authority of his
widow, who is still living, was six hundred and fifty pounds. He was
born and reared in Allentown, New Jersey, and was sent out on the road
in 1836 by James Reeside. His first service was on the "June Bug Line,"
a line of brief existence, but full of dash and spirit. "Old Mount"
married the widow of Joseph Magee, on May 3, 1839. The clergyman who
performed the marriage ceremony was the Rev. John W. Phillips, of
Uniontown. Joseph Magee was a blacksmith. His residence and shop were on
the roadside, at the west end of Uniontown, near the present toll house.
He owned sixteen acres of land on the northeast side of the road, which
now forms a part of the Gilmore tract, and his widow, who is also the
widow of "Old Mount," is still living with a third husband, one Thomas,
of Wales. Her present home is in Allegheny City, Pa., and she continues
to draw a dower interest from the land owned by her first husband, above
mentioned. "Old Mount" has a son, Amos Frisbie Demmings, living near his
mother, named after Amos Frisbie, who lived in Uniontown many years ago,
and carried on the business of stove making. After driving a stage for a
number of years, "Old Mount" relinquished his connection with the
passenger coaches, and became a driver on the express line. This line
carried small packages of light goods, and oysters, known as fast
freight, and the people along the road, by way of derision, called it
"The Shake Gut Line." The vehicles of this line were long and strong
box-shaped wagons, something like the wagons used for transporting a
menagerie. They were drawn by four horses, with relays at established
points, driven by check reins or lines, as stage teams were driven. The
speed of the express wagons was almost equal to that of the coaches of
the stage lines. They made a great noise in their rapid passage over the
road, and coming down some of the long hills, could be heard for miles.
By the side of the drivers frequently sat one or more way-goers whose
necessities impelled them to seek cheap transportation. What proportion
of their meagre fares went to the driver, and what to the owners of the
line, has never been definitely ascertained. "Old Mount" stuck to the
road until its glory began to fade, and in April, 1851, left Uniontown
and removed with his family to Brownsville, where he remained about
eighteen months. While residing at Brownsville, he was engaged in
hauling goods from the steamboat landing at that place to points in
western Virginia, along the line of the Baltimore and Ohio railroad,
then undergoing construction. He owned the team he drove in this
employment. From Brownsville he went to South Side Pittsburg, then a
separate municipality, called Birmingham. From that point he continued
the hauling of goods to western Virginia, and also kept a boarding
house. He did not remain in Birmingham longer than two years, probably
not that long, and moved from there to McKeesport, where he engaged in
the hotel business, having previously leased the Eagle House at that
place. He died at McKeesport on March 4, 1855, and was buried there. His
death occurred in less than a year after he went to McKeesport, and thus
terminated the career of one whose name, half a century ago, was
familiarly spoken in every town, tavern and wayside cabin, from
Baltimore to Wheeling.

Simeon Houser was a stage driver. When stages left the road Simeon went
to tavern keeping. He kept the old house which stood on the lot now
occupied by the residence of Dr. Ewing, in Uniontown. It was called the
"Buzzard's Roost," not by reason of any bad fame of Simeon Houser, for
it had that name before he got there. Simeon was a very tall man, and
raw boned, with strongly marked face and features. He served a number of
years as constable of Uniontown. In 1851 William Bigler and William F.
Johnson, rival candidates for governor, visited Uniontown. Bigler took
in Greene county on his tour, and coming over to Fayette, struck the
National Road at Searight's, where he met a popular ovation. His friends
in that vicinity made a large raft of logs, which they placed on a
strong wagon, and with a team of six white horses hauled to Uniontown,
the Brownsville brass band seated on the raft and discoursing music, as
the procession moved along the road. Bigler, in his early days, had been
employed in constructing and running rafts on the Susquehanna river, and
his supporters stirred up enthusiasm for him by calling him "The
Raftsman of the Susquehanna." He was elected, not because he was a
raftsman, but because the Democrats of that day outnumbered the Whigs.
Johnston, his competitor, was a Whig. The present Republican party was
not then in existence. Simeon Houser, aforesaid, drove the big white
team that hauled the raft, and this is why allusion is made to the
incident. It was a grand day for Simeon. Mr. Bigler spoke from the
raft in Bierer's woods, west of Uniontown, to a great multitude, and Dr.
Smith Fuller, standing on the same raft, made the speech of welcome.
Simeon Houser, like hundreds of old pike boys, yielded up his life in
defense of the Stars and Stripes.

[Illustration: HENRY FARWELL.]

Henry Farwell, father of the Broadway printer, was an old stage driver.
He came to Uniontown in 1839, "the winter of the deep snow." He came on
the Oyster Line from Little Crossings, working his way through the snow,
which averaged a depth of four feet on the level, and was three days on
the way. The oyster boxes were placed on a sled, drawn by six horses,
and the Oyster Line made as good time as the stage lines while the deep
snow lasted, and passenger coaches, like oyster boxes, were moved on
sleds. Farwell came to Uniontown in obedience to an order of one of the
stage lines, to take charge of a team at that place. He drove stage for
ten years, one-half of the time in Ohio. When the staging days were over
on the old road, Farwell located in Uniontown, and carried on the trade
of shoemaking, which he learned before he took to stage driving. He
owned the lot on which the National Bank of Fayette county now stands.
He has been dead several years, and is well remembered by the older
citizens of Uniontown.

Archie McNeil was of the class of merry stage drivers, and enlivened the
road with his quaint tricks and humorous jokes. His service as a driver
was confined for the most part to the western end of the road, between
Brownsville and Wheeling. An unsophisticated youth from the back
country, of ungainly form and manners, near the close of the forties,
sauntered into Washington, Pennsylvania, to seek employment, with an
ambition not uncommon among young men of that period, to become a stage
driver. In his wanderings about the town he halted at the National
House, then kept by Edward Lane, where he fell in with Archie McNeil,
and to him made known the object of his visit. Archie, ever ready to
perpetrate a joke, encouraged the aspirations of the young "greenhorn,"
and questioned him concerning his experience in driving horses and
divers other matters and things pertaining to the work he proposed to
engage in. Opposite the National House, on the Maiden street front,
there was a long wooden shed, into which empty coaches were run for
shelter, the tongues thereof protruding toward the street. McNeil
proposed to the supplicating youth that he furnish a practical
illustration of his talent as a driver, to which he readily assented,
and crossing the street to the shed where the coaches were, he was
commanded to climb up on the driver's seat, which he promptly did.
McNeil then fastened a full set of reins used for driving, to the end of
the coach tongue, and handed them up to the young man. He next placed in
his hands a driver's whip, and told him to show what he could do. The
coach bodies, it will be remembered, were placed on long, wide, and
stout leather springs, which caused a gentle rocking when in motion. The
young weakling, fully equipped as a driver, swayed himself back and
forth, cracked the whip first on one side, and then on the other of the
tongue, rocked the coach vehemently, manipulated the reins in various
forms and with great pomp, and continued exercising himself in this
manner for a considerable time, without evincing the slightest
consciousness that he was the victim of a joke. A number of persons, the
writer included, witnessed this ludicrous scene, and heartily enjoyed
the fun. Among the spectators was James G. Blaine, then a student at
Washington college. McNeil was a son-in-law of Jack Bailiss, the old
driver before mentioned, and when stage lines were withdrawn from the
road he moved with his family to Iowa, and settled in Oskaloosa.

Watty Noble might well be esteemed the Nestor of stage drivers. He
commenced his career as a driver on the Bedford and Chambersburg pike.
His route on that road was between Reamer's and the Juniata Crossings,
_via_ Lilly's and Ray's Hills, a distance of ten miles, and his average
time between the points named, was one hour and thirty minutes. He drove
one team on this route for a period of ten years without losing or
exchanging a horse. He subsequently drove for five consecutive years on
the National Road, between Brownsville and Hillsboro, and, as the old
pike boys were accustomed to say, "leveled the road." When he "got the
start," no other driver could pass him, unless in case of accident. He
was not a showy reinsman, but noted for keeping his team well and long
together. In personal habits he was quiet and steady, and no man ever
impeached his honesty or fidelity. Jim Burr, the famous old driver
elsewhere mentioned, was a son-in-law of Watty Noble.

Charley Bostick, a stage driver who lived in Uniontown, gained a
somewhat unsavory reputation as one of the principals in a social
scandal, involving the name of a prominent old Uniontown merchant. The
incident produced great agitation in Uniontown society at the time, and
its disagreeable details are stored away in the memories of all the
older citizens of that place, but it is doubtful if three-fourths of its
present inhabitants ever heard of it. On the night of the occurrence it
fell to Bostick's lot in the rounds of his regular service as a driver,
to take a coach from Uniontown to Farmington, but he was so prominently
and closely identified with the event referred to that he deemed it
expedient to employ a substitute, which he procured in the person of
"Dumb Ike," competent for the service and the occasion, and ever ready
for such exigencies.

Alfred Wolf, an old stage driver, is remembered as a large, fine looking
and blustering sort of a man. His wife was a sister of Watson and
Robinson Murphy, two well known, thrifty and highly esteemed farmers of
Fayette county, Pennsylvania. The marriage ceremony that made Miss
Martha Murphy the lawful wife of Alfred Wolf was performed by the late
Hon. William Hatfield, when that gentleman was an acting Justice of the
Peace for Redstone township, and the writer hereof was present at the
wedding. When stage drivers were no longer required on the National
Road, Alfred Wolf engaged in the business of tavern keeping, and for a
number of years kept a public house in McClellandtown; and when the
strife between the States culminated in actual hostilities, he enlisted
as a Union soldier and perished in the cause. His widow went to Ohio,
re-married, and is still living in that State.

Henry G. Marcy, called Governor, because of his near kinship to the old
time, distinguished New York statesman of that name, who was at the head
of the War Department during the conflict with Mexico, was a stage
driver and lived in Uniontown. He was a small man in stature, but had a
bright and clear intellect. He died in Uniontown a number of years ago
at an advanced age, leaving a widow, still surviving, but quite feeble by
reason of her great age. George E. Marcy, also called Governor, a well
known and active Democratic politician of Uniontown, is a son of the old
driver.

Joseph Hughes, an old stage driver, is still living in Washington,
Pennsylvania, vivacious and sprightly despite the weight of years piled
upon his back. He was an expert and trusty driver, well known along the
road, and cherishes the memory of the stirring times, when the road was
the great highway of the Nation and he and his fellow drivers rode on
the top wave of the excitement incident thereto.

James Bradley, an old stage driver, worked sometimes at repairs on the
road. He made a breaker of unusual height on the hill east of
Washington, Pennsylvania, and upon being questioned as to his motive for
making it so high, replied that "he wanted to give some of the boys a
lofty toss." A few days thereafter, he was in service as a driver
himself, and going down the hill mentioned at a rapid rate, to "scoot
the hollow," as he termed it, his coach struck the high breaker and he
got the "lofty toss" himself, having been thrown from the box, a
distance of nearly two rods, causing him a broken arm and other less
serious injuries. He said, after this accident, that he would never
again make high breakers on the road, or advise others to do so.

John Teed, husband of Mrs. Teed, who keeps the popular and prosperous
boarding house on Morgantown street, Uniontown, was an old stage driver.
His first engagement as a driver on the road was with the Express line,
called derisively "The Shake Gut." After driving a short time on the
Express, he was given a team on one of the regular coach lines. He was
an approved driver and promoted to the office of guardsman. The
guardsman was a person sent with the coach to superintend its progress,
and aid in protecting it from the incursions of robbers, which were not
uncommon in the night time on the mountainous sections of the road.

Thomas Poland was in every essential a stage driver, and zealously
devoted to his calling. He drove out from Uniontown, east and west, as
occasion required. He was a man rather below the average stature, but
stoutly built and of swarthy complexion. Many old drivers were moved to
grief when business ceased on the road, but no one felt the change more
keenly than Thomas Poland.

John Guttery, of Washington, Pennsylvania, was one of the early stage
drivers of the road, and a good and trusty one. He was a tall man,
rounded out proportionately to his height, and closely resembled the
renowned old driver, Redding Bunting. He was a brother of Charles
Guttery, the old wagoner and tavern keeper mentioned in another chapter
of this volume. John Guttery, after driving stage a number of years,
gave up that exciting occupation and established a livery stable in
Washington, which he conducted successfully until his death in that
place a number of years ago.




CHAPTER XXIV.

  _Stages and Stage Drivers continued--Gen. Taylor approaching
     Cumberland--Early Coaches--The first Troy Coach on the Road--Mr.
     Reeside and Gen. Jackson--John Buck--Accidents--Kangaroo and
     Bob-tail Teams--John Mills and William Bishop--Celebration at
     Cumberland--David Bonebraker, Hanson Willison, and a long list of
     other old drivers--Billy Willis and Peter Burdine--Fare Rates--The
     Way Bill--The Landlords--Pilot and Pioneer Lines--Compensation of
     Stage Drivers--Hopwood's Row--Withdrawal of the lines--The dignity
     of stage drivers, estimated by an old pike boy._


Scharts' history of Western Maryland gives the following account of
President Taylor's ride over the mountain division of the road, when on
his way to Washington to be inaugurated:

"President Taylor and his party were, in 1849, conveyed over the road
under the marshalship of that most indefatigable Whig, Thomas Shriver,
who, with some other Cumberlanders, proceeded to the Ohio river and met
the presidential party. Among the party were statesmen, politicians, and
office-hunters, notably Col. Bullet, a brilliant editor from New
Orleans, who was to occupy a relation to President Taylor something like
that of Henry J. Raymond to Lincoln. The road was a perfect glare of
ice, and everything above ground was literally plated with sleeted
frost. The scenery was beautiful; to native mountaineers too common to
be of much interest, but to a Southerner like Gen. Taylor, who had never
seen the like, it was a phenomenon. In going down a spur of Meadow
Mountain, the presidential coach, with the others, danced and waltzed on
the polished road, first on one side and then on the other, with every
sign of an immediate capsize, but the coaches were manned with the most
expert of the whole corps of drivers. Shriver was in the rear, and in
the greatest trepidation for the safety of the President. He seemed to
feel himself responsible for the security of the head of the Nation.
Down each hill and mountain his bare head could be seen protruding
through the window of his coach to discover if the President's coach was
still upon wheels. The iron gray head of the General could almost with
the same frequency be seen outside of his window, not to see after
anybody's safety, but to look upon what seemed to him an arctic
panorama. After a ride of many miles the last long slope was passed and
everything was safe. At twilight the Narrows were reached, two miles
west of Cumberland, one of the boldest and most sublime views on the
Atlantic slope. Gen. Taylor assumed authority and ordered a halt, and
out he got in the storm and snow and looked at the giddy heights on
either side of Wills creek, until he had taken in the grandeur of the
scenery. He had beheld nothing like it before, even in his campaigns in
Northern Mexico. The President-elect was tendered a reception on his
arrival at Cumberland, and the next morning he and his party left on the
cars for Washington."

At an early day there was a coach factory at or near the Little
Crossings, where many of the first passenger coaches used on the road
were made. They were without thorough braces, or springs of any kind.
Their bodies were long, and the inside seats for passengers placed
crosswise. They had but one door, and that was in the front, so that
passengers on entering were compelled to climb over the front seats to
reach those in the rear.

The first coach of the Troy pattern was placed on the road in the year
1829 by James Reeside, and tradition has it that he won this coach with
a bet on Gen. Jackson's election to the presidency. Mr. Reeside was
desirous that Gen. Jackson should be the first person to ride in this
coach, and accordingly tendered it to the President-elect when on his
way to Washington, who true to his habit of refusing gifts, declined the
proffered compliment as to himself, but consented that his family might
occupy the coach. Charley Howell was the driver, and his team was one of
the finest on the road. Many coaches were brought out on the road
afterward from the Troy and Concord factories. These coaches cost
between five and six hundred dollars each.

John Buck was one of the oldest and best stage drivers on the road. He
lived in Washington, Pennsylvania, and drove on the old line in the
life-time of Daniel Moore, and was a great favorite of that ancient
stage proprietor. When Lafayette visited Washington in 1825, Mr. Moore
was active and prominent in arranging for his reception at that place,
and assigned John Buck to drive the coach in which the illustrious
visitor entered the town. It was a proud day for the old driver, who
shared with the hero of the occasion, the plaudits of the people. Buck
subsequently became the senior member of the firm of Buck, Lyon & Wolf,
contractors, who built most of the locks and dams on the Muskingum
river, in the State of Ohio. This old firm was called the "Menagerie
Company," on account of the names of its members.

[Illustration: THE NARROWS.]

William Robinson (not "Billy") suffered an "upset" at Somerfield, in
1832, with a full load of passengers going west. The stage coach had but
one door, and to bring up the door side to the Endsley tavern, in
Somerfield, it was necessary to wheel around. Robinson turned his team
with such rapidity as to overturn the coach, and the passengers were all
tumbled out in a pile, but none of them were seriously hurt. Wash.
Alridge threw a coach over on the Conway hill, near Somerfield,
inflicting a severe spinal injury upon a passenger who lived in
Cincinnati. The sufferer was cared for at the tavern in Jockey
Hollow, kept at the time by Aaron Wyatt. The stage company (old line)
paid the injured passenger a considerable sum in damages, without suit.
A passenger by the name of Merrill, of Indianapolis, had a leg broken by
the upsetting of a coach at the turn of the road, above Somerfield;
Samuel Jaco was the driver. William Roach, a well known driver, was
killed in an "upset" at the Little Crossings bridge, about the year
1837. This seems to have been a different accident from that which
occurred near the same place in 1835, related in the sketch of John
Marker. Marker witnessed the accident of 1835, and states that the
driver who was killed at that time was James Rhodes. David Stinson, an
old driver, was killed by an "upset" on Woodcock Hill. Woodcock Hill is
a short distance west of Thomas Brownfield's old Mt. Augusta tavern, and
is the highest peak on the road in Fayette county, Pennsylvania. Charley
Howell upset in 1835, coming down the Winding Ridge Hill, and was badly
hurt. He had a leg and arm broken, and was nursed at Connelly's tavern,
in Petersburg, for many months before he recovered.

In 1834 or 1835, Mr. Stockton transferred a number of stage teams and
drivers, from the Baltimore and Washington City road, to the National
Road. Two of these teams ran in and out from Somerfield. One called "the
Kangaroo team" was driven by John Mills. They were large, dark bays, and
much admired by lovers of fine horses. Mills knew how to handle them. He
was a superb driver. Another of these "transferred" teams was driven by
William Bishop. The horses in this team were light bays, all
"bob-tails," and notwithstanding there was but one good eye in the whole
team, and all were "sprung in the knees," it is asserted by many old
pike boys that this unique and "blemished" team was the fastest on the
road. It was brought out from the Baltimore and Washington road by
Charles Howell, who drove it a short time before it was turned over to
William Bishop. Bishop was a capital reinsman.

The preservation of the National Road was considered so vital to the
general welfare by everybody living upon its line and adjacent to it,
that the deepest interest was manifested in the success of every measure
proposed for its benefit. There was no powerful and paid "lobby" around
the halls of Congress when the Cumberland Road was the highway of the
Republic, as there is at this day, but all measures planned and
presented for its preservation and repair, were carefully watched and
guarded by such statesmen as Henry Clay, Daniel Sturgeon, Andrew
Stewart, T. M. T. McKennan, Lewis Steenrod, W. T. Hamilton, and Henry W.
Beeson. The following from a Cumberland paper published in that place
sixty years ago shows the popular feeling in behalf of the road at that
date:

"The citizens of the town on the 21st of May, 1832, in demonstration of
their great joy growing out of the appropriation made by the National
Government for the repair of the Cumberland Road, made arrangements for
the celebration of that event. In pursuance of that arrangement, Samuel
Slicer illuminated his large and splendid hotel, which patriotic
example was followed by James Black. In addition to the illumination,
Mr. Bunting (our famous 'old Red'), agent of L. W. Stockton, ordered out
a coach, drawn by four large gray stallions, driven by George Shuck. The
stage was beautifully illuminated, which presented to the generous
citizens of this place a novelty calculated to impress upon the minds of
all who witnessed it the great benefits they anticipated by having the
road repaired. There were also seated upon the top of the vehicle
several gentlemen who played on various instruments, which contributed
very much to the amusement of the citizens and gave a zest to everything
that inspired delight or created feelings of patriotism. They started
from the front of Mr. Slicer's hotel, and as they moved on slowly the
band played 'Hail Columbia,' 'Freemasons' March,' 'Bonaparte Crossing
the Rhine,' 'Washington's March,' together with a new tune composed by
Mr. Mobley, of this place, and named by the gentlemen on the stage, 'The
Lady We Love Best,' and many others, as they passed through the
principal streets of the town. On their return they played 'Home, Sweet
Home,' to the admiration of all who heard it."

David Bonebraker was a stage driver of good reputation, and a general
favorite. While his name would import otherwise, he was a careful driver
and never during his whole service did he break a bone of man or beast.
He was a large, fine looking man, and drove between Somerfield and Mt.
Washington as early as 1831, and for a number of years thereafter.

Hanson Willison was early on the road as a stage driver, and none of his
fellow drivers excelled him in skillfulness. He drove a brief period
between Uniontown and Brownsville, but for the most part in and out from
Cumberland. He is still living in Cumberland, proprietor of the American
House livery stables, and doing a profitable business. He retains the
habits of the early days of the road, generous almost to a fault,
perfectly familiar with the road's history, his memory is well stored
with its exciting incidents and accidents. Hanson Willison and Ashael
Willison before mentioned, are brothers.

[Illustration: HANSON WILLISON.]

The few remaining old folks who witnessed the exciting scenes of the
National Road in its palmy days, will readily recall the following old
stage drivers: John Griffith, William Witham, George Lukens, Wash
Alters, Hank Smith, John Heinselman, Barney Strader, John Munson, West
Crawford, James Chair, William Roberts, Vin Huffman, John Windell, a
small, thin faced man, with rings in his ears, one of the earliest
drivers, William Saint, who was also a blacksmith, and worked,
occasionally, at his trade in Uniontown. He went to Texas before the
civil war, and died there. Lewis Gribble, son of John, the old wagoner
and tavern keeper. He went to Virginia, drove stage in that State, and
died there. John Sparker, John Snell, David Oller, Joseph Henderson, a
steady-going man, mentioned among the old tavern keepers in connection
with the "Gals house," David Armor, William Armor, Samuel Oller, and
William Dickey. The Ollers, the Armors, Dickey and Henderson were of
Washington, Pa. Jacob Snyder, subsequently manager and proprietor of
the Shipley house, in Cumberland. William and George Grim, John Zane,
James Schaverns, Joseph Vanhorn, John McIlree, Jesse Boring, John
Munson, John Ruth, David Jones, Benjamin Miller, subsequently tavern
keeper in the old Mannypenny house, Uniontown. An early line of stages
stopped at Miller's. James Mannypenny, Thomas Fee, Walter Head, educated
for the ministry, Thomas and Edward McVenus, William Totten, William
Vanhorn, Spencer Motherspaw, James Griffith, Abram Dedrick, William
Fowler, Thomas Chilson, William Jones, Andrew Heck, John Fink, William
Irwin, James Sampey, subsequently and for many years owner and manager
of the tavern at Mt. Washington, where the Good Intent line changed
horses and passengers often stopped for meals; Isaac Newton, Robert
Jackson, a young man of diminutive size, from one of the New England
States, whose father came and took him home; James Dennison,
subsequently tavern keeper at Claysville and at Hopwood; Isaac Newton,
died at Mt. Washington when John Foster kept the tavern at that point;
Matthew Byers, Hugh Drum, John Hendrix, Alexander Thompson, William
Hart, Charles Kemp, Ben Watkins, Ben Watson, John and Andrew Shaffer,
Garret Clark, Garret Minster, John Ferrell, James Lynch, John Seaman,
James Reynolds, John Bunting, Lindy Adams, Leander Fisk, James Derlin,
Aaron Wyatt, James Andrews, Alfred Haney, Wash Bodkin, William Crawford,
Charles Cherry, William Hammers, Addis Lynn, Harry, Nelse and Jack
Hammers, Nimrod, Joseph, Jack and William Sopher, John and Joseph
Pomroy, William and Watt Whisson, John McCollough, William Miller, son
of Charley, the old tavern keeper west of Hillsborough; Robert
McIlheney, John McMack, Thomas, Joshua and William Boyd, John Parsons,
Matthew Davis, one of the oldest, and still living at Brownsville; John
W. Boyce, George Wiggins, brother of Harrison, the old fox hunter of the
mountains; Robert Bennett, William White, David Reynolds, James
McIllree, Fred Buckingham, Thomas and William Noble.

William Noble died in Washington, Pennsylvania, Jan. 26, 1894.

Robert McIlheny, after relinquishing the reins and whip, became an agent
for the sale of the celebrated Hayes buggies, of Washington.

John Parsons left the road to take charge of a hotel in Bridgeville,
Allegheny county, Pennsylvania. Alfred Haney went South, became
baggagemaster on a Southern railroad, and was killed in an accident.
Charley Cherry had the manners of a savage, and was called "the big
savage man," but it is not known that he ever wantonly shed the blood of
a fellow being.

James McIlree drove between Washington and Wheeling.

Hugh Drum was called "Mickey Murray." He lingered for a while on the
road after its glory departed, and pushed out for New York, where he
engaged to drive an omnibus. What became of him in the subsequent
shifting sands of time is not known, but presumably he has gone to the
unknown world.

[Illustration: MATT. DAVIS.]

William McCleary, who died recently near Claysville leaving an estate
valued at $50,000; Daniel Dawson, subsequently kept a tavern near
Limestone, Marshall county, West Virginia, and died there; Samuel
Rowalt, Robert Bell, William Watkins, John Ford, still living in
Monongahela city; George Freiger, Barney and Samuel Nunemaker, Thomas
Cox, John Ruth, Abram Boyce, Charles Oulitt, James Dean, William
("Boggy") Moore, when a boy a rider on the pony express; John Schenck,
Thomas Hager, Joseph Ruff, Dandy Jack, James Fisk, Joseph Drake, Andrew
Ferrell, John Fouch, George Walker, George Banford, Joseph Lewis, Larry
Willard, Isaiah Fuller, Davy Crockett, Henry Wagner, John Foster, Henry
Smith, James Foster, John Noble, Edward McGinnis, Thomas McGinnis, John
Johnson (Old Sandy), John Horrell, William Grim, Elias Johnson, Daniel
Boyer, James Bodkin, James Null, William Null, William Clark, David
Brower, Richard Frantz, James Rowe, John Seaman, David Brennard, Henry
Schuck, George Crow, James Andrews (Dutch Jim), drove in and out from
Grantsville; John Huhn, drove in and out from Claysville; Moses
Thornburg, Wylie Baily, James McClung, James, Abraham and Robert Devan,
brothers; Thomas and George Henderson, Stephen Leggett, James Wilson,
Henry Herrick, John Giddings, Ed Washburn, J. S. Beck, Frank White,
Jesse Matthews, Robert Fenton, Jesse Hardin, David Johnson, Archy
McGregor, Samuel Darby, James Moore, Joseph Drake, James Riley, William
Matthews, Edward Hall, James Vancamp, Benjamin Miller, grandson of the
old tavern keeper of Uniontown; Samuel Betts, Calvin Springer,
ex-sheriff of Fayette county; James Noggle, Martin Stedler, William
Wiley, John Wiley, William McGidigen, James McGidigen, Daniel Shriver,
Jerome Heck, Frederic Zimmerman, Robert Bennett, Edward Kelley, John
Clark, Samuel Blair, Ross Clark, George Butts, Beck Kelley, William
Kelley, William Fisher, James and Thomas Bradley, Thomas Johnson,
William Brower, Richard Frazee, Isaac Toner (Dumb Ike), Joseph Jenk,
Evans Holton, Daniel Dean, Jesse Brennard, George Brennard, John Steep,
John Collier, Ben Tracy, George Moore, George Richmire, Charles
Richmire, Thomas McMillen, Samuel Porter, Isaac Flagle, William and Ross
Clark, Richard Butts, Garret and West Crawford, John Brown, subsequently
a clerk in the Wheeling postoffice; Joseph Matthews, John Waugh, William
Hickman, a circus man; George Robbins, Abram Boyce, Oliver Jackson,
Joseph Bishop, Thomas McClelland, Elisha Stockwell, Isaac Denny,
subsequently tavern keeper at the old Griffin house in the mountain,
west of Somerfield; John Harris, drove on the Good Intent line, and died
in Uniontown; Charles and Robert Marquis, James Moore, son-in-law of
James Sampey, of Mount Washington; Perry Sheets, drove west of
Washington; Elmer Budd, drove from Uniontown to Brownsville; Frank
Watson, Bate Smith, Sam Jerome, James Downer, son of William, of the big
water trough on Laurel Hill, when a boy a rider for the pony express;
William Stewart, Caleb Crossland, of Uniontown; William Bogardus, who
lost an eye by coming in contact with a pump handle on Morgantown
street, Uniontown, on a dark night; John Robinson, a very large man;
Samuel Youman, mentioned under the head of old wagoners, next to "Old
Mount" the largest man on the road; Thomas Milligan, Joshua Boyd,
Stephen Leonard, David Johnson, James McCauley, Thomas Boyd, Garret
Clark, Henry Miller, Thomas Moore, William Wilkinson, Galloway Crawford,
Samuel Jaco, Robert Wright, Fred. Buckingham, Jacob Rapp, killed at
Brownsville about 1840 by his team running off; John Rush, Samuel
Holsted, Sandy Connor, living as late as 1882, and carrying the mail in
a two-horse vehicle from Frostburg to Grantsville; John Farrell, farming
near Grantsville in 1882 and at that date eighty-five years old; Jacob
Shock, Eph. Benjamin, William Bergoman, Upton Marlow, subsequently
proprietor of the American and other leading hotels in Denver, Colorado;
Archie McVicker, James Cameron, Charles Enox, Robert Amos, James
Finnegan, drove a bob-tailed team from Somerfield to Keyser's Ridge;
Squire Binch, of Brownsville, well remembered by the old folks of that
place; Richard Harris, Joseph and David Strong, the former for many
years a prominent citizen of Cumberland, and frequently honored by
public trusts; Abe Walls, ---- Bonum, called "Magnum Bonum;" James Gray,
Henry Powell, Henry Bergoman, Rock Goodridge, Sherwood Mott, Daniel
Boyer, Robert Dennis, David James, Thomas Grace, John Lidy, drove a dun
team of bob-tails from Farmington to Somerfield, that formerly belonged
to the Pioneer line; Isaac Frazee, James McLean, Thomas and Henry
Mahany, Baptist Mullinix, Amariah Bonner, B. W. Earl, subsequently a
stage agent, and tavern keeper at the Stone house near Fayette Springs,
and at Brownsville; John and Matthias Vanhorn, Daniel Quinn, James
Corbin, William Corman, of Braddee mail robbery fame; Atwood Merrill, a
fiery partisan of the Good Intent line; William Willis, noted as a fast
driver on the Old line. On one occasion Willis passed Peter Burdine, a
fast driver as before stated of the Good Intent line, which prompted the
partisans of the Old line to get up the little rhyme following to
emphasize and signalize the event:

     "Said Billy Willis to Peter Burdine,
     You had better wait for the Oyster line."

The fares on the stage lines were as follows:

     From Baltimore to Frederic                             $ 2 00
       "  Frederic to Hagerstown                              2 00
       "  Hagerstown to Cumberland                            5 00
       "  Cumberland to Uniontown                             4 00
       "  Uniontown to Washington                             2 25
       "  Washington to Wheeling                              2 00
                                                            ------
        Through fare                                        $17 25

A paper was prepared by the agent of the line at the starting point of
the coach in the nature of a bill of lading, called the "way bill." This
bill was given to the driver, and by him delivered to the landlord at
the station immediately upon the arrival of the coach. It contained the
name and destination of each passenger, and the several sums paid as
fare. It also bore the time of departure from the starting point, and
contained blanks for noting the time of the arrival and departure at
every station. The time was noted by an agent of the line, if one were
at the station, and in the absence of an agent, the noting was done by
the landlord. If a passenger got on at a way station, and this was of
daily occurrence, he paid his fare to the landlord or agent, which was
duly noted on the way bill, together with the passenger's destination.

In addition to the stage lines hereinbefore mentioned, there was a line
known as the "Landlords' Line," put on the road by tavern keepers,
prominent among whom were William Willis (the old driver before
mentioned), Joseph Dilly, and Samuel Luman. There was also a "Pilot
Line" and a "Pioneer Line." These lines had but a short run. The
railroad managers east of Cumberland favored the older lines, and gave
them such advantages in rates that the new lines were compelled to
retire from the competition. They sold out their stock to the old
companies. James Reeside owned the "Pilot Line," and the "Pioneer Line"
was owned by Peters, Moore & Co.

The compensation paid stage drivers was twelve dollars a month, with
boarding and lodging. They took their meals and lodged at the stage
houses, except the married men, who lodged in their own dwellings when
chance threw them at home.

At Uniontown a number of contiguous frame buildings on Mill and South
streets, in the rear of Brownfield's tavern, known as "Hopwood's Row,"
were occupied almost exclusively by the families of stage drivers. They
were erected and owned by the late Rice G. Hopwood, Esquire, and hence
the name given them. Two or three of these old houses are all that are
left standing, and they are in a dilapidated condition. The spirit of
improvement which in late years entered Uniontown, seems to have
carefully avoided the neighborhood of "Hopwood's Row."

The Good Intent and Stockton lines were taken from the National Road in
1851, and placed on the plank road from Cumberland to West Newton. From
the latter point passengers were conveyed by steamboat to Pittsburg by
way of the Youghiogheny river, which was made navigable at that date by
a system of locks and dams like that of the Monongahela. Upon the
withdrawal of the lines mentioned, a line was put on the National Road
by Redding Bunting and Joshua Marshe, and ran as far west as Washington,
Pennsylvania. William Hall subsequently purchased the interest of Mr.
Marshe in this line, which was kept on the road until about the close of
the year 1852, when the era of four-horse coaches ended.

[Illustration: JOHN McILREE.]

Mr. Endsley, before quoted, furnishes his juvenile opinion of stages and
stage drivers, which was shared in by all the boys of the road, as
follows:

"My earliest recollections are intimately associated with coaches, teams
and drivers, and like most boys raised in an old stage tavern, I
longed to be a man when I could aspire to the greatness and dignity of a
professional stage driver. In my boyish eyes no position in life had so
many attractions as that of driving a stage team. A Judge, a
Congressman, even Henry Clay or President Jackson, did not measure up to
the character of John Mills and Charley Howell, in my juvenile fancy."

The picture of the stage coach era herein drawn may be lacking in vigor
and perspicuity of style, but it contains no exaggeration. Much more
could be written concerning it, and the story would still be incomplete.
It is sad to think that nearly all the old drivers, so full of life and
hope and promise when pursuing their favorite calling on the nation's
great highway, have answered the summons that awaits the whole human
family, and of the vast multitude that witnessed and admired the dashing
exploits of the old drivers, but few remain to relate the story. When
the old pike was superseded by the railroad, many of the stage drivers
went west and continued their calling on stage lines occupying ground in
advance of the approaching railway. Others lingered on the confines of
the familiar road, and fell into various pursuits of common life. Of
these, some achieved success. As drivers they had opportunity for making
acquaintances and friends. Hanson Willison was eminently successful as a
local politician, and achieved the distinction of being twice elected
sheriff of Alleghany county, Maryland.




CHAPTER XXV.

  _Distinguished Stage Proprietors, Lucius W. Stockton, James Reeside,
     Dr. Howard Kennedy, William H. Stelle--Old Stage Agents, Charley
     Rettig, John Risley, William Biddle, James Coudy, Redding Bunting,
     Edward Lane, Theodore Granger, Charles Danforth, Jacob Beck, Daniel
     Brown, "Billy" Scott, "Lem" Cross, and B. W. Earl--The Pony
     Express._


The most conspicuous of all the old stage proprietors of the National
Road was Lucius Witham Stockton. James Reeside was probably an older
stage man, and may have owned and operated more stage lines; but Mr.
Stockton was longer and more prominently identified with the business on
the National Road. He was born at Flemington, New Jersey, September 1,
1799. He was a son of Lucius Stockton, and a grandson of the Rev. Philip
Stockton, known in his day and among his countrymen as "The
Revolutionary Preacher," who was a brother of Richard Stockton, a signer
of the Declaration of Independence from the colony of New Jersey. L. W.
Stockton appeared in Uniontown as a stage proprietor previous to the
year 1824, the exact date not ascertainable. He was twice married. His
first marriage occurred on November 24, 1824, and at that date he was a
resident of Uniontown, and had been previous thereto. His first wife was
Rebecca Moore, a daughter of Daniel Moore, an old stage proprietor who
lived in Washington, Pennsylvania. By his first marriage he had six
children, viz: Richard C., Daniel Moore, Elizabeth C., Lucius Witham,
Margaret, and Rebecca. Richard, Daniel, and Elizabeth, by the first
marriage, are dead; the last named died in infancy. Lucius Witham is
living in Philadelphia. He married Ellen, the youngest daughter of Dr.
John Wishart, an old and distinguished physician of Washington,
Pennsylvania, grandfather on the maternal line of Hon. Ernest F.
Acheson, late Republican nominee for Congress in the Twenty-fourth
district of Pennsylvania. Margaret Stockton became the wife of Dr.
Thomas McKennan, a leading physician at this time of Washington,
Pennsylvania, and a member of the old and distinguished McKennan family
of that place. Rebecca Stockton became the wife of Capt. Alexander
Wishart, and is living in Newark, New Jersey, where her husband is
executive officer of the Law and Order League. Captain Wishart was a
gallant soldier of the Union army in the war between the States.

[Illustration: L. W. STOCKTON.]

Mr. Stockton's second wife was Katharine Stockton, his first cousin. She
is still living, making her home with her son-in-law, Gen. Leiper, of
Philadelphia. By his second marriage Mr. Stockton had four children, as
follows: Katharine, Richard C., Elias Boudinot and Henrietta Maria. Of
these all are dead but Henrietta Maria. She is the wife of Gen. Leiper,
with whom her mother lives, as before stated, in Philadelphia.

It is related as an incident in the early career of Mr. Stockton that he
had a race with a horse and buggy against a locomotive, between the
Relay House and Baltimore, in which he came out ahead. The horse he
drove on that occasion was a favorite gray. He had a pair of "Winflower"
mares, which he drove frequently from Uniontown to Wheeling between
breakfast and tea time, tarrying two or three hours at mid-day in
Washington. At the watering places he ordered a little whisky to be
added to the water given these spirited and fleet animals, and they
became so accustomed to it that, it is said, they refused to drink
unless the water contained the stimulating element. He would also drive
from Uniontown to Cumberland in a day, stopping at the stations to
transact business, and from Cumberland to Hagerstown, sixty-six miles,
was an ordinary day's drive for him. His private carriage was a long
open vehicle which he called "The Flying Dutchman." Hanson Willison, who
has a vivid recollection of Mr. Stockton and his lively trips over the
road, says that the names of his sorrel mares (the "Winflowers") were
"Bet" and "Sal," and that they once ran off. On that occasion Mr.
Stockton was accompanied by his wife and a sister. Miss Stockton was
much alarmed, and pulling the coat-tail of her brother cried out
piteously, "Hold on, brother William, hold on, or we'll all be killed!"
But Mr. Stockton heeded not the cries of his sister, and having no fear
of horses, soon regained control of the runaways without sustaining loss
or injury.

Mr. Stockton died at Uniontown on April 25th, 1844, at "Ben Lomond," the
name he gave his residence, now the property of the widow and heirs of
the late Judge Gilmore. A few years ago the remains of Mr. Stockton were
removed from the old Methodist burying ground in Uniontown, under
direction of his loving daughters, Mrs. Wishart and Mrs. Dr. McKennan,
and deposited in the beautiful cemetery at Washington, Pa.

Mr. Stockton was of Episcopalian lineage, and active in establishing the
services of the church in Uniontown. He brought out Bishop Stone, of
Maryland, to baptize his daughter Rebecca, now Mrs. Wishart. He was a
vestryman, and besides contributing liberally in money to support the
church, donated to the parish of Uniontown the lot on which the new
stone edifice of St. Peter's now stands.

James Reeside, the second son of Edward Reeside and his wife, Janet
Alexander, was born near Paisley, Renfrew, Scotland, and was brought,
when an infant, to Baltimore county, Md., in 1789, where he was raised.
His parents being in humble circumstances, toil was his first estate.
Poor in book learning and in earthly goods, he possessed genius, energy,
executive ability, and an ambition that fitted him to be a leader of
men. Before the war of 1812 he was a wagoner, hauling merchandise from
Baltimore and Philadelphia to Pittsburg and west to Zanesville and
Columbus, Ohio. His promptness and sagacity soon enabled him to own his
own teams, which were employed in hauling artillery to Canada.
Commissioned a forage master under Gen. Winfield Scott, at Lundy's Lane,
his Scottish blood prompted him to seize a musket, as a volunteer, from
which hard fought battle he carried honorable scars. On his return he
settled at Hagerstown, Md., where, in 1816, he married Mary, the
daughter of John Weis, a soldier of the Revolutionary war. Abandoning
wagoning, he ran a stage line, in 1816 to 1818, from Hagerstown _via_
Greencastle and Mercersburg to McConnellstown, there connecting with the
stage line then in operation from Chambersburg to Pittsburg by Bedford,
Somerset, and Mt. Pleasant. In 1818, in connection with Stockton &
Stokes, of Baltimore; Joseph Boyd, of Hagerstown; Kincaid, Beck & Evans,
of Uniontown; George Dawson, of Brownsville; Stephen Hill, of Hillsboro;
and Simms & Pemberton, of Wheeling, he put on the first regular stage
line, carrying the mail, between Baltimore and Wheeling, before the
construction of the turnpikes between Hagerstown and Cumberland. This
division of the route being from Hancock to Frostburg, he removed to
Cumberland, where, in conjunction with his stage line, he kept the
"McKinley Tavern," at the corner of Baltimore and Mechanics streets,
afterward kept by Jacob Fechtig, James Stoddard, John Edwards, and
others, and now known as the "Elberon." In 1820 he quit tavern keeping,
and confined himself to mail contracting and the stage business. In 1827
John McLean, Postmaster General, afterward one of the Justices of the
Supreme Court of the United States, prevailed on him to take the mail
contract between Philadelphia and New York, and he moved from Cumberland
to Philadelphia. In the first year he reduced the time for transporting
the mail between the two cities from twenty-three to sixteen hours, and
soon thereafter to twelve hours. He soon became the owner of most of the
lines running out of Philadelphia and New York, and the largest mail
contractor in the United States. He employed in this service more than
one thousand horses and four hundred men. The wagoner soon became the
"Land Admiral," a title given him by the press in recognition of his
energy and ability.

[Illustration: JAMES REESIDE.]

The Postoffice Department at that time having to rely on its own
resources, and under Major W. T. Barry, then Postmaster-General, the
service had so increased in thinly settled sections it became deeply in
debt. Mr. Reeside raised, on his personal responsibility, large sums of
money to relieve it. His efforts were appreciated, and he was the
esteemed friend of Andrew Jackson, Henry Clay, and other distinguished
men, without regard to politics, although he was a pronounced Democrat.
Of massive frame, six feet five inches in height, yet spare in flesh,
clear cut features, sparkling, clear blue-gray eyes, fair complexion,
with dark, sandy, curly hair, he was a true Highlander in appearance,
genial in disposition, with quick and ready wit. Fond of song and
story, kind, yet strict, with all in his employment, and generous to a
fault, no words can more appropriately describe him than those of his
favorite poet and countryman, Robert Burns:

     "For thus the royal mandate ran,
     When first the human race began,
     The social, friendly, honest man
         Where'er he be,
     'Tis he fulfills great nature's plan,
         An' none but he."

Controversies arising between Amos Kendall, the successor of Barry, and
all the old mail contractors, their pay was suspended upon frivolous
grounds, compelling them to bring suits, among the most celebrated of
which were those of Reeside and Stockton & Stokes. The latter's case was
referred to Virgil Maxy, who found in their favor about $140,000. Mr.
Reeside's claim was tried before Justice Baldwin and a jury in 1841, and
resulted in a verdict for plaintiff of $196,496.06, which, after
seventeen years, was paid, with interest. As soon as his contracts under
Kendall expired he quit the mail service, after putting the Philadelphia
and New York mail on the Camden & Amboy railroad during the residue of
his contract term.

In 1836 he bought the interest of John W. Weaver between Cumberland and
Wheeling, then a tri-weekly line; increased it to a daily, then twice
daily, and added another tri-weekly line, and named the lines "Good
Intent," which was the name he had previously given the fast mail line
between Philadelphia and Pittsburg. In 1839 he sold his entire interest
in the National Road lines, and gave his attention to his suit against
the United States. His health being impaired, he spent the winter of
1842 in New Orleans. Returning in the ensuing spring, without benefit to
his health, he died in Philadelphia on the 3d of September, 1842.

Mr. Reeside attracted attention by reason of the peculiar garb he
appeared in. In the winter season he always wore a long drab overcoat
and a fur cap. Once in passing along a street in Philadelphia in company
with Col. Richard M. Johnson, of Kentucky, Vice-President of the United
States, some scarlet cloth was observed in a tailor's window, which
prompted Col. Johnson to say: "Reeside, as your coaches are all red, you
ought to wear a red vest." Mr. Reeside replied: "I will get one if you
will." "Agreed," said Johnson, and straightway both ordered red vests
and red neckties, and from that time as long as they lived continued to
wear vests and neckties of scarlet colors. James Reeside aided in an
early day to develop the mighty resources of our country, with such
agencies as were then available, and his name and good work deserve to
be perpetuated in history.

Dr. Howard Kennedy, an owner of stock in the National Road Stage
Company, and for a brief period a trustee of the road under the
provisions of a Pennsylvania law, enacted in 1848, repealed in 1856, was
born in Washington county, Maryland, September 15th, 1809. His father
was the Hon. Thomas Kennedy, an illustrious citizen, who figured
conspicuously in the history of Maryland in the olden time. Dr. Kennedy
was a graduate of the Medical University of Baltimore, and a thoroughly
educated physician, but the practice of medicine not proving congenial
to his tastes, he soon abandoned it and embarked in other pursuits.
About the year 1840, or a little before that time, he was appointed a
special, confidential agent of the general postoffice department, in
which relation he achieved distinction by detecting numerous mail
robberies, and bringing the perpetrators before the courts for trial and
punishment. It was through the vigilance of Dr. Kennedy that the mail
robberies of the Haldeman brothers, Pete and Abe, and Pate Sides, at
Negro Mountain, were discovered, and the offenders apprehended and
punished.

The Haldemans and Sides were stage drivers, and their calling through
the dismal shades of death and other dark regions in the mountains with
big, tempting, mail bags in their charge, no doubt turned their minds to
what they considered a speedy, if not altogether a safe method of
getting money. Whispers of suspicion growing out of the vigilance of Dr.
Kennedy in pushing his investigations, reached the ears of the suspected
ones, and they fled to Canada, but not to be thwarted in his purposes,
Dr. Kennedy pursued them thither, had them arrested and brought back to
Baltimore for trial. Abe Haldeman was acquitted, but Pete and Pate Sides
were convicted and sent to the penitentiary. Dr. Kennedy was also the
prime mover in bringing to light the noted mail robberies of Dr. John F.
Braddee, of Uniontown, as will be seen by the following affidavits:

     _Pennsylvania, Fayette County, ss._:

     The testimony of Dr. Howard Kennedy taken before N. Ewing,
     president judge of the 14th Judicial district of Pennsylvania, the
     8th day of January, 1841, in reference to the amount of bail to be
     required of John F. Braddee, Peter Mills Strayer and William
     Purnell. The said Dr. Howard Kennedy being first by me duly sworn
     according to law, deposeth and saith: "There will be difficulty in
     ascertaining the amount of money stolen from the mails. There have
     been six mail pouches or bags stolen, which would average twenty to
     thirty thousand dollars each. The whole would, I am satisfied,
     amount to one hundred thousand dollars. I saw the money alleged to
     have been found in the stable of John F. Braddee. The amount thus
     found was $10,098.60. The amount of cash stolen is probably about
     $50,000.

                                            "HOWARD KENNEDY."

     Taken and subscribed before me, January 8th, 1841.
                                                N. EWING,
                           P. Judge, 14th Judicial District.

[Illustration: WILLIAM H. STELLE.]

                                        PITTSBURG, January 25, 1841.

     "Howard Kennedy, special agent of the postoffice department, in
     addition to the testimony given by him before his Honor, Judge
     Ewing, further deposes that since that time he has received reports
     from various persons and places in the West of letters mailed at
     dates which would have, by due course of mail, been in the bags
     stolen, containing bank notes, scrip, certificates, drafts, and
     checks, amounting to $102,000 and upwards; that every mail brings
     him additional reports of losses, and that he believes the amounts
     reported will not constitute more than one-half of what has been
     lost in the mails between the 16th of November and the 18th of
     December, 1840, on the route from Wheeling to New York.

                                            "HOWARD KENNEDY.
                           "Special Agent Postoffice Department."

     Sworn and subscribed before me the 25th day of January, 1841.
                                              T. IRWIN, District Judge.

As before stated, Dr. Kennedy was one of the owners of the line of
coaches known as the National Road Stage Company. This was popularly
known as the Stockton line, called "the old line," because it was the
oldest on the road. Dr. Kennedy managed all the business of this line
relating to the transportation of the mails. He was also one of the
original members of the Western Express Company, doing business between
Cumberland and Wheeling and Pittsburg _via_ the Monongahela river. L. W.
Stockton dying in the spring of 1844, in the fall of that year Dr.
Kennedy brought his family from Hagerstown, Maryland, to Uniontown, and
established his residence in the old Stockton mansion, called "Ben
Lomond," now the home of Mrs. Judge Gilmore. Here Dr. Kennedy resided
until the year 1851, when he returned to Hagerstown, where he died on
the 12th of June, 1855. He was of medium height and delicate form, of
pleasant address, and a gentleman by birth, education, association and
aspiration; in religion an Episcopalian, and in politics a Democrat. His
widow, a sister of the late Alfred Howell, of Uniontown, survives him.
She is enjoying the sunset of a gentle life in Hagerstown, the central
figure of a remnant of that polite and refined society which in the
palmy days of the National Road distinguished all the old towns along
its line.

William H. Stelle was born in New Jersey, and it will be noted that many
of the stage owners, agents, and drivers came out from that State. Two
of Mr. Stelle's partners in the stage business, John A. Wirt and Mr.
Hutchinson, were likewise Jersey men. It is related that Mr. Stelle and
Mr. Acheson were both desirous of selling their interests in the stage
lines, the former being an owner in the Good Intent, and the latter in
the Stockton line. Mr. Stelle one day approached Mr. Acheson in
Wheeling, and told him he would give him five hundred dollars, if he
would sell or buy at a price to be mutually named. Mr. Acheson named a
price which he would give or take, and Mr. Stelle elected to sell, and
promptly paid Mr. Acheson five hundred dollars for acceding to his
proposition. Mr. Stelle located in Wheeling about the year 1841, and
died at Elm Grove, Ohio county, West Virginia, on the 26th of September,
1854, aged about fifty years. He left a son, William H., and a daughter,
Mrs. Susan R. Hamilton, both living in Wheeling.

Agents of the stage lines possessed functions somewhat, but not
altogether, like those of railroad conductors. Some agents passed
constantly over the road, paying bills, providing horses and equipage,
and giving general direction to the running of the lines. Others were
stationary, attending to local business. These agents were prominent
characters of the road, and popularly esteemed as men of high position.
One of the earliest agents was Charles Rettig, who subsequently kept the
tavern two and one-half miles east of Washington, and referred to in a
chapter on taverns and tavern keepers. John Risly, of Frederic, Md., and
William Biddle and James Coudy, of Hancock, were old agents of lines
east of Cumberland. Redding Bunting, Edward Lane, Theodore Granger and
Charles Danforth were agents of the Old line west of Cumberland, with
authority extending to Wheeling. Bunting also kept the National House in
Uniontown, and Lane kept the National House in Washington, which were
headquarters at those points respectively for their line. Charles
Danforth was a leading local agent of the Stockton line at Uniontown. He
was a large, fine looking man, with florid complexion, heavy black
whiskers, and possessed of popular manners. He was a native of New York
State, and died at Bedford, Pa., in 1853. His remains were brought to
Uniontown, and interred in the old Methodist cemetery, near Beeson's old
mill. His widow is living in Chicago. Edward Lane was a man of average
size, of reddish complexion, energetic in motion, and affable in manner.
His tavern in Washington, Pa., was one of the best eating houses on the
road. Granger was a large, dark complexioned man, not well liked by the
people, but a favorite of Mr. Stockton. After the stage lines were taken
from the road, Granger went to Cincinnati, procured employment at a
livery stable, and died in that city in indigent circumstances. Jacob
Beck was an agent for Weaver's line, which was on the road a short time,
and went with that line to Ohio and Kentucky. He returned from the West,
and was a bar-keeper for John N. Dagg, of Washington, Pa., and
subsequently, as elsewhere stated, kept tavern at Rony's Point, Va., and
died there. He was an old stage driver, a good one, and esteemed as an
honest man. Daniel Brown, mentioned among the old tavern keepers, was an
agent of the Good Intent line, and a very competent one. He was a native
of New Jersey, and his sad ending has been alluded to in another
chapter. William Scott, familiarly called "Billy," was a well-known
agent of the Good Intent line. He had been a driver, and was promoted to
an agency on account of his competency and fidelity. He was a master of
his business, a man of small stature, dark hair and complexion, and a
little given to brusqueness of manner, but on the whole rather a popular
agent. He remained an agent of the Good Intent line until business
ceased on the road, when he went to Iowa, and became an agent of a stage
line in that State. From Iowa he went to Texas, and died at Jefferson in
that State. It is said that he was descended from a good family on both
sides, who were wealthy, and that he engaged in stage driving from
choice, rather than necessity, and his friends were disappointed in his
career. Lemuel Cross was an agent of the Old line. He also kept tavern
at Piny Grove, as elsewhere stated, and is well remembered. His
jurisdiction as agent was mainly on the mountain division of the road,
and he thoroughly understood his business, and was familiar with all the
haunts, hills, and hollows of the mountains. B. W. Earl was likewise an
agent for a while of the Good Intent line. He commenced a driver, was
advanced to an agency, and ended a tavern keeper. John Foster, Andrew
Cable, William F. Cowdery, Levi Rose and William Terry were agents at
Wheeling. The latter had charge in part of Neil, Moore & Company's line
in Ohio.


THE PONY EXPRESS.

In the year 1835 or 6, Amos Kendall, being Postmaster-General, placed on
the road a line of couriers, called the "Pony Express." It was intended
to carry light mails with more speed than the general mail was carried
by the coaches. The Pony Express was a single horse and a boy rider,
with a leather mail pouch thrown over the horse's back, something after
the style of the old-fashioned saddlebags. The route for each horse
covered a distance of about six miles on the average. The horse was put
to his utmost speed, and the rider carried a tin horn which was
vigorously blown when approaching a station. William Moore, Thomas
Wooley, subsequently stage drivers, William Meredith, Frank Holly and
James Neese were among the riders on the Pony Express east of
Cumberland, and Sandy Conner, Pate Sides and Thomas A. Wiley, all three
afterward stage drivers, and William Conn rode west of Cumberland. Wiley
rode from Uniontown to Washington, Pennsylvania, and also between
Washington and Wheeling. He went with the log cabin boys from Uniontown
to Baltimore in 1840 as a driver of one of the stage teams employed on
that occasion. He is still living, an employe of the Baltimore & Ohio
Railroad Company at Camden Station, Baltimore, in the service of which
he has been employed since 1852. He was an attendant at the bedside of
L. W. Stockton during that gentleman's last illness. Calvin Morris, a
son of William Morris, the old tavern keeper on the hill west of Monroe,
and William Downer, a son of the old gentleman who lived at and
maintained the big water trough on Laurel Hill, were also riders on the
Pony Express. William Morris was one of the contractors for carrying
this fast mail, and his house was one of the relays of the line. The
relay next west was the old toll house near Searights. Luther Morris, a
brother of Calvin, the Pony Express rider, went to Iowa previous to the
civil war, and was elected State Treasurer on two or three occasions.
John Gilfillan, now, or recently, of Parkersburg, West Virginia, was a
rider on the Pony Express between West Alexander and Wheeling. Bryant
and Craven, of West Alexander, were among the contractors of the Pony
Express line. "The Pony Express" did not remain long on the road, but
when it was on, old pike boys say "it kicked up a dust."




CHAPTER XXVI.

  _Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers from Baltimore to Boonsboro--Pen
     Picture of an Old Tavern by James G. Blaine--The Maypole--The Hand
     in Hand--Earlocker's--Pine Orchard--The Brown Stand--Levi Chambers,
     the Nullifier--Old Whalen's Sunfish, Bob Fowler's Goose and
     Warfield's Ham--Poplar Springs--Allen Dorsie, Van McPherson, The
     Widow Dean, Getzendanner's, Peter Hagan, Riddlemoser and the
     McGruder House, Peter Zettle, Emanuel Harr._


     "CALDWELL'S TAVERN: We did not use the high sounding _hotel_, but
     the good old Anglo-Saxon _tavern_, with its wide open fire in the
     cheerful bar room, and the bountiful spread in the dining room, and
     the long porch for summer loafers, and the immense stabling with
     its wealth of horse-flesh, and the great open yard for the road
     wagons. How real and vivid it all seems to me this moment! All the
     reminiscences of the old pike, for which you are an enthusiast, are
     heartily shared by me."--JAMES G. BLAINE.

Caldwell's tavern, mentioned by Mr. Blaine, is seven miles west of
Washington, Pennsylvania, and will be referred to hereafter in its
proper place. Mr. Blaine's description is appropriate to nearly all the
old taverns of the road.

The outward appearance of an old tavern of the National Road was no
index to the quality of the entertainment it afforded. Many of the least
pretentious houses furnished the best meals, and paid the most agreeable
attention to guests and patrons. It was not unusual to see the wagon
yard attached to a small wooden and apparently decaying tavern crowded
with teams and wagons, while the inviting grounds of the imposing brick
tavern near by were without an occupant.

The May Pole tavern in Baltimore was a favorite stopping place for old
wagoners. It is located on the southwest corner of Paca and German
streets, and still standing, an object of much interest to the old
people of the road. In front of it stands a tall, slim, granite column,
representative of a pole, and preservative of the ancient name. The May
Pole was kept in 1833 by Henry Clark, and in 1836 by James Adams, who
remained in charge until his death. His successor was Isaac Willison, a
Virginian, and before assuming control of the May Pole, an agent of the
Baltimore & Ohio Railroad company, at Frederic City. George Elliott,
subsequently manager for Mrs. Adams, at the Mountain City house in
Cumberland, was at one time a clerk in the May Pole tavern.

The "Hand in Hand" tavern on Paca, between Lexington and Saratoga
streets, and the "White Swan" on Howard street, were likewise old wagon
stands in Baltimore, well patronized in the early days of the National
Road. Thomas Elliott also kept a wagon stand in Baltimore, and enjoyed a
fair share of patronage. He was the father of George Elliott, above
mentioned. The May Pole, however, was the favorite tavern of the old
wagoners of the National Road. The "Three Ton" and "Gen. Wayne" taverns
had each extensive stabling, and furnished accommodations for droves and
drovers. The National Road entered the city of Baltimore by way of West
Baltimore street.

The first wagon stand west of Baltimore, fifty years ago, was kept by a
man whose name was Hawes. It was seven miles from the city, and wagoners
often left it in the morning, drove to Baltimore, unloaded, reloaded,
and returned to it in the evening of the same day, and the next morning
proceeded on the long journey to their western destination. The Hawes
tavern ceased to do business after 1840.

At Ellicott's Mills, ten miles west of Baltimore, there was no wagon
stand, but stage houses were located there, where stage teams were kept
and exchanged.

One mile west of Ellicott's, Frank Earlocker kept a wagon stand, that
was largely patronized. He was rather of an economical turn of mind, and
old wagoners were wont to say of him that he concealed the whisky bottle
behind the counter, against the custom of the road, which was to expose
it to full view; and it is said that the miserly Earlocker lost more
than he gained by his habit, since it induced wagoners to inquire for a
drink, more to worry the landlord than to appease the appetite.

A short distance west of Earlocker's is "Pine Orchard," where a tavern
was kept by one Goslin. He was a goslin only in name. Otherwise, he was
a square man, and knew how to treat strangers and travelers, especially
wagoners, who largely favored him with their patronage. His house was a
brick structure, and stood on the north side of the road, and for aught
known to the contrary, is still standing, a monument commemorative of
the many good old taverns which studded the road in the days of its
glory.

James Dehoff kept a tavern at Pine Orchard as early as 1835. His house
was a wagoners' resort, and stood on the south side of the road.

An old tavern, known as the "Brown Stand," four miles west of "Pine
Orchard," was a popular stopping place for wagoners in its day. In 1838
Levi Chambers took charge of this house, and continued to conduct it
until 1842. He was called "Nullifier" Chambers, because of his adherence
to the nullification doctrine, announced and advocated by John C.
Calhoun. He, however, knew how to keep a tavern, and was a sober and
intelligent man. On the first of January, 1841, John Crampton and
William Orr, old wagoners before mentioned, drove out from Baltimore
with full loads, and put up at the "Brown Stand." During the night a box
of silk goods was stolen from Orr's wagon. The loss was discovered early
in the morning, and Orr and Chambers each mounted a horse and pushed out
in the direction of Baltimore, in search of the stolen goods and the
thief. There was a light snow on the road, and tracks were visible,
indicative of rapid steps toward the east. Reaching Baltimore, Messrs.
Orr and Chambers entered the bar room of the May Pole tavern, in which a
number of persons were drinking, and among them one, who, from his
actions, was suspected as the thief. He was arrested, tried, convicted,
and sent to the penitentiary.

Four miles west of the "Nullifier's," John Whalen kept a wagon stand,
and one of the best on the road. Old wagoners entertain pleasant
recollections of John Whalen, and delight in recounting the good cheer
that abounded and abided in his old tavern. He kept the tavern at this
point up to the year 1842.

One Warfield kept a tavern a short distance west of Whalen's as early as
1835, and had a good wagon custom. Old wagoners had a rough distich on
this section of the road, running something like this:

     "Old Wheeler's sunfish,
     Bob Fowler's roast goose,
     Warfield's ham,
     Ain't that jam!"

New Lisbon was an aspiring village, twenty-six miles west of Baltimore,
and the first point of note west of Whalen's. Stages stopped and teams
were changed at New Lisbon, but it had no wagon stand.

At Poplar Springs, one mile west of New Lisbon, there was a wagon stand
kept by Allen Dorsie. Near the old tavern is a large, gushing spring, in
the midst of tall poplar trees, and hence the name "Poplar Springs."
Such was the situation at this point fifty years ago, but alas, fifty
years is a long time, and the "Poplar Springs" may present a different
appearance now. Allen Dorsie, the old proprietor of the tavern here, was
likewise and for many years superintendent of the Maryland division of
the road. He was a very large man, six feet in height, and rounded out
in proportion. He was besides a man of admitted integrity and good
intellect. He ceased keeping tavern at Poplar Springs in 1842.

Seven miles west of Poplar Springs Van McPherson kept a tavern, which
did an extensive business. The proprietor was half Dutch and half Irish,
as his name imports, and he had the faculty of pleasing everybody. His
house was a brick structure on the north side of the road, and is
probably still standing. Van McPherson kept this house from 1836 to
1842, and made money in it.

New Market is a village west of McPherson's old tavern, and in Frederic
county, Maryland. Here the stages stopped and changed teams, and an old
wagon stand was kept by one Shell. It is said of Shell that his name
differed from his table, in that the latter contained no shells, but the
best of savory viands.

Three miles west of New Market, Frank Wharton kept a tavern, and a good
one. He was rough in manner, and could swear longer and louder than
Wilse Clement, but he kept his house in good shape and did an extensive
business.

One mile west of Wharton's the widow Dean kept a tavern. Her house was a
brick structure on the south side of the road, and she owned it and the
ground whereon it stood, in fee simple. She was largely patronized by
wagoners.

Next after passing Mrs. Deans old stand, the city of Frederic is
reached, which fifty years ago was the largest town on the road between
Wheeling and Baltimore. James Dehoof and John Lambert kept old wagon
stands in Frederic City. Lambert died about 1840, and was succeeded by
John Miller, who kept the house down to the year 1853.

Four miles west of Frederic City the old wagoners encountered Cotockton
mountain, and here was a fine old tavern kept by Getzendanner, a German.
His house was a stone building, on the south side of the road,
presumably standing to this day. Getzendanner, true to his native
traits, was the owner of the property. Old wagoners unite in saying that
the old German kept a good house, barring a little too much garlic in
his sausages.

Peter Hagan played the part of host at an old tavern, one mile west of
Getzendanner's. His house was a log building, and stood on the south
side of the road. As before stated, the outward appearance of an old
tavern on the National Road was no index to affairs within; and though
Peter Hagan's house was small and made with logs, the cheer within was
exhilarating. His meals were simple and but little varied, yet so
manipulated in the kitchen, and spread upon the table so tastefully, and
withal so clean, that they were tempting even to an epicure. Peter
Hagan's patrons were for the most part wagoners, and the old wagoners of
the National Road knew what good living was, and "put up" only where the
fare was inviting. Peter Hagan was an uncle of Robert Hagan, a local
politician of South Union township, Fayette county, Pennsylvania.

Proceeding westward from Hagan's old tavern, the next point is the
village of Middletown, which hoped to become a city, and might have
succeeded, had not the steam railway eclipsed the glory of the old pike.
At Middletown the stages had relays of horses. One of the stage houses
at this point was kept by ---- Titlow, a relative of F. B. Titlow, of
Uniontown. Here also there was a wagon stand, kept by Samuel
Riddlemoser. This was in 1840. In the spring of 1841 Riddlemoser moved
to the Widow McGruder house, one mile west of Middletown. The McGruder
house was well conducted, and enjoyed a large patronage.

South Mountain comes next, and here a tavern was kept by one Miller. It
was a wagon stand, a stone building, on the north side of the road. The
battle of South Mountain was fought here, but the roar of the cannon
failed to awaken the departed glories of the old Miller tavern.

One mile west of South Mountain, Petter Zettle, a German, kept a tavern.
It was a wagon stand, and a popular one. The house was of brick, and
stood on the south side of the road. The old landlord was accustomed to
join in the merry-making of the old wagoners, and as the jokes went
around in the old bar room, the German spice was plainly discernible as
well as agreeable, in unison with the familiar notes of the native pike
boys.

One mile west of Zettle's, Robert Fowler kept a wagon stand. Fowler quit
in 1839, and was succeeded by Emanuel Harr, who conducted the house for
many years. Joe Garver, a noted blacksmith, had a shop at this point.
Garver, it is said, could cut and replace as many as a dozen wagon tires
in a single night. It was not an uncommon thing for the old blacksmiths
of the road to work all night at shoeing horses and repairing wagons.




CHAPTER XXVII.

  _Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Boonsboro to
     Cumberland--Funkstown, Antietam, Hagerstown, Dirty Spigot, Shady
     Bower, Clear Spring, North Mountain, Indian Spring, Hancock--The
     House of Nicodemus--Accident on Sideling Hill, the Longest Hill on
     the Road--Snib Hollow--Town Hill--Green Ridge--Pratt's Hollow--A
     Fugitive Slave--Polish Mountain--Flintstone--Martin's Mountain._


         "It stands all alone like a goblin in gray,
         The old-fashioned inn of a pioneer day,
         In a land so forlorn and forgotten, it seems
         Like a wraith of the past rising into our dreams;
         Its glories have vanished, and only the ghost
         Of a sign-board now creaks on its desolate post,
         Recalling a time when all hearts were akin
         As they rested at night in that welcoming inn."

                            JAMES NEWTON MATTHEWS.

Boonsboro is a small town at the foot of South Mountain in Maryland, and
in the palmy days of the National Road was a lively village. Old
wagoners and stage drivers spread its fame, but railroad conductors are
silent as to its memory. The Slifer Brothers kept tavern in Boonsboro in
the olden time. Their house was not a wagon stand. One of the Slifer
brothers, as before stated, claimed to be the inventor of the "rubber,"
brake, as it is commonly called. At the west end of Boonsboro the widow
Galwix kept a wagon stand and did a large business. She was the widow of
John Galwix, hereinbefore mentioned as a fancy wagoner. Robert Fowler
kept a tavern in Boonsboro as early as 1835 and a wagon stand on the
north side of the road.

Three and a half miles west of Boonsboro Henry and Jacob Fosnock,
Germans, kept a wagon stand, which was well patronized. The property was
owned by the Fosnocks, and they made money with their tavern. They were
bachelors, but had an unmarried sister, Susan, who acted in the capacity
of hostess. She subsequently became the wife of the old wagoner, Joseph
Crampton. The Fosnocks were at the point mentioned as late as 1842.

Funkstown appears next in sight. Funkstown, another old village
identified with the by-gone glories of the old pike. The name of this
village brings to mind the once familiar form of John Funk, an old
wagoner. John lived at or near Funkstown, and his family may have given
the name to the village. Funkstown is located on Little Antietam creek,
about seventy miles west of Baltimore. Fifty years ago there was a
paper mill and a grist mill at Funkstown, and they may be there yet, and
others in addition. At the east end of Funkstown, Joseph Watts kept a
wagon stand, and competed for the custom of the wagoners with William
Ashton, who kept a similar tavern at the west end of the town. Each did
a good business. Ashton will be remembered as the athletic wagoner, who
leaped over the top of a road wagon at Petersburg. He knew the wants of
wagoners and served them well at his old tavern. He was the owner of two
fine six-horse teams, and kept them constantly on the road.

After Funkstown, come the classic shades and handsome streets of
Hagerstown. Hagerstown was always a prominent point on the road. It
ranked with Wheeling, Washington, Brownsville, Uniontown, Cumberland,
and Frederic. Hagerstown was a station for the stage lines. It outlived
the road, and flourishes as one of the best towns of Maryland. The only
old wagon stand in Hagerstown was that of John B. Wrench. But Hagerstown
was rather too stylish a place for old wagoners, and Wrench gave up his
house there in 1842, and removed to Piney Grove, where he found a more
congenial atmosphere. He subsequently kept one of the old taverns at
Grantsville, from which point he emigrated to Iowa, and died there.

Four and a half miles west of Hagerstown, an old wagon stand was kept by
David Newcomer. It was a stone house, on the north side of the road.
Newcomer furnished good entertainment, and was well favored with
customers, mostly wagoners. He was a Quaker, and a money maker. He dealt
in horses, in addition to tavern keeping. When offering a horse for
sale, his wife was accustomed to say in the hearing of the person
proposing to buy: "Now, David, thee must not sell that favorite horse."
This, old wagoners say, was a "set-up job" between David and his spouse
to gain a good price. Newcomer was the owner of the property, and as the
house was of stone, is probably standing yet; but the ring of the old
pike has gone from it long since.

Three miles westward from Newcomer's was the imposing and
well-remembered tavern kept by John Miller. It was of brick, a large and
commodious building, situate on the north side of the road. Miller owned
the property, and it may be in the possession of his descendants to this
day. There were large rooms in this house, adapted to dancing purposes,
and young men and maidens of the vicinity frequently tripped to the
notes of the old time music in its spacious halls. The waltz was
unknown, and the figures varied from the "hoe down" to the cotillion,
closing always with the "Virginia Reel." The old wagoners were
invariably invited to participate in these festivities, and engaged in
them with a gusto not excelled by the lads and lasses of the surrounding
neighborhood. Alfred Bailes, the old pike boy of Dunbar, drove a line
team from John S. Miller's to the Nicodemus House, two miles west of
Hancock, as early as the year 1836, and is probably the only survivor of
the young folks who participated in the gayeties of Miller's old
tavern.

One mile west of Miller's is "Shady Bower." There a tavern was kept by
Conrod Wolsey. His house was well favored by wagoners, who sought his
generous board in goodly numbers, and while well liked by his customers,
he got the name of "Dirty Spigot," because the spigot of a whisky barrel
in his house was once besmeared with filth. There was a large distillery
near Wolsey's tavern, operated by Barnes Mason. Mason had two teams on
the road, driven by William Keefer and Joseph Myers.

Clear Spring comes next, and derives its name from the existence of a
large, gushing spring of clear water, in volume sufficient to propel a
mill. An old wagon stand was kept at Clear Spring by Andrew Kershaw, who
died the proprietor of the house, and was succeeded by his son Jonathan.
The house was a large brick building, on the south side of the road.
Stages stopped and exchanged teams at Clear Spring, but not at
Kershaw's. His house, as stated, was a wagon stand. Gusty Mitchell is a
well-remembered character of Clear Spring. He used to steal and drink
the wagoners' whisky, and "bum" around their teams in all sorts of ways.
One night the wagoners poured turpentine over Gusty and set fire to him,
which so frightened him that he never afterward had anything to do with
wagoners.

The next old tavern was on the top of North Mountain, two miles west of
Clear Spring, kept by Joseph Kensel. It was a log house, and on the
north side of the road. Kensel owned the property. While this old tavern
was humble in outward appearance, the fires burned brightly within, and
its patrons, who were numerous, highly extolled the quality of the
viands it spread before them.

Indian Spring comes next, four and a half miles west from Clear Spring.
Here a wagon stand was kept by David Miller. The house is a stone
structure, on the north side of the road, and Miller owned it in fee
simple. This old house was a favorite resort of wagoners, and night
after night echoed the once familiar notes of the great highway, in the
days of its glory.

Three miles west from David Miller's, Anthony Snider, a distant relative
of John Snider of happy memory, kept a wagon stand. It was a frame
building on the north side of the road. Peter Hawes once lived at this
house, and hauled stone for an aqueduct on the adjacent canal.

Four miles west of Snider's, on the north side of the road, stood the
old frame tavern of Widow Bevans. She owned the property, and her house
was a popular stopping place. It will be noted that in many instances
widows kept the best taverns along the road. There is no record of a
widow making a failure as a tavern keeper.

Two miles further on to the westward, and before the once familiar
tavern of Widow Bevans entirely recedes from view, the old wagon stand
of David Barnett is reached. His house was a large log building, on the
north side of the road. Here the first transportation line of six-horse
teams, John Bradfield agent, had relays, its next relay eastward being
the house of John Miller, before mentioned. Barnett was a jolly old
landlord, fond of exchanging jokes with old wagoners and other patrons.
He had a manner and a method of pleasing his guests, and did a large and
profitable business.

Westward, two miles from Barnett's, is the historic town of Hancock,
named in honor of the man who wrote his name in letters so large and
legible, that they were read all round the world. There was no old wagon
stand tavern in Hancock, except for a short time about the year 1838.
John Shane established it, but was not successful, and removed to
Cumberland, where he set up a confectionery shop. Wagoners preferred
country before town taverns, as a rule. Stages stopped and exchanged
horses in Hancock.

Two miles west of Hancock, one Nicodemus kept an old wagon stand. His
first name has not been preserved, owing probably to the sublimity of
his surname. He was known all along the road, but mentioned only as
Nicodemus. His house was a frame building on the north side of the road,
and he owned it, and died in it. He kept a good tavern, and was well
patronized. Widow Downer kept this house before the time of Nicodemus.

Two miles west of the house of Nicodemus is Sideling Hill, so called
from the sloping character of the ground upon which the road is laid. At
the eastern foot of this hill Jacob Brosius kept an old wagon stand, and
had a good share of custom. His house was a frame building and stood on
the south side of the road. The distance from the foot to the summit of
Sideling Hill is four miles, and it is the longest hill on the road. In
1837 Jacob Anderson, an old wagoner, was killed on Sideling Hill. His
team became frightened on the summit and ran down the western slope,
coming in contact with a large tree on the roadside with such force as
to break it down, and falling on Anderson, he was instantly killed.
Isaac Browning, Caleb Langley and Black Westley, with their teams and
wagons, were on the road with Anderson at the time of this accident.
Anderson was a citizen of Loudon county, Virginia. Langley, Browning and
Westley belonged to Fayette county, Pennsylvania. The road crosses a
stream at Sideling Hill, called Sideling Hill creek. There was a covered
bridge over this creek. In 1841 John Moss and Billy George, old
wagoners, drove their teams on this bridge, and stopping a while to rest
under the shade afforded by the roof, the bridge broke down,
precipitating horses, wagons and drivers a distance of fourteen feet to
the water, causing considerable damage to the wagons and the goods
therein, but strange to say inflicting but slight injuries upon the
drivers and teams. The teams and wagons belonged to Robert Newlove, of
Wheeling.

Two miles from the foot of Sideling Hill, and on the north side of the
road, John H. Mann kept a wagon stand. His house was a frame building.
Mann was a citizen of some prominence, and at one time represented his
county (Washington) in the Maryland Legislature. It is not known that
his proclivities in the line of statesmanship impaired in any wise his
talent for tavern keeping.

On the western slope of Sideling Hill, about midway between the summit
and the foot, Thomas Norris kept a tavern, which was a favorite resort
of wagoners. His house was a large stone building, on the north side of
the road. There was a picturesqueness about the location of this old
tavern that imparted a peculiar spice to the ordinary rounds of
entertainment enjoyed by its guests. Samuel Cessna kept this house at
one time.

One mile west of Sideling Hill creek, a wagon stand was kept by the
widow Ashkettle, another widow, and she no exception to the rule before
stated, that the widows all kept good houses. Her name is not
inappropriate to some of the duties of housekeeping, but Mrs.
Ashkettle's forte was not in making lye, but in setting a good, clean
table. She had a son, David, who managed the business of the house for
her. Her house was a frame building, and stood on the north side of the
road.

Two miles west of Mrs. Ashkettle's the wayfarer struck the point bearing
the homely name of "Snib Hollow." These old names never wear out, no
matter how ugly they are, and it is well they do not. They all have a
significance and an interest, local or otherwise, which would be lost by
a change of name. Quidnuncs in history and literature have exerted their
restless talents in efforts to obliterate these seemingly rude, old
names, and substitute fancy ones in their stead, but they have failed,
and their failure is a pleasant tribute to the supremacy of common
sense. As early as 1825 the widow Turnbull kept a tavern at Snib Hollow.
Later, an old wagon stand was kept there by John Alder, who had a large
run of customers. His house was a log building, on the north side of the
road.

Town Hill comes next, a half a mile west of Snib Hollow, at the foot of
which Dennis Hoblitzell kept a tavern as early as the year 1830, and
probably earlier. The house was on the east side of the road, and the
locality is often called Piney Plains. Mrs. McClelland, of the
McClelland House, Uniontown, is a daughter of Dennis Hoblitzell. Samuel
Cessna subsequently kept this house, and stage lines and wagon lines all
stopped at it. It was here, and in Cessna's time, that Governor Corwin,
of Ohio, was treated as a negro servant, mention of which is made in
another chapter. In 1836 John Snider stopped over night at this house,
with a load of emigrants, while Cessna was keeping it, and had to clean
the oats he fed to his horses with an ordinary bed sheet, the windmill
not having reached this point at that early day.

At the foot of Town Hill, on the west side, Henry Bevans kept a tavern.
It was a wagon stand, and likewise a station for one of the stage lines.
The house stood on the north side of the road, and enjoyed a good trade.
Samuel Luman, the old stage driver, kept this house in 1839.

Two miles west from the Bevans house is Green Ridge, where an old wagon
stand was kept by Elisha Collins. His house was a log building, and
stood on the north side of the road. Although this house was humble in
appearance, old wagoners are unstinted in bestowing praises on its
ancient good cheer.

Trudging onward, two miles further to the westward, the old wagoner, and
many a weary traveler, found a pleasant resting place at "Pratt's
Hollow," where Samuel Hamilton kept a cozy old tavern. It was a frame
house, on the north side of the road. Hamilton was a planter as well as
tavern keeper, and raised tobacco and owned and worked negro slaves.
Levi McGruder succeeded Hamilton as the keeper of this house. This
locality derived its name from Pratt, who owned the property at an early
day, and, upon authority of the veteran David Mahaney, kept the first
tavern there. An incident occurred at Pratt's Hollow in the year 1842,
which brings to memory the state of public society in _ante bellum_
times. Among the old wagoners of the road, was Richard Shadburn. He was
a native of Virginia, and born a slave, while his complexion was so
fair, and his hair so straight, that he readily passed for a white man.
When quite young he escaped from his master and struck out for liberty
among the enlivening scenes of the great highway of the Republic. On a
certain evening of the year mentioned, he drove into McGruder's wagon
yard along with a number of other wagoners, to rest for the night. The
sun had not yet disappeared behind the western hills, and a stage coach
pulled up in front of McGruder's tavern, and stopped for water, as was
the custom at that point. Among the passengers in that coach was the
owner of the slave, Shadburn. Looking out through the window of the
coach he observed and recognized Shadburn, and calling to his aid a
fellow passenger, emerged from the coach with a determination to reclaim
his property. Dick was seized, but being a man of great muscular power,
succeeded in releasing himself from the clutches of his assailants and
fled. The disappointed master fired at Dick with a pistol, as he ran,
but he made good his escape. The team driven by Shadburn belonged to
Parson's of Ohio, who shortly after the escapade mentioned, sent another
driver to McGruder's to take charge of it. Shadburn never afterward
reappeared on the road, and it is believed that he found a home and at
last a grave in Canada.

It was near Pratt's Hollow that the Cotrells, father and two sons,
murdered a peddler in 1822, the perpetrators of which crime were all
hung from the same scaffold in Frederic. The old tavern at Pratt's
Hollow was destroyed by fire many years ago, and was never rebuilt.

Two miles west from Pratt's Hollow, John S. Miller conducted an old
tavern, and a good one. His house was a frame building, and stood on the
north side of the road. It was a popular stopping place for wagoners.
Miller kept this house as early as 1836, and subsequently became the
proprietor of the old tavern, five miles west of Washington,
Pennsylvania, where he died.

"Polish Mountain" is reached next, one mile west of the old Miller
stand. On the summit of this little, but picturesque mountain, Philip
Fletcher kept an old tavern, and greeted and treated thousands of old
wagoners and other travelers. His house stood on the north side of the
road, and was made of logs, but the table it furnished was equal to the
best on the road.

And next comes Flintstone, four miles west of Fletcher's. All old pike
boys remember Flintstone. The name has a familiar ring. The stages
stopped at Flintstone, and Thomas Robinson kept the leading tavern
there, in the olden time. His house was a stage station, and a wagon
stand as well. Robinson, the good old landlord, got into a difficulty,
many years ago, with one Silas Twigg, and was killed outright by his
assailant. As early as 1835 Jonathan Huddleson kept a tavern in
Flintstone, and had the patronage of one of the stage lines. He
subsequently kept the old Tomlinson tavern at the Little Meadows. John
Piper was an old tavern keeper at Flintstone. His house was a favorite
summer resort, and also enjoyed the patronage of old wagoners. The Piper
house is a large brick building, and stands on the north side of the
road. John Piper died about the year 1872. The house is continued as a
tavern under the joint management of John Howard, a son-in-law, and an
unmarried daughter of the old proprietor. Henry B. Elbon also kept a
tavern in Flintstone for many years, but his career began after that of
the old road ended. Elbon died about four or five years ago. Fairweather
and Ladew, of New York, own and operate a large tannery at Flintstone.

Two miles west of Flintstone, Martin's Mountain is encountered, at the
foot of which, on the east, Thomas Streets presided over an old tavern,
and welcomed and cared for many a guest. His house was a frame
structure, on the south side of the road.

Two miles further on the westward tramp the widow Osford kept a regular
old wagon stand. She was assisted by her son, Joseph. It is needless to
state that her house was popular. She was a widow. Her house was a log
building, on the south side of the road, with a large wagon yard
attached. Her dining room occupied the greater portion of the ground
floor of her house, and her table was always crowded with hungry guests.
Kitchen and bar room made up the remainder of the first story, and
wagoners' beds covered every inch of the bar room floor at night. Mrs.
Osford retired from this house after a long season of prosperity, and
was succeeded by Peter Hager, an old wagoner, who at one time drove a
team for William Searight.

Two miles west from widow Osford's, Henry Miller kept an old tavern. It
was a brick house, on the south side of the road. It will be noted that
Miller is the leading name among the old tavern keepers of the road. The
Smiths don't figure much in this line.

Two miles west of Henry Miller's an old tavern was kept by Slifer, whose
first name is lost to memory. It is probable he was of the family of
Slifers who kept at Boonsboro. It is said of this Slifer that he was a
good, square dealing landlord, kept a good house and enjoyed a fair
share of patronage.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

  _Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Cumberland to Little
     Crossings--The City of Cumberland--Everstine's--The Six Mile House
     and Bridge--Clary's--Tragedy in Frostburg--Thomas Beall--Sand
     Springs--Big Savage--Little Savage--Thomas Johnson--The Shades of
     Death--John Recknor--Piney Grove--Mortimer Cade--Tomlinson's--Widow
     Wooding._


The city of Cumberland is the initial point, as before stated, of that
portion of the National Road which was constructed by authority of
Congress, and paid for with funds drawn from the public treasury of the
United States. In 1835 James Black kept the leading tavern in
Cumberland. It was a stage house. In 1836 John and Emory Edwards, of
Boonsboro, leased the Black House, and conducted it as a tavern for many
years thereafter. John Snider, the old pike boy of pleasant memory,
hauled a portion of the household goods of the Edwards' from their old
home in Boonsboro to their new location at Cumberland. At the date last
mentioned there were two wagon stands in Cumberland. One of them was
kept by Thomas Plumer. Plumer had teams on the road. The other was kept
by George Mattingly. Frederic Shipley kept a tavern in Cumberland
previous to the year 1840. It was located on Baltimore street, near the
site of the station first established by the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad
Company. This house was subsequently conducted by George W. Gump, and
after him, in 1857, by David Mahaney. One Kaig, of Bedford county,
Pennsylvania, succeeded Mahaney in the control of this house. It was
called "The American," and entertained wagoners and the traveling public
at large. In 1844 and later, the widow Adams kept a wagon stand in
Cumberland, on the site of the present rolling mill. George Elliott was
manager for Mrs. Adams. The house was a large brick structure, and known
in its day as the "Mountain City House." Lewis Smith kept "The Blue
Springs House" on Mechanics street, and was largely patronized by old
wagoners. Frederic Shipley also kept a tavern on Mechanics street, after
he left the American. John Kelso, the old wagoner, kept a tavern for a
short time on Mechanics street, and was well patronized; and Otho
Barcus, another old wagoner, kept the "Pennsylvania House" on Mechanics
street in 1843, and for a period of three years thereafter. The road
when first laid out, as seen in a previous chapter, passed over Wills
Mountain. In 1834 this location was changed for a better grade, up the
valleys of Wills creek and Braddock's run. To make this change it was
necessary to first obtain the consent of the State of Maryland, which
was granted by an act of her Legislature in 1832. The old Plumer tavern
stood at the eastern end of the old location, and the old Mattingly
tavern at the same end of the new location. George Evans kept a tavern,
also, near the eastern end of the original location.

[Illustration: JOHN KELSO.]

Five miles west of Cumberland, on the new location, a wagon stand was
kept by Joseph Everstine. This was a frame house, and stood on the north
side of the road. It was well conducted, but owing to its proximity to
Cumberland, did not do as large a business as other taverns of the road,
more advantageously located.

Six miles west from Cumberland there was an old tavern known as the "Six
Mile House." It belonged to the Bruces, an old and wealthy family of
Alleghany county, Maryland, and many years ago was destroyed by fire. A
new building was erected on the old site, and remains to this day in the
occupancy of a nephew of the old tavern keeper, Aden Clary. This house
is near the junction of the old and new locations above referred to, and
near the stone bridge over Braddock's run. The sixth mile post from
Cumberland stands on the north wall of this bridge, firm and unshaken.
The bridge is well preserved, and a polished stone thereof bears this
inscription: "1835--Built by Thomas Fealy, Lieut. Jno. Pickell, U. S.
Engineer, H. M. Petitt, Ass't Supt'd."

Eight miles west from Cumberland Aden Clary kept. His house was a large
and commodious brick building on the south side of the road, and is
still standing. There was not a more popular house on the road than Aden
Clary's.

Frostburg is next reached. This was always a prominent point on the
road. It did not derive its name, as many suppose, from the crisp
atmosphere in which it was located, but from the original owner of the
land on which it stands, whose name was Frost. Frostburg was the first
stage station west of Cumberland. The leading taverns of Frostburg in
the palmy days of the road were the "Franklin House" and the "Highland
Hall House." The Franklin House was kept for many years by Thomas Beall,
the father of the Bealls of Uniontown. It was headquarters of the Good
Intent stage line. The Highland Hall House was conducted at different
times by George W. Claybaugh, George Evans, Samuel Cessna and Thomas
Porter. It was the headquarters of the Stockton line of coaches. During
Cessna's time at this house he was the principal actor in a tragedy
which produced considerable commotion in the vicinity. A negro servant
employed by Cessna addressed some insulting remark to his wife, and
immediately upon being informed thereof, Cessna proceeded to dispatch
the negro without ceremony. He was tried in Cumberland for murder and
acquitted, public sentiment very generally acquiescing in the verdict of
the jury. About the year 1850 the Highland Hall House was purchased by
the authorities of the Catholic church, remodeled, improved and
converted to ecclesiastical uses.

About one mile west of Frostburg, and at the foot of Big Savage
mountain, is Sand Springs, so called from the gurgling water in the sand
at that point. In 1836 the widow Ward kept a wagon stand tavern at Sand
Springs. Her house was a favorite resort for old wagoners. On the night
of October 3, 1836, snow fell to the depth of a foot at Sand Springs,
breaking down the timber all through the surrounding mountains. Mrs.
Ward's wagon yard was crowded with teams and wagons that night, and the
snow was so deep the next day that the wagoners deemed it inexpedient to
turn out, and remained at Mrs. Ward's until the following morning. John
Snider was among the wagoners at Mrs. Ward's on the occasion mentioned,
and is authority for the occurrence of the October snow storm. The
tavern at Sand Springs was subsequently kept by John Welsh, an old stage
driver, Hiram Sutton and Jacob Conrod, in the order named. Hiram Sutton
was a son-in-law of Jared Clary. He kept the Sand Springs tavern down to
the year 1852, when he moved to Parkersburg, West Virginia, and may be
living there yet. Philip Spiker, the old blacksmith at Sand Springs, it
is said could shoe more horses in a given time than any other blacksmith
on the road. He had a rival, however, in A. Brice Devan, now of Dunbar,
who, in the palmy days of the road, carried on a shop in Hopwood, and
shod horses for old wagoners all night long on many occasions. Devan's
backers will not concede that Spiker was a speedier shoer than he.

A short distance west of Sand Springs, on the side of Big Savage
mountain, an old wagon stand was kept by one Cheney, afterward by Jacob
Conrod. It is a stone house, on the south side of the road. In Cheney's
time at this house, Henry Clay Bush, who was an old wagoner, says that
metallic mugs were used for drinking purposes, instead of glasses. He
further states that the mugs were clean, and probably used through
deference to the pure whisky of that day. Big Savage mountain is two
thousand five hundred and eighty feet above the Atlantic.

Two miles west from Cheney's, and at the foot of Little Savage mountain,
Thomas Beall kept a tavern as early as 1830. William E. Beall,
superintendent of the Uniontown rolling mill, was born at this old
tavern. Thomas Beall removed from this place to Missouri, but after a
short absence, returned to Western Maryland, and took charge of the
Franklin House in Frostburg. Thomas Johnson succeeded Thomas Beall in
the management of this house. It was a noted place, and Johnson was a
noted character. He was a good fiddler and a good dancer. He owned a
negro named Dennis, who was also a good dancer, and night after night in
the cheerful bar room of the old tavern, Dennis performed the "double
shuffle," responsive to lively music furnished by his old master.
Johnson was small in stature, weighing but little over a hundred pounds.
Although he participated freely in the fun of the old road, he was not
unmindful or neglectful of his business. He owned the old tavern-stand
mentioned and the lands adjacent, and dying, left a comfortable
inheritance to his descendants. Little Savage mountain has an elevation
of two thousand four hundred and eighty feet above the Atlantic, being
one hundred feet lower than Big Savage.

Three miles further westward, and at the eastern approach to the Shades
of Death, John Recknor kept an old wagon stand, well known, and in its
day well patronized. Recknor kept this house as early as 1830, and ended
his days in it. It was a log and frame structure on the north side of
the road, with a commodious wagon yard attached. The thick branches of
the pine trees growing on Shade Hill, hung over this old house,
imparting to it a romantic, as well as an attractive perspective. The
fame of Mrs. Recknor as a purveyor of hot biscuits was co-extensive with
the line of the road. Now,

     "The kitchen is cold and the hall is as still,
     As the heart of the hostess out there on the hill."

Piney Grove comes next, two miles from Recknor's, so called from the
numerous pine trees growing in the locality in the olden time. At an
early day Joshua Johnson, a wealthy man of Frederic City, owned fifteen
thousand acres of land, embracing Piney Grove and the Shades of Death,
which he held for many years for speculative purposes. Portions of this
large area, it is said, continue in the possession of Johnson's
descendants to this day. The pine trees were cut down many years ago,
sawed up and shipped to market. William Frost, of Frostburg, erected the
first extensive saw mill in the vicinity. At Piney Grove there was an
old tavern, kept at different times by Truman Fairall, Mortimer Cade,
Lemuel Cross, John Wrench and David Mahaney. All the stage lines of the
road stopped at this old tavern, and wagoners in goodly numbers also
congregated there. It was a large frame building on the north side of
the road, and on the opposite side large stables and sheds were erected
for sheltering horses and vehicles.

West of Piney Grove about one-fourth of a mile, an old wagon stand was
kept by a man whose name was Wagoner, and subsequently by Isaac Bell,
and later by Mortimer Cade. Cade kept this house in 1840, and died in
it. His widow continued to keep it as a tavern for a number of years,
and until she became the wife of William Fear, who kept a tavern on
Keyser's Ridge. A daughter of Mrs. Cade is living in Uniontown at this
time.

Two miles west of Piney Grove the celebrated old Tomlinson tavern at
Little Meadows is reached. This is an old stand; as old as the National
Road. Here the lines of the National and the old Braddock roads
coincide. Jesse Tomlinson owned the land at this point, and kept a
tavern on the old Braddock road, before the National Road was made. Upon
the opening of the latter he abandoned his old house and erected a new
one on the new road, which he conducted as a tavern for many years.
After his death the property passed to the hands of Jacob Sides. W. M.
F. Magraw, as before stated, married a daughter of Jacob Sides. This
place is referred to as the Little Meadows in the official record of
Braddock's unfortunate march through the mountains in 1755. The region
at and about Mt. Washington, further westward on the line of the road,
where the conflict between Washington and the French and Indians
occurred, in 1754, is designated by Washington, in his official report
of that engagement, as the Great Meadows. Tomlinson's tavern is a large
stone house, on the north side of the road. After Tomlinson, it was kept
by Thomas Endsley, who was succeeded by Thomas Thistle, Thomas Thistle
by James Stoddard, and he, in turn, by Jesse Huddleson, Truman Fairall,
Lemuel Cross and David Mahaney, all before the railroad was continued
west of Cumberland. It was kept by George Layman after the railroad
absorbed the trade. Layman was afterward sheriff of Alleghany county,
Maryland. In the year 1862, while the property was under the control of
Mr. Magraw, the old Tomlinson tavern was remodeled and much improved.
The contract for the improvements was undertaken by George W. Wyning, a
well known carpenter of Uniontown, who superintended the work in person,
and during its progress he and Magraw together, spent many a pleasant
hour amid the exhilarating atmosphere of the mountains, in the society
of the old pike boys. James K. Polk dined at the Tomlinson house in the
spring of 1845, on his way to Washington to be inaugurated President.
Huddleson was keeping the house at that time. The occasion brought
together a large concourse of mountain people, who were addressed by the
President-elect.

One mile west from Tomlinson's the widow Wooding kept a tavern as early
as 1842, and for some time thereafter. Her house was a frame building,
on the north side of the road, and was largely patronized by old
wagoners. Mrs. Wooding growing old, and wearied by the onerous duties of
tavern keeping, gave up the business, and turned her house over to her
son-in-law. Peter Yeast, who conducted it for a season, and in turn
surrendered it to John Wright.

One mile west of Mrs. Wooding's old stand the traveler reaches the
Little Crossings, a name given to the locality from the circumstance
that here the road crosses the Castleman river; and the prefix "little"
is used because the Castleman is a smaller stream than the Youghiogheny,
which is crossed a few miles further westward, and called the Big
Crossings. There was no tavern at the Little Crossings previous to the
year 1836. Subsequent to that date a tavern was established there by
Alexander Carlisle, who entertained the traveling public in a
satisfactory manner. His house was a large frame structure, on the south
side of the road, subsequently kept by John and Samuel McCurdy, and
later, at different times, by David Johnson, William Dawson, Elisha
Brown, Jacob Conrod and David Mahaney. Although nearly twenty years
elapsed from the building of the road before any old landlord at Little
Crossings beckoned the weary traveler to rest and refreshment,
nevertheless, thereafter, and until business ceased on the line, that
locality presented many and rare attractions, as all old pike boys are
ready to verify.




CHAPTER XXIX.

  _Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Little Crossings to Winding
     Ridge--Grantsville--The Old Shultz, Steiner and Fuller Houses--The
     Veteran, David Mahaney--Thomas Thistle, Widow Haldeman, Death of
     Mrs. Recknor, Negro Mountain, Keyser's Ridge, Log Cabin Boys of
     1840, James Stoddard, Dennis Hoblitzell, The Fears, The McCurdys,
     Adam Yeast, David Johnson, Perry Shultz, Truman Fairall, John
     Woods, The Bane House, Wooing and Wedding of an Old Tavern Keeper,
     James Reynolds, Henry Walters._


Next after leaving the Little Crossings on the westward march, comes
Grantsville, a romantic little mountain village in Garrett, formerly
Alleghany, county, Maryland, named long before the hero of Appomattox
was known to fame, and therefore not in his honor. In 1833 Samuel Gillis
kept a tavern in the east end of Grantsville, on the south side of the
road, the same house that in later years was kept by John Slicer. It was
a wagon stand in the time of Gillis, and Slicer did not take charge of
it until business had ceased on the road. John Lehman kept a tavern in
Grantsville in 1836. He was a son-in-law, as was Peter Yeast, of the
good old widow Wooding, before mentioned.

The Lehman House was subsequently kept by Henry Fuller, and after him by
George Smouse. It was a frame building near the center of the village,
on the south side of the street and road. In 1843 Henry Fuller
demolished this old house, and erected a new one in its place. Adam
Shultz kept a tavern at the east end of Grantsville back in the forties,
and dying in charge, was succeeded by his son Perry, who continued it
down to the year 1852, when the ancient glories of the old pike began to
weaken and wane. The Shultz House was an imposing brick structure, on
the south side of the road, and was kept for a while by the veteran
David Mahaney, and at one time by Jesse King. Perry Shultz was
subsequently elected sheriff of Alleghany county, Maryland. Solomon
Steiner also kept a tavern in Grantsville during a portion of the
prosperous era of the road. Grantsville seems to have been a favorite
locality for tavern keepers of German names and antecedents. Steiner's
tavern was a brick building, and stood on the opposite side of the road
from the old Shultz House. Steiner built it, owned it, and died in it,
and his son, Archibald, conducted it for a number of years after his
father's death. It was a wagon stand. The Fuller House was kept at
different times by John D. Wrench, Bazil Garletts, Barney Brown, John
Slicer, William Slicer, William Beffler, John Millinger, and Nathaniel
Slicer. Christian M. Livengood is the present proprietor. Archibald
Steiner was succeeded in his father's old house, first, by William Shaw,
and thereafter in turn by John Millinger and Jonas E. Canagy, the
present proprietor, and it is now called the Farmer's House.

David Mahaney, whose name frequently appears in these pages, is a
remarkable man. A boy when the National Road was made, he has lived on
and near it all his life. His present residence is Dunbar, Fayette
county, Pa., but he is a familiar figure on the streets of Uniontown. He
is the father of Lloyd Mahaney, the well known enterprising owner and
manager of the handsome new Mahaney house in Uniontown, and of George
Mahaney, also a popular hotel man, who at one time kept the Dixon house
in Greensburg, afterward a hotel in Pittsburg, and at the present time
is conducting a house in Latrobe. David Mahaney was born in Washington
county, Md., near Hagerstown, in 1807, and is therefore in his
eighty-sixth year, while he has the appearance of a man not over sixty.
His complexion is swarthy, step elastic, and his memory but slightly
impaired by the inroads of time. His father was a native of Culpeper
county, Va., who met with a melancholy death by drowning in the Potomac
river, on the night of the presidential election of 1856. His polling
place was eight miles from his residence, in Maryland, and to reach it
and vote involved the crossing of the Potomac. It was late in the
evening when he left the polls to return home, and upon reaching the
river, by some untoward accident fell into the water and perished. David
Mahaney's first venture in tavern keeping on his own account was at the
old Shultz house in Grantsville. He was personally acquainted with Henry
Clay, Thomas H. Benton, Lewis Cass, and others of the old time
statesmen, and frequently entertained them.

As early as 1836 Thomas Thistle kept a tavern at the foot of Negro
Mountain, two miles west of Grantsville. With a name somewhat rasping in
its import, Thistle had a smooth tongue, a mild manner, and furnished
excellent entertainment for the traveling public. He was one of the
oldest and best known tavern keepers on the road. His house was a long,
frame wooden building, on the south side of the road, at times a stage
station, and throughout its entire existence a wagon stand. Here the
National Road crosses the line of the old Braddock road. In 1844 William
Dehaven kept the old Thistle tavern, and later it was kept by Levi Dean.

One and a half miles west from the old Thistle house, and on the eastern
slope of Negro Mountain, the widow Haldeman kept a tavern as early as
1840, and like all the widows, had a large patronage. While conducting
this house, Mrs. Haldeman became the wife of Daniel Smouse, who
thereafter took charge of it. The house was a log building, on the south
side of the road, and the spacious grounds surrounding it were crowded,
night after night, with six-horse teams and big, broad wheeled wagons,
covered with canvass, presenting the appearance of a military
encampment. This old house was subsequently kept by George Smouse, and
later by John Wright. The widow Recknor, of savory memory, before
mentioned, died a boarder in this old tavern, much lamented.

[Illustration: DAVID MAHANY.]

Onward, westward and upward, the crest of Negro Mountain is reached.
There are several versions of the origin of the name of this mountain.
Probably the one most worthy of acceptance is that in the early
collisions between the whites and the Indians, a negro appeared as an
ally of the Indians in a conflict on this mountain, and was among the
slain. Negro Mountain is two thousand eight hundred and twenty-five feet
above the level of the Atlantic ocean, and the second highest elevation
on the line of the road. The old commissioners give the height of the
mountain as two thousand three hundred and twenty-eight and twelve
one-hundredths feet, from their base of measurement in the Potomac, near
Cumberland, and as before stated, make no mention of Keyser's Ridge. In
the year 1836 Dennis Hoblitzell kept a tavern near the summit of Negro
Mountain, on the eastern slope. He was the father of Mrs. McClelland, of
the McClelland house in Uniontown. This old tavern is a stone building,
on the north side of the road, and the same that in after years became
celebrated as a resort for hog drovers, under the management of William
Sheets. It was kept as a tavern after Hoblitzell left it, and before the
time of Sheets, by Thomas Beall.

Two miles west from Negro Mountain Keyser's Ridge looms up in view. This
was a famous locality in the prosperous days of the road. It is a bald,
bleak range, not inaptly described as the back-bone of the mountains. It
is two thousand eight hundred and forty-three feet above sea level, and
the highest point on the road. In the olden time snow drifts often
accumulated to the depth of twenty feet on Keyser's Ridge, and stages
and wagons were compelled to take to the skirting glades to avoid them.
Francis McCambridge kept a tavern here as early as 1820, and was
succeeded by Robert Hunter, and he by James Stoddard, some time previous
to 1840. Hunter went from this house to Petersburg. James Stoddard was
the grandfather of Mrs. McClelland, of the McClelland house, Uniontown.
Stages stopped at Stoddard's, as well as wagoners and travelers of every
description. The log cabin boys of Uniontown stopped at Stoddard's the
first night out on their memorable trip to Baltimore, in 1840, to attend
the great Whig mass meeting of that year in that city. They had with
them, on wheels, a regular log cabin, well stored with refreshments of
every kind, and the very best; and every mile of their long journey
resounded with lusty shouts for "Tippecanoe and Tyler, too." E. B.
Dawson, esq., and Lucien B. Bowie, of Uniontown, are the only survivors
of that unique pilgrimage, so far as can be ascertained. The party
consisted of such distinguished and well remembered Whigs, of Uniontown,
as James Veech, Alfred Patterson, Rice G. Hopwood, Thomas R. Davidson,
Lee Haymaker, John Harvey, William McDonald, Robert L. Barry, James
Endsley, William E. Austin, E. B. Dawson and Lucien B. Bowie. There
were doubtless others, but owing to the long lapse of time their names
are not recalled. Redding Bunting drove the team that hauled the cabin,
and Thomas A. Wiley was with the party as an employe of the Stockton
stage line, which furnished four coaches for the transportation of the
political pilgrims. James Endsley was of the Somerfield family of
Endsleys, and died in that place in July, 1893. At Middletown, a short
distance east of South Mountain, in Maryland, the log cabin boys were
confronted with a petticoat suspended from a pole, which excited them to
rage. A collision and a fight ensued. John Harvey, the muscular man of
the log cabin boys, engaged a like representative of the other side, and
it is claimed, by the friends of Harvey, that he vanquished his
antagonist. It is not improbable that both sides claimed a victory. The
party reached Baltimore safely and on time, and were received in that
city with great enthusiasm. They were tendered a reception speech, which
was delivered by "The Milford Bard," a celebrated Baltimore poet and
orator of that day, and the speech responsive was made by William E.
Austin, who was a graceful orator, and his effort on this occasion was
one of his best. The Stoddard House, at Keyser's Ridge, was subsequently
and successively kept by Dennis Hoblitzell, William Fear, one of the
McCurdys, Adam Yeast and David Johnson, the latter the stepfather of
Mrs. McClelland, of the McClelland House, Uniontown, before mentioned,
who was born in this house when it was kept by her father, Dennis
Hoblitzell. William Fear owned the old Stoddard House, and sold it to
Perry Shultz, who conducted it as a tavern for a number of years, in
addition to the parties above named. William and Daniel Fear were
brothers. William, upon quitting the road, removed to Virginia, where he
lived to an old age and died. Daniel exchanged the mountains for the
rich valley of the Monongahela, and ended his days in Brownsville. In
1840 Truman Fairall built a house on Keyser's Ridge, and conducted it as
a tavern down to the year 1853, and a short time thereafter moved to the
State of Iowa, where he spent the remainder of his life. The Stockton
line of coaches stopped at Fairall's. Fairall was a native of Old
Virginia. Samuel Fairall, a son of Truman, the old tavern keeper, at one
time a student in the Dunlap's Creek Academy, near Merrittstown, Fayette
county, Pennsylvania, is a law judge in one of the courts of Iowa.

About half a mile west of Keyser's Ridge, and in the year 1850, John
Woods built a house and conducted it as a tavern until the close of
business on the road. He was an uncle of Henry, Thomas and Alexander
Woods, of Uniontown, and an old wagoner. Sandy Connor, the old
blacksmith of Keyser's Ridge, and occasionally a stage driver, retired
to an humble dwelling on the road side, opposite the Woods House, and
there in the depths of the mountains took final leave of the old road
and all its endearing memories.

Two miles west of Keyser's Ridge an old wagon stand tavern was kept by
Daniel Fear, before mentioned, who was the father of John G. Fear, who
kept the old Workman House, in Brownsville, a few years ago, George W.
Fear, formerly a wholesale liquor merchant in the same place, and Frank
Fear, who once kept the Yough House in Connellsville. The old Fear
tavern referred to was also at one time kept by Harvey Bane and by
William Carlisle, and later by David Johnson. It was a frame house on
the north side of the road. Within the venerable walls of this old
tavern, and amid the romantic walks about it, when it was kept by David
Johnson, Alfred McClelland, the renowned old tavern keeper of Uniontown,
wooed and won his bride, and here in 1856 was happily married to Miss
Sarah E. Hoblitzell, now, and for many years, a widow, and reigning
mistress of the old McClelland House, in Uniontown, one of the most
famous of all the far famed hostelries of the road.

About three-fourths of a mile west from the old Fear House, in later
years better known as the Bane House, James Reynolds established a
tavern as early as the year 1818, and continued to preside over it and
entertain the traveling public until the year 1843. It was a popular
wagon stand in its day. James Reynolds, its old proprietor, was the
father of William Reynolds, elsewhere mentioned as an old wagoner,
tavern keeper and express agent. Daniel Fear succeeded James Reynolds in
the old house mentioned, and conducted it for a term of four years. He
next moved to a wooden house about three hundred yards to the westward,
and kept it as a tavern for two years. This old house was built by Jacob
Frederic Augustine, and known as the Augustine House. From this old
house Daniel Fear moved to Sand Springs, and kept the old Hiram Sutton
house at that point for a term of two years, at the end of which he
moved to Brownsville, and died suddenly in Uniontown on July 7, 1854,
while on a business errand to that place. John Woods succeeded Fear in
the Augustine House.

Within a distance of one hundred yards westward from the old Reynolds
House, and in the year 1845, Henry Walters erected a wooden building and
embarked in the business of tavern keeping. After a brief experience in
this line, he removed to Hopwood, where he operated a blacksmith shop.
While in Hopwood, and from the savings of tavern keeping and
blacksmithing, he purchased the land on Dunbar's Camp, occupied it a
number of years, sold it at an advance to Dr. Waters, of the Soldiers'
Orphans' School, and with his added accumulations, bought the old
Grier-Brown farm on Redstone creek, in Franklin township, Fayette
county, Pennsylvania, founded the village of Waltersburg, and about two
years ago died, leaving his family a comfortable inheritance. He is well
remembered as an amiable, industrious and money accumulating citizen of
German origin.




CHAPTER XXX.

  _Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Winding Ridge to the Big
     Crossings--The State Line--How it is Noted--The Old Stone Tavern on
     Winding Ridge, John Welsh, Major Paul, The Wables, Edward C. Jones,
     The Augustines, Daniel Blucher, Petersburg, Gen. Ross, William
     Roddy, Gabriel Abrams, The Risler Family, Col. Samuel Elder, Robert
     Hunter, John McMullin, Alfred Newlon, Lott Watson, John Mitchell,
     John Bradfield, The Temple of Juno, The Big Crossings, Endsley's
     Old Tavern, John Campbell, William Imhoff--An Old Time Fourth of
     July Celebration._


From Baltimore to the point last mentioned in the preceding chapter, all
the old taverns on the road are in the State of Maryland. The road
crosses the dividing line between the States of Maryland and
Pennsylvania, near the eastern foot of Winding Ridge. The crossing point
is marked by a metal slab shaped like the ordinary mile post, and bears
this inscription on one side: "State Line, Md. 96-3/4 to Wheeling, to
Petersburg, 2-3/4." On the other side: "State Line, Penna. 34-1/4 to
Cumberland, to Frostburg, 23-1/4."

Near the top of Winding Ridge, and in Somerset county, Pa., there is an
old stone tavern which was built as early as the year 1819, and by John
Welsh, who occupied it and conducted it down to the year 1821, when it
passed to the management of Samuel Dennison, who was succeeded in turn
by M. J. Clark, Isaac Ochletree, Peter Yeast, Maj. William Paul, Michael
Cresap, Robert Boice and William Lenhart. John Welsh, who built this
house and first occupied it, was the father-in-law of Aden Clary, well
known in the early history of the road. Major Paul kept this house in
1836, and for some time thereafter. He subsequently kept a tavern in
Washington, Pa., on Maiden street, opposite the female seminary, and
later in West Brownsville, where he died more than forty years ago. He
was familiarly known from one end of the road to the other. Voluble in
speech, rotund in form, and ruddy in complexion, Major Paul was a fine
type of the jolly landlord of the old road. He had a daughter, the wife
of Aaron Wyatt, an old tavern keeper of the road, who always enjoyed the
reputation of keeping a good house, owing in all probability to the
early and practical training of his wife. Mrs. Patrick at one time owned
and occupied the old stone house on top of Winding Ridge. She was the
mother of W. W. Patrick, now, and for many years, the intelligent head
of the old reputable and successful banking house of R. Patrick & Co.,
of Pittsburg. About the year 1850 the stables, appurtenant to the old
stone tavern, above mentioned, and when it was kept by William Lenhart,
were destroyed by fire, supposed to have been the incendiary work of a
disreputable woman. The loss was serious, and included two fine horses,
the property of William Hall, the typical old regular wagoner,
hereinbefore mentioned. Winding Ridge derives its name from the tortuous
course of the old Braddock road up the mountain, at that point.

[Illustration: JOHN RISLER.]

At the foot of Winding Ridge, on the north side of the road, an old
wagon and drove stand was kept as early as the year 1820, by John Wable.
This old tavern keeper was probably well advanced in years when he first
put out his sign, and from this old house he was summoned to his last
account. He had two sons, John and Jacob, who succeeded him in the
management of the old tavern, as tenants in common. The sons applied
themselves assiduously to the business of entertaining the public, and
after a brief experience, concluded that their father's old house was
too small to meet the demands of the increasing trade and travel of the
road, and accordingly tore it down and erected a new and larger one in
its place. The new house attracted a paying business, and remains a well
known landmark of the road. In course of time the Wables left this
house, and their successor was Edward C. Jones, the grandfather, on the
maternal line, of Caleb and Noble McCormick, of Uniontown. This was more
than fifty years ago. Mr. Jones moved from this old house to Searights,
where he resided for a time, and subsequently located in New Salem,
where he died. The old Wable house next passed to the hands of Jonas
Augustine, who became its owner and conducted it as a tavern for many
years, doing a good business. While in charge of this old tavern he was
elected a member of the legislature of Pennsylvania for Somerset county,
and represented his constituents with recognized fidelity. He died soon
after his legislative career ended, and the old tavern was purchased by
his brother, Daniel Augustine, who kept it for many years, and until
tavern keeping on the road ceased to be profitable. Previous to the
occupancy of Daniel Augustine, this house was kept for brief periods
between 1840 and 1845, first by Michael Cresap, and after him by Joseph
Whetstone. Cresap went from this house to the stone house on Winding
Ridge. The widow of Jonas Augustine, well advanced in years, occupies
this old house at the present time, as a private residence, and Daniel
Augustine is a resident of Petersburg, and regarded as the richest man
in that town.

One mile west of Augustine's, Daniel Blucher kept a tavern as early as
1828. He was a German, and his custom consisted mainly of the patronage
of old wagoners. This house dropped from the roll of taverns long before
the great travel on the road ceased.

The ancient and picturesque village of Petersburg is the next point
reached on the westward march. Petersburg is noted for its healthful
location and the beauty of the surrounding scenery. It has always been a
popular resort for summer tourists seeking exemption from the stifling
heat of crowded cities. Here lives [G]Gen. Moses A. Ross, a retired
merchant, who did business in the village for fifty years, and gained
the confidence and enjoys the esteem of all his neighbors. A number of
years ago his fellow citizens elected him to the legislature, and he
served them intelligently, faithfully and honestly. He is a christian
gentleman, and his long and honest business career on the road entitles
him to be classed as a pike boy, well worthy of honorable mention.
General Ross was born in Masontown, Fayette Co., Pa., in the year 1810.
Here also lived for many years, and died, William Roddy, who was at one
time a superintendent of the road, and a gentleman of unquestioned
integrity. The first tavern ever kept in Petersburg was by Gabriel
Abrams, father of the late Judge Abrams, of Brownsville. It was a frame
house, on the south side of the road, and built by Gabriel Abrams,
aforesaid. This house did a large business throughout the entire career
of the road, as a national highway. Subsequent to the time of Abrams it
was conducted successively and successfully by John Skinner, Daniel
Clary (in 1830), William Reynolds, Thomas Brownfield, James Marlow,
Michael Cresap, Peter Turney, Joseph Hendrickson and Henry Magee. A
frame house on the north side, erected by Henry Wentling, was conducted
by him as a tavern from 1820 to 1829, when he leased it to John Risler,
a celebrated old tavern keeper, who kept at various points on the road
in the days of its glory. Mr. Risler was the father-in-law of the
venerable Harrison Wiggins, Brown Hadden, and the late Stephen W.
Snyder, and it is the tradition of the road that wherever a kitchen and
a dining room were controlled by a female member of the Risler family,
there a well cooked and relishable meal was sure to be obtained. Mr.
Risler was succeeded in the old Wentling house by James Connelly, and
he, in 1835, by the stalwart and popular old wagoner, Matthias Fry. Fry
remained in charge until the spring of 1838, when he turned it over to
John Bell, who was succeeded by his son-in-law, Col. Samuel Elder, who
remained in charge until some time late in the forties, when he moved to
Uniontown and took the management of the National house in that place.
In the year 1832 Robert Hunter opened a tavern in a brick house, on the
south side of the road and street, in Petersburg, and conducted it for
many years with marked success. Mrs. Hunter, the old and amiable hostess
of this house, is remembered as well for her good qualities as a
housekeeper as for her immense size. She weighed two hundred and fifty
pounds. This old house was subsequently kept by John A. Walker, John
McMullin, Alfred Newlon and Lott Watson, in the order given, and was
always well kept. The stage coaches of one of the early lines stopped at
this house, and it has been extensively patronized by summer visitors
and pleasure seekers. It was one of the very best eating houses on the
road, and is continued as a tavern to this day by Mr. Mitchell, who
holds a license and keeps a good house. John E. Reeside married a
step-daughter of John McMullin.

[Footnote G: Died December 12, 1893.]

[Illustration: THE TEMPLE OF JUNO.]

At a very early period in the road's history, John Mitchell kept a
tavern one mile west of Petersburg, on the north side. Besides doing a
general business, this old house was a station for the first line of
stages on the road. It was destroyed by fire on the 31st day of October,
1828, and supplied by a new log structure, which was kept as a tavern
for many years by John Mitchell, jr., who erected near the old site the
present large and substantial brick building in which he is now living,
one of the oldest men on the road. On the opposite side of the road from
this house immense stabling was erected, in after years supplemented by
cattle and hay scales, all of which are still standing, tending slightly
towards dilapidation and decay, but in a much better state of
preservation than most of the old stables of the road. There is a large
and fertile farm connected with this old tavern stand, well managed,
under the direction of its venerable owner, [H]John Mitchell.

[Footnote H: Died in 1892.]

A short distance west from Mitchell's, a large brick house on the north
side of the road, was kept as a tavern by John Bradfield in 1840, and
later. The locality was known as Newbury. John Bradfield was the general
agent of the first heavy freight line put on the road, moved by six
horse teams, stationed at intervals of fifteen miles. He was an old
wagoner, and a good business man, and before going to Newbury kept a
tavern in Wheeling and in Washington, Pennsylvania. After Bradfield's
retirement the Newbury house was continued as a tavern by Moses
Jennings.

Less than a mile west of Newbury, on the north side of the road, an old
building once used as a tavern, attracts special attention by reason of
the singular style of its architecture. It is a wooden structure,
commonly called a frame, with an unusually high portico in front,
supported by four round and tall wooden columns, tapering upward and
downward from the centers. It reminds one of the old pictures of the
temple of Juno, and possibly the designer had that ancient temple in
view when he planned this old tavern. He is said to have been a native
of the vicinity, not likely versed in the classic orders of
architecture, but the style he adopted in this instance might reasonably
be regarded as the Monogynous. Two immense stables appurtenant to this
old tavern, one log, the other frame, both still standing, weather
beaten, empty, and useless, bear silent, but impressive testimony to the
thrift of other days, and impart a tinge of melancholy to the memories
of the old pike. Daniel Show was the original owner of the quaint old
building above described, and its first occupant. He sold it to Samuel
Easter, who conducted it for a brief period, and was succeeded by Peter
Lenhart, mentioned hereinafter as "Shellbark." Samuel Thompson succeeded
Lenhart, and he in 1846 was succeeded by Mrs. Metzgar, who subsequently
became the wife of John Olwine.

[Illustration: THE ENDSLEY HOUSE.]

And now the hills that skirt the Youghiogheny river rise to view, and
Somerfield is reached, an ancient little town, which the old metal mile
posts on the road persist in calling Smithfield. That this town was once
called Smithfield there can be no doubt, and that it now is Somerfield
is equally clear. It was originally called Smithfield, because its
founder's name was Smith, but the postoffice department changed it to
Somerfield on account of the great multitude of Smiths and Smithfields
in all portions of the universe. Somerfield has been the scene of many a
lively incident of the old road. Here light feet, impelled by lighter
hearts, tripped to the notes of merry music, and the ringing laugh and
sprightly jokes of the old stage driver and wagoner, enlivened the now
dull halls of the old taverns. The most noted old tavern keeper of
Somerfield was Capt. Thomas Endsley. Somerfield was always a stage
station, the second relay east of Uniontown. The Endsley House was the
headquarters of Stockton's line. It is a stone building, and stands near
the bank of the river at the western end of the town, and was erected in
the year 1818 by Kinkead, Beck & Evans, the old bridge builders, and
occupied and conducted as a tavern by James Kinkead, the senior member
of the firm, from the date of its completion to the year 1822. John
Campbell was its next occupant, who kept it for a term of two years, and
until 1824. Capt. Endsley then took charge of it, and conducted it down
to the year 1829. John Shaffer kept it from 1829 to 1831, when Capt.
Endsley again took charge and continued down to 1834, when Redding
Bunting was installed, and conducted it down to the year 1837. He was
succeeded by John Richards, who remained in charge until 1840. Squire
Hagan conducted it from 1840 to 1842, and Aaron Wyatt from 1842 to 1847,
when Capt. Endsley, the third time, re-entered, and remained in charge
until 1852, when he gave place to his son William, the present
incumbent. This old house is as solid as when first constructed. Its
foundation walls are not the least impaired, and its mortar pointings
are as hard as the stones, while the wood work, and notably the doors,
casings and mantel pieces, are in a perfect state of preservation,
attesting the skill of the mechanics at the early period in which the
house was built. Near the center of the town, on the south side of the
street, an old log tavern was kept by John Campbell, as early as the
year 1824, and immediately after his retirement from the Endsley House.
He was succeeded in turn at this house by L. C. Dunn, Samuel Frazee,
Moses Jennings, and John Bradfield. The June Bug line of stages stopped
at this house, and for a while the Good Intent line. It went out of
business in 1853, was remodeled and improved, and is now the private
residence of James Watson. Prior to 1837 and down to 1849 a tavern was
kept on the north side of the street in Somerfield, by Daniel Blucher,
J. Tantlinger, Capt. Morrow, Aaron Wyatt, Andrew Craig, Samuel Thompson
and P. R. Sides, in the order given. This house ceased to do business in
1849, and was pulled down in 1883, and never rebuilt. In 1823 James
Kinkead, the old bridge builder, kept a tavern in a brick house on the
south side of the street in Somerfield. This house was afterward and
successively kept by William Imhoff, James Watson, Lot Watson, John
Irvin and Ephraim Vansickle. Vansickle was a blind man and engaged in
tavern keeping when the glory of the road was fading away. He had many
of the elements of a successful tavern keeper, and furnished
satisfactory entertainment to the few travelers and strangers who sought
shelter and refreshment under his kindly roof; but he was too late.
Tavern keeping on the National Road was but a legend when he embarked in
the business, and he was constrained to listen day after day, and night
after night to the glowing recitals of the good times in bygone years,
and reconcile himself as best he could to the existing situation. At
Somerfield the road crosses the Youghiogheny river over a large,
handsome and substantial stone bridge, three hundred and seventy-five
feet in length, with three symmetrical arches, and appropriately named
by old pike boys the Big Crossings. A large dressed stone in the wall of
this bridge above the surface of the road, and near the eastern end,
bears the inscription; "Kinkead, Beck & Evans, builders, July 4th,
1818." The day of the month, the anniversary of Independence, is given
because on that day the bridge was finished, and the occasion was
celebrated with great eclat. The inhabitants of the mountains for miles
around, male and female, old and young, with old fashioned banners and
old fashioned music, turned out in great numbers, inspired by that
genuine patriotism which characterized the early period of our country's
independence, while yet many of the soldiers of the revolution were
living, and were addressed in eloquent terms by the Hon. Andrew Stewart,
Col. Samuel Evans, Hon. John Dawson and John M. Austin, of Uniontown.




CHAPTER XXXI.

  _Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Big Crossings to Mt.
     Washington--Old Shellbark, Jacob Probasco, Jockey Hollow, Old Tom
     Brown, Mt. Augusta, Marlow's, the Three Cabins, McCollough's--A
     Fugitive Slave Tragedy--A Sermon cut short by the Baying of
     Hounds--Charley Rush--The Sheep's Ear--the Bull's Head, the Old
     Inks House, Nick McCartney, Boss Rush, Samuel Frazer, John Rush._


The first old tavern west of the "Big Crossings," and the first in
Fayette county, Pa. (for the river here is the boundary line between the
counties of Fayette and Somerset), is that which for many years was kept
by Peter Lenhart, commonly known as "Shellbark." This is a two-story
house, originally built with logs, but subsequently weather-boarded and
painted red. The red, however, has long since disappeared, and it now
wears the dingy, dark colored hue that settles upon all ancient
buildings. A man named Ebert built this house and occupied it as a
private residence. He was a tanner by trade, and a justice of the peace.
He sold out to Peter Lenhart's father, who occupied the house also as a
private residence until his death, when his son Peter succeeded him and
opened up the house as a tavern, and soon after added a distillery. The
house had a good custom and "Shellbark" was prosperous. He was an
eccentric man, and like Orator Puff, had two tones to his voice. He had
a habit, upon rising every morning, of cutting a large slice from a loaf
of bread, spreading it with butter, and eating it in connection with a
glass of whiskey. He enjoyed this matutinal habit for many years, and
rarely omitted it. Why he was called "Shellbark" is not accurately
known. He was in early life an old-line Democrat, but in later years got
"mixed up," and seemed to have lost his political moorings. He died a
few years ago, and his widow and daughter remain in the old house,
occasionally entertaining strangers and travelers in very satisfactory
style.

[Illustration: THE BIG CROSSINGS.]

The next old tavern stand is about half a mile from Lenhart's, on the
south side of the road. The line of the National Road here is the same
as that of the old Braddock road, and this house was kept as a tavern by
Andrew Flenniken, before the National Road was constructed. Jacob
Probasco succeeded Flenniken in this house. Besides keeping a tavern,
Probasco had teams on the road, was a contractor for repairs, operated a
store, put up and operated a grist and saw mill, and engaged in many
other enterprises. One of his contracts was for taking up a portion of
the old road bed. At first, as elsewhere noted, the road was paved with
large boulders, which were subsequently taken up and their places
supplied by stones broken into small pieces. There are points along
the road where the old bed remains, and here the road is in better
condition than elsewhere, which has started the belief that it was a
mistake to take up the original bed; but this is a disputed and
unsettled question. Prominent among those who thought it was a mistake
to take up the original road bed was Capt. Thomas Endsley, the old
tavern keeper of Somerfield. He argued the question on many occasions
with the engineers, and after the work was done adhered to his opinion,
and characterized the plan as a foolish notion of inexperienced young
cadets. Probasco got into trouble in attempting to collect a claim by
attachment, was indicted for perjury, and soon after left the State,
settling in Ohio, and there became prominent and wealthy. It was a
relative, probably a son of Jacob Probasco, who donated the money for
the erection of the celebrated fountains in the city of Cincinnati.
Probasco sold out to Peter Baker, who kept the house a number of years,
and he was succeeded in turn by John Irvin, Jacob Richards, Charles
Kemp, Aaron Wyatt, Morris Mauler, Aden Clary and Alexander Speers. It
was a stage house, and passengers by one of the coach lines took meals
there. John Conway now occupies the property, and it is owned by Aden
Clary, of Frostburg, Maryland. The house is long and narrow, made up of
different structures erected at different times, one part stone, another
log, and a third frame, all now, and for a long time heretofore, joined
together and enclosed by weather-boarding. The intervening space between
this and the Youghiogheny river is called "Jockey Hollow," a level piece
of road upon which horses were run and cock-fighting practiced. Hence
the name Jockey Hollow. Ephraim Vansickle, "Blind Eph," as he was
called, kept a tavern many years in an old log house in Jockey Hollow,
and did a good business. This house was never kept as a tavern by any
other person than Vansickle. He subsequently kept a tavern in
Somerfield. Nicholas Bradley, who died a few years ago, was an old
denizen of Jockey Hollow. He was a contractor on the original
construction of the road, and as his name implies, an Irishman. His son,
Daniel, still lives here, an active business man and an influential
Democratic politician. [I]Jeremiah Easter, esq., Democratic Jury
Commissioner, also lives here. John Conway once kept a tavern in the
"bend of the road" near the foot of the hill, about half a mile west of
Jockey Hollow. This house was a log structure, long since demolished,
and a small frame now stands on the old site. John Conway was Daniel
Bradley's grandfather, long since dead, and therefore not the man at
present occupying the old Probasco tavern.

[Footnote I: Now deceased.]

Next is the old tavern of Thomas Brown. This is a large stone house,
built by Mr. Brown about the time the road was made. It stands on the
south side of the road. Brown kept it as a tavern from the time it was
built until the time of his death. Col. Ben Brownfield and Gen. Henry W.
Beeson were wont to come here on their sleighing excursions in the olden
time, often remaining many nights and days enjoying themselves in
dancing and feasting. Brown was a good fiddler, and furnished his guests
with music, as well as other means of entertainment. He was a large man
with a shrill voice, and considered a popular landlord. The property
remained in the Brown family a few years after the death of the old
proprietor, and ultimately fell into the hands of Jacob Umberson, the
present occupant. The elections of Henry Clay township were formerly
held at this house, and many exciting scenes have been witnessed here on
election day.

The next old tavern site is Mt. Augusta. (Site is used because the old
brick tavern house that stood here for so many years was burned down
some time ago, and has not been rebuilt.) It was one of the largest and
most commodious houses on the road, with two large water troughs and
extensive stabling among the appurtenances. In the palmy days of the
road it did a large business. John Collier was the original owner and
occupant of this property. At his death it fell into the hands of his
son, Daniel, who kept it for a number of years and sold out to Thomas
Brownfield. Brownfield kept tavern here for thirty years, and sold out
to John O'Hegarty, the present owner and occupant. Daniel Collier moved
from here to Georges township, where he died a few years ago, the owner
of a large estate. Brownfield became successively commissioner and
sheriff of Fayette county, Pennsylvania, and at the close of his term as
sheriff removed to the State of Missouri, where he died. The sale of
this property by Brownfield to O'Hegarty, was effected through the
agency of the celebrated Henry Clay Dean. O'Hegarty lived in Lebanon
county, Pennsylvania, when he became the purchaser. The old tavern house
was burnt during the occupancy of Mr. O'Hegarty. After the fire he moved
into a frame tenant house, on the opposite side of the road, a little to
the east, where he lives now. He is an acting justice of the peace,
esteemed for his honesty and probity, and wields great influence among
his neighbors.

Next is a stone house on the south side of the road, first kept as a
tavern by William Shaw, and afterward by William Griffin, Charles Kemp,
Isaac Denny and William A. Stone, in the order given. It did a good
business, and was regarded as a good house.

[Illustration: DANIEL COLLIER.]

Next comes the old Marlow House. This is a large two-story brick
building, near the summit of a long hill. On the opposite side of the
road a large stable was erected, capable of sheltering a hundred horses,
and now in a decaying condition. The indispensable water-trough was here
also. This house was built and kept as a tavern by Benjamin Miller, the
grandfather of Ben, Jeff and Sam Miller, of Uniontown. Miller sold the
property to James Marlow. Marlow kept it a long time, and died in it. At
the time of his death he was superintendent of the road. He was a short,
heavy set, quiet man, and came from Maryland. He had several sons, all
of whom went west many years ago, and one of them is now the proprietor
of the "American hotel," in the city of Denver. Benjamin Miller was
once a candidate for the Legislature, and pending his canvass declared,
"By the Eternal, if the people did not elect him he would go up on the
hill overlooking Harrisburg, and look down with contempt upon the
Capitol." He was not elected.

At the foot of the hill, below the Marlow House, stood, in the olden
time, a cluster of small log cabins, three in number, which constituted
a tavern stand known as the "Bush House," or "Three Cabins." This quaint
old tavern was kept by one Leonard Clark, who entertained a great many
strangers and travelers, especially such as were in quest of something
to slake their thirst. Its best business days were during the time the
road was undergoing construction, and upon its completion the "Three
Cabins" succumbed to more pretentious inns. These cabins were covered
with clap-boards; the chimneys built of rough stones, and "topped out"
with mud and sticks. Clark, the old proprietor, retired from public life
soon after the completion of the road, went west, left his cabins to the
tender mercies of the elements, and scarcely a trace of them can be seen
at this day. That jolly times occurred at this old tavern, among the
early pike boys, there can be no question.

The next house is a two-story stone building with portico in front,
known in recent years as the "Old McCollough Stand." It was built and
first kept as a tavern by a man named Bryant. James Sampey, Isaac Nixon,
Morris Mauler and Nicholas McCartney, each kept this house for shorter
or longer terms before McCollough went into it. Col. John W. McCollough,
who became the owner of the property, kept tavern here for many years,
and died the proprietor. He was a man of stalwart size, a talking man
and a politician. He was likewise a contractor, and did much work on the
road. He left a widow and several children. [J]Jim and Nick, two of his
sons, are well known pike boys. His [K]widow married 'Squire Burke, who
now occupies the house, and there is no place on the road where a better
meal can be obtained. A tragedy was enacted at this house which forms a
memorable event in the history of the old pike, and served as a good
text for the old anti-slavery agitators. It was on the 4th of July,
1845. Early in the morning of that day, while a number of wagoners were
engaged in feeding and cleaning their teams, as they stood in the wagon
yard, a negro passed along the road, and William King, one of the
wagoners aforesaid, cried out in a loud voice to Nicholas McCartney, who
was then keeping the house, "There goes a runaway nigger." "Are you sure
of that?" inquired McCartney. "I am," replied King, whereupon McCartney
darted after the negro and captured him a short distance south of the
house, the rocks and brush in that locality having impeded the progress
of the fugitive. McCartney led him into the house, and informed him that
he was going to take him back to his master in Maryland. The negro
seemed submissive, and McCartney placed him in charge of one Atwell
Holland, his brother-in-law, while he went for a horse to carry out his
purpose of taking him back to Maryland. During McCartney's absence the
negro ran out of the house, and Atwell and others pursued him. Atwell
being more fleet than any of the other pursuers, soon overtook the
negro, whereupon he wheeled upon Holland, drew a dirk knife from his
pocket, struck it into his pursuer's heart, and made good his escape.
Holland immediately fell to the ground, and expired while being borne to
the house by his companions. Among the persons present on this tragic
occasion, was one Lewis Mitchell, who was a great hunter and an
occasional preacher. While Holland was lying on the ground dying,
Mitchell placed wild grape leaves on his wound, and prayed for him.
Mitchell was preaching once in this neighborhood, and in one of his most
earnest passages, heard the yelping of hounds. He immediately ceased
preaching, and exclaimed, "There are the hounds, and d--d if Lead ain't
ahead," and straightway dashed out of the meeting house to join the
sportsmen.

[Footnote J: Both now dead.]

[Footnote K: Now dead.]

The next old tavern is about four hundred yards from the last one, and
was also built by Bryant, above mentioned, but not for a tavern. This
house was kept successively by John McCollough, Morris Mauler and Adam
Yeast, and is now kept by [L]Nick McCollough. There were times when it
had a "good run" of patronage. Adam Yeast, one of its old occupants, was
an eccentric character, and ultimately became a lunatic.

[Footnote L: Since deceased.]

Next we come to Charley Rush's old stand. This was a famous stopping
place. Charles Rush settled here in the woods in 1838, built the house,
which he occupied as a tavern until he died in 1846, in the prime of
life. He always kept a big team on the road, under the management of a
hired driver. He was a brother of Boss Rush, and the father of Henry
Clay Rush, a prominent and influential citizen of Uniontown. He was fond
of horse racing, and always kept fast horses. His son Henry Clay was his
favorite rider, who, when a small boy, appeared on the race course
arrayed in the jockey outfit, and exactly filling the regulation weight.
He would cut a sorry figure now, on the back of a race horse. Charles
Rush was kind and charitable in disposition, but when exigencies
required, would not decline a fisticuff. Many an overbearing bully has
felt the damaging effects of his well-aimed blows. He entertained
strangers and travelers at his hospitable board, whether they had the
means of paying their bills or not, but always preferred that
impecunious guests should inform him of their condition before engaging
accommodations. On one occasion an Irishman tarried with him over night,
and in the morning, after breakfast, informed him that he had no money
to pay his bill. "Why didn't you tell me that last night?" sharply
inquired Mr. Rush. "And faith, sir," replied the Irishman, "I'm very
sorry to tell you of it this morning." Rush, pleased with his wit,
absolved him from his bill, gave him a parting drink, and allowed him to
go "Scot free." [M]William L. Smith, esq., ex-county commissioner,
married the widow Rush, and occupies the old stand as a private
residence. Samuel Rush, a farmer, and brother of Charles, lived about
three miles from here, back in the country. He was a contractor on the
road, and an energetic, honest and highly respected citizen. He was the
father of [N]Marker Rush, the proprietor of the well known "Rush House,"
near the Union Depot, in Pittsburg. Marker must have inherited his
fondness for the sports of the day through his uncle Charles, as his
father was not given to worldly indulgences.

[Footnote M: Now dead.]

[Footnote N: Since deceased.]

[Illustration: SEBASTIAN RUSH.]

There was a little log house a short distance west of Charley Rush's old
stand, which was kept as a tavern for a few years by Edward Dean. It was
not one of the original taverns, and not considered "regular." The pike
boys of the neighborhood called it the "Sheep's Ear." Its chief business
consisted in selling whisky at three cents a drink, which was the price
of whisky all along the road. F. H. Oliphant, the well known iron
manufacturer, probably the oldest in the State, once put a line of
wagons on the road to carry goods and merchandise from Brownsville to
Cumberland. The wagons were drawn by mules, and the teams changed at
fixed points along the road. This old Dean House was one of the stopping
places of this line. One night some mischievous person, or persons, cut
the harness of one of the teams into shreds, so that Oliphant's line did
not move out the next morning from the "Sheep's Ear." Another house of
similar proportions and character near by, was kept by Thomas Dean. It
was known in the neighborhood as the "Bull's Head." It was the custom of
the pike boys of the neighborhood to collect together in these old
houses, when they were kept as taverns, now at one and then at the
other, to "while away" the long winter evenings, and enjoy themselves in
dancing and revelry. Nicholas McCartney often attended these festive
gatherings when a young man, and could relate many interesting incidents
and anecdotes connected with the "Sheep's Ear" and "Bull's Head" inns.

We next come to the old Inks House, now owned and occupied by Nicholas
McCartney. This is a large frame, weather-boarded house, with a spacious
wagon yard attached, a large stable and a number of sheds and other
outbuildings. The house was built by George Inks, and kept by him as a
tavern for many years. A man named Heckrote kept here once, and so also
did John Risler, and Samuel M. Clement, for many years a prosperous
farmer on Redstone creek, near Uniontown, entertained the traveling
public for a brief period, in his early manhood, and proved himself a
competent landlord. The house enjoyed a large share of patronage during
the prosperous times on the road. [O]Mr. McCartney, present occupant and
owner, has been in feeble health for many months. Previous to his
present illness he was a man of robust health and great energy. He is a
son-in-law of Thomas Brownfield, the old proprietor of the Mt. Augusta
House. He is universally esteemed among his neighbors, and general
sympathy is manifested on account of his illness.

[Footnote O: Now dead.]

We next reach the celebrated house of [P]Sebastian Rush, invariably
called "Boss." It is not a wagon stand, but an old stage house. Here
stage passengers took meals, which were invariably gotten up in the best
style. The house was built in 1837 by Hon. Nathaniel Ewing, who then
owned it. Rush moved into it soon after it was finished, as lessee of
Judge Ewing, and not long after purchased it, and occupied it
uninterruptedly to the present time. Here, also, is a store, postoffice
and other improvements, constituting a little village called Farmington,
and considered the grand commercial and business center of the
mountains. Sebastian Rush is widely known as an influential Republican
politician, has been superintendent of the road by appointment of the
Governor, and nominated by his party for Associate Judge, but defeated
by reason of the decided and long existing preponderance of the
Democracy in the county. When a young man, and living in a small log
house near the tavern stand of his brother, Charles, he was elected
constable of his township, and, being too poor to own a horse, performed
the functions of his office on foot. Since then he has made constables
and other officers, and owned horses without number. Previous to 1837
the widow Tantlinger kept tavern in an old wooden house, on the ground
now covered by the Rush house. The store here, before Rush came to the
property, was conducted by Peter T. Laishley, an old and well known
Methodist preacher, still living. He was then a Free Will Baptist.
Morgan Jones also once kept store at this point. He is now a real estate
broker in Philadelphia, and said to be wealthy. He had several brothers,
among them David, John and Samuel E., who were well known. David settled
in Wisconsin, and became Lieutenant Governor. John went to Kentucky, and
became a prominent iron manufacturer. Samuel E. is a Probate Judge in
southern Colorado. Allen Crane also once kept store here.[Q]

[Footnote P: Deceased.]

[Footnote Q: Deceased.]

The house now owned and occupied by Washington Hensel, was once kept as
a tavern by Samuel Frazer. Its public career terminated about the time
Sebastian Rush located at Farmington. A short distance over the hill,
west, there is a frame house, built by John Rush, and by him kept as a
tavern for a number of years. Henry Clay Rush also kept this house for a
short time. It is not classed among the old taverns, but during its
short public career enjoyed a high degree of popularity. Boss Rush, jr.,
lives here now in the capacity of a private citizen. John Rush was one
of the most popular landlords along the road. He is a brother of Boss,
and is still living, somewhere in the west. This old house was destroyed
by fire a few years ago, and nothing remains of it but two tall
chimneys, standing erect at this day.

[Illustration: RUINS OF THE OLD JOHN RUSH HOUSE.]




CHAPTER XXXII.

  _Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Fort Necessity,
     Washington's First Battle Field, Monroe Springs, Reception to
     President Monroe, Gate Bob McDowell, Braddock's Run and Grave,
     Fayette Springs, A Trio of Old Fiddlers, Chalk Hill, Snyders, Old
     Squire Price, The Summit of Laurel Hill, Molly Calhoun, Ephraim
     McLean, The Big Water Trough on Laurel Hill, The Goat Pen, The
     Turkey's Nest, Monroe, known now mostly as Hopwood, Matthias Fry,
     German D. Hair, The Old Morris House, Widow Sands, Harry Gilbert._


Mt. Washington is a point replete with historic interest. Here
Washington first measured swords with an enemy, and fought his first
battle. It is the site of Fort Necessity, and known in colonial times as
the Great Meadows. Gen. Washington subsequently became the owner of this
property, and held it until his death. It was no doubt owing to the fact
that his first engagement with an armed foe took place on this ground he
resolved to buy it. In his last will he directed it to be sold by his
executors, together with other real estate he held, and the proceeds
divided among parties he named. The tract, when owned by Washington,
contained two hundred and thirty-four acres, and he valued it at six
dollars an acre. He thus refers to it in a note appended to his will:

"This land is valuable on account of its local situation. It affords an
exceeding good stand on Braddock's road, from Ft. Cumberland to
Pittsburg, and besides a fertile soil, possesses a large quantity of
natural meadow, fit for the scythe. It is distinguished by the
appellation of the Great Meadows, where the first action with the
French, in 1754, was fought."

Previous to 1835, and by divers good conveyances and assurances, down
from Washington, this estate passed into the hands of the late Hon.
Nathaniel Ewing, who caused to be erected on the property the large
brick house, still standing, and one of the most noted old taverns on
the road. Judge Ewing subsequently sold and conveyed the property to
James Sampey, who went into possession and kept the tavern for many
years, and until his death. The first year after Mr. Sampey's death the
management of the tavern and farm was placed in charge of Robert
Hogsett, who turned over to the representative of the estate the sum of
four thousand dollars, as the profits of one year. The Good Intent line
of stages stopped at Sampey's, and as showing the extent of the business
of the house, Mr. Hogsett mentions that on one morning seventy-two
stage passengers took breakfast there. John Foster and James Moore
subsequently kept this house. They were sons-in-law of James Sampey, and
Moore was an old stage driver. At the close of business on the road.
Ellis Y. Beggs purchased the property and the tavern was closed. William
D. Beggs, the father of Ellis, died in this house. He had collected the
tolls for many years at the gate near Searights, was likewise a school
teacher, and a good one, and was, for a number of years, Steward of the
County Home. His eldest daughter, Jane, was the second wife of Dr. Smith
Fuller, the eminent Uniontown physician. Godfrey Fazenbaker succeeded
Beggs in the ownership, and engaged extensively in farming and stock
raising. Mr. Fazenbaker died in possession, and the property descended
to his heirs, who are the present occupants. The big water-trough still
remains on the opposite side of the road from this old tavern, but all
else has changed since the days when the proud stage driver cracked his
long silken-ended whip over the backs of his four spanking steeds.

The next old tavern was at Monroe Springs, on the hillside, a short
distance west of one of the old round toll houses. This house was built
by Charles McKinney, and opened up by him as a tavern. It was a log
house, weather-boarded, of small dimensions, now entirely obliterated.
Boss Rush commenced his career as a tavern keeper in the old house at
this point, and it was kept at various times by such well known men as
Wm. S. Gaither, German D. Hair, Wm. Dillon, Morris Mauler, John Rush,
John Foster and David Ogg. It was essentially a wagon stand, and night
after night, in the prosperous era of the road, the ground all around it
was crowded with big wagons and teams, and the old bar room rang out
with the songs and jokes of the jolly wagoner. Opposite the house a
large water-trough was erected, kept full and overflowing from a spring
near by, called "The Monroe Spring," in honor of President Monroe. When
McKinney kept this house President Monroe passed along the road, and a
public dinner was given him here. John Hagan, then a contractor on the
original construction of the road, was prominently connected with the
bestowal of this compliment upon the old-time President. The few old
folks who have personal recollections of this event, speak of it as a
memorable and exciting occasion. The dinner was substantial and superb,
and highly enjoyed by all participating, including the illustrious
guest. John Hagan was the father of Robert Hagan, esq., ex-commissioner
of Fayette county, Pennsylvania.

[Illustration: HON. SAMUEL SHIPLEY.]

One of the old stone toll houses stood a short distance east of the
Monroe Springs, and remained until 1893, when it was torn down. Hiram
Seaton was one of the early collectors at this point. He was the father
of [R]C. S. Seaton, the well known banker of Uniontown. He subsequently
served two terms as County Treasurer. He had a wooden leg, and was
esteemed as an honest man. He went west, settled in Missouri, and died
there. He was succeeded as toll collector by Robert McDowell, always
thereafter called "Gate Bob," to distinguish him from a number of other
well known citizens bearing the same name. Robert McDowell was also an
honest man, a popular man and a fighting man. He was tall, thin and
muscular. His fingers were distorted by rheumatism, but he could use
them in a fight with terrible effect. He was the Democratic candidate
for county commissioner of Fayette county, Pennsylvania, in 1854, but
beaten by the Know Nothings. He died a few years ago at Dunbar, very
greatly lamented. The memory of "Gate Bob" will long remain fresh in the
recollection of the pike boys, old and young.

[Footnote R: Now dead.]

The next old tavern stand is the "Braddock's Run House." Gen. Braddock
was buried near this house, a day or two after his disastrous defeat by
the French and Indians, at Braddock's Field, near Pittsburg. The exact
spot where he was buried is still pointed out, and can be seen from the
road. This circumstance gave name to the brook here, and the tavern. The
house was built by Charles McKinney, the same person who built the
"Monroe Springs House." He kept tavern here for many years. The house is
a large two-story stone structure. It was subsequently and successively
kept by Robert Shaw, Noble McCormick and William Shaw. This property is
now owned by the heirs of James Dixon, and is not a public house.

Next we come to the "Fayette Springs Hotel," a large stone house built
at an early day by the Hon. Andrew Stewart, who owned the property, and
remained its owner until the day of his death. It was recently sold by
his heirs to Capt. John Messmore, of Uniontown. This house was a
favorite resort for visitors to the Fayette Springs, situate about
three-quarters of a mile distant. In its halcyon days it had its ten-pin
alley, billiard tables, swing, and other appliances of pleasure and
comfort, but they have all passed away, and probably by reason of hard
times, and the abatement of interest in the Springs may never again be
brought into requisition. Here merry parties of young folks from
Uniontown and elsewhere were accustomed to assemble and enjoy a hearty
supper, engage in the dizzy mazes of the dance, and when it was all over
"go home with the girls in the morning." Mahlon Fell and Tom Collins
were the old-time fiddlers, and furnished the music, which in its line
was of superior excellence. They were occasionally reinforced by Jacob
B. Miller, esq., who tendered his services without pecuniary reward, and
in the language of the day, "could make a fiddle talk." Collins is dead.
[S]Fell and Miller are both living. The former has joined the church and
abandoned the fiddle, while the latter still retains his taste and
talent for music, and often entertains his friends in a private manner,
with many of the popular tunes of the olden time. The "Fayette Springs
House" has been kept in turn by Cuthbert Wiggins, John Risler, B. W.
Earl, Samuel Lewis, William Snyder, William Darlington, John Rush, Major
Swearingen, Redding Bunting, Cuthbert Downer, and perhaps others.

[Footnote S: All now dead.]

We next reach "Chalk Hill," so called from the circumstance of white
clay adhering to the shovels of the workmen engaged in digging the
foundation of the road. The tavern house was built here in 1823 by
Jonathan Downer, who was its first host. He was succeeded by Boss Rush,
and he in turn by Springer Downer, Samuel Shipley, William Shipley and
Milford Shipley. [T]John Olwine now owns the property, and keeps tavern
here. It is a two-story frame, with commodious stabling attached. Boss
Rush went from this house to Farmington. Samuel Shipley bought this
property at an Orphans' Court sale, in 1846, for $1,405, and paid for it
in gold. Westley Frost was the sheriff and trustee to sell. Shipley
subsequently became an associate judge. He was more fortunate than his
neighbor and fellow inn keeper, Boss Rush, in belonging to the strong
side. Rush was one of his competitors on the Republican side.

[Footnote T: Now dead.]

Next comes the old tavern stand of James Snyder. Snyder seems to have
been here always, and is here yet. He did vacate a short time for
William Shaw, but not long enough to change the tradition that this is,
and always was, Snyder's. The house looks old and dingy, and no wonder,
for it has withstood the wild dashes of numberless mountain storms. It
is situate at the foot of the eastern slope of Laurel Hill, and on the
head waters of Sandy Creek. The old stable is decaying, and will soon be
gone. The old host, too, is showing the marks of time and age. He has
already passed beyond the age defined by the Psalmist. His three score
and ten are supplemented by well nigh half a score.[U] He is the only
old landmark left along the road, that has not shifted from original
ground, except Natty Brownfield. A few years ago he was elected county
commissioner on the Democratic ticket, but practically without
opposition. He is universally esteemed for his honesty. As a tavern
keeper he enjoyed an excellent reputation, and many a weary traveler has
found consolation and comfort under his hospitable roof. The best wishes
of all his neighbors attend the old gentleman in his declining years,
and heaven's choicest blessings are invoked upon his venerable head.

[Footnote U: Now deceased.]

Near the top of Laurel Hill on the eastern slope, once lived a noted
character named Benjamin Price. His house, a log structure, was built
near the roadside, but below its surface, so that the upper story was
about on a level with the road. He kept a cake shop, was an acting
justice of the peace, and a strict Methodist, and was in the habit of
annoying wagoners and hog drovers by fining them for swearing, and they
in turn annoyed him by throwing billets of wood and disabled hogs down
his chimney. Price is long since dead, and the last vestige of his old
house has disappeared. The stable nearby it remained longer, but it has
gone, too. A few apple trees planted by the hands of the 'Squire, now
encroached upon by the mountain undergrowth, are all that remain to
indicate the spot where the old house stood.

[Illustration: STONE HOUSE, DARLINGTON'S.]

We next reach the "Summit House." This is not a wagon stand, nor
strictly an old tavern, but rather a fashionable and popular summer
resort. It is on the apex of Laurel Hill, and has the advantage of pure
air, and an extensive and charming view of the surrounding and
underlying country. At this point large finger boards were erected,
indicating distances and routes to the Washington Springs, Dulaney's
Cave and Jumonville's Grave, which are landmarks indelibly impressed
upon the memories of surviving wagoners and stage drivers. The property
here belongs to [V]Col. Samuel Evans, a wealthy and well known citizen
of Fayette county. [W]Ephraim McClean kept the house here for many
years, and made it famous by the excellence and style of his
entertainment. His flannel cakes and spring chickens have passed into
history, as unrivalled productions of culinary art and tempters of the
appetite. There is a large spring and bath house here. This has ever
been a favorite resort of parties in pursuit of pleasure. Here the
youth, beauty and fashion of Uniontown were wont to come to while away
an evening in eating, dancing and other diversions. The rooms were
small, but the pleasure was unbounded. Here also the yeomanry of the
county came to make a harvest home, or celebrate an anniversary. The
drive, up and down the mountain, is delightful, and formed no small
share of the pleasure incident to the old time parties at this popular
place of resort.

[Footnote V: Deceased.]

[Footnote W: Deceased.]

Ephraim McClean left this house many years ago and settled in Illinois.
He was succeeded by Henry Clay Rush, who maintained the reputation of
the house during his occupancy, but left it in 1856 to go to Searights.
Brown Hadden came in after Rush, and after Hadden the house was
successively kept by Stephen W. Snyder, John Snyder, William Boyd and
Webb Barnet, the present occupant. Anterior to the erection of the
present buildings, and many years ago, one Molly Calhoun kept a small
cake shop at this point, and displayed upon her sign-board the following
quaint legend:

     "Out of this rock, runs water clear,
     'Tis soon changed into good beer,
     Stop, traveler, stop, if you see fit,
     And quench your thirst for a fippennybit."

About a mile down the western slope of Laurel Hill we come to the famous
watering trough. Here William Downard lived for many years in a stone
house built against the hillside. He did not keep a tavern, for he had
no ground for teams to stand upon, and no stabling that was accessible,
but he always maintained the big water-trough in good condition _pro
bono publico_, and it would be almost impossible for big teams to make
the ascent of Laurel Hill, in hot weather without water. Downard was
eccentric and cross, and begrudged the use of his water to persons he
did not like, although the supply was inexhaustible. He was born near
Uniontown of English parentage, a Federalist in politics, and a skeptic
in religion. He was endowed with strong sense, and could argue with
considerable force. He has been dead many years.

A little over a mile below the big water trough the romantic spot known
as the "Turkey's Nest" is reached. The road crosses a small stream here,
which, owing to the peculiar formation of the ground, required the
erection of a bridge, supported on the south side by an immense stone
wall. This is one of the largest stone structures on the road, and is in
a good state of preservation. It is a fine specimen of workmanship, and
a grand monument to the skill of the old time stonemasons. This locality
has always been invested with much interest, and admired by the lovers
of picturesque beauty. Until recently it wore its primitive colorings.
Now it is changed. Its primitive appearance has disappeared before the
advancing forces of progress and improvement. The native trees have been
cut down and a little hamlet occupies their places with attendant
stables, cribs, coops and other out-houses. The old massive curved stone
wall remains, but all about it so changed in appearance that the spot is
scarcely recognized as the "Turkey's Nest." It is the popular belief
that this locality derived its name from the discovery here of a wild
turkey's nest, by workmen engaged on the original construction of the
road.

An old long log house, near the foot of the hill, was called the "Goat
Pen," and why is not accurately known, but this name it bore from one
end of the road to the other.

We now reach the ancient and celebrated village of Monroe, a name it
took in honor of the President hereinbefore mentioned. Approached from
the east, the first old tavern and the first house in the place is the
"Deford House," in the olden time and by old people called the General
Wayne House. It appears that at an early day General Wayne had occasion
to pass this way, and tarried over night with John Deford, who kept
tavern in a small log house a short distance in the rear of the present
building. Deford at this time was contemplating the erection of a new
and more imposing edifice, and applied to his distinguished guest for a
plan. It was furnished, and the present stone structure is the outcome
of it, which shows plainly enough that General Wayne was a much better
soldier than architect. Deford kept tavern here for a long time, and was
succeeded first by Henry Fisher and next by Matthias Fry. Samuel Magie
is now the owner of the property, and its career as a tavern is ended.

A frame house a short distance below and on the opposite side of the
street from the Deford House was once kept by James Dennison, who had a
considerable trade. It was afterward kept by Matthias Fry, but business
then had greatly decreased. Fry, in his prime, was one of the best men
on the road, and a great favorite among the wagoners. He had been a
wagoner himself for many years, and was at one time general agent for a
transportation line from Baltimore to Wheeling, which made him the
disburser of large sums of money, and he discharged his office with
scrupulous fidelity. He was a large, fine looking man, stoutly built,
and possessing great physical power. Although amiable and good natured,
he was occasionally drawn into a fight, and on one occasion, at
Petersburg, in Somerset county, Pennsylvania, whipped three reputed
bullies, one after another, who entered his house when he lived there,
and proposed to "clean him out," as evidence of their prowess. He died a
few years ago in Monroe, where his widow is still living.[X]

[Footnote X: Now dead.]

[Illustration: JAMES SNYDER.]

The next old tavern in Monroe is the stone house built by Andrew
McMasters, and subsequently owned and kept for many years by German D.
Hair. He was the only man that ever kept this house, and he died in it a
few years ago, aged about eighty years. He was a native of Chester
county, Pennsylvania, and came to the vicinity of Uniontown about the
time the road was made. He was a stonemason by trade, and worked on many
of the bridges of the road, including the eastern and western bridges at
Uniontown.

Next we come to the "Shipley House." Like all the tavern houses in
Monroe, and nearly all the private houses, this is a stone building, and
is two stories high. It was erected by E. W. Clement, and good
workmanship displayed in its construction. It was kept awhile by
Clement, and after him at different times by John Wallace, Archibald
Skiles, Samuel Shipley, Redding Bunting, and Lindsey Messmore.

Next is the "Monroe House," one of the oldest in the place. It was built
by Andrew McMasters, and subsequently and successively kept by E.W.
Clement, Thomas Acklin, James Shafer, A. Skiles, John Worthington, M.
Fry, and Calvin Springer. This was a popular house in the golden era of
the road, and did an extensive business. Monroe was a thriving village
when the pike flourished, and the center of fun and frolic. It began to
decline when the trade left the road, but is now reviving and wearing an
air of prosperity by reason of the coal developments in the vicinity.

On the hill above Monroe stands an old two-story brick house, fast
sinking into decay, which was once a well known and popular tavern
stand. It was owned and kept by William Morris. He put up an imposing
sign, inscribed on the west side with the words, "Welcome from the
West," and on the east side the words, "Welcome from the East." This was
no false lure, and travelers from the east and west crowded into the old
house to enjoy its good cheer. Alonzo L. Little, for many years editor
and proprietor of the _Genius of Liberty_, was a son-in-law of William
Morris, and he had a son (Luther) who settled in Iowa and was elected
State Treasurer there.

Harry Gilbert once kept a tavern in the house where Charles Livingston
now has a grocery, at the east end of Uniontown, and in later years it
was kept by M. Fry and J. Allen Messmore.

Many years ago the Widow Sands kept tavern in the frame house at the
point where the Connellsville and Cool Spring Furnace roads lead off
from the pike.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

  _Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Uniontown--The Town as it
     Appeared to Gen. Douglass in 1784--Its Subsequent Growth and
     Improvement--The First Tavern--Other Early Taverns--An Old Chief
     Justice and an Old Landlady wrangle over a Roasted Pig--Anecdote of
     George Manypenny and President Jefferson--The Swan, The McClelland,
     The Seaton, The National, The Clinton, The Moran, The Mahaney._


[Illustration: GEN. EPHRAIM DOUGLASS.]

At the east end of Uniontown the road crosses Redstone creek, over a
massive and extensive stone bridge, one of the best and most expensive
samples of masonry on the whole line, built by Kinkead, Beck and Evans
in 1818. Gen. Ephraim Douglass, the first prothonotary of Fayette
county, Pennsylvania, in a letter to Gen. James Irvine, in 1784,
describes Uniontown in the following vigorous and graphic style:

     "_My Dear General_--If my promise were not engaged to write to you,
     my inclinations are sufficiently so to embrace with alacrity any
     opportunity of expressing the gratitude so justly due to your
     valuable friendship, of declaring the friendship of mine. This
     Uniontown is the most obscure spot on the face of the globe. I have
     been here seven or eight weeks, without one opportunity of writing
     to the land of the living, and though considerably south of you, so
     cold that a person not knowing the latitude, would conclude we were
     placed near one of the poles. Pray have you had a severe winter
     below? We have been frozen up here for more than a month past, but
     a great many of us having been bred in another State, the eating of
     hominy is as natural to us as the drinking of whisky in the
     morning. The town and its appurtenances consist of our president
     and a lovely little family, a court house and school house in one,
     a mill and consequently a miller, four taverns, three smith shops,
     five retail shops, two tan yards, one of them only occupied, one
     saddler's shop, two hatter's shops, one mason, one cake woman (we
     had two, but one of them having committed a petit larceny is upon
     banishment), two widows and some reputed maids, to which may be
     added a distillery. The upper part of this edifice is the
     habitation at will of your humble servant, who, beside the smoke of
     his own chimney, which is intolerable enough, is fumigated by that
     of two stills below, exclusive of the other effluvia that arises
     from the dirty vessels in which they prepare the materials for the
     stills. The upper floor of my parlor, which is also my chamber
     and office, is laid with loose clap-boards, or puncheons, and the
     gable ends entirely open; and yet this is the best place in my
     power to procure, till the weather will permit me to build, and
     even this I am subject to be turned out of the moment the owner,
     who is at Kentuck, and hourly expected, returns. I can say little
     of the country in general, but that it is very poor in everything
     but its soil, which is excellent, and that part contiguous to the
     town is really beautiful, being level and prettily situate,
     accommodated with good water, and excellent meadow ground. But
     money we have not, nor any practicable way of making it. How taxes
     are collected, debts paid, or fees discharged, I know not; and yet
     the good people appear willing enough to run in debt and go to law.
     I shall be able to give you a better account of this hereafter.
     Col. McClean received me with a degree of generous friendship, that
     does honor to the goodness of his heart, and continues to show
     every mark of satisfaction at my appointment. He is determined to
     act under the commission sent him by council, and though the fees
     would, had he declined it, have been a considerable addition to my
     profits, I cannot say that I regret his keeping them. He has a
     numerous small family, and though of an ample fortune in lands, has
     no cash at command. The general curse of the country, disunion,
     rages in this little mud hole with as much fury, as if they had
     each pursuits of the utmost importance, and the most opposed to
     each other, when in truth, they have no pursuits at all that
     deserve the name, except that of obtaining food and whisky, for
     raiment they scarcely use any. The commissioners--trustees, I
     should say--having fixed on a spot in one end of the town for the
     public buildings, which was by far the most proper, in every point
     of view, exclusive of the saving of expense, the other end took the
     alarm and charged them with partiality, and have been ever since
     uttering their complaints. And at the late election for justices,
     two having been carried in this end of the town, and none in the
     other, has made them quite outrageous. This trash is not worth
     troubling you with, therefore I beg your pardon, and am with
     unfeigned esteem, dear general, your very humble servant.

                                                  "EPHRAIM DOUGLASS."

That was a long time ago, and a great change has come over the face of
things. Gen. Douglass lived to see Uniontown arise from the mud hole and
become a flourishing county seat. His mortal remains lie buried within
the sound of the court house bell, and could he come forth now, and see
Uniontown, he would be startled. Instead of a mud hole, he would see
finely paved streets, studded with handsome buildings, lighted by
electricity, enlivened by electric cars, telegraphs, telephones and
railroads, and where the old distilleries stood, beautiful and staunch
church edifices with spires pointing to the skies, and in fact he would
behold all the evidences of a flourishing city, inhabited by active,
intelligent and Christian people.

The first tavern in Uniontown was kept by John Collins in 1781. It was a
log house on the north side of the main street, the site of which is now
covered by "Commercial Row." This old house remained standing until
1839, when it was torn down by its owner of that date. Isaac Beeson, who
erected the buildings thereafter known as "Commercial Row." John Collins
kept this old tavern down to the year 1799. It was subsequently kept at
different times by Samuel Salter, Cuthbert Wiggins, William Salter, John
Hoge and Andrew Byers. William Salter was an old sheriff. Byers went
from this house to the old Walker House, now the "Central," and
afterward to the "Clinton House."

Jonathan Rowland, Daniel Culp and Matthew Campbell each kept a tavern in
Uniontown as early as 1783. The location of Rowland's tavern is not
accurately known, but the best evidence available, points to the lot now
owned by Daniel Downer, esq., and occupied by law offices, near the
court house, as the site. Jonathan Rowland subsequently became a justice
of the peace, and a leader in public affairs. Culp's old tavern was a
log house on the lot now owned and occupied by Justice Willson, corner
of Main street and Gallatin avenue. Matthew Campbell's old tavern, stood
on the western side of the lot now covered by the Moran House, formerly
and for many years known as the "Fulton."

Colin Campbell as early as 1785 kept a tavern in a house that stood on
the lot now covered by the Bryan building, on Main street, near the
center of the town. This old tavern was subsequently owned and presided
over by Samuel Salter, father of William Salter, the old sheriff.

Margaret Allen kept a tavern in the east end of town, a little above and
opposite the Madison College buildings, in the year 1788, and for some
time thereafter. She died in 1810, at the age of ninety-one years.

Dr. Robert McClure opened a tavern in December, 1792, a short distance
west of the court house, on the south side of the street, and kept it
down to the year 1813. It does not appear that any other person kept
this house. It was in close proximity to the "Jolly Irishman," hereafter
mentioned.

Thomas Collins, son of John Collins, before mentioned, kept a tavern as
early as 1794 in an old house on the lot, corner of Morgantown and Main
streets, now occupied by the Tremont buildings. Thomas Collins was
sheriff of Fayette county from 1796 to 1799, and commanded a company of
soldiers from Uniontown and vicinity in the war of 1812, locally called
the "Madison Rowdies." A number of his descendants are still living in
the neighborhood of Uniontown.

Previous to the opening of the present century the veteran of Laurel
Hill, John Slack, before mentioned, kept a tavern in the old Shelcut
house, on the south side of Main street, opposite the old Gregg house,
and afterward kept the "Spread Eagle," the exact location of which is
involved in doubt, but the best information available assigns it to the
Weniger corner, opposite the old Walker house, hereinafter mentioned.

William Downard, subsequently proprietor of the big water-trough house
on Laurel Hill, kept tavern in the Shelcut house from 1801 until
probably 1808, when he retired to the pine covered slope of Laurel Hill,
where he spent the remainder of his life. He served as County
Commissioner from 1802 to 1805.

The Gregg house, situate on the north side of Main street, on the lot
now covered by the residence of Dr. J. B. Ewing, was in existence as a
tavern as early as 1798, and continued as late as 1865. It was a small
house of brick and frame united, but had a large patronage. In early
times travelers and other guests at taverns did not desire or expect
separate rooms, and hence a small tavern like the Gregg house could
accommodate as many persons as the more pretentious hotel of the present
day; and at wagon stands the bar room, as before stated, was the only
bed chamber for wagoners. James Gregg was the first proprietor of the
Gregg house, and was succeeded by his widow, Nancy Gregg, in 1810. After
her time it was kept in turn by William Medkirk, Matthew Allen, Simeon
Houser, Amos Howell, Philip D. Stentz, and Thomas Moxley. James Gregg,
the old proprietor of this house, was the father-in-law of the late Hon.
Daniel Sturgeon, who was a United States Senator in the days of Clay,
Webster and Calhoun.

In 1779, and for a number of years thereafter, Pierson Sayers kept a
tavern in the house now occupied by Mrs. Ruby, on the north side of Main
street, a short distance west of the court house. While keeping this
house Sayers was elected Sheriff, and turned over his tavern to Jacob
Harbaugh, who conducted it for three years, when, singularly enough, he
was elected to succeed Sayers as Sheriff. Ellis Baily, the grandfather
of Mrs. Ruby, bought this property from Pierson Sayers, and
subsequently, and for many years, it was the private residence of the
late Hon. John Dawson.

James Piper kept the "Jolly Irishman" as early as 1801. This bustling
old tavern was located on Main street, opposite the residence of the
late Hon. Daniel Kaine. James Piper, a son of the old proprietor, was a
prominent and influential citizen of the town and county for many years.
He was a member of the bar, a Justice of the Peace, Register of Wills,
and Recorder of Deeds. He left Uniontown about 1850, went west, and died
soon after.

William Merriman kept a tavern near Margaret Allen's old stand as early
as 1802. But little is known at this date of Merriman or his old tavern.
Its existence was brief and its patronage limited.

At and before the beginning of the present century Samuel Salter kept a
tavern in an old log and frame house that stood on the lot now occupied
by the handsome residence of the Hon. John K. Ewing. Chief Justice
Thomas McKean "put up" at this old tavern on his visits to Uniontown to
hold the courts of Fayette county, and was frequently regaled with roast
pig. The pig was well prepared, cooked and dressed, and in all respects
savory, but its frequent appearance on the table moved the old Chief
Justice to believe that he was getting "too much of a good thing," and
accordingly one day, in peremptory terms, he commanded the dining room
girl to remove the offensive dish, which she did with trembling hands.
This of course raised a storm in the old hostelry. Mrs. Salter became
indignant, and, bringing back the pig, replaced it on the table, at the
same time addressing the Judge thus: "You are Chief Justice and run the
court; I am chief cook and run this dining room. That pig must stay,"
and it did. Upon the withdrawal of Salter, in the year 1811, this old
tavern came under the management and control of Jacob Harbaugh, the old
Sheriff before mentioned. After Harbaugh's time it was kept by George
Ewing down to a period as late probably as 1830. Hugh Espey, a well
remembered old County Treasurer, and straightgoing Presbyterian elder,
married a daughter of George Ewing.

Opposite the old Gregg house, and adjoining the Shelcut house, George
Manypenny kept a tavern as early as the year 1814, and probably before
that date. This was a leading tavern of the town, subsequently conducted
by Benjamin Miller, and after him by Harry Gilbert. One of the old stage
lines stopped at this house. George Manypenny, the old proprietor, was
the father of the late Hon. George W. Manypenny, who was for many years
a prominent and popular political leader and officeholder of the State
of Ohio. He was born in Uniontown, and most likely in his father's old
tavern. George Manypenny, sr., is described by those who remember him as
a vigorous, pushing and witty Irishman. He called once to see President
Jefferson, and was invited by His Excellency to take a glass of wine
with him, which he did without hesitancy, and to obtain a second glass,
this story is told of him: As he was about to withdraw from the
executive mansion he remarked to Mr. Jefferson that he was going home,
and would tell his friends that he had the honor of taking two glasses
with the President of the United States, and hoped His Excellency would
not let him go home with a lie in his mouth. As the story goes, the old
President saw the point of the ingenious suggestion, and again brought
forward the wine.

The Walker house, corner of Broadway and Main streets, was kept as a
tavern as early as 1816 by Zadoc Walker, who owned the property. General
LaFayette was entertained at this house in 1825, and Santa Anna, the
renowned Mexican warrior, stopped over night in it on his way to
Washington City, about sixty years ago. This house has been kept at
different times since by Andrew Byers, William Byers, Redding Bunting,
and others. When Bunting kept it, it was called the "United States." It
has recently been enlarged and improved, and its name changed to the
"Central." Its first host under the new name was James I. Feather, who
subsequently became associated with William A. McHugh. Its present
lessees and managers are Messrs. Frock and Mitchell. The Spottsylvania
house, for many years conducted prosperously by John Manaway, and
afterward, until it closed, by Lloyd Mahaney, adjoined the Walker house
on the west, and used a number of rooms belonging to that old hostelry.

[Illustration: AARON WYATT.]

The McCleary house ranked high as an old-time inn or tavern. It is
situate on the corner of Main and Arch streets, a substantial brick
building, recently enlarged, embellished and improved, and at present
catering to the public under the historic name of "Brunswick," and
conducted by Russell W. Beall, a gentleman admirably equipped for the
business. Ewing McCleary owned and kept this old tavern as early as the
year 1819, and many years thereafter. Upon his death, which occurred in
this house, it was continued as a tavern under the management of his
widow, until she became the wife of William Hart, when he took charge of
it and kept it down to the year 1840, or thereabout, when he fell into
disgrace and retired under a storm of popular reprobation. This house
was a favorite stopping place of General Jackson. On an occasion a
committee of citizens met Jackson on the road near town and tendered him
the freedom of the municipality. Among other things made known to him by
the committee, he was informed that quarters had been provided for his
accommodation at the Walker House. He replied that he "always stopped at
Hart's." "But," rejoined the chairman of the committee, "Hart is a Whig,
and his tavern a Whig house." The old warrior answered back by saying
that "Hart always treated him well, and he would go to his house," and
to Hart's he went, reluctantly escorted by the Democratic committee.
After Hart's precipitate withdrawal from this old house, it was leased
by S. B. Hays, subsequently of the Mansion and other old taverns in
Washington, Pennsylvania. Hays conducted it for a brief period when it
went into the possession of Joshua Marsh, who remained in charge not
longer than a year or two, and left it to take charge of the National
House. Its next occupant was the veteran Redding Bunting. After Bunting
came Aaron Stone, then William Beatty, and after him William Gans. After
Gans, Peter Uriah Hook was installed as landlord, who named the house
"The Eagle," and remained in charge a number of years. Hook was an
eccentric man, given to redundancy of speech, a merchant, auctioneer,
and for two years a member of the lower branch of the State legislature.
He died in Uniontown, a number of years ago, but will not soon be
forgotten. Aaron Wyatt succeeded Hook, and kept the house until his
death. His widow and son James succeeded to the management, and James
dying in the house, it passed to the hands of his widow, Mrs. Kate
Wyatt, and from her to Russell W. Beall, the present occupant.

The before-mentioned old taverns were of the town, rather than of the
road. Most of them were in existence and doing business before the road
was made. The remaining old taverns of Uniontown, hereafter mentioned,
were essentially taverns of the National Road, and derived their
principal patronage from it.

The Swan, Nathaniel Brownfield proprietor, is an old, long frame
building, at the west end of town, supplemented some years after it
commenced business, by a brick addition to the eastern end. Thomas
Brownfield, father of Nathaniel, the present proprietor, and grandfather
on the maternal side, of the author of this volume, kept this old tavern
as early as 1805, and down to the year 1829. When the National Road was
opened for business, this house became a wagon stand, and continued such
until the last crack of a Battelly White whip was heard on the road. It
was provided with two commodious wagon yards, one at the front, on the
roadside opposite the house, and the other between the house and the
large stable in the rear. With the exception of one year that this old
tavern was kept by William Cox, Nathaniel Brownfield, who was born under
its roof, has kept it, uninterruptedly, from the date of his father's
death, and "holds the fort" to this day, "with none to molest or make
him afraid." Upwards of eighty, and in vigorous health, he has witnessed
and participated in the exciting scenes of the road from the beginning
to the end thereof. At an early period he became the owner of a farm
consisting of one hundred acres adjacent to town, which he managed
advantageously in connection with his tavern, and within the past year
sold for the sum of one thousand and five dollars per acre, retaining
his old tavern stand, to which he is attached by so many memories. His
wife and good helpmate survives with him, and together they occupy the
old tavern and recount with varied emotions the stirring scenes of the
eventful past.

The McClelland House, as has been elsewhere stated, is one of the best
known old taverns on the National Road. It is located on the north side
of the Main street, and in the western end of town. As early as 1795,
Richard Weaver kept a tavern in a wooden building on the lot now covered
by the McClelland House, and was succeeded by William McClelland.
William McClelland was keeping this old tavern in 1802, and owned the
lot on which it stood at that date in fee simple. After the death of
William McClelland his son, Alfred, came into possession, tore down the
old building, and erected in its stead the present brick building, known
always thereafter as the McClelland House. This house was the
headquarters of the Good Intent line of stages, from the time it was put
on the road until it was withdrawn at the end of the road's career as a
national highway. Alfred McClelland presided over this house and
controlled it from the date of its erection until he died, with the
exception of brief intervals mentioned below. He was a large, raw-boned
man, of agreeable, though somewhat awkward manners, and had complete
knowledge of the mysterious art of keeping a tavern. He had for his main
clerk and bar-keeper, Macon W. Rine, a confidential and loyal friend,
well remembered by the older citizens of Uniontown, as a thoroughly
competent man for his employment. Alfred McClelland died on the 8th of
September, 1862. In the intervals before mentioned, the McClelland House
was kept for a short time previous to 1840 by S. B. Hays, before he
took control of the old McCleary House. Thereafter, at different times,
the house was kept by Jerry Colflesh, Lewis D. Beall, William and Thomas
Swan, J. W. Kissinger, Calvin Springer, William Wyatt, Kim Frey, Russell
Frey, Frey and Swan, Joseph C. Stacy and Charles H. Rush, in the order
named. It is at present conducted, as elsewhere stated, by Mrs. Sarah E.
McClelland, widow of the old proprietor, and retains all its ancient
prestige, under her admirable management.

[Illustration: THE BROWNFIELD HOUSE.]

The Seaton House was a familiar hostelry in the olden time. It was
founded by James C. Seaton in the year 1820, or thereabout. It is
located on the northeast corner of Main and Arch streets, diagonally
opposite the old McCleary House, and is now known as the West End Hotel.
Mr. Seaton, the old proprietor, came to Uniontown from Virginia, and
died in this old house many years ago. The house was built in sections
at different times until it reached its present large proportions.
During its occupancy by Mr. Seaton it was a wagon stand of the National
Road, and extensively patronized. It was provided with ample grounds for
wagons and teams to stand on, which are now covered by the Lingo block
and other buildings in the vicinity. Mr. Seaton had three sons: Hiram,
James, and John. Hiram was the old toll collector before mentioned, and
James was a pike boy in a general way. He drove stage occasionally, and
also the express; led horses from station to station on the road, and
made himself useful in many other ways. He died at his father's old
tavern in the meridian of the bright era of the road, and before he had
reached middle age. John Seaton, the other son, went west, and died
recently in Nebraska. Daniel Collier, before mentioned as keeper of the
old tavern at Mount Augusta, was a son-in-law of James C. Seaton; and
Charles H. Seaton, the well known insurance agent of Uniontown, is a
great-grandson of the old proprietor, and others of his descendants are
still living in Uniontown and vicinity. After Mr. Seaton's death this
old tavern was continued a number of years by his widow, and growing old
she leased it to James Swan, who conducted it for a brief period, Mrs.
Seaton boarding with him in the house. Mr. Swan was succeeded by Philip
D. Stentz, and he in turn by J. W. Kissinger, Kim Frey, David G. Sperry,
John Messmore and Henry Jennings. The late James T. Redburn bought the
property from the Seaton heirs and sold it to John Messmore, who in turn
sold it to Henry Jennings. It is now owned and kept by George Titlow,
under the name of the West End Hotel, as before stated, well conducted
and well patronized.

The old National House is located on the northwest corner of Morgantown
and Fayette streets. It was built for a private residence by the late
Hon. Thomas Irwin, and occupied by him as such until he was appointed
Judge of the United States District Court for the Western district of
Pennsylvania, when he moved to Pittsburg. Judge Irwin sold the property
to the celebrated Dr. John F. Braddee, of mail robbing notoriety, and he
occupied it during the period covered by his depredations upon the mail
bags. Its situation for such operations was convenient, as it adjoined
the old Stockton stage yard hereinbefore described. After Braddee's
conviction L. W. Stockton acquired title to the property, and
subsequently sold and conveyed it to Joshua Marsh, who opened it as a
tavern. It was the headquarters of the Stockton line of stages from the
time it was opened until all stage lines were withdrawn from the road.
James K. Polk, with his family and traveling companions, stopped over
night at The National when on his way to the capital to be inaugurated
President, in the spring of 1845. A large number of citizens assembled
on the occasion to meet the coming President, and were addressed by him
from the high steps in front of the house. The National was a well kept
house. Situate a distance from the main street, it was comparatively
exempt from the ordinary street noises, and conducted in a quiet manner,
disturbed only by the arrival and departure of the stage coaches. Mr.
Marsh, its old proprietor, was a man of retiring disposition, gentle
manners, and feeble health. He visited Washington when Mr. Buchanan was
inaugurated President, and was one of the unfortunates who were poisoned
on that occasion at the National Hotel of that place. He returned home,
but never fully recovered from the effects of the poison, and died in
Uniontown. Among others who kept the National were George Evans and Col.
Samuel Elder. The latter is still living, a hale octogenarian, at
Ligonier Westmoreland county, Pa.

The Clinton House, which stood on a lot adjoining the old Court House,
was a popular house throughout its whole career. It was demolished in
1890 by condemnation proceedings, and the lot on which it stood taken by
the county for the use of the new Court House. It was erected in 1835 by
the late Hon. Andrew Stewart, who occupied it as a private residence and
kept his law office in it for a number of years. It was first kept as a
tavern by Andrew Byers, and after him, from time to time, until its
demolition, by Stephen W. Snyder, whose wife was a Risler, Zadoc
Cracraft, Isaac Kerr, Jesse B. Gardner, John Bierer, Calvin Springer,
Springer & Renshaw, Bernard Winslow, William Springer, Joseph Wright, J.
R. Thornton, and James I. Feather. General Taylor stopped over night at
the Clinton House in 1849, _en route_ to Washington to assume the office
of President of the United States. It was kept at that time by Andrew
Byers.

[Illustration: COL. SAMUEL ELDER.]

The Moran House is the old Fulton House, opposite the Court House, on
Elbow or Main street. Like the old Seaton House, the Fulton was built in
sections, some of them by Seth Howell and others by his predecessors.
Seth Howell kept this house a long time. He was called "Flinger,"
because he had a habit of flinging disorderly persons out of the house,
as he termed the process of ejecting. Howell was succeeded by Calvin
Springer, and he by William Thorndell, who became the owner of the
property. David Mahaney came in after Thorndell, Michael Carter after
Mahaney, and it next passed to the hands of James Moran, its present
occupant and owner, who gave it the name of the Moran House. This old
tavern was always well patronized, and continues to be under its present
proprietor, who has added many improvements, and the house is in better
shape now than at any time heretofore.

The name Mahaney has long been identified with the National Road. The
Mahaney House was built and is conducted by Lloyd Mahaney, a son of
David, elsewhere mentioned. It is the newest hotel in Uniontown, and the
finest in architectural display. It is a hotel, having come into
existence after the old inns and taverns had been relegated to the dead
past. It is located on a lot formerly owned and occupied by George
Ebbert, adjoining the present National Bank of Fayette County on the
east, and is on the south side of Main street. It is well managed and
does a large business, and is likewise one of the best of the many
recent improvements in Uniontown, and reflects credit on its
proprietor.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

  _Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Uniontown to
     Searights--Anecdote of John Slack--Slack at Night and Tight in the
     Morning--Old Roads--Parting Tribute to the Old Taverns of the
     Mountains--Henry Clay Extols the Virtue of Buckwheat Cakes--Boss
     Rush and his Poker--Moxleys--The Old Hunter House--Searights--The
     Grays and the Gray Meeting--Jackson Men and Adams Men Meet and
     Count Noses--Old Political Leaders--Barnacles of the Road._


The tavern keepers on the "old road," as it is called, were as earnestly
opposed to the building of the National Road, as those on the latter
were to the building of the railroad, and for like reasons. The
following anecdote serves as an illustration: John Slack kept a tavern
for many years at the summit of Laurel Hill on the old road, in a house
near the Washington Springs. Before the National Road was opened said
Slack, in a complaining manner, "Wagons coming up Laurel Hill would
stick in the mud a mile or so below my house, when the drivers would
unhitch, leave their wagons in the mud, and bring their teams to my
house and stay with me all night. In the morning they would return to
their stranded wagons, dig and haul them out, and get back to my house
and stay with me another night. Thus counting the wagons going east and
west, I got four night's bills from the same set of wagoners." "Now,"
concluded Slack (since the completion of the National Road), with
indignation, "the wagoners whiff by without stopping." Old wagoners were
accustomed to say of Slack that he was "Slack at night and tight in the
morning," meaning that he was clever and cheerful when they "put up"
with him in the evening, and close and exacting in the morning when
bills were payable.

The old road referred to was the Braddock road, which from the summit of
Laurel Hill, turned northwardly, as before stated, to Gists (Mt.
Braddock), Stewart's Crossing (Connellsville), Braddock's Field and Fort
Pitt (Pittsburg).

[Illustration: THE SEARIGHT HOUSE.]

An old road between Uniontown and Brownsville was laid out in 1774 by
viewers appointed by the court of Westmoreland county, Pennsylvania,
before Fayette county was established, upon a petition signed mainly by
inhabitants of Brownsville and vicinity, who complained that "they had
to carry their corn twenty miles to the mill of Henry Beeson at
Uniontown." The distance of twenty miles complained of was by way of the
old road known as "Burd's," from the mouth of Redstone creek to
Gists, where it intersected Braddock's road. The road between Uniontown
and Brownsville, above mentioned, was carried east of Uniontown, to
intersect the Braddock road, which it did, near Slack's tavern. The line
of the National Road closely follows that of the old road between
Uniontown and Brownsville. Marks of the old road are plainly visible to
this day, and some of the old buildings, which were erected along its
line, are still standing, notably the dwelling of Thomas B. Graham,
esq., three miles west of Uniontown, which was an old tavern. This old
house was the first residence of the Hon. Andrew Stewart after his
marriage, and his oldest son, David Shriver, was born in it.

John Slack, the old tavern keeper before mentioned, was the father of
Mrs. McClean, wife of Ephraim McClean, who for many years kept the
Cottage tavern on the summit of Laurel Hill, and no doubt the fame of
this house under the management of the McCleans is attributable in great
measure to the early training of Mrs. McClean in her father's old
tavern, where she was reared.

Heretofore in these pages the reader has been introduced to old taverns
and old tavern keepers on the mountain division of the road, a long
division covering two hundred miles, including the intervening glades
and valleys. Surprise is often expressed that there were so many good
taverns in the mountains, remote from fertile fields and needed markets.
That they were equal to the best on the road is conceded; and that the
old taverns of the National Road have never been surpassed for bounteous
entertainment and good cheer, is likewise conceded; in fact, has never
been disputed. It may seem a trifling thing to be written down in
serious history, that the old taverns of the mountains excelled all
others in the matter of serving buckwheat cakes; but it is germane and
true. To relieve this statement from the imputation of being a trifling
one, it may be added that there are men and women still living on the
line of the National Road who often heard the great statesman, orator
and patriot, Henry Clay, praising the good qualities of the buckwheat
cakes furnished by the old mountain taverns with as much fervor and more
enthusiasm than he ever exhibited in commending his favorite measure,
the Protective Tariff. And, as a matter of fact, it might be stated in
this connection, that the making of buckwheat cakes is essentially a
home industry, not, however, of the infantile order, and while it may
not need protection, is certainly deserving of encouragement. Another
memorable feature of the mountain taverns was the immense fires kept
constantly burning in the old bar rooms during the old-time winters. In
many instances the grates were seven feet in length, with corresponding
width and depth, and would contain an ordinary wagon load of coal; and
when the fires were stirred up in these immense grates, and set to
roaring, the jolly old wagoners occupying the bar rooms paid little heed
to the eagerness of the howling mountain weather. The old landlord of
the mountains took special pride in keeping up his bar room fire. He
kept a poker from six to eight feet long, and would not allow it to be
used by any one but himself. Boss Rush, not inaptly termed "the prince
of landlords," was so careful and punctilious about the management of
his bar room fire that he kept his big poker under lock and key, so that
no one could use it but himself, always using it at the right time, and
keeping up a uniform and proper temperature for the comfort of his
guests. With this parting tribute to the memory of the old taverns and
tavern keepers of the mountains, the attention of the reader is now
invited to those on the line of the road through the rich valleys of the
tributaries of the Ohio. Monroe and Uniontown, and the intervening space
of two miles between these points, are covered in a previous chapter.

Three miles west of Uniontown is an old tavern stand known in late years
as the Moxley House. It is a long log and frame building, situate on the
south side of the road, with a porch extending along its entire
frontage. This house was first kept as a tavern by Bazil Wiggins, an
uncle of Harrison Wiggins, the old fox hunter before mentioned, next by
John Gray, grandfather of the old and popular conductor from Uniontown
to Pittsburg on the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad, now and for many years
deceased. Its next occupant, and from 1836 to 1838, was William Cox, a
brother-in-law of E. W. Clement, the famous swearer. In 1838 the
property was purchased by Thomas Moxley, who went into possession and
continued it as a tavern stand down to the year 1863, when Henry Clay
Rush bought it and occupied it until the year 1865, when he sold it to
Edmund Leonard, its present occupant. When Moxley took charge of this
old tavern he gave it the name of "The Half-way House," for the reason
that its location is about midway between Cumberland and Wheeling. It
was always a well conducted tavern, and did a large business, mainly in
the line of wagon custom.

Less than a mile west of the old Moxley House, on the south side, and
back a few yards from the road, is a fine brick building, which, during
a portion of the prosperous era of the road, was a well known and
popular tavern stand. The house was built by Robert Hunter, who occupied
it for several years, but did not seem inclined to court patronage, and,
as a consequence, did not do much business. He leased the house to
William Darlington, and moved to Ohio. Darlington, as before stated, had
been an old wagoner, was a man of amiable temper, and did a large
business at this house. He remained in it until the year 1848, when he
moved to the mountain and took charge of the Stone House, then known as
the Fayette Springs House, now Dean's. There he remained until he became
the occupant of the Mansion House on the estate of the late Col. Samuel
Evans, near Uniontown, where he died. When Darlington vacated the old
Hunter House it was turned over to Peter Colley, whose father, Abel
Colley, had previously bought it from Hunter. Peter Colley kept the
house a number of years, and died in possession. He was a man of quiet
deportment, attentive to strangers and travelers, and enjoyed an
extensive line of custom, until the termination of the road's high
career. The old tavern is now the private residence of A. A. Taggart,
son-in-law of Peter Colley, proprietor of one of the planing mills of
Uniontown, and a successful contractor and builder.

[Illustration: JOSEPH GRAY.]

Next, two miles further west, is Searights. Here is the old half-way
house between Uniontown and Brownsville, a large stone building on the
north side of the road, at the crossing of the great drovers' road of
other days leading from the Flats of Grave Creek, Virginia, to Bedford,
Pennsylvania. The large stables connected with this house, on the
opposite side of the road, are still standing, and in a good state of
preservation. In the olden time, in addition to the ordinary travel on
the road, sleighing and other parties from Uniontown and Brownsville
were accustomed to go to this old tavern for a night's dancing, and the
attending festivities. This is also the battleground of the memorable
"Gray Meeting" in 1828, where the opposing hosts between Jackson and
Adams went into an open field and measured strength by "counting off,"
the Jacksonians outnumbering their adversaries by a decided
preponderance, greatly to the mortification of the weaker column. This
meeting was called the "Gray meeting," because the tavern there was then
kept by John Gray, formerly of the Moxley House, before mentioned. The
leaders on the occasion of this trial of strength were as follows: On
the Jackson side, Gen. Henry W. Beeson, Col. Ben Brownfield, John
Fuller, David Gilmore, Larkin S. Dearth. Alexander Johnson, Provance
McCormick, William F. Coplan, Henry J. Rigdon, William Hatfield and
William Searight. On the Adams side: Andrew Stewart, John Dawson, John
M. Austin, Israel Miller, E. P. Oliphant, Chads Chalfant, Stokely
Conwell, Levi Springer, Dennis Springer, and William Colvin. Prior to
1840 many of the Democratic county meetings and conventions were held at
Searights. Before the era of railroads it was a central point for
Uniontown, Connellsville and Brownsville. A large water-trough was
always maintained at this old tavern, where teams attached to all kinds
of wagons, coaches and other vehicles, as well as horses and mules led
in droves, were halted for refreshment. At times relays of stage horses
for extra occasions were stationed here, and it was always a relay for
the line teams moving merchandise. An old sign-board was displayed at
the front of the house for many years, bearing in large gilt letters the
legend SEARIGHTS. The old tavern at Searights was built by Josiah Frost,
about the time the National Road was constructed, and in the year 1821
William Searight acquired it by purchase from Frost. Joseph T. Noble as
lessee of William Searight kept the tavern first after it was vacated by
Frost. It was kept for a brief period at intervals by William Searight,
but owing to his absence from home, being a contractor on public works,
he did not give the management his personal attention, but placed it in
the hands of James Allison, a well remembered and highly esteemed
citizen, subsequently and for many years postmaster at Searights. John
Gray, as has been stated, kept this house in 1828. He was succeeded by
John Risler, the noted old tavern keeper, before mentioned. Mrs.
Risler's mother died at this house. Her name was Marsh. After Mr. Risler
left, and about 1840, Matthias Fry went into possession, and conducted
the house for a number of years. He had been a popular old wagoner, and
drew a large wagon trade. He was succeeded by Joseph Gray, son of John,
before mentioned, and father of John Gray, the old railroad conductor.
Joseph Gray died in this house in January, 1851. He was a worthy
citizen, well deserving of honorable mention. After the death of Joseph
Gray the house was kept first by William Shaw, known as "Tavern Keeper
Billy," and after him by William Shaw, known as "Wagoner Billy." These
two Shaws were not of kin. In 1856 Henry Clay Rush took charge of the
house and remained in it until 1863, when he purchased the Moxley
property and removed to that point, as before stated. Rush was a popular
man, and was liberally patronized by the traveling public. In the fall
of 1862, or winter of 1863, the mansion house of Ewing Searight was
destroyed by fire, and he moved to the old tavern when Rush vacated it,
remained for a while, and subsequently from time to time leased it to
James Frost, Alfred McCormick, Thomas Allen, C. W. Downer, Robert
Moxley, Lewis Fry and James W. Claybaugh. During the terms of the last
mentioned persons the patronage of the house was mostly local. The house
is now the private residence of William Searight, a son of Ewing
Searight, owner of the property, and late superintendent of the road.
William Searight, the old proprietor, was superintendent of the road for
many years, during its flourishing era.

The National Road had its contingent of quaint characters, eccentric
men, philosophers in one sense, and loafers in another. They were
indigenous to the road, could not live away from it, and enjoyed the
precarious subsistence they obtained on it. The load-stone that
attracted them and attached them to the road, probably above all other
influences, was the pure whisky, before mentioned. It was plentiful and
cheap, and could be obtained almost for the mere asking. It did not
contain the elements of modern whisky, which excites men to revolution,
insurrection, violence and insanity. Of the characters alluded to, whose
haunts were at the old taverns along the road between Searights and
Brownsville, the reader familiar with that portion of the line will
readily recall Marion Smith, (Logan) George Ducket, Jonathan Crawford,
John W. Dougherty, Gideon Lehman and Billy Bluebaker. Logan's forte was
imitating the crowing of a rooster. Ducket had no pronounced trait, but
under a patriotic impulse volunteered as a soldier in the Mexican war,
and marched with Major Gardner, Daniel Hazard and the other heroes to
the halls of the Montezumas. Crawford was a tailor, and worked at his
trade as little as possible, but quietly enjoyed his potations. He had
nothing to say. Dougherty was a walking arsenal, savage in appearance
and gesticulation. He carried knives, pistols and a general assortment
of deadly weapons, but was never known to use them on an adversary.
Lehman was also a tailor and bass drummer. He had a bronzed complexion,
and a stolid temperament. Billy Bluebaker was elastic in motion, but
lacking in brain. He wore the smallest hat of any individual on the
road, and was happy in doing little jobs for old wagoners at his uncle's
tavern. These odd characters have all gone with the majority of the men
of the road. They witnessed and in their way participated in the
enlivening scenes of the great highway, and are entitled to a place in
its history.

[Illustration: WILLIAM SHAW.
               "WAGONER BILLY."]




CHAPTER XXXV.

  _Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers, continued--Searights to
     Brownsville--Able Colley's, Johnson's, known later as
     Hatfield's--William Hatfield, his Good Name and Melancholy
     Death--An old and odd Indenture--The old Peter Colley House--A
     Tavern with a Brief Career, the Red Tavern, Wilkes Brown,
     Brubaker's--Brownsville--Anecdotes of Jackson and Clay--James
     Workman and Doctor Stoy--Ham and Eggs--Bazil Brashear, James C.
     Beckley, William Reynolds, the Monongahela House, the Clark House,
     the Iron Bridge, Bridgeport, John Riley, the Monongahela Bridge._


Over the hill from Searights is the old Abel Colley stand. The old
tavern here, in the flourishing era of the road, did a large business,
mainly in the line of entertaining wagoners. While all the taverns of
the road were more or less patronized by wagoners, excepting a few which
were exclusively stage houses, they had favorite stopping places, and
the Abel Colley tavern was one of these. The old proprietor and his
family had methods and manners which were agreeable to wagoners, and
they made it a point to stop at this house in great numbers. The bills
were moderate, yet the patronage was so extensive and continued so long
that Abel Colley accumulated a considerable fortune at this old tavern,
and when trade and travel ceased built a fine brick residence on the
roadside opposite, where he retired with his family to private life, and
in a few years thereafter died. Nancy, the wife of the old tavern
keeper, is well remembered as a large, amiable woman, who habitually
wore an expansive cap of the Queen Anne style. She long since passed to
the life beyond. W. Searight Colley, a son of Abel, now occupies and
owns the brick dwelling mentioned, with a fine farm adjacent. Peter
Colley, of the old Hunter tavern before mentioned, was likewise a son of
Abel, and he had a son, Levi, a farmer and freeholder, who died a number
of years ago on the old Covert farm, near Moxley's, now in the occupancy
of one of his sons. The Abel Colley tavern is still standing, a
monument, like many others, of the faded glories of the old pike. This
old house was kept as early as the year 1825 by Darius Grimes, and after
him by Thomas Moxley. In Moxley's time it was called the "Green Tree,"
and the writer remembers the picture of the green tree which appeared on
the sign board that hung and swung for many years in front of this old
tavern. Abel Colley took charge after Moxley left. According to the
recollection of Ebenezer Finley, as appears by his letter in the
Appendix to this volume, the Abel Colley tavern, was kept by Samuel
Wolverton and by Hugh Thompson, and this must have been previous to the
time of Darius Grimes. It was certainly before Moxley's time.

[Illustration: ABEL COLLEY.]

About one mile west of the Abel Colley house there is an old stone
tavern on the north side of the road, known in early days as Johnson's,
later as Hatfield's. This house was built in 1817 by Randolph Dearth for
Robert Johnson, who kept it as a tavern down to the year 1841, when he
retired to a farm in Franklin township, Fayette county, Pennsylvania,
where he died, leaving behind him a good name, which is better than
great riches, of which latter he had a goodly share. He was the
father-in-law of Thomas Brownfield, who, in 1862, was Sheriff of Fayette
county, Pennsylvania, and previously a tavern keeper on the road. Henry
L. Murphy, a well known and thrifty farmer of Jefferson township,
Fayette county, Pennsylvania, likewise married a daughter of Robert
Johnson. This tavern, under the guidance of Robert Johnson, did a large
business, and the old proprietor made money by conducting it. The
successor of Robert Johnson in the management of this house was Arthur
Wallace, who remained in it for a single year. He was a brother of John
Wallace, who once kept the Wilse Clement house in Hopwood, and
subsequently removed to Morgantown, Virginia, and an uncle of James
Wallace, present proprietor of the Wallace House in Morgantown. Peter
Frasher, the old wagoner and tavern keeper before mentioned, married a
daughter of Arthur Wallace. Charles Guttery succeeded Arthur Wallace in
the Johnson House. [Y]Guttery was an old wagoner, and is now keeping a
tavern in Beallsville, Washington county, Pennsylvania, and probably the
oldest man in the business. He was at the Johnson House in 1844, and a
wagoner many years before that date. From 1849 to 1851 John Foster kept
the Johnson House. He was a brother of the first wife of Robert Hogsett.
Foster was succeeded by Hiram Holmes, who kept the house one year. In
1852 William Hatfield, who had previously bought the property, went into
the house and kept it as a tavern until the year 1855, when he closed it
as a public house, but continued to occupy it as a private residence
until his melancholy death. Before engaging in tavern keeping, William
Hatfield served many years as a Justice of the Peace, and subsequent to
1855 served a term as Associate Judge. He was a blacksmith by trade, and
made the old iron gates of the road. He was industrious and honest, and
likewise noted for his kindness to his fellow men. It was while engaged
in doing a favor for an old neighbor, in the year 1871, that he lost his
life. His neighbor, John C. Craft, had purchased a patent pump, and
called on Judge Hatfield to assist him in placing it in his well. The
Judge, as was his habit, promptly responded, and, going down to the
bottom of the well, called to his neighbor, who stood at the surface, to
send him down a saw or an ax. The needed tool was placed in a heavy
iron-bound tub and started down, but, through neglect, the cable
slipped, and the tub was precipitated a great depth upon Judge
Hatfield's head, fatally injuring him. He was extricated from his
perilous position in an unconscious state, carried home, and lingering
only a few hours, died. His remains were interred in the beautiful
cemetery near Brownsville, attended by a large concourse of sorrowing
citizens, including the Judges of the Courts and the members of the bar
of Fayette county, Pennsylvania.

[Footnote Y: Deceased.]

Following is an exact copy of the indenture which bound William Hatfield
to learn the trade of a blacksmith:

     _This Indenture Witnesseth_: That William Hatfield, of the township
     of Union, in the county of Fayette, State of Pennsylvania, hath put
     himself by the approbation of his guardian, JOHN WITHROW, and by
     these presents doth voluntarily put himself an apprentice to GEORGE
     WINTERMUTE, of the township of Redstone, county and State
     aforesaid, blacksmith, to learn his art, trade or mystery he now
     occupieth or followeth, and after the manner of an apprentice to
     serve him from the day of the date hereof, for and during the full
     end and term of five years next ensuing, during all which time he,
     the said apprentice, his said master shall faithfully serve, his
     secrets keep, his lawful commands every where gladly obey; he shall
     do no damage to his said master, nor suffer it to be done without
     giving notice to his said master; he shall not waste his master's
     goods, nor lend them unlawfully to others; he shall not absent
     himself day or night from his master's service without his leave;
     he shall not commit any unlawful deed, whereby his said master
     shall sustain damage, nor contract matrimony within the said term;
     he shall not buy nor sell, nor make any contract whatsomever,
     whereby his master receive damage, but in all things behave himself
     as a faithful apprentice ought to do during the said term. And the
     said George Wintermute shall use the utmost of his endeavors to
     teach, or cause to be taught and instructed, the said apprentice
     the trade or mystery he now occupieth or followeth, and procure and
     provide for him, the said apprentice, sufficient meat, drink,
     common working apparel, washing, and lodging, fitting for an
     apprentice during the said term; and further, he the said master,
     doth agree to give unto the said apprentice, ten month's schooling
     within the said term, and also the said master doth agree to give
     unto the said apprentice two weeks in harvest in each and every
     year that he, the said apprentice, shall stay with his said master;
     also the said George Wintermute, doth agree to give unto the said
     apprentice one good freedom suit of clothes. And for the true
     performance of all and every the said covenants and agreements,
     either of the said parties binds themselves to each other by these
     presents.

     In witness thereof, they have interchangeably put their hands and
     seals, this first day of April, one thousand eight hundred and
     sixteen.

                                 GEORGE WINTERMUTE. [Seal.]
       Witness present,          WILLIAM HATFIELD.  [Seal.]
     BENJAMIN ROBERTS.  JOHN WITHROW.      [Seal.]

[Illustration: HON. WILLIAM HATFIELD.]

_Fayette County, ss._:

    May the 29th, one thousand eight hundred and sixteen, before me the
    subscriber, one of the justices of peace in and for the said county,
    came the parties to the within indenture and severally acknowledged
    it as their act and deed. Given under my hand and seal the day and
    year above mentioned.

                                                  BENJAMIN ROBERTS. [Seal.]

All the covenants and agreements of this quaint document were faithfully
kept on the part of William Hatfield. Benjamin Roberts, the Justice of
the Peace, before whom the instrument was acknowledged, was the father
of William B. Roberts, who led the company from Uniontown to engage in
the Mexican war, and upon the organization of the second regiment of
Pennsylvania volunteers was elected colonel, and served as such until
his death, which occurred in the city of Mexico. The old justice lived
on a small farm in Menallen township, Fayette county, Pennsylvania,
north of and adjoining the Searight farm, and Col. Roberts, his
distinguished son, was born there.

One mile west of Hatfield's is the old Peter Colley stand. It is a stone
house on the south side of the road. Peter Colley was the father of Abel
Colley, and an early settler. He kept a tavern on the old road before
the National Road was made. He was a money maker, and owned the land on
which his tavern was erected, in fee. He was probably the first man on
the National Road who acquired the fame of having a barrel of money. Old
pike boys said he kept his money in a barrel. Peter Colley was well
advanced in years when the National Road was made, and did not long
enjoy the profits of the new highway. At his death his tavern passed to
the hands of his son George, who kept it for many years, and until he
followed his father to the unknown world. George Colley lived to see and
lament the decline of business on the road, and after his death his
house was discontinued as a tavern. The hills on either side of this old
house are among the highest on the road, the summit of the western range
being twelve hundred and seventy-four feet above the level of the sea.
In the olden time, as before stated, extra horses, called "the
postilion," were required to aid the stage coaches in ascending these
hills.

A little over a mile further west a plastered stone house, on the north
side of the road, was kept as a tavern at intervals, during the
prosperous era of the road. It is not, however, to be classed among the
old taverns of the road. It was first kept as a tavern previous to 1840
by Arthur Wallace. Isaac Baily subsequently kept it for a brief period,
and enjoyed a good measure of patronage. Baily afterward became
postmaster at Brownsville, and finally a member of the Fayette county,
Pennsylvania, bar. He was a shrewd Yankee, and an active local
politician. His wife was a daughter of Solomon Colley, of the large
family of Colleys of the vicinity. George Craft once lived in this
house, and occasionally entertained strangers and travelers, but was not
a regular tavern keeper. This was also the residence at one time of
"Jackey Craft," known as an eccentric character, who was in the habit of
starting out over the road in a sleigh with bells, when there was no
snow on the ground. Before his mind became unbalanced, "Jackey" was a
pushing, money making citizen, but his life went out under a cloud of
mental derangement, causing deep regret among his many friends.

A few hundred yards further west on the south side of the road, is the
red tavern, so called, because in early days it was painted red. It is a
wooden building, weather-boarded. This house had a large wagon custom,
and, what may be considered strange without explanation, was more
largely patronized by wagoners going west than east. This was owing to
the means of ingress to and egress from the house. It is located near
the summit of a hill, a short distance from the road, and immediately in
front of it, adjoining the road, is a steep embankment. To drive to the
house going west, a way leads off from the summit of the hill, which is
level, but to drive out to the road the descent is steep, and wagoners
coming east could not reach the wagon yard without driving up this steep
grade, and, in many instances, preferred driving on to Colley's rather
than pressing their teams against such an obstacle. Despite the
disadvantage mentioned, this tavern, as before stated, was a popular
resort for wagoners. It was first kept by Cuthbert Wiggins, father of
Harrison Wiggins, and at this house Harrison Wiggins was born. It was
next kept by George Richards, whose widow became the wife of John Gadd.
Cuthbert Wiggins was at this house as early as 1812. John Gribble
succeeded Richards as early as 1836, and continued to keep this house
for many years, making money in the business, and ultimately buying a
farm in the neighborhood, ceased tavern keeping and became a successful
farmer. He has been dead many years, but is well remembered as a worthy
citizen. Upon the retirement of Gribble, this house passed to the
management of Fielding Frasher, a steady-going man, who had been a
wagoner on the road, and knew how to keep a tavern. He was an uncle of
Capt. L. H. Frasher, of Uniontown, ex-District Attorney of Fayette
county. Fielding Frasher had a good custom while keeping this house, but
did not continue long in the business, and was succeeded by Huston Todd,
a well known citizen in his day. He was a brother-in-law of Judge
Hatfield, father of Ewing Todd, for many years a leading citizen of
Brownsville, now deceased, and grandfather of William Hatfield Todd, a
popular and efficient postal clerk on the route between Pittsburg and
New York. Peter Williams, oldest son of the late Gen. William W.
Williams, married a daughter of Huston Todd. The reputation of this old
house was fully maintained while under the control of Huston Todd. Peter
Frasher next took charge of this house. He was a brother of Fielding
Frasher, and a typical pike boy, bright, active, and popular. He had
been a wagoner, and knew the road from Baltimore to Wheeling. The house,
while he kept it, was crowded with guests, but his generous nature
prevented him from exacting full payment of bills at all times, and
as a consequence his coffers were not as much swollen as those of many
of the tavern keepers, more mindful of the chief end of tavern keeping.
George Friend succeeded Peter Frasher, but remained only a short time,
when he gave way to Parker McDonald. McDonald was the last man who
conducted this house as a tavern. He was active, attentive, and popular,
but the glory of the road had departed, and the business of tavern
keeping was a thing of the past. The old red tavern and the farm
adjacent belong to the old and wealthy Bowman family, of Brownsville.

[Illustration: JOHNSON-HATFIELD HOUSE.]

A short distance west of the red tavern a stone house was kept by Wilkes
Brown, before the National Road was made, and derived its trade for the
most part from the old road. It is still standing, but not immediately
on the National Road. Wilkes Brown was of the family of Thomas Brown,
the founder of Brownsville.

The next old tavern stand on the westward tramp is Brubaker's, a fine
brick building on the north side near Brownsville. Daniel Brubaker
purchased this property from David Auld, and went into possession in the
year 1826, and from that date until his death was its constant occupant,
with the exception of a very brief period that it was occupied and kept
as a tavern by Alexander R. Watson. Mr. Brubaker survived the business
era of the road, and died in his old tavern. He was a Pennsylvania
Dutchman, born in Somerset county, and possessed the thrift
characteristic of his race. Although economical and saving, he was not
stinted in providing for the comfortable entertainment of his guests,
and enjoyed a large patronage, especially in the line of wagon custom.
After ascending the long hill out from Brownsville, going east, old
wagoners found a pleasant resting place at Brubaker's. Alex. R. Watson
will be remembered by the old folks of the road as a man of small
stature, but considerable energy, who, about forty-five years ago, ran
an omnibus line between Brownsville and Uniontown for the conveyance of
passengers.

The next point is Brownsville, for many years the head of steamboat
navigation on the Monongahela river. Here many passengers were
transferred from the stage lines to the steamboats plying between this
point and Pittsburg. It is shown by official figures that from 1844, the
date at which the slack water improvement was completed to Brownsville,
to 1852, when through business ceased on the National Road, covering a
period of eight years, more than two hundred thousand passengers left
the stage lines at Brownsville and took passage on the Monongahela
steamers. West-going passengers were "ticketed through" from Cumberland,
Baltimore and other points east, to Pittsburg and other points west,
_via_ the National Road, and the Monongahela river route. A movement was
set on foot as early as the year 1814, looking to the improvement of the
navigation of the Monongahela river, by means of locks and dams,
followed by later spasmodic efforts, but nothing of a practical nature
was accomplished in this direction until 1836, when a company was
incorporated to carry forward and complete the work. The act of
incorporation designated a number of prominent citizens to solicit and
receive subscriptions of stock, among whom were Ephraim L. Blaine,
father of James G. Blaine, of Washington county; William Hopkins, of the
same county, and Andrew Stewart and Samuel Evans, of Fayette county. Of
all the gentlemen designated for this purpose, and there was quite a
large number, not one is living at this day. There were no wagon stand
taverns in Brownsville. Wagoners "put up" at the old Riley and Bar
houses in Bridgeport, and at Brubaker's, east of town. The old Workman
House, at the upper end of Market street, was a famous stage house. It
had the patronage of the Stockton line. This house is a stone structure,
on the north side of the street, with a spacious porch in front. James
Workman, the old proprietor, will be remembered as a gentleman of ruddy
complexion, gray hair, slim, but erect stature, elastic step and curt
speech. He presided at this house for many years, and had a wide
reputation for serving good meals. This old house was built by John
McClure Hezlop in 1797, who first kept it as a tavern. James Beckley
afterwards kept it, and after his decease, it was continued as a tavern
by his widow. James Workman took charge of it in 1843. After Workman,
and since the decline of travel on the road, it has been kept at
different times by William Garrett, Aaron Wyatt, William Wyatt, Jacob
Marks, John G. Fear, and probably others. It is continued as a tavern,
and kept at the present time by Fred Chalfant.

The late George E. Hogg, for many years a leading and wealthy citizen of
Brownsville, is authority for the following amusing story concerning
James Workman, the old tavern keeper, and General Jackson. On an
occasion of one of General Jackson's frequent trips over the National
Road, the citizens of Brownsville resolved to give him a public
reception. All the usual arrangements for such an event were made,
including a dinner at Workman's tavern. The hero, upon reaching town,
was taken to the Presbyterian church to listen to a reception speech and
receive the greetings of the people. Soon after the audience had settled
down Mr. Workman entered the building, and forcing himself down the main
aisle, and to a front pew occupied by General Jackson, accosted him
thus: "General Jackson, I have been commissioned by the committee of
arrangements to provide your dinner, and have come to inquire if there
is any particular article of diet you prefer above another, that I may
have the pleasure of gratifying your taste." The old General gravely
responded, "Ham and eggs." This seemed rather confusing to the old
landlord, who, supposing the General was joking, repeated his inquiry,
when the same response came a second time and in an emphatic tone, "Ham
and eggs." The old landlord then hastily withdrew, hurried home, and
commanded his cook to prepare ham and eggs for General Jackson's dinner.
The ham of that day was a different thing from the flabby, flavorless
so-called "sugar cured" counterfeit of the present day, and thousands of
other well meaning citizens besides General Jackson were fond of the ham
of the olden time. Eggs, of course, are the same now as of yore, but
simply and solely because modern food corrupters have not discovered any
method of debauching them.

[Illustration: WORKMAN HOUSE.]

Mr. Hogg, above quoted, is responsible also for the following story: An
Old Line coach in which Henry Clay was a passenger was upset on the iron
bridge, and he was slightly injured and conveyed to the Workman house.
Dr. Stoy, an old practitioner of the place, was summoned, and hastened
to the relief of the distinguished sufferer. The old physician was given
to loquacity, and not a little elated by being called to see so
distinguished a patient. He prescribed brandy, and to vary the
prescription and assuage the patient's apprehension, began the recital
of an old joke, meanwhile holding in his hand a glass of brandy. Mr.
Clay, perceiving that the story was going to be a long one, interrupted
the doctor by suggesting that he be permitted to drink the brandy
without further delay, and rub the glass over his wounds.

A few steps below the Workman House an old tavern was kept by Bazil
Brashear, and subsequently by James Searight, who left it in 1836, to
take charge of the "National House" in Washington, Pennsylvania. The
Brashear House was a station for many years of one or more of the early
stage lines, and in 1825 Gen. Lafayette dined at this house while on his
way from Washington, Pennsylvania, to Uniontown. This old house, built
of stone, is still standing, owned and occupied as a private residence
by the widow of the late Westley Frost. Bazil Brashear was a
brother-in-law of Thomas Brown, the founder of Brownsville, and the
grandfather of Prof. Brashear, the distinguished astronomer of
Pittsburg.

James C. Beckley kept a tavern in a frame house at the head of old Front
street, for a number of years. He was a local politician of much
shrewdness, commanding a considerable following, a close friend of the
late Hon. John L. Dawson, and served that old-time, able and
distinguished statesman in many trying contests.

Further down the main street and on the south side near the present
location of the old Monongahela Bank, was the Marshall House. This house
was first kept as a tavern by William Reynolds, who was an agent of the
Adams Express Company. Mr. Reynolds previously kept the old Abrams House
in Petersburg. He did a good business at the Marshall House, which was
headquarters for the Express Company. This house was subsequently kept
at different times by Hiram Holmes, Isaac Vance, Harvey Schroyer, J.W.
Kisinger and William Garrett. After Reynolds left it the name was
changed, and it was known as the Petroleum House. It has not been used
as a tavern for a number of years.

William Reynolds was a native of Brownsville, born in 1804, and drove
his father's team between Baltimore and Wheeling, before reaching his
majority. He kept tavern in Petersburg five years, and moved from that
place to Brandonville, Virginia, where he engaged in a mercantile
venture, as a partner of his uncle, Zalmon Ludington, esq. After a brief
experience as a merchant, he returned to his father's old tavern west
of Keyser's Ridge, and afterward resumed tavern keeping in Petersburg.
From Petersburg he went to Brownsville. He was killed in a railroad
accident near Pittsburg in 1856, while in the service of the Adams
Express Company. His son John is postmaster at Confluence, Somerset
county, Pennsylvania, and William Hartman, the unfortunate brakeman who
was shot and killed on the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad, near Dunbar, in
August, 1893, was a grandson of William Reynolds.

The old Clark mansion, located at the east end of "the neck" in
Brownsville, was converted to a tavern about forty-five years ago, and
became the headquarters of the Good Intent stage line. It was first
opened up as a tavern by Andrew Byers, who had previously kept the
Clinton House in Uniontown. When Byers left it Daniel Brown, the old
stage agent, took charge of it and conducted it for a brief period.
Daniel Brown's reputation as a model tavern keeper has been adverted
to in another chapter. After Brown's time the patronage of this house
was mostly of a local character. The Clark House was kept for a while
after Brown left it by Capt. Morgan Mason, who subsequently located in
St. Louis, where he still resides, a leading citizen, and an ex-sheriff
of that city. The widow Schroyer also kept this house, and Matthew
Story, and it is at present kept by the Theakston Brothers.

The Monongahela House, a short distance west of the Clark House, on the
south side, was originally and for many years the private residence of
Samuel J. Krepps. It has been probably fifty years since this house was
thrown open to the public as a tavern. One of the McCurdy's was first
installed as landlord of this house. He was succeeded by Jesse Hardin,
an old stage driver, and Isaac Bailey, William Gans, Ephraim H. Bar,
Cyrus L. Conner and John B. Krepps, son of the owner, kept this house
nearly, if not exactly, in the order given. It was a stage house, and
had a large run of general custom. It continues to be one of the leading
hotels of Brownsville, under the management of David Provins.

Thomas Brown, James Auld, Amos Wilson and James C. Beckley were tavern
keepers in Brownsville prior to the construction of the National Road.
Auld preceded Beckley in the old house at the head of Front street,
above mentioned. Amos Wilson kept the old "Black Horse" tavern on Front
street.

A few yards westward from the Monongahela House the road crosses
Dunlap's creek over a handsome and expensive iron bridge, erected in
1835, and the first of the kind west of the Allegheny mountains. The
vicissitudes attending the construction of this bridge have been alluded
to in a previous chapter. The stone work of this bridge, which is a fine
specimen of heavy masonry, was let by contract to William Searight, who
pushed it forward and completed it with his characteristic energy. David
Chipps, a well remembered old citizen of the vicinity of Uniontown, and
an expert stone mason, was a boss workman on this bridge, and the late
Gen. William W. Williams, who in the prime of his life was an
excellent mason, also worked on its walls and abutments. The work was
done under authority of the War Department of the general government.

[Illustration: BRIDGE OVER THE MONONGAHELA.]

After crossing the iron bridge the traveler is in the ancient borough of
Bridgeport. Here Jack Arnold kept a tavern at a very early period. He
was succeeded by John Riley, who for many years kept a wagon stand.
Riley was a staunch citizen, and participated in the public affairs of
his town. His tavern was near the market house, and was a popular resort
in the olden time. Isaac Kimber, Robert Patterson and John Neelan kept
taverns in Bridgeport before the National Road was made. The present Bar
House is on the site of the old Kimber House. The Bar House is owned by
Ephraim H. Bar, who conducted it as a tavern for many years. It was a
wagon stand, and had a good trade. Robert Carter, old wagoner before
mentioned, was one of the men who for a time successfully conducted the
Bar House. Thornton Young, George Garrard, Matthew Story and Eli Bar
kept this house in recent years at different times, and it is now
conducted by W. F. Higinbotham.

It is but a short distance from the iron bridge before mentioned to the
long wooden bridge over the Monongahela river. This bridge, although a
link of the National Road, was not built by the government. It is a
private enterprise, and was erected in 1833. In 1810 an act was passed
by the Legislature of Pennsylvania, authorizing the Governor to
incorporate a company to build and operate a bridge at this point; but
for some cause the company was not organized, and in 1830 a company was
incorporated by the Legislature. Ephraim L. Blaine, father of the
brilliant and popular statesman, was an incorporator under the
provisions of the act of 1830, and the company authorized by that act
promptly organized, and completed the bridge at the date above
mentioned. Neil Gillespie, the grandfather of James G. Blaine, was named
in the act of 1810, above mentioned, as one of the commissioners to
solicit and receive subscriptions of stock for the bridge.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

  _Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Brownsville to
     Beallsville--West Brownsville, the Birthplace of James G.
     Blaine--Indian Hill, later known as Krepps' Knob--Indian Peter and
     Neil Gillespie--The Adams House, John Cummins, Vincent Owens--An
     Old and Mysterious Murder--Malden, Bry Taylor--Tragic Death of a
     Beautiful Girl--Centreville, John Rogers, Zeph Riggle, Battelly
     White, the whip-maker, Mrs. Dutton, Eli Railley, The Old
     Constitution, Beallsville, David Mitchell, Andrew and Thomas Keys,
     Robert Cluggage, William Greenfield, Mrs. Chambers, Charles
     Guttery._


[Illustration: OLD TAVERN AT MALDEN.]

From the Big Crossings to the Monongahela river at Brownsville the road
passes through Fayette county, Pennsylvania. After crossing the river
bridge at Brownsville, going west, the traveler reaches the soil of
Washington county, and plants his feet in the ancient village of West
Brownsville. From the hill tops on the road, as far west as Hillsboro,
glimpses are had of the receding mountains. West Brownsville has the
great distinction of being the birth place of James G. Blaine, the
foremost and most popular of all American statesmen of the present day.
It is related in Crumrine's valuable and well written history of
Washington county, that the land upon which West Brownsville stands was
originally owned by Indian Peter. This Indian Peter, at a very early
day, lived on lands in the vicinity of Uniontown, and gave name to
Peter's street, the oldest street of that town. He had a neighbor whose
name was Philip Shute, with whom he was not on friendly terms. Prior to
1769 Indian Peter wrote to the authorities of the proprietary
government, that "he could not get along with the damned Dutchman, and
wished to give up his land for another tract." His request was promptly
complied with, and he was given a tract of three hundred and thirty-nine
acres, situate on the west side of the Monongahela river, which was
surveyed and called "Indian Hill," and upon this tract stands the town
of West Brownsville. It embraces Krepps' Knob, which together with the
character of the old owner, accounts for the name given the tract.
Krepps' Knob is ten hundred and forty feet above the level of the
Atlantic ocean. Indian Peter, it seems, died in possession of the Indian
Hill tract, and it passed to his widow Mary, a white woman, and his
oldest son William. In 1784 the widow and son aforesaid, sold the tract
to Neil Gillespie, the great-grandfather of James G. Blaine. The price
agreed upon between the parties was forty shillings per acre, payable in
instalments of money, iron and one negro. This tract of land remained
in the Gillespie family for many years. Philip Shute, the old German
neighbor of Indian Peter, lived in Union township, Fayette county, now
North Union, near the late residence of Colonel Evans, and gave name to
the gushing mountain stream which flows through the lands of that
vicinity. The bridge over the Monongahela river stands on an almost
direct north and south line, and a short distance from its northern end
the road makes a sharp angle to the westward. On the south side of this
angle a tavern was kept by Samuel Adams, as early as the year 1820.
Samuel Adams was the father of Estep Adams, the present polite and
popular postmaster at West Brownsville. John Huston succeeded Samuel
Adams in this old house. In the early days of the road this house was
constantly crowded with guests. At the close of Huston's term, the old
house, which was a wooden structure, was torn down, and the present
brick building was erected on its site, and continued as a tavern
throughout the whole period of the road's prosperous era, and for many
years thereafter. Joshua Armstrong was the first occupant of the new
building. His term was prior to the year 1840. Morris Purcell came in,
after Armstrong. Dr. Adams, the postmaster before mentioned, when a boy,
counted fifty road wagons standing around this old tavern, in one night,
when it was kept by Morris Purcell. The wagon yard, which was large and
commodious, was located on the west side, and in the rear of the house.
Major William Paul, hereinbefore mentioned, succeeded Purcell in this
house, about the year 1842, and retained the extensive line of wagon
custom with which his predecessor was favored. James Watkins, an old
stage driver of Washington, Pennsylvania, was Maj. Paul's bar keeper at
this house, and his son-in-law, Thomas Hamen Hopkins, was the successor
of Maj. Paul in this house. His widow is still keeping a tavern in West
Brownsville. She is well up in years, but her memory is clear and well
stored with interesting reminiscences of the road. Greenberry Millburn
next had charge of this house, and kept it for a brief period, when he
retired, and his name does not subsequently appear on the roll of old
tavern keepers. John Cummins was the next occupant of this house. He
purchased the property, and held it until his death, which occurred near
the close of the prosperous era of the road. He was an Irishman, thrifty
and energetic, and besides tavern keeping, took contracts on public
works. About the year 1859 this house passed to the control of Moses
Bennington, who conducted it during the era of the civil war. He was
succeeded by William Dawson, whose successor was James B. Dorsie. Doc
Bar kept the house for a brief period, and one of its occupants was
Robert Miller. Upon the expiration of Miller's term Thomas H. Hopkins
again took charge, and it was subsequently kept for short periods, at
different times, by Solomon Watkins, James Nichols and John Taylor. The
house is at present owned by the Pittsburg, Virginia and Charleston
railroad company, and used as a passenger and freight station.

A few hundred yards west of the old Adams stand, and near the foot of
the river hill, on the river side, an old stone house was kept as a
tavern when the road was first opened, and for a number of years
thereafter. The first man who catered to the wants of the traveling
public at this old tavern was Vincent Owens, who had been a faithful
soldier in Washington's army in the war of the Revolution. The property
belonged to the old Krepps family of the vicinity, and the old tavern
stood at the northwest landing of the old Krepps ferry. Owens was
succeeded at this old tavern by Samuel Acklin, and Acklin by John
Krepps, a brother of Samuel J. Krepps. Morris Purcell succeeded Krepps,
and went from here to the old Adams House, before mentioned. The Krepps
ferry was operated in connection with the management of this old tavern,
and the ferry was continued down to the year 1845. The tavern was closed
here long before the decline of travel on the road. The father of
Vincent Owens was murdered in this old tavern while his son was
conducting it. The crime was an atrocious one, causing great excitement
and indignation in the neighborhood at the time, and the manner and
motives of the act seem to be shrouded in mystery. Two persons who
lodged in the house over night were suspected of the crime, but they
fled before the light of the morning and were never apprehended.

About two and one-half miles west of Krepps' Ferry an ancient hamlet
called by old pike boys Malden is reached. Here on the north side of the
road stands an old stone tavern, which in the palmy days of the road was
a popular stopping point. It belonged originally to the old Krepps
family, of Brownsville, and was designed and erected for a tavern. It
was evidently the belief of the old owners that a town would grow up on
this site, as they caused a stone in the front wall of the old tavern,
near the top, to be dressed and inscribed in cut letters with the name
Kreppsville. This name, however, was not adopted by the public, but the
place was, and continues to be known as Malden. The origin of this name
is not positively known, but tradition has it that a party of emigrants
encamping on the ground one night, fancying that it resembled the place
of their nativity, Malden, probably in the State of Massachusetts, gave
it that name. Be this as it may, Malden is the popular name of the
locality. The old tavern here was built in two sections and at different
dates. The original, which is now the western section, was built in
1822, and a dressed stone in its front wall bears that date. The second,
or eastern section, was built in 1830. It is the second section that
bears the name Kreppsville, above mentioned; and, in addition, the stone
slab disclosing this name shows the date 1830, also the word "Liberty,"
and the figure of a plow and sheaf of wheat. Bry Taylor was the first
person who kept the old tavern at Malden, and he was constantly busy
while there in attending to the wants of the traveling public. He had an
amiable and beautiful daughter, Kizzie, who was accidentally killed in
this house, causing great sorrow in the neighborhood. Her brother,
James, had been out hunting one day, and returning, placed his gun
negligently on a table. His sister, Miss Kizzie, besought him to
put the gun in a safe place, which he declined to do, remarking that "it
wouldn't hurt anybody where it was." Miss Kizzie did not share his
confidence in regard to the absence of danger, and proceeded to remove
the gun herself. Her brother interfered to prevent the gun's removal,
when a scuffle ensued between the parties, during which the gun was
discharged, and Miss Kizzie was fatally shot. The room in which this sad
affair occurred is still pointed out to visitors. As if by the law of
compensation, James Taylor, the brother, many years afterward was
himself shot. He became a river man, and gradually made his way to
points down the Ohio and Mississippi, and was finally shot and killed by
a United States Marshal near Memphis. Samuel Acklin followed Taylor in
the old tavern at Malden, and was favored with a large patronage,
consisting mainly of wagoners and drovers. Acklin was at this house as
early as 1836. Samuel Bailey succeeded Acklin, and Bailey was succeeded
in turn by William Pepper and William Garrett. James Britton, now and
for thirty years past, has owned this property. He occupies the old
tavern as a private residence, and operates the fertile farm attached to
it.

[Illustration: WILLIAM GREENFIELD.]

The next point west, distant about three miles, is Centreville. Moving
onward towards Centreville the traveler passes the old farms and
residences of Jonathan Knight, the famous civil engineer of other days,
and Nathan Pusey, father of Hon. W. H. M. Pusey, a leading banker,
Democratic politician and ex-member of Congress, of Council Bluffs,
Iowa. Another point of interest on this part of the line, is the old
historic Taylor church, which stands on the north side of the road, a
monument of the religious tendencies of the good old inhabitants of the
vicinity. Centreville was laid out in 1821, soon after the road was
completed, and with special reference to its completion, and the
anticipated prosperity to ensue by reason thereof. It is equi-distant
between Uniontown and Washington. The first old tavern kept in
Centreville was by John Rogers, father of the venerable Joseph T.
Rogers, of Bridgeport. It is a brick house, on the north side of the
road, still standing. Robert Rogers succeeded his father in this house
and kept it for many years, and died in possession. At brief intervals
in the lifetime of Robert Rogers this house was conducted by Solomon
Bracken, son-in-law of Mr. Rogers, and a Mr. Wilson, the latter
occupying it but for one year. The Rogers House was known and noted
throughout the entire period of the road's prosperous era as a quiet,
orderly, well kept tavern. The leading wagon stand in Centreville was on
the hill at the west end of town, a brick house, on the south side of
the road. The wagon yard was in the rear. Zephania Riggle kept this
house at an early day, and was succeeded in 1845 by Peter Colley, a
nephew of Abel Colley, before mentioned. Henry Whitsett came in after
Colley, and next Jacob Marks, who was followed by William Garrett, and
Jesse Quail succeeded Garrett. The property is now owned by Joseph B.
Jeffreys who keeps the old tavern open for the accommodation of
strangers and travelers. The house kept by Zeph Riggle on this site was
destroyed by fire during his incumbency, and promptly rebuilt. Battley
White, the celebrated manufacturer of the wagoner's black snake whip,
before mentioned, lived in Centreville. The house now occupied by Morris
Cleaver, on the hill west of Centreville, was at one time a tavern. It
was first kept by Charley Miller, then by Zeph Riggle, and next, in
1836, by Mrs. Dutton, mother of John R. Dutton, the well known,
reputable and prosperous merchant of Brownsville. Mrs. Dutton owned the
property, and moved from here to Brownsville, after which this old
tavern closed. Its career was somewhat brief, but it was a well kept
tavern, and had a good line of custom in its day.

About half a mile west from Mrs. Dutton's an old frame tavern, on the
north side of the road, as early as 1824, displayed the sign of the
CONSTITUTION, and entertained primitive travelers of the road. This old
house was kept for a while by one Johnson, but it long since disappeared
from view.

Eli Railley kept a tavern as early as 1830 in a brick house on the north
side of the road, about one and a half miles west of Centreville, and
was succeeded by the widow Welsh, who conducted it as a tavern as late
as 1850. This house is still standing, owned by Amos Cleaver, and
occupied by his son as a private residence.

Beallsville, distant one and a half miles from the old Railley tavern,
is next reached. In proceeding to Beallsville the traveler passes one of
the old toll houses, all of which, as before stated, are still standing,
and in good condition, except the one near Mt. Washington and the one on
Big Savage mountain. David Mitchell, the old collector at the gate near
Beallsville, is well remembered as a straightforward, honest and
intelligent citizen. Beallsville, like Centreville as a town, was the
outgrowth of the National Road. It was laid out in 1821, and
incorporated as a borough in 1852. Jonathan Knight, the old engineer
before mentioned, surveyed the site of the town and made the plat. The
National Road forms the main street of this town, as it does that of
Centreville. The first old tavern reached in Beallsville, going west,
was on the north side, at the east end of the town. This house was first
kept by Andrew Keys, and after him by Thomas Keys. This was previous to
1840. It was next kept by Robert Cluggage, and after Cluggage, James
Dennison kept it. Dennison was succeeded by Moses Bennington, who
afterwards kept the old Adams House at West Brownsville. Charles Guttery
also kept this house in 1854. Dennison was a Claysville man, and after
keeping tavern for short terms, at different points on the road,
returned to Claysville, where he died. He was an old wagoner, as well as
a tavern keeper, and well and favorably known on the road. He had an
interest by marriage, or birth-right, in some real estate at or near
Claysville, and this is doubtless the chord that drew him at last back
to that point. The old Keys tavern had a commodious wagon yard attached,
and entertained many old wagoners.

[Illustration: CHARLES GUTTERY.]

About the center of the town of Beallsville, and on the south or west
side, Wm. Greenfield kept a famous old tavern, and he was in many other
respects a famous old man. He was tall and spare, with a brown
complexion, a defective eye, and a philosophic turn of mind. It was his
fortune to have a good wife, and to her, in great measure, was
attributed the high grade of this old tavern. The traveler could always
get a good cup of coffee at Greenfield's, a rare thing in a tavern and
utterly unknown in a hotel. In addition to keeping tavern, William
Greenfield was a banker, and established the "Beallsville Savings Bank."
His bank was in his tavern, and his safe was his pocket. He issued notes
of small denominations, which were handsomely printed and engraved, and
they acquired some credit, and a limited circulation. The pressure of
redemption, however, was more than the old banker-tavern keeper could
withstand, and he was forced to close business as a banker, but
continued his tavern successfully. It is due to the memory of the old
gentleman to state, that no serious losses were sustained by the note
holders of his bank. He continued to keep tavern at the old stand until
his death, which occurred many years ago, and all the old pike boys,
from one end of the road to the other, have a kind word for the memory
of William Greenfield.

Charley Miller kept a tavern as early as 1830, and probably before that
date, in the brick house on the corner opposite Greenfield's, and this
house was subsequently, and for many years kept by Mrs. Chambers. It was
a quiet, orderly, and aristocratic old tavern, especially when under the
management of Mrs. Chambers, and enjoyed a good reputation as an eating
house. Benjamin Demon took charge of this house after the retirement of
Mrs. Chambers, and kept it for a while. Moses Bennington succeeded
Demon, and Charles Guttery succeeded Bennington. Guttery was the last of
the old line of tavern keepers, at this house. Beallsville was a station
for the line wagons, and John Cook, an old wagoner whose home was there,
drove a line team for many years.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

  _Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Beallsville to
     Washington--Hillsboro--The Old Hill House--Samuel Youman, next to
     Old Mount the biggest man of the Road--George Ringland, John Noble,
     Billy Robinson, Charley Miller's, The Gals House, Daniel Ward, Egg
     Nog Hill, The Long Stretch, Thomas Hastings, The Upland House,
     Joseph Doak, The Mount Vernon House, Maj. Dunlap, Charles Rettig,
     Pancake, Jonathan Martin, The Sample House._


Three miles west from Beallsville the traveler reaches the village of
Hillsboro. This little town is another outgrowth of the National Road,
and as at Beallsville and Centreville, the road forms its main street.
The grade from Beallsville to Hillsboro is for the most part ascending,
the hill going out west from Beallsville being one of the longest on the
road, and Hillsboro is situate on a lofty eminence overlooking a wide
range of hills, and many fertile slopes and valleys. On the summit above
Hillsboro, the traveler coming east, gets the first glimpses of Laurel
Hill, thirty miles distant in the mountains. Crumrine's history of
Washington county, before quoted, informs us that Hillsboro was laid out
in the year 1819, a date coincident with the completion of the road. The
proprietors of the town were Stephen Hill and Thomas McGiffin, and
Crumrine's history contains the following notice of the first public
sale of lots:

     "The public are informed that a town has been laid off, to be
     called Hillsboro, adjoining Hill's stone tavern, about equal
     distance from Washington to Brownsville, and that lots will be sold
     on the premises on Monday, the 19th day of August, at public
     auction. Sale to commence at 10 o'clock A. M.

     July 19, 1819.                               STEPHEN HILL,
                                                  THOMAS MCGIFFIN,
                                                  Proprietors."

[Illustration: BILLY ROBINSON.]

Accompanying the plat of the town as recorded, says Crumrine, were these
remarks: "The above is a plan of the town of Hillsboro, nearly
equi-distant between Brownsville and Washington, Pennsylvania, on the
United States road." Signed by the proprietors. Stephen Hill belonged to
an old family of that name, which was among the early settlers of the
region, and Thomas McGiffin was an old and prominent lawyer of
Washington, and a contractor on the original construction of the road,
father of Col. Norton McGiffin, a soldier of two wars, and Sheriff and
member of the Legislature for Washington county. Hill's stone tavern
was in existence as early as 1794. In the early history of the National
Road, and for a number of years, it was the leading tavern of Hillsboro,
kept by Thomas Hill, who was not a son, but a near relative, probably a
nephew, of Stephen Hill, the old proprietor. Samuel Youman kept this
house fifty years ago, after the retirement of Hill. Youman was a stage
driver as well as a tavern keeper, and next to "Old Mount," as before
stated, the biggest man on the road. One of the stage lines, that on
which Youman was a driver, stopped at this house, and it was the only
stage house on the road that was largely patronized by old wagoners, and
their favor was obtained probably by reason of the spacious and
commodious wagon yard in front of the house. John Hampson, John Gibson,
William Dawson and Oliver Lacock each in turn kept this house since
Youman's time, and it is at present continued as a tavern by Mr.
Lacock's son.

In the year 1827 James Beck kept a tavern in Hillsboro. He was a member
of the old bridge builders firm of Kinkead, Beck & Evans, and moved from
the "Vance farm," near Uniontown, which he once owned, to Hillsboro, at
the date named. He remained in Hillsboro but one year, and his successor
in the tavern there was George Ringland. Ringland was a citizen of some
prominence in his day, a brother of Col. Thomas Ringland, an old
soldier, and a leading man in the public affairs of Washington county
more than half a century ago. David Railly succeeded Ringland in this
house about the year 1840. It was a stage house, but did a general
business. After Railly this house was kept at different times by John
Noble, who married Railly's widow, John Taylor, Henry Taylor, Jesse Core
and William Robinson. Noble and Robinson were both old stage drivers,
Noble before, as well as after his experience as a tavern keeper.
Robinson died a tavern keeper, and in the house last mentioned. "Billy"
Robinson was one of the best known and most popular men of the road. He
was short in stature, with reddish complexion, dark hair, and an amiable
disposition. He hauled many an old-time statesman safely in his nimble
coach, and afterward dined him sumptuously in his bountiful tavern.
There was an old tavern in Hillsboro, near the centre of the town, on
the south side of the road, kept first by John Wilson, and after his
time by Stephen Phelps, and next and last by David Powell. Its career
was not as long as many other old taverns of the road, but in its time
it was a lively house and had a large run of custom. Zeph Riggle kept a
tavern in what is known as the Dr. Clark house, on the south side, in
Hillsboro, at an early day, and as at other points on the road where he
catered to the wants of the traveling public, drew a good trade. He was
the only person that ever kept this house as a tavern.

About two miles west of Hillsboro the famous old tavern of Charley
Miller is reached. It is a large and handsome brick building on the
south side of the road, and was kept before Miller's time by Henry
Taylor. Miller did a large business, and had all sorts of customers,
with a capacity to adapt himself to the wants and whims of every
variety. He was accustomed to say, in commendation of his whisky, that
it was a hundred years old; that he could vouch for its age, for he
helped to make it. Parties of young folks were accustomed to drive out
from Washington, a distance of ten miles, to take a meal and have a
dance at Charley Miller's. His meals were sumptuous and savory, and gave
his house a reputation from which he did not fail to profit. One of his
specialties was fine peach brandy, which is graciously remembered and
frequently spoken of by the survivors of the old pike boys with a glow
of enthusiasm. Miller died in this house, and it passed to the hands of
David Ullery.

     "No longer the host hobbles down from his rest
     In the porch's cool shadow, to welcome his guest
     With a smile of delight and a grasp of the hand,
     And a glance of the eye that no heart could withstand."

One and a half miles west of Charley Miller's, on the south side of the
road, a tavern was kept in a wooden building many years ago by William
Plymire. This old tavern furnished good entertainment, and its old host
was attentive and polite to his patrons. Plymire was succeeded in this
house by Henry Yorty, who kept it going as a tavern until his death, and
for some time thereafter it was kept by his widow, but was never kept as
a tavern after Mrs. Yorty's time.

The next old wagon stand on the westward tramp is the "Gals House." This
house is situate on the north side of the road, about two miles west of
Charley Miller's. It is a frame building, and once was painted red, but
the red all wore off many years ago, and was not replaced. It was called
the "Gals House," because it was owned and conducted by three maiden
women of the family name of Dague. The grounds around this old house,
night after night, throughout the entire period of the road's
prosperity, were crowded with teams and wagons, and the reputation of
the place was excellent in every particular. The Dague girls were the
owners of the house, and of about eighty acres of rich land surrounding
it, and after business closed on the road, they sold and conveyed the
property to Joseph Henderson, a well remembered and worthy old stage
driver, who went into possession and made this place his home for many
years.

[Illustration: DANIEL WARD.]

One mile further west is Ward's. Here a well known tavern was kept by
Daniel Ward, all through the flourishing era of the road, and it was
well kept and well patronized. Ward was rich, the owner of his tavern
stand, and a fine farm in addition, and therefore unlike many other old
tavern keepers of the road who leased their houses from year to year,
and changed from point to point at different times. Ward's tavern is a
large frame house, on the north side of the road, with a spacious porch
in front, and a large wagon yard conveniently attached, and was a
favorite stopping place for old wagoners. The old house is still
standing, unused, because not needed as a tavern, but it remains a
prominent landmark of the road, carrying the mind back to the period
of its enlivening scenes and moving pageants. Daniel Ward was a
pronounced type of the old tavern keeper. He was rather a large man, not
fleshy, but broad shouldered, with a slight stoop. His complexion was
reddish, and he always had a pleasant smile wherewith to greet a guest.
He wore a broad-rimmed, high-crowned, brown-colored fur hat, with long,
soft nap, the style of hat worn by all old tavern keepers and wagoners
when dressed for special occasions. Mrs. Ward was an admirable help-mate
for her husband. She was a large woman, of florid complexion, and full
of energy and zeal in her occupation. The meals she spread before her
numerous guests in all seasons were bountiful and relishable, and gave
her husband's old tavern a wide reputation. What a change? Once all was
life and animation at this old tavern, now

     "The wind whistles shrill, through the wide open doors,
     And lizards keep house, on the mouldering floors."

Four miles west from Ward's the old and popular wagon stand of Thomas
Hastings is reached. In proceeding onward toward the Hastings House a
celebrated point is passed, known in the peculiar vocabulary of the road
as "Egg Nog Hill." On this hill for many years lived in retirement
Samuel Flowers, one of the oldest, steadiest and best known wagoners of
the road. William D. Evans, residing in Malvern, Iowa, a son of Gabriel
Evans, of the old firm of Kinkead, Beck & Evans, contractors and bridge
builders, before mentioned, furnishes the following story as to the
origin of the name of this hill: The engineers in locating the line of
the road were much exercised in fixing the grade at this point, and
before arriving at conclusions the sun went down, and with a view
probably of stimulating their minds to clearer conceptions, they ordered
a bucket of egg-nog to be served in their shanty. Partaking freely of
this ancient, agreeable and strong beverage during the night, they
proceeded next morning with the work in hand, and established the grade
without further embarrassment. The chain carriers and other employees
were called in to the rough, roadside banquet, and the region all around
echoed the notes of that night's revelry, and ever thereafter the
locality has been known as "Egg Nog Hill." If this is a true account of
the origin of the name, and the authority quoted is respectable and
credible, there are many persons willing to aver that the influence of
the egg nog was anything but propitious, since the grade of the road at
this point is nothing to boast of. At the foot of Egg Nog Hill a valley
is reached over which the road passes for a distance of two miles on a
level grade, varied by slight undulations, terminating at or near the
old Buchanan postoffice. This portion of the road was called by old
stage drivers "The Long Stretch," and over its favorable grade stage
teams sped with more than ordinary rapidity. It is considered germaine
to state in this connection, that the general grade of the road has been
much and sharply criticised, and by many condemned outright. The main
point of objection urged against the grade is, that it involves many
long and steep hills, which could have been avoided by making side cuts
and occupying the valleys, and this is true, but any other location
would have lengthened the line and increased the cost of construction
and maintenance. David Shriver, of Cumberland, was the chief engineer in
charge of the location, and instructed by the Government to make the
line as straight as practicable, within the limit of a five degree
elevation. Besides, there was a popular theory when the line was
located, that a road over hills was not as fatiguing to horses as a road
with a uniform grade. It was argued that a horse is provided with two
sets of muscles, one of which is used in going up and the other in going
down a hill, and the conclusion was that horses were relieved and rested
by a change from an up to a down grade. After this digression, the
reader's attention is invited back to the old tavern of Thomas Hastings.
It is situate on the summit of a hill of average length and grade on the
south side, and a short distance back from the road. The location of
this house, with reference to the road, is similar to that of the old
red tavern, two miles east of Brownsville. The Hastings House was a
leading tavern of the road, all through its prosperous era. The large
patronage it enjoyed is the best evidence that it was well kept.

John W. McDowell, of Uniontown, an ex-County Commissioner of Fayette
county, Pennsylvania, was working on the road in 1844 under the
superintendency of William Searight, and boarding at the Hastings House.
On the morning of the election of that year he rose "bright and early,"
took his breakfast "before the break of day," mounted a horse, and rode
to Mt. Washington, the polling place for Wharton township, which was his
home, in time to vote for Polk and Dallas. McDowell frequently relates
this incident of his life, when recounting his party services, and lays
particular stress on the circumstance that the dining room girls gladly
furnished him his breakfast and cheered him on his mission. The distance
from the old Hastings tavern to Mt. Washington is forty-two miles.

While the road was undergoing construction, there was a tavern about
midway of the "Long Stretch," and on the south side of the road. It was
kept by one Smith, of the extensive American family of that name. At
times there was great disorder and much tumult, amounting almost to
riot, at this old tavern, and on one of these occasions the old militia
of Washington county was ordered to the scene to enforce the keeping of
the peace. These disorders, like similar outbreaks of the present day,
were no doubt attributable to the immoderate use of intoxicants.

[Illustration: JOHN W. McDOWELL.]

Within a few hundred feet, and west of the old Hastings house, Samuel
Hughes kept a tavern in 1844 and before, and probably a short time after
that date. His house was a large and imposing frame building on the
north side of the road, and known in its day as the "Upland House." This
name appeared on the sign board. The surroundings of this house were
attractive. It had an aristocratic air about it, and enjoyed an
aristocratic patronage. While old wagoners crowded the Hastings
House, travelers in chaises and fine carriages stopped at the Upland. By
some means, and many years ago, this old house was demolished, and a
fine brick building erected on its site, owned and occupied by Joseph
Doak, who was at one time a superintendent of the road.

About one and a half miles west of the Upland House, Major James Dunlap,
at a very early period of the road's history, kept a tavern on the south
side, on an elevation and a little distance back from the roadside. It
was called the "Mt. Vernon House," and was doing business as early as
the year 1816, two years before the road was completed as far west as
Washington. Major Dunlap was a prominent man of his day, and brigade
inspector of the Washington county (Pennsylvania) militia, an office of
no little consequence in the early history of Pennsylvania. Major Dunlap
subsequently kept the Jackson House in Washington, Pennsylvania. Before
reaching the Mt. Vernon House, an old round toll house is passed, where
William Hill collected tolls for many years from the throngs of
travelers on the road. The old Mt. Vernon House was supplanted by a new
one, under the direction of Charles Rettig, who became the owner of the
property. The new house is a brick structure, and was a wagon stand.
There was an abundant water supply at this house, and old stage drivers
and wagoners halted upon reaching it to refresh their teams. Charles
Rettig died about the year 1860. He was a staunch and sturdy citizen,
and possessed the confidence and enjoyed the respect of all his
neighbors.

The next point west, but a short distance, is invested with more than
ordinary interest. It is Pancake, sometimes called Martinsburg, and in
later years, to a limited extent, known as Laboratory. But Pancake was
the original, and remains the popular name. It is almost within eyesight
of Washington. The first tavern here was kept by George Pancake, and
hence the name given the place. His house was a small log building,
erected near the beginning of the present century, and probably the
first house in the village. Pancake did well with the means at his
command, but his old house was not equal to the growing wants of the
road, and after it was removed, and the old proprietor called to his
final reckoning, Jonathan Martin appeared on the scene. Martin was a
discerning man, and foreseeing the future of the National Road as a
great highway, built a large brick house for use as a tavern. It is
situate on the north side of the road, two stories, twelve large and
comfortable rooms, and was erected in the year 1825. A spacious porch
runs the entire length of the house and approaches the edge of the road.
Jonathan Martin kept this tavern from the date of its erection until
business closed on the road, with the exception of one year that it was
in charge of J. W. Holland, back in the forties. Since the close of its
career as a tavern it has been occupied as a quiet farm house. Martin
was a genial landlord, and made money at tavern keeping. A short
distance back from the tavern he had a horse-power grist mill and a
carding machine which he operated for a number of years, thus
supplementing his gains as a tavern keeper. General Jackson was on one
occasion a guest of Martin's tavern, and the celebrated theologian,
Alexander Campbell, frequently lodged within its venerable walls and sat
at its bounteous table.

As early as 1824 George Ringland kept a wagon stand tavern within a
short distance of the borough limits of Washington. His old house, a
commodious brick building, is still standing, situate on the north, or
at this point rather, east side of the road, with sufficient ground
intervening to form a good wagon yard. John Sample succeeded Ringland at
this old stand, and became the owner of the property. It is now the
private residence of William Workman, esq., and has not been kept as a
tavern since 1844.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

  _Old Tavern and Tavern Keepers continued--Washington--Washington and
     Jefferson College--The Female Seminary--James Wilson, first Tavern
     Keeper in Washington--The two Dodds--Major McCormick's--The White
     Goose and the Golden Swan--Hallam's Old Wagon Stand--The
     Valentine--The Buck--The Gen. Andrew Jackson--The Globe--The Cross
     Keys--The Indian Queen--The Mermaid--The Rising Sun--The Gen.
     Brown--The Fountain--Billy Brown and Jimmy Brown--The Mansion--John
     N. Dagg--A Giant Boot Jack--The American--The Fulton--The
     National--Surratt's--The Greene House._


Washington became a point on the National Road by force of a provision
in the act of Assembly of Pennsylvania, approved April 9th, 1807, before
recited. In a retrospective view that seems to have been a wise
provision. Washington, it is true, is older than the road, but without
the road it would be difficult to conjecture what the history of the
town would have been from 1818 down to 1852. That the road had much to
do in promoting the growth and prosperity of the town, there can be no
question, and it must also be conceded that the town contributed in good
round measure to the life and prosperity of the road. Washington is one
of the largest and prettiest towns on the road, not as well favored by
location as Uniontown. While Washington possesses many very important
advantages, it has at the same time, like other towns, its
disadvantages. For example, it is a dry town. It was not dry in the
palmy days of the old pike. No liquor can at this time be lawfully sold
in Washington as a beverage, and the town is not over abundantly
supplied with good water. On the other hand, the town is justly
distinguished for the superiority of its educational institutions.
Washington and Jefferson college is one of the best in the land. Its
graduates include many of the ablest men of the country, both of the
present and the past. Everywhere, at every loading point in our widely
extended Republic, the graduates of Washington and Jefferson College are
pushing ahead at the front, in all the learned professions, in the
judiciary, and in every line of honorable industry. It is not a dude
college, as many more pretentious colleges are, but a working college,
sending out workers, equipped like men, to run the race set before them.
The Female Seminary is another institution of which the citizens of
Washington are justly proud. It stands in the front rank of similar
institutions, and for more than half a century, year after year, has
sent out its graduates to cheer and brighten the world.

The writer of these lines confesses to an affection for Washington,
which no vicissitude of life or time can alienate. He was educated at
her college, and if he failed in obtaining a thorough education, it was
not the fault of his venerable _alma mater_. Dr. David McConoughy, who
presided over the college, when the writer was a student within its
halls, deserves to be classed among the Saints. A purer man never lived.
He was a Christian, who never entertained a doubt, and a scholar in the
broadest sense; and it is most gratifying to the thousands of graduates
and friends of the college scattered broadcast throughout the land, to
know that Dr. Moffatt, the present head of the institution, is a worthy
successor of that venerated president. The writer also retains the
sweetest recollections of the old citizens of Washington, and cherishes
with deepest feeling his associations at college with James G. Blaine,
who subsequently became the most illustrious statesman of his
generation, and many others who have written their names high on the
scroll of fame.

There may be some readers inclined to think that the blending of stage
drivers and wagoners with doctors, teachers and statesmen, is a strange
commingling; but it is not. History is literature, and stage drivers and
wagoners, like other classes, and occupations of men, enter into the web
and woof of history.

James Wilson hung out the first tavern sign in Washington. His house was
a log structure, and stood at the northwest corner of Main and Beau
streets, now covered by Smith's store. He opened up business in 1781,
and was licensed by the court to dispense the ardent at "Catfish Camp."
He continued business in this house down to the year 1792. The old
Supreme Judges stopped at Wilson's tavern when they went to Washington
to hold the courts of Oyer and Terminer. Whether they were fed on roast
pig, as Chief Justice McKean at Salter's old tavern in Uniontown, does
not appear of record. After Wilson's time this house was enlarged and
otherwise improved, and continued as a tavern by Michael Ocheltree, who
remained in charge down to the year 1812, when a man of the name of
Rotroff was installed as host. Rotroff gave way to John Kline, who came
up from the Cross Roads, nine miles west of Brownsville, and took charge
of the house, under the sign of "Gen. Wayne." Capt. John McCluney
followed Kline, and he in turn was followed by Joseph Teeters and Joseph
Hallam. Hallam kept the house until probably 1840, when he went down
town to take charge of the old wagon stand on the site of the present
Valentine House. When Hallam left it the old Wilson House ceased to be a
tavern.

As early as 1782 John Dodd kept tavern in a log house on the east side
of Main street, nearly opposite the court house, and remained its host
until his death in 1795. He died while returning home from a trading
trip to New Orleans. John Wilson next took charge, and conducted its
affairs for many years, associated with stirring events, down to a
period as late probably as 1835, when the house disappeared as a tavern.
John Dodd was an ancestor of the numerous Dodds now of Washington and
vicinity, most of whom have taken to the ministry and other learned
professions.

Charles Dodd, a brother of John, above mentioned, kept a tavern on Main
street in 1782, in a log house, recently occupied by Robert Strean's
hardware store. The first courts of Washington county were held in this
old tavern, and the county jail was a log stable in the rear of the lot
on which it stood. Charles Dodd kept this tavern for ten years, and sold
out to Daniel Kehr, who continued it a short time, but finding it
unprofitable, took down his sign and went to shoemaking.

John Adams kept a tavern from 1783 to 1789. Its location is not
accurately known, and so in the case of John Colwell, a tavern keeper of
1784. In 1785 Hugh Means, Samuel Acklin and William Falconer, were
tavern keepers in Washington. Acklin continued in the business until
1788, and Falconer until 1791. William Meetkirk, who was subsequently a
justice of the peace for many years, kept a tavern on Main street from
1786 to 1793, in the house until recently occupied by Mrs. McFarland,
and it is not unlikely that this is the house kept by Colwell and Means.

Maj. George McCormick kept a tavern in 1788, and Col. John May's journal
compliments it by this entry: "Thursday, Aug. 7, 1788, set out from the
hotel at four o'clock, and at half-past eight arrived at Maj. George
McCormick's in Washington, where we breakfasted. This is an excellent
house, where New England men put up." The writer regrets his failure to
ascertain the exact location of this old tavern.

Hugh Wilson (son of James) kept a tavern in Washington in 1789, and John
McMichael in 1790, the locations of which are not now ascertainable.

Charles Valentine kept the "White Goose" in 1791. This house stood on
the lot now covered by the Valentine House. The name Valentine is
prominently identified with the National Road from the date of its
construction to the present time. The "White Goose" was the symbol under
which this old tavern sailed until the year 1806, when it assumed the
more poetic name of "Golden Swan," under the management of John Rettigg.
Rettigg was relieved from its cares and responsibilities in 1810 by
Juliana Valentine, who presided over its destinies down to the year
1819. It next passed to the control and management of James Sargeant,
who kept it for a brief period, and turned it over to John Valentine and
Lewis Valentine, who continued it down to 1825. It was next kept for two
years by John Hays. In 1827 it was kept by Isaac Sumny, under the sign
of the "Washington Hall." It was kept by Samuel Donley and various other
persons, down to about the year 1840, when as before stated, it passed
to the control of Joseph Hallam. In Hallam's time it was a popular wagon
stand, and did a large business. Hallam was a man below the medium
size, a little stooped, and of quiet demeanor. He had a good wagon yard,
and catered to the tastes of old wagoners in an agreeable manner. The
happiest moments of Amos Waltz were those in which he inserted the gear
pole between the spokes of the hind wheel of a road wagon, as it stood
on Hallam's yard, and afterward took a drink with the jolly wagoners in
Hallam's old bar-room. In 1847 or 1848 the present Valentine House was
built, and kept for many years thereafter by Maj. Geo. T. Hammond. It
was also kept a while by ex-Sheriff Andrew Bruce, afterward by
ex-Sheriff Hugh Keys, and later and until a recent date by William F.
Dickey, and is now called the "Allison House."

In 1791 Michael Kuntz kept a tavern where Vowell's drug store stands.
This house was kept in 1797 by John Scott, under the sign of the "Spread
Eagle." I. Neilson, John Fisher, Samuel McMillen, and John Ferguson,
were all old tavern keepers of Washington.

Joseph Huston kept the "Buck Tavern" as early as 1796. This is a stone
house on the east side of Main street, below Maiden. Huston kept this
house until 1812, and died in it. His widow succeeded him for a brief
period, and leased the house to James Sargeant, who kept it until 1815,
when Mrs. Huston again went in, and kept it until 1820. She afterward
re-married, lost her second husband, and was keeping this house in 1838
as Elizabeth Fleming, and it was continued after that date by her son,
William B. Huston. The old Buck is still standing, one of the landmarks
of the town.

In 1797 James Workman kept a tavern, the site of which is not known. He
continued until 1813, when he went to farming. After three years'
experience in farming he returned to town, and opened a tavern under the
sign of "Gen. Andrew Jackson." This old tavern stood on the west side of
Main street, below the "Globe Inn." It was subsequently kept by Maj.
James Dunlap of the old Mt. Vernon House, east of Pancake.

From 1798 to 1806 Dr. John J. Lemoyne kept a tavern on the south side of
Main street, where an old road came down over Gallows Hill. This house
was afterward kept by Jacob Good, and continued for a number of years by
his widow.

The "Globe Inn" was one of the most famous old taverns in Washington. It
was located on the west side of Main street, at the corner of Strawberry
alley. This house was opened as a tavern in 1797, and in the next year
passed to the hands of David Morris, and was kept by him, continuously,
until his death in 1834. General LaFayette was entertained at this house
in 1825, and it was a favorite stopping place of Henry Clay, and many
other statesmen and heroes of the olden time. This old tavern was a
frame building, and remained standing until 1891. Rev. William P.
Alrich, an old and popular professor of mathematics in Washington
college, married a daughter of David Morris.

One Fox kept a tavern, at an early period, in a house that stood on the
east side of Main street, where the Morgan Block now stands.

The "Cross Keys" was a popular tavern of the olden time. It stood on the
southeast corner of Main and Wheeling streets, opposite the Valentine
House. It was opened in 1801 by James McCamant, who kept it until his
death, which occurred in 1813. Tradition has it that he died from the
effects of a bite by a mad wolf. His widow continued it for about two
years, when she quit it to take charge of the "General Washington
House," nearly opposite the court house. She returned, however, after a
time to the "Cross Keys," and was keeping that house as late as 1831. In
the year last named she caused to be inserted in a town paper a notice
that she furnished dinner and horse feed for twenty-five cents, and
boarding and lodging for jurors and others attending court for two
dollars a week. The "Cross Keys" was kept afterward at different dates
by James Sargeant, Charles Rettig, John Bradfield, William Blakely and
Otho Hartzell. It closed as a tavern previous to 1844. James McCamant,
the first proprietor of the "Cross Keys" tavern, was the father-in-law
of Joseph Henderson, esq., a prominent and popular old lawyer of
Washington.

Christian Keiffer kept a tavern in 1805 at the sign of "Washington."
Keiffer's career as a tavern keeper must have been a brief and an
uninteresting one, since old inhabitants are unable to locate his house,
although it bore a name that should and does survive, in every other
form except in its application to Keiffer's old tavern.

John Kirk kept a tavern about the beginning of the present century in a
house that stood on Wheeling street, west of Main. This house was
painted red and penciled to imitate brick. After Kirk left it William
Wilson became its proprietor. He was known as "Center Billy." He did not
find tavern keeping sufficiently profitable, and quitting the business,
turned his attention to blacksmithing and wagon making. The old name of
Wheeling street was "Belle," and the present name was given it by the
old stage drivers and wagoners, because it intersected the old road
leading to Wheeling.

The "Indian Queen" was an old and well remembered tavern on Main street,
opposite the court house. It was opened in 1808 by John McCluny. In 1815
it changed its location and solicited public patronage on Main street,
above Chestnut, where Justice Donehoe's residence now is, under the
auspices of its old founder, John McCluny aforesaid. In its new location
it became the headquarters of the Jackson Democracy. This house was kept
by Thomas Officer, and was known as the "Green Tree," before McCluny
placed it under the shield of the "Indian Queen." It was afterward
occupied by John Johnson, who kept it for a number of years, and it
ceased to do business as a tavern during his occupancy.

About the year 1820 John Manuel kept a tavern in a white frame house on
the west side of Main street, immediately below the present depot of the
Baltimore & Ohio railroad.

There was an old tavern in Washington at an early day kept by Jacob
Moler, and known as "The Mermaid." It was located on the south side of
West Wheeling street, and on the lot now owned by Charles Driehorst. It
was the headquarters of the Hibernians, and while it did not aspire to
rival the "Globe" or the "Rising Sun," it was not lacking in patronage.
It does not appear to have been continued as a tavern after the time of
Moler.

The "Rising Sun," a leading tavern in its day, occupied a lot near the
corner of Main and Chestnut streets, almost directly opposite the house
subsequently known as "The Mansion." The first proprietor of the "Rising
Sun" was James Garrett, and he remained in charge until 1822. He was
active in his business, and accustomed to say, "Walk in, walk in,
gentlemen; I keep a decent house, and provide sweetened bitters." James
Briceland kept this house for one year, after which he turned it back to
Garrett, who continued to keep it until it passed to the hands of John
N. Dagg, who kept it until he purchased the "Mansion House," on the
opposite corner. It is said that one hundred teams have been seen
standing around the "Rising Sun" in a single night. Briceland went down
to the lower end of town and took charge of the house subsequently known
as "The National." In 1823 while Dagg was keeping the "Rising Sun," a
townsman and an old wagoner had an altercation in the bar-room, and Dagg
pitched them both out into the street. In the descent the wagoner's head
struck the curb-stone, fatally injuring him. Mr. Dagg was prosecuted and
arraigned for murder in consequence, but acquitted by the jury on the
ground that the homicide was more the result of accident, than any
intention to kill. During the brief term of Mr. Briceland at the "Rising
Sun" he had as guests on one occasion, Gen. Andrew Jackson, family and
suite. The distinguished party were _en route_ to Washington City, and
upon departing from the "Rising Sun" were honored by an escort of
citizens of Washington as far east as Hillsboro.

In 1821 Enoch Miller opened a tavern in a large brick house at the west
end of town, nearly opposite the old Methodist church, which stood on
Chestnut street, a little below Franklin. He called his house the
"General Brown," and it was well patronized. Richard Donaldson kept this
house after Miller's time. Upon quitting the "General Brown" Enoch
Miller opened the "Fountain Inn," a brick building nearly opposite and a
few doors east of the "General Brown," on Chestnut street, and he was
succeeded in this house in 1825 by George Ringland. William P. Byles was
an old proprietor of this house also.

William J. Brown, called "Old Billy," kept a tavern as early as 1832,
and for many years thereafter, on the east side of Main street near the
center of town. It was a frame building and had a fair paying custom. It
was known for a time as the "Farmers' Inn," and later as the "Black
Bear." The old proprietor was a quaint character, and much pestered by
the boys of the town. With all his troubles and tribulations he managed
to lay aside a sufficiency of worldly goods to protect himself against
the requirements of a rainy day.

[Illustration: S. B. HAYS.]

And there was old "Jimmy Brown," another odd character, not a relation
of "Billy." Jimmy was an Irishman, and knew how to make and keep money.
He kept a tavern for many years in a white frame house opposite the
court house, and near the "Fulton." He called his house "The Franklin."
His savings were sufficient to warrant him in tearing down his old house
and erecting in its stead a fine new brick structure, which he did.
After building his new house he married a wife, and was warmly
congratulated by his numerous friends. With the assistance of his wife
he continued to entertain the public until his death, leaving the cares
and anxieties of his business to his bereaved widow, who soon after
remarried and retired to private life. The house is now used for
mercantile purposes, one of the best locations in town. Jimmy Brown,
when occupying his old house, was accustomed to say to his friends: "I
have some nice _fesh_, come away to the cellar with me, and see my
_fesh_." He had no license then.

The Mansion House was a leading tavern in Washington from the time it
commenced business until it was destroyed by fire, which occurred after
the National Road ceased to be a great thoroughfare. It was located on
the northeast corner of Main and Chestnut streets. Before the "Mansion
House" was built an old red frame house stood on this corner, which was
kept as a tavern by a man whose surname was Scott. John N. Dagg bought
this property prior to his withdrawal from the "Rising Sun," on the
opposite corner, and commenced to improve it. The outcome of his
enterprise was the erection of a large brick building, known as the
Mansion House, with extensive sheds and stables in the rear. About the
year 1834 Mr. Dagg leased the premises to John Irons, who conducted the
house for a period of two years, after which Mr. Dagg returned as
landlord, and continued to keep it down to the year 1844, or thereabout,
when he leased it to S. B. and C. Hayes, who conducted it for a brief
period, and were succeeded by Bryson and Shirls, subsequently of the St.
Charles Hotel, Pittsburgh. The Good Intent line of stages gave its
patronage to the "American," when that house was kept by the Messrs.
Hayes, and to the "Greene House," when it was kept by Daniel Brown.
Thereafter the headquarters of that line were at the Mansion House, and
it was headquarters for the Pilot line when the Good Intent stopped at
the "American." The Mansion House had a large country trade, as well as
that derived from the National Road. The old bar room was of immense
size, and the old proprietor, John N. Dagg, was one of the largest men
on the road. He was not fat, but tall, and widely proportioned. He
provided for his country guests a large upright boot jack, with side
bars, which acted as levers, designed to steady the toe in the operation
of drawing off a boot. Half cut, cheap leather slippers were also
provided, and upon pulling their boots, guests put on these slippers,
and in the mornings, piles of boots, nicely polished, were placed in a
corner of the bar room, to await the return of their owners from the
slumbers of the night. It was not an uncommon thing to see scores of
country people sitting about in the big bar room after supper, talking
over the events of the day, all wearing the slippers referred to,
preparatory to going to rest for the night, at the early bed time of
that happy period. James K. Polk, wife and suite, stopped at the Mansion
House on the inaugural trip in 1845. The "Examiner," under date of
February 15, 1845, gave the following account of the reception of the
distinguished party: "President Polk arrived in our borough on Monday
evening last, about 5 o'clock, escorted by quite a respectable number of
our citizens. The President was accompanied by his lady, J. Knox Walker,
his private secretary, and Master Marshall Polk, comprising the
President's family; also Colonel Butler, of Kentucky, Judge Hubbard, of
Alabama, and Messrs. T. K. Stevenson, J. G. Harris and J. N. Esselman.
The arrival of the President having been sooner than was anticipated,
and intelligence of the same having reached us on Sabbath last, the
arrangements on the part of our citizens were not so complete or
extensive as they would have been under other and more favorable
circumstances. Upon the arrival of the President at the Mansion House he
was addressed by Dr. Wishart, as chairman of the committee of reception,
in a spirited and appropriate manner, to which the President responded,
to the evident gratification of the large assembly of persons who were
present. In the course of his remarks Colonel Polk alluded to the
unbounded feeling of gratitude which filled his bosom for the
distinguished partiality which had been extended toward him by his
fellow citizens; to the great responsibility which that partiality had
devolved upon him; to his implicit confidence in that power which
controls the destinies of individuals as well as nations; to his
determination to act for the best interests of our beloved country, and
the vital importance of freedom of opinion and contrariety of sentiment
among a Republican people. In concluding his remarks, the President
expressed a strong desire to interchange congratulations with as many of
our citizens, of all parties, as time and circumstances would permit.
After the formal reception was completed the President was conducted
into the Mansion House, and during the evening was waited upon by many
hundreds of our citizens, from town and country, without party
distinction. Many of the ladies of our borough, with the Principal,
assistant teachers and young ladies of our Female Seminary, also, called
upon Mrs. Polk, whose plain, dignified and fascinating deportment and
intelligent conversation rendered her company exceedingly pleasant. Mrs.
Polk has certainly not been too highly complimented, by the many notices
which have been bestowed upon her, as a lady most admirably suited to
the discharge of the peculiar duties which await her as the wife of the
President-elect. On Tuesday morning at 9 o'clock the President and suite
left our borough, in good health and spirits, for Uniontown, at which
place they remained over night."

[Illustration: GEORGE T. HAMMOND.]

The Fulton House was a prominent house of entertainment in Washington
for many years. It is located on the corner of Main and Beau streets,
nearly opposite the court house. John Purviance kept a tavern on the
Fulton House site from 1790 to 1805, and three years thereafter went to
Claysville, as stated elsewhere in these pages. Richard Donaldson
succeeded Purviance in this old house. John Fleming kept a tavern on
this corner in 1820, called "The Philadelphia and Kentucky Inn." In
January, 1821, a fire occurred in this house, on occasion of the
marriage of a daughter of Mr. Fleming, which partially destroyed the
building, and saddest of all, burnt to death one of the old proprietor's
daughters. After the present large brick building was erected on this
corner, it was called "The American House," and was kept by S. B. and C.
Hayes previous to 1840, and after them by John Huey. In 1846 or 1847 it
was leased by Henry Fulton, who came from Westmoreland county,
Pennsylvania, and under his management it took the name of the "Fulton
House," which it retained, and under which it became widely and
favorably known, until it was given the absurd name of "Hotel Maine."
The Fulton House was admirably conducted and extensively patronized.

The National House was the headquarters of the Stockton line of stages.
It is located on the northwest corner of Main and Maiden streets. The
firm name of the Stockton line of stages was "The National Road Stage
Company," and it has been seen that this line bestowed its favor upon
public houses bearing the name "National." In 1821 Samuel Dennison, who
came from Greensburg, Pennsylvania, kept an old tavern that stood on the
site of the "National House." It was then known as "The Travelers' Inn
and Stage Office." It was subsequently enlarged and improved, and in
1823 passed to the control of James Briceland, under the name of the
"National House." Its next occupant was John Irons, who was succeeded by
James Searight, in 1836, and he in turn by Daniel Valentine, George T.
Hammond, Edward Lane, Adam C. Morrow and Elliot Seaburn. It was an
elegant eating house in the days of staging, and at its best under the
management of Hammond and Lane, respectively. It is now called the "Auld
House," and, as in many other instances, its old prestige departed with
its old name. James Searight went from the "National House" to
Zanesville, Ohio, and kept a tavern there for a short time, and
returning to Washington, leased the "Greene House," which was managed by
his son, William. These Searights were of a Cumberland, Maryland,
family.

As early as 1815 Richard Donaldson kept a tavern on Maiden street,
opposite the Female Seminary. This old house was surrounded by spacious
grounds, and there was a ball alley in the rear of it, which afforded
means of exercise and amusement for the town boys of the olden time.
James Workman succeeded Donaldson in this old tavern, and he, in 1830,
was succeeded by Samuel Surratt, father of James F. Surratt, the popular
postmaster of Steubenville, Ohio. Major William Paull kept this house
previous to 1840, and for a time thereafter, and at the close of his
term it was purchased by the trustees of the Female Seminary, since
which time it has formed a portion of the real estate belonging to that
institution. Major Paull came to this house from the old stone house on
Winding Ridge, and kept it as a wagon stand. It had good facilities for
the accommodation of wagoners, by reason of the spacious grounds before
mentioned, and these, in connection with the fact that Major Paull was
an experienced tavern keeper of the road, attracted a large and
profitable patronage.

The "Greene House," a popular tavern, was located on the east side of
Main street, south of the Mansion House, and on a lot formerly owned by
John L. Gow, esq. It was kept in 1842 by William Searight, before
mentioned, who was succeeded by S. B. and C. Hayes, whose occupancy was
brief, and about 1846 it came under the control of Daniel Brown, one of
the most competent landlords of his day and generation. During Brown's
incumbency it had the patronage of the Good Intent Stage company.
Brown's bar-keeper was Benjamin White, who wore his hair long and had a
scar on his face. His employer always addressed him as "Benny," and
confided in his integrity to the fullest extent, and in very truth
"Benny" was entirely worthy of his employer's confidence. Whither this
quaint old bar-keeper drifted, when the eclipse came over the sunshine
of the road, is not known, but his name deserves to be perpetuated in
history.

Most of the facts contained in this chapter rest on authority of
Crumrine's history of Washington county, Pennsylvania.

[Illustration: THE RANKIN HOUSE.]




CHAPTER XXXIX.

  _Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--Washington to West
     Alexander--Rankintown--John Rankin--Andrew McDonald--Freaks of an
     Old Wagon-maker--Robert Smith--John Coulson--Millers--Bedillions--
     The S Bridge--Caldwells--Mrs. Brownlee--Another Widow McClelland--
     Claysville--John Sargent--An event in the Life of Dan Rice--Basil
     Brown--Dennisons--The Walker House--Jonathan D. Leet--Coon Island--
     John Canode--Rogers and the Doughertys--John Valentine._


After passing Washington the ancient little village of Rankintown is
reached. It is situated a short distance over the top of the hill
leading up from Catfish, and a little over a mile from Washington. Here
a tavern was kept in early times by one Spalding, who seems to have
failed in impressing his name on the locality. His successor was John
Rankin, who dying, left his name behind him. His house was a large frame
building on the south side of the road, with the customary wagon yard
attached. While this old tavern did a large wagoner's trade, its
agreeable old host ministered largely to the wants of the traveling
public without distinction. As before intimated wagoners as a rule
preferred country taverns, and this is probably the reason so many of
them halted at Rankin's rather than proceeding on to Washington, going
east, where a number of good taverns were located, but being in a large
town, more or less under the ban of "tony places." John Rankin owned the
old tavern stand at Rankintown, and after conducting it for many years
during the flourishing era of the road, to use a common phrase of the
road, "died with the harness on." His widow continued to keep tavern at
the old stand until about the year 1847, when growing old and tired of
the cares and responsibilities of tavern keeping, concluded to retire to
private life, and leased the premises to a Mr. Johnson, who conducted
the house down to the fifties, when he was succeeded by Andrew McDonald,
who remained in charge until the activities of the road ceased. The
private residence of the late Hon. William Montgomery was for a number
of years on the roadside near the old Rankin tavern. He was an
illustrious old pike boy and championed the glories of the road on many
an occasion. Rankintown is now an incorporated borough, under the name
and style of West Washington, but the glories of the old pike all rest
and abide behind the present municipality.

In 1844 and subsequent to that date, Alpheus Murphy, a wagon-maker,
lived and operated a shop near the old Rankin tavern. He gained a local
notoriety for proclaiming in a loud voice in season and out of season,
his sentiments on current topics, and especially political issues. He
was a man of great physical strength, and a skillful workman. He had no
scruples against taking an occasional glass of the pure whisky that
abounded on the road in his day, and was a frequent visitor to
Washington. Prompted possibly by the influence of the active element
mentioned, he was accustomed to ascend the cupola of the Washington
court house and from the balustrade near its summit give vent to his
feelings, mainly of a Democratic tendency, in stentorian tones that
startled the whole community. Notwithstanding the boisterous fits that
marked and may have marred his life, he passed quietly away from the
scenes of earth, and will be long and kindly remembered by those who
knew him.

Two miles west of Rankintown Robert Smith kept a tavern as early as the
year 1818. At this point the National Road crossed an ancient roadway
leading from Washington to Wheeling, and Robert Smith kept a tavern here
on the old road. It was a frame house on the south side of the road, and
in after years became the homestead and private residence of Jacob
Weirich, who died its possessor.

Less than a mile west of Smith's John Coulson kept a tavern as early as
1820, and probably before that date. His house was a frame building, on
the south side of the road. The old building was torn down many years
ago, and a brick structure erected in its place. Coulson, the old
proprietor, has been dead fifty years, and at his death his tavern was
closed, and not again re-opened as a public house. The old wagoners and
stage drivers who were familiar with Coulson's tavern long since passed
to other scenes, along with its old proprietor.

About one mile west of the old Coulson House the well remembered and
popular wagon stand of John Miller is reached. Miller moved to this
point in 1836 from a stand two miles west of Pratt's Hollow, and east of
Cumberland, as before stated. The Miller house here is a large brick
building, with all the necessary outbuildings for a tavern, and a good
wagon yard. It is situate on the north side of the road. To gain the
wagon yard going west, old wagoners ascended a steep grade, but on the
other side the way was level. Miller had a good custom at his tavern
east of Cumberland, and his old friends followed him to his new
location. He had long experience as a tavern keeper, and furnished
satisfactory entertainment to the traveling public. Previous to 1836
Levi Wilson kept this house, and entertained the first crop of wagoners
on the road, and tradition attributes to him a good fame as a tavern
keeper. Miller died in this house. A son of Levi Wilson married a
daughter of John Miller, and since the death of the latter has been
occupying this old tavern-stand as a private residence.

[Illustration: THE JOHN MILLER HOUSE.]

At the foot of the hill west of Miller's, and on the north side of the
road, is the old Bedillion tavern. This house was kept as early as
1830 by one Scott, and as late as 1848 by Christly Wolf, and later by
George Boyd, but owing to a usage, in some instances difficult to
account for, it is better known as Bedillion's, especially among old
wagoners, than by any other name. Bedillion was a German, and his first
name was Abraham, and he probably possessed German traits and practices
which made an impression on old wagoners not to be forgotten. He kept
this house in 1836. Wolf also was of German origin, but his manners and
methods were of the American type. He was a man of prominence in his
neighborhood, and wielded considerable local influence, and was likewise
a member of the firm of Buck, Lyon and Wolf, contractors, before
mentioned. The old Bedillion tavern is a large frame building, with a
high porch in front. George Boyd took charge of this house in the early
fifties. He exchanged the shoe business in Washington for what he no
doubt considered the more profitable pursuit of tavern keeping on the
old pike. In this he seems to have been disappointed. His career as a
tavern keeper was not successful, and there were two reasons for it.
First, he began too late, and second, he was not a pike boy, and
therefore not familiar with the wants and ways of the road.

On the north side of the road, about one mile wrest of the S Bridge, and
as far back in the past as seventy years, one Andrew Caldwell (not a
relative of James, hereinafter mentioned), kept a small wooden tavern
and entertained primitive travelers and neighborhood callers in
primitive style. An old blacksmith, bearing the surname McSwiggin, was
found dead near this old tavern, and there was an undercurrent of
suspicion in the neighborhood that Andrew Caldwell, aforesaid, had, in
some manner and for some purpose, taken the old blacksmith's life.
However, no prosecution was instituted, and, in fact, no legal
investigation made as to the cause of the mysterious death; and it is to
be hoped, for the reputation of the early pike boys, that the suspicions
whispered against the old tavern keeper were groundless.

The next noted old tavern on the westward march is Mrs. Caldwell's,
seven miles from Washington. Before reaching Mrs. Caldwell's, the
celebrated S Bridge is passed. This bridge takes its name from its
shape, which resembles the letter S. It is a large stone bridge over a
branch of Buffalo creek. Near this bridge a county road leads to
Taylorstown, celebrated in recent years for its oil developments, and in
this vicinity reside James Noble and John Thompson, two old wagoners of
the road, mentioned in a previous chapter. There is a postoffice here
called "S Bridge," which affords postal facilities for a rich and
populous neighborhood. In early times there was a tavern at the eastern
end of the S Bridge, and one at its western end. These old taverns
accommodated the public in their day, but their facilities were limited,
and they ceased to entertain strangers and travelers previous to 1840.
Caldwell's is the tavern mentioned by Mr. Blaine, in the opening chapter
of this volume on old taverns. James Caldwell owned and conducted this
old tavern from the time the road was opened up for travel, or very soon
thereafter, until the year 1838, when he died, and his widow, Hester
Caldwell, kept it going as a tavern from that date until 1873, so that
she was one of the oldest tavern keepers of the road. The house is a
large and handsome structure, near the summit of a long hill, and on the
south side of the road. It is, at the present time, occupied by J. A.
Gordon, who entertains the public, and as of old, the house is a
favorite resort of pleasure seeking parties.

A half a mile west from Caldwell's, the widow Brownlee kept a tavern in
the early history of the road. Her house was a frame building on the
south side of the road. Robert Hall afterwards kept this house, and upon
his retirement it ceased to do business as a tavern.

On the top of the hill west of Mrs. Brownlee's the widow McClelland kept
a tavern sixty years ago. She was not of the famous tavern keeping
family of McClelland, of Uniontown. This widow McClelland was keeping
tavern at the point mentioned before the widow McClelland of the
McClelland House in Uniontown was born. The Baltimore & Ohio railroad at
this day passes through a tunnel near the old tavern of widow
McClelland.

Claysville is next reached. It is stated in Crumrine's history of
Washington county, that John Purviance was the first tavern keeper in
Claysville, and that he was the founder of the town. "When it became
certain," says Crumrine, "that the National Road would pass through the
place, Purviance caused the following notice to be inserted in the
Washington _Reporter_:

     "The subscriber having laid off a number of building lots in the
     new town of Claysville, will offer the same at public sale on the
     premises, on Thursday, the 8th day of March, next. Claysville is
     distant ten miles from Washington, westward, and about eighteen
     east of Wheeling, and six from Alexandria. The great National Road
     from Cumberland to Wheeling as located by Col. Williams and
     confirmed by the President, and now rapidly progressing towards its
     completion, passes directly through the town.

     Washington, April 21, 1817.
                                                  JOHN PURVIANCE."

[Illustration: THE "S" BRIDGE.]

It goes without saying that this town was named in honor of Henry Clay,
the unrivaled champion of the road. As at other towns mentioned, the
road forms the main street of Claysville. In 1821 James Sargent kept a
tavern in Claysville, at the sign of the Black Horse. He moved to
Claysville from Washington, and the house he kept in Claysville was a
brick building, occupied formerly by John Porter. Claysville was a stage
station, as before stated. Bazil Brown kept a tavern in Claysville as
early as 1836, and probably before that date. He kept a wagon stand and
had a large patronage. Some time during the forties, Dan Rice, after his
circus stranded, was exhibiting a "learned pig" to the people of
Claysville, and in Bazil Brown's tavern. On the night of the
entertainment Brown lost an overcoat, and charged Dan Rice with stealing
it, and had him sent up to Washington jail to await trial. Dan
employed Seth T. Hurd to defend him, and was acquitted. Soon after Dan
appeared in Claysville with a new circus, and sang an original song in
the ring intended to embody his recollections of the overcoat escapade,
and to lampoon Brown for prosecuting him. The song was smooth, as all
Dan's were, and the thrusts at Brown sarcastic and severe, and much
enjoyed by the local hearers. Despite this unfortunate occurrence Bazil
Brown was a popular landlord, and kept a good house. The old circus man
is still living, and has probably forgotten and forgiven the old tavern
keeper for accusing him of felony, but the old tavern keeper long since
passed beyond the dark waters, and entered upon the realities of another
and unknown realm. James Dennison kept a tavern in Claysville as early
as 1840. He subsequently kept at Beallsville and at Hopwood as before
stated. He was an old wagoner and kept a wagon stand, but had the
patronage of one of the stage lines in Claysville, as well as a wagon
custom. Old wagoners felt themselves entirely at home at Dennison's
tavern, and thoroughly enjoyed his agreeable entertainment. David Bell,
John Walker, James Kelley, Stephen Conkling and John McIlree were all
old tavern keepers at Claysville, and kept stage houses.

There was also a Watkins who kept tavern in Claysville. The house he
kept was destroyed by fire previous to 1850. It had the patronage of the
Good Intent stage line. David Bell was an old stage driver. His house in
Claysville was a brick building on the south side, diagonally opposite
the old Walker House. He subsequently kept the Fulton House in
Washington in 1862 and 1863. The Walker House was a frame building, on
the north side. Walker subsequently located at Wheeling and kept a
tavern there. Conkling kept the Walker House. McIlree kept the Brown
House. Kelley also kept the Walker House, and it was in this house, and
in Kelley's time, that Jim Burr, the noted stage driver, "knocked out"
the Cincinnati buffer, before mentioned. The Stockton line of coaches
stopped at the old Brown House, and the Good Intent line at the Walker
and Watkins Houses.

The widow Calahan kept a tavern in Claysville prior to 1840. Jonathan D.
Leet married her daughter. Leet was a pike boy of no little distinction
in his day. His discernment and good taste in wedding the fair daughter
of an old tavern keeper were not the only proofs of his wit and worth.
He was a lawyer of ability, a major of militia, postmaster of Washington
during the presidency of President Polk, and member of the Legislature
for Washington county. A large man with prominent features, and somewhat
awkward in manner, he was the personification of Mars, when arrayed in
the elaborate uniform of the old militia system. The great gilt rolls of
the ponderous epaulette, and the immense three cornered and sharp
pointed chapeau produced a feeling of awe among all beholders, and
struck terror to the hearts of young folks. Major Leet being a lawyer
was Judge Advocate at all courts martial during the time he was in
commission. Those courts were frequently held in Washington, and their
members were required to sit, hear and determine in full uniform. On
such occasions Major Leet was "the observed of all observers," and
elicited the admiration of his many friends. There was an old
silversmith in Washington by the name of Galt, a man of acute
intelligence, given to the amusing side of life, and a close friend of
the philosopher Dr. Creigh, of the same place. These old worthies were
warm friends of Major Leet, and their enthusiasm knew no bounds in
expressing delight over the triumphs of the Major, in conducting these
courts martial. In 1848, when Major Leet was postmaster, he was an
ardent advocate of the election of General Cass to the presidency, and
accustomed to allude with emphasis to the fact that his favorite was "a
brave old volunteer." His candidate, however, was defeated, and under
the rule of partisanship, he was superseded in the postoffice by a
friend of the victorious columns. Subsequently he was elected to the
Legislature, and after serving his term did not return to live among his
constituents. He was essentially a pike boy, devoted to the memories of
the road, and fond of its associations, yet he died in a strange land,
and his is not the only instance wherein a seat in the Legislature has
led a man from the gentle paths and innocent pastimes of his early days.

Three miles west from Claysville, at the foot of a long hill, the
romantic, not to say classic spot of Coon Island is reached. Here was an
old tavern stand, for many years kept by John Canode previous to 1840.
It was on the north side of the road, and a wagon stand. The stages
stopped here also at times, and it was a regular relay for the express
wagons. After Canode's time the tavern here was kept by John Brotherton
and sons. It was a prominent point during the flourishing era of the
road. As late as 1853 a Mr. Reed kept the old tavern at Coon Island. The
old stage and wagon lines, however, were withdrawn previous to that
date, and some small local lines substituted, as if to prevent an abrupt
termination to the high prosperity which the road enjoyed for so long a
period. The origin of the name Coon Island is presumably
unascertainable, else Crumrine in his history of Washington county would
have given it, as the locality is within the limits of that county. That
coons existed and flourished in the neighborhood from time immemorial,
there is scarcely a doubt, but an island has never been witnessed there
since the subsidence of the great flood in Noah's time. The point is now
a station on the Baltimore & Ohio railroad, and the name is changed to
Vienna. The old name is more appropriate, albeit the island is absent.
It is more appropriate, because it is familiar to the people, but it
seems to be the inevitable doom of many old familiar names to fall
before the advance of modern fancies. Think of an old wagoner going back
to Coon Island after an absence of half a century, to find himself "a
mere looker on in Vienna!" Shades of the old pike, hide this ruthless
and senseless innovation from the eyes of mankind.

[Illustration: DAVID BELL.]

Two miles west from Coon Island and a short distance beyond the site of
the old Catholic church, an old tavern was kept in early days by one
Rogers, and subsequently by Jacob and Michael Dougherty. It was a frame
house, on the north side of the road. A good water trough was maintained
at this old stand, and travelers halted here for water. In 1830 this old
tavern was kept by Jacob Jones, the father of the distinguished iron
manufacturer and politician, B. F. Jones, of Pittsburg. The old church
mentioned, which will be remembered by all who are familiar with this
section of the road, was taken down a few years ago, and rebuilt at
Claysville, a more central point for the parishioners. Before reaching
Dougherty's another old round toll house is passed, the last one on the
road in Pennsylvania. Here William McCleary collected the tolls for many
years.

A few hundred yards further west the old and popular tavern of John
Valentine is reached. It is a frame house, on the north side of the
road, large and commodious, and was a favorite resort of wagoners.
Valentine kept this tavern a great many years. If he had a predecessor
or a successor in this house, his name is totally eclipsed by that of
John Valentine. He possessed the talent for tavern keeping in a rare
degree, and was a brother of Daniel Valentine, the old and popular
tavern keeper of Washington, and of Charles Valentine, an old wagoner of
that place.




CHAPTER XL.

  _Old Taverns and Tavern Keepers continued--West Alexander to
     Wheeling--A Modern Gretna Green--Dr. McCluskey--Crossing Another
     State Line--Abram Carr--The Widow Beck, with whom Abram Lincoln
     boarded, and at whose house Robert T. Lincoln was born--The Widow
     Rhodes and Abram Beagle--John White, Isaac Jones, Roney's Point,
     Ninian Bell, John Bentley, James Kimberly, Triadelphia, John D.
     Foster, Col. Thompson, the Widow Gooding--The Clay Monument--Col.
     Moses Shepherd and his wife, Lydia--Samuel Carter--Michael
     Blackburn--Steenrods--Wheeling--John McCortney, and others._


Crumrine's history of Washington county states that West Alexander was
first laid out in 1796 by Robert Humphreys, that most of the lots were
subsequently acquired by Charles D. Hass, who in the year 1817 sold them
by public outcry; that the National Road at the last mentioned date was
in process of construction, and had been actually opened for travel from
Cumberland to the Big Crossings, and it was believed that all the towns
upon its route would become places of prosperity and importance; that
the town of West Alexander was destroyed by fire on May 4, 1831, but
slowly recovered from the disaster, and in the succeeding twenty years
became a thriving village, by reason of the prosperity of the great
thoroughfare on which it was located. A house called the "American
Eagle" was the first tavern in West Alexander, established by Duncan
Morrison in 1796, and kept by him for a number of years. Subsequent
tavern keepers in West Alexander were Charles Mayes, Zebulon Warner,
John Gooding, John Woodburn, William McCall, Solomon Cook, James
Sargent, Charles Hallam, Mary Warner, James Bell, Silver Gilfillan,
Samuel Beamer, James Matthers, John Irons, Moses Thornburg, Samuel Doak,
Joseph Lawson, Joseph Dowdal, William F. Gordon, William McCutcheon, and
perhaps others. Joseph Lawson was probably the best known of all these
old tavern keepers. He kept a wagon stand for a long time during the
prosperous era of the road, and was extensively patronized. He had been
an old wagoner himself, and knew the secret of agreeably entertaining
old wagoners. He is mentioned in a previous chapter as a "fancy wagoner"
of the road. His tavern in West Alexander was a large and commodious
frame building at the western end of the town, on the south side of the
road, with a large and well arranged wagon yard attached. He owned the
property, and died in possession. Beside being a successful wagoner and
tavern keeper, Joseph Lawson was a staunch citizen, a man of influence
and highly esteemed. He was at one time, for a brief period,
Superintendent of the road from Brownsville to the Virginia line.

[Illustration: JOSEPH F. MAYES. (OLD JUSTICE OF THE PEACE.)]

There was, during the prosperous era of the road, an academy at West
Alexander under the management of the Rev. Dr. John McCluskey, where
many boys were trained for entrance to Washington college. Dr. McCluskey
was an eminent scholar, an able preacher, a successful educator and a
worthy man in all the walks of life. He devoted a long and laborious
life here, to gain a better one hereafter, and let us hope he is now
realizing its enjoyment. West Alexander is also noted as a rival of the
celebrated Gretna Green, of Scotland, by reason of the many clandestine
marriages which have taken place there. Joseph F. Mayes, an old justice
of the peace of the place, married nineteen hundred and eighteen couples
from 1862 to 1881, more than nine-tenths of whom were elopers. It is
estimated that from 1835 to 1885, the date of the enactment of the
Pennsylvania marriage license law, over five thousand eloping couples
were married in West Alexander.

One mile distant from West Alexander on the north side of the road,
Abram Carr kept a tavern as early as 1836. It was a frame building, and
a wagon stand. After Carr this old tavern was kept by Silver Gilfillan,
before mentioned in the list of tavern keepers at West Alexander. Carr
and Gilfillan well knew the ways of the road, and were competent men in
their line. Old wagoners were accustomed to lay aside their coin, to pay
bills at Gilfillan's tavern, under a belief that he coveted silver
because of his Christian name. This was the first tavern located in Old
Virginia on the westward march, being less than a mile from the
Pennsylvania State line.

Two miles further west a large frame tavern on the north side of the
road, was kept by Mrs. Sarah Beck as early as 1832. It was a station for
the Stockton line of coaches. Mrs. Beck was succeeded in this house by
Samuel Node, who retained the good will and patronage extended to his
predecessor. Mrs. Beck was the widow of James Beck, of the old bridge
building firm of Kinkead, Beck & Evans, frequently mentioned in these
pages. Her son, William G. Beck, still living in Fairfield, Iowa, was
the hero of the exciting race between two coaches from Cumberland to
Piney Grove, mentioned in a previous chapter. James Beck, the husband of
Sarah Beck, died in Wheeling in 1829, while keeping a tavern in that
place. His widow was of a heroic mold, and resolved to carry on the
battle of life on her own account, and continued in the business of
tavern keeping. She kept tavern at various points, and finally about the
year 1847 bade a last adieu to the scenes of the road, amid which she
had been reared, and emigrated to the then far west. Leasing a house in
Springfield, Illinois, she resumed the business of tavern keeping. While
a member of the Illinois Legislature, Abraham Lincoln was a boarder in
Mrs. Beck's house, and Robert T. Lincoln, the late United States
minister at London, was born under her roof. Thus an old tavern keeper
of the National Road was closely associated with, and enjoyed the
confidence of, one of the most illustrious personages of his time or of
any time.

A short distance, less than a mile further west, the widow Rhodes kept a
popular wagon stand as early as 1830. Another widow, and no exception to
the rule, before stated. Her house was a frame building, on the south
side of the road, and a busy, bustling hostelry. Abram Beagle, an old
wagoner, became the husband of the widow Rhodes, as elsewhere in these
pages stated, and relieved her of many of the active cares of tavern
keeping, until his death, which occurred in this house, leaving his wife
a second time a widow, and she continued the business of tavern keeping
as the widow Beagle, with her usual success. Abram Beagle was likewise,
and before he married Mrs. Rhodes, a contractor on the road. His work
was near the Little Crossings.

The next old tavern on the west, and a short distance from the widow
Rhodes' house, was kept as early as 1830 by John White. It was a frame
house on the north side of the road. Mrs. Beck, before mentioned,
subsequently bought this property, improved it in many details, and
especially by the erection of a substantial new stable, with a capacity
for sheltering one hundred horses. She conducted this tavern in 1833,
and kept the stock and boarded the drivers and other employees of the
Stockton line of coaches. She was a favorite of that line, and
patronized by it at all points of the road where she kept a tavern,
except at the Greene House in Washington, where she had the favor and
patronage of the Good Intent line. The old White stand was kept by the
widow Miller and her son, after Mrs. Beck left it, and they were
succeeded by Peter Perkins, and he in turn by John Brotherton.

One mile further west Isaac Jones kept a tavern as early as 1835, and
probably before that date. His house was a frame building on the north
side of the road. He was not active in soliciting patronage, and after a
brief and not very successful career as a tavern keeper, closed his
house to the public and continued to occupy it as a private residence,
and it was never thereafter opened as a tavern.

Rooney's Point is next reached, a stage station ten miles from Wheeling.
The original owner of the land here was Roney, and its peculiar
conformation, a high ridge ending in a point on the south side of the
road, gave it the name of Roney's Point. It is a familiar name, and was
a lively place during the palmy days of the road. On the north side of
the road, at Roney's Point, a large stone tavern was kept by one Ninian
Bell, prior to the year 1828. He was succeeded by James Beck, Mrs. Sarah
Beck, Moses Thornburg, and Jacob Beck, in the order named. James and
Jacob Beck were not relatives. The old Simms line of stages stopped at
this house when it was kept by James Beck, and it was the stopping place
of the Good Intent line, when kept by Jacob Beck.

[Illustration: MRS. SARAH BECK.]

One mile west of Roney's Point, on the south side, stood an old frame
tavern, which, in the eventful days of the road gathered in its share
of glory. It was kept first by John Bentley, and after him by James
Kimberly. In addition to the custom it gained from the road, this house
was a favorite resort of the young rural residents, male and female, of
that portion of Old Virginia, and here they were accustomed to go for a
night's festivity, always confining themselves within the bounds of
propriety, but within those bounds enjoying themselves in a high degree.
There is many a gray-haired veteran living in the vicinity now, of both
sexes, whose memories revert with pleasure to the exciting and
exhilarating scenes they witnessed and participated in, at John
Bentley's old tavern.

One mile further west, Triadelphia is reached, a small village, and like
many others, the outgrowth of the National Road. Here John D. Foster
kept a tavern at an early day, and very old pike boys say it was a good
one. It was a frame building on the north side of the road. The old
landlord is said to have been courteous in deportment, given to
hospitality, and scrupulously observant of the proprieties of life. His
daughter, Mary, became the wife of C. S. Malt by, the celebrated oyster
dealer of Baltimore. The first parties who shipped oysters over the road
by express were Nicholas Roe, Edward Wright, and Holt and Malt by. The
latter firm soon obtained entire control of the business, and made a
fortune in it. Malt by died within the past two years in Connecticut,
and Holt was killed in a railroad accident in Virginia in 1852. Colonel
Thompson also kept a tavern in Triadelphia in an early day. His house
was a frame building, on the north side. Colonel Thompson was a
gentleman of the old Virginia school, and a fine type of the genial
landlord. He ceased keeping this house previous to 1840, and was
succeeded by William Barnes, who in turn was succeeded by Edward Lane,
and Lane by Frank Lawson. This house was largely patronized by pleasure
seekers from Wheeling and other places, beside doing an extensive road
business, and enjoyed an excellent reputation as a hostelry.

Three miles further west the old tavern of Mrs. Gooding, another widow,
is reached. The site of this old tavern is now covered by the
flourishing village of Elm Grove. Mrs. Gooding had a wide fame as a
hostess, and her house was crowded by patrons. It is a stone building,
still standing, situate on the south side of the road. Old wagoners to
this day, enthuse over the sumptuousness of the widow Coding's table.
Sleighing parties from Wheeling frequented this old tavern in the
halcyon days of the road, and were handsomely entertained.

     "Oh, the songs they would sing, and the tales they would spin,
     As they lounged in the light of the old country inn.
     But a day came at last when the stage brought no load
     To the gate, as it rolled up the long, dusty road.
     And lo! at the sunrise a shrill whistle blew
     O'er the hills--and the old yielded place to the new--
     And a merciless age with its discord and din
     Made wreck, as it passed, of the pioneer inn."

Before reaching Mrs. Coding's the Clay Monument is passed. This monument
was erected by Moses Shepherd and Lydia, his wife, under an inspiration
of personal admiration of the great statesman, and with a further view
of commemorating his distinguished public services in behalf of the
road. It is of free stone, located upon a level piece of ground about
fifty feet south of the east end of a stone bridge of three arches, over
Wheeling creek. At its base its circumference is twenty-four feet,
towering to a height of twenty feet, and surmounted by a chiselled
figure of the Goddess of Liberty, at this date bearing plain evidences
of the ravages of time and storm. Originally each of the four sides of
the base column revealed an elaborate inscription, but all are totally
effaced now, except the one on the east side, which is as follows: "TIME
will bring every amelioration and refinement, most gratifying to
rational man, and the humblest flower freely plucked under the shelter
of the Tree of Liberty, is more to be desired than all the trappings of
royalty; 44th year of American Independence, Anni Domini, 1820." The
word TIME stands out in bold relief over the other words quoted. John
Awry, of Claysville, and Alexander Ramsey, of Washington, two old and
well remembered stone-cutters, worked on this monument. The former did
most of the carving, in which he was an expert, and the latter much of
the fine chiselling. Ramsey was the father-in-law of William G. Beck,
the old stage driver previously mentioned.

On a picturesque eminence, near the monument, overlooking Big Wheeling
creek, stands the ancient and historic Shepherd mansion, a stone
building erected in 1798, and now known as "Monument Place," the
delightful and hospitable home of Maj. Alonzo Louring. In the olden
time, when the National Road was the bustling highway of the Republic,
the handsome and luxurious stage coaches of the period, frequently bore
Henry Clay and other eminent men of his day to the Shepherd mansion,
where they revealed in Old Virginia hospitality.

Near the old Shepherd mansion stands an antiquated sun dial, covered
with the marks of time, and bearing on its south face this inscription:

     "The noiseless foot of TIME steals softly by,
     And ere we think of MANHOOD age draws nigh."

[Illustration: COL. MOSES SHEPHERD.]

[Illustration: MRS. LYDIA SHEPHERD.]

On the north face of this dial appear the names and the figures: "Moses
and Lydia Shepherd, 1820." Col. Moses Shepherd died in 1832, and his
widow subsequently married Gen. Daniel Kruger, whom she also survived
many years. They are all now dead, and their mortal remains mingle with
their native dust, in the cemetery attached to the "Stone Church," near
Elm Grove. A handsome monument stands at their graves bearing the
following inscriptions: On one side, "_Sic Transit Gloria Mandi_: Sacred
to the memory of Col. Moses Shepherd, who departed this life April 29th,
1832, in the 69th year of his age." "To him the country owes a large
debt of gratitude, as well for his defense of it, when a frontier
settlement, as for his recent public services in aiding the
extension and construction of the CUMBERLAND ROAD through Virginia." The
obverse side tells the story of the second husband, as follows: "_Sic
Transit Gloria Mandi_: Sacred to the memory of Gen. Daniel Kruger, who
died July 12th, 1843, in the 64th year of his age." A third side
perpetuates the memory of the twice bereaved widow as follows: "_Sic
Transit Gloria Mandi_: Lydia S. Kruger, wife of Gen. Daniel Kruger,
formerly Lydia S. Bogs, first married Col. Moses Shepherd: Born Feb.
26th, 1766: Died Sept. 26th, 1867, in the 102d year of her age." High up
on the granite shaft is chiselled on two sides the picture of a log
cabin, and at the door appears a female figure in sitting posture, with
a dog in repose at the feet, while in the back ground is seen the
representation of a martial group, with branches of a palm tree
overhanging the whole design.

A short distance west from widow Goodings, Samuel Carter kept a tavern
as early as 1830. It was a brick house on the south side of the road, a
resort for pleasure seekers from Wheeling, and a well kept house. This
house was subsequently kept by William Strawn.

About one mile west of Carter's, Michael Blackburn kept a tavern in the
olden time, and was well favored with custom. It was a stone house on
the north side of the road.

Next comes Steenrod's, two miles out from Wheeling, a brick and stone
building on the south side of the road, and a widely known old tavern.
Daniel Steenrod, the old landlord, owned the property, and was a man of
intelligence and much influence. His son, Lewis, represented the
Wheeling district in Congress during the prosperous era of the road,
and, as before stated, was one of its most zealous champions. Lewis
Steenrod, a grandson of the old landlord, is at this time (1892), High
Sheriff of Ohio county, West Virginia, and on November 18th of this
year, executed Maier, the murderer. Daniel Steenrod kept the old tavern
last mentioned as early as 1825, and probably before that date, and
continued throughout the whole period of the road's great career as a
national highway. He died April 27th, 1864, aged eighty years. The
property still remains in the Steenrod family.

A short distance from Steenrod's, on the north side, was "Good's
Bottom," now called Pleasant Valley, doubtless by reason of the frantic
iconoclasm, which has lain its ruthless hands on so many old and
familiar names. At Good's Bottom there was a race course in early times,
and it was here, and previous to 1840, that the celebrated horse
"Tariff" lost his laurels. "Tariff" was owned by Thomas Porter, a farmer
and stock man of Claysville. Joseph White, the well known marble dealer
of Uniontown, a native of the vicinity of Claysville, was a witness of
the discomfiture of "Tariff" on the old race course at Good's Bottom.

And now, after a long journey of two hundred and sixty miles, the city
of Wheeling is reached. Wheeling was the western terminus of the road,
in contemplation of the Act of Congress of March 29th, 1806, given in a
previous chapter. John McCortney kept the most noted wagon stand in
Wheeling. He was likewise a commission merchant, which further
identified him with old wagoners, enabling him to furnish them with back
loads. His tavern was located on Main street, running back east on
Fourteenth to alley B, parallel with, and between Main and Market, with
ample grounds surrounding it for wagons and teams to stand on. These
grounds were so extensive that they accommodated the old time circus, in
addition to wagons and teams of the road, and two distinct circuses have
been known to exhibit on them at the same time. They were not of the
modern "triple ring" order, but of the Dan Rice design. McCortney was a
man of agreeable manners, and managed his extensive business with marked
success. He died in Wheeling on December 10th, 1872, aged seventy-nine
years. He was three times married. His last wife was the widow of
William H. Stelle, one of the proprietors of the Good Intent stage line.
Martin Bugger was McCartney's bar-keeper for many years, and is
remembered by old wagoners as a rival of Wilse Clement in hard swearing.
On lower Water street, Robert Newlove kept a wagon stand, and was well
liked by old wagoners, and well patronized by them. He was the owner of
wagons and teams, which he kept on the road, in charge of hired drivers.
In 1829 Richard Simms, the old stage proprietor, kept the United States
hotel, and was its owner. James Beck kept this house after Simms, and
James Dennison after Beck. James McCray kept it next after Dennison, and
Mordecai Yarnell next after McCray. The Monroe House, on Monroe, now
Tenth street, was kept in 1830 by John McClure, and subsequently by
James Matthers. The Virginia House was kept in 1830 by John Graham, and
afterward by one Beltsville, and later by Jacob Kline. Beltsville and
Kline came out from Baltimore. The United States, the Monroe and the
Virginia, were stage stations. On upper Main street, in 1830, Moses
Mossier kept a tavern, and on the same street, and at the same time, a
tavern was kept by Mrs. Beamer, widow of Captain Frederic Beamer,
assisted by her son, Samuel, who was a soldier of 1812. Capt. Frederic
Beamer kept a tavern in Wheeling as early as the year 1802, at the sign
of the Wagon, and took boarders at two piastres a week. The town council
of Wheeling met in Capt. Beamers tavern in 1806. The house that Widow
Beamer presided over as hostess, is a brick building, on the southwest
corner of Main and Ninth streets, on a lot bordering the river. This
house is still standing, but has not been used as a tavern for many
years. Beamers old Landing was at the foot of Ninth street, where the
National Road approached the Ohio river. In 1830 Joseph Teeters kept a
wagon stand in Wheeling, below McCartney's, and John Bradfield kept a
similar stand on Water street in 1837-8. The mysterious disappearance of
a man by the name of Cooper from the Mossier House about 1840, produced
a local sensation, followed by an accusation of foul play and a charge
of murder. Cooper, in company with a friend and neighbor by the name of
Long, put up together one evening at the Mossier House, and on the next
morning Cooper was missing. The two had come in from Ohio, and were
going to Washington county, Pennsylvania, where they were born and
raised, to visit relatives and old friends. It appears that Cooper rose
early and took an outgoing coach back to Ohio without notifying his
traveling companion or any one else. A dead body was found in the river
and identified as that of Cooper; and Long, after reaching his
destination, was arrested for murder and lodged in the Washington jail.
The Virginia authorities made no requisition for him, and he was finally
discharged, and settled in Michigan. A few years afterward, Cooper was
discovered in Indianapolis, sound and well.

[Illustration: JOHN McCORTNEY.]

The Forsyth's of Wheeling, James H. and his son Leonard, were
prominently identified with the destinies of the National Road. The
commission house of James H. Forsythe & Co. was a leading establishment
of its kind. James H. Forsythe, the senior member of this old firm, was
noted for his energy and clear-hoodedness. He could converse with any
number of persons, and indite a letter at the same time, without being
in any wise confused. His son, Leonard, was also well known on the road.
He conducted commission houses at Brownsville and Cumberland, and very
often passed over the road, in the management of his business. He is now
living in Texas near Austin, and feels a deep interest in the history of
the road.

W. L. McNeil, of Wheeling, when a young man, had a brief experience as a
wagoner. He drove several trips for Thomas Darkly, who was a merchant
with stores in Baltimore and Wheeling, and is well remembered by old
pike boys. McNeil "put up" at Natty Brownfield's, in Uniontown, when
driving Drake's team, a half a century and longer ago, and has never
forgotten the good entertainment he enjoyed at that old tavern.

The old tavern keepers of the National Road were a remarkable body of
men. In many instances they were free holders, men well posted in
current affairs, and influential in their respective neighbourhoods.
They were honorable in their dealings, and believed that every man's
word should be as good as his bond. As caterers they made no display.
They had no bills of fare, printed on gilt edged paper, or fine linen,
and it is doubtful if any one of them ever heard the modern word _Menu_,
yet the spreads of their generous boards would almost kindle
exhilaration in the heart of a misanthrope. The thought may be
attributable to change of time or circumstance, or taste, or all
together, but there is an immovable conviction in the mind of the writer
of these pages, that the viands of modern hotels, lack the savouriness
of those of the old taverns of the National Road.




CHAPTER XLI.

  _West of Wheeling--Old Stage Lines Beyond the Ohio River--William
     Neil--Gen. N. P. Flamage--Stage Stations--Old Taverns and Tavern
     Keepers--Rev. Doctor Cinnabar and "Sunset" Cox were old Pike
     Boys--Lively Times in Guernsey--Crossing another State
     line--Sycamore Valley--Old Taverns in Richmond--A link
     out--Centerville--Dublin--Through Indiana--The Road Disappears
     among the Prairies of Illinois._


It is estimated that two-fifths of the trade and travel of the road were
diverted at Brownsville, and fell into the channel furnished at that
point by the slack water improvement of the Monongahela river, and a
like proportion descended the Ohio from Wheeling, and the remaining
fifth continued on the road to Columbus, Ohio, and points further west.
The travel west of Wheeling was chiefly local, and the road presented
scarcely a tithe of the thrift, push, whirl and excitement which
characterized it, east of that point; and there was a corresponding lack
of incident, accident and anecdote on the extreme western division. The
distance from Wheeling to Columbus is one hundred and twenty-nine miles,
and the road enters the capital of Ohio by way of High street. Before
the era of railroads Columbus derived its chief business from the
National Road.

Neil, Moore & Co. operated a line of stage coaches between Wheeling and
Columbus prior to, and for some time after, the year 1840, and their
line extended west as far as Springfield. Daniel Moore, of Washington,
Pennsylvania, and his son Henry, composed the Moore end of this old Ohio
Stage Company. Henry Moore subsequently located in Baltimore, and died
there. His father died in Washington, Pennsylvania, more than half a
century ago. John Scott, of Washington, Pennsylvania, antedates Daniel
Moore as a stage proprietor. He ran a line of coaches between Washington
and Wheeling as early as the year 1810, on an old road between those
points, which was used previous to the construction of the National
Road, and had the contract for carrying the United States mails.

William Neil, the old stage proprietor, was the projector and owner of
the Neil House, the leading hotel of Columbus. He was the possessor of
large means, enhanced by holdings of large tracts of fertile land near
Columbus, which he acquired at low figures in an early day. It is said
his manners were not of the _suave_ order, but he was noted for energy
and shrewdness. One who knew him says of him, that "he was honest in his
dealings, somewhat rough in his ways, but an energetic, pushing man,
who made things move." This description fits many of the old pike boys.

Gen. N. P. Flamage, of whom further mention is made hereafter, owned and
operated a line of coaches also between Wheeling and Columbus, and made
things lively along the road. He called his line the "Good Intent."

John Weaver, as before stated, transferred his old line of coaches
called the "Peoples," from the eastern to the Ohio portion of the road.
There was considerable competition between these old lines, but not
comparable to that of the old lines east of Wheeling. The stage stations
between Wheeling and Columbus were: St. Gainesville, Morristown,
Fairview, Washington, Cambridge, Concord, Zanesville, Gratiot, named in
honor of Brig. Gen. Gratiot, before mentioned; Jackson, Etna and
Reynolds burg.

Among the old tavern keepers west of Wheeling, the following were
prominent and well known in the olden time: Moses Rhodes kept at
Bridgeport, and hailed the west-bound traveler on his entrance to the
borders of the State of Ohio. A short distance further west, one Cusic,
and after him Nicol's, in the same old tavern, ministered to the wants
of the traveler on the nation's old highway. A short drive from Nicols'
brought the wayfarer to the house of Chambers, ever ready to wait upon
the public, and a little beyond was the Woodman's house, kept by Isaac
Cleaves, who afterward hung up his sign at a house further west. Passing
Woodman's, the next old tavern was McMahon's, a veritable son of Erin,
overflowing with native generosity. This part of the road seems to have
been an Irish row, since the next old tavern, after passing McMahon's,
was kept by one McCray. A short distance west of McCray's the town of
St. Gainesville comes in view, one of the oldest towns of Ohio, the seat
of justice for Belmont county, and named in honor of the illustrious old
Westmoreland county, Pennsylvania, soldier and patriot, Gen. Arthur St.
Clair.

In St. Gainesville, James Smith kept the stage office, and bowed in
genuine old pike style to the coming and going passengers. One mile west
of St. Gainesville, an old German, or Swede, bearing the non-musical
name of Swanker, or something like it, kept a tavern, and, according to
tradition, a good one. His house was a fine brick building, on the north
side of the road. One mile further west, one Hoover entertained the
traveling public, and beyond him, one Chamberlain presided over a good
old tavern.

The village of Louisville is next reached, which, of course, had its
tavern, as all villages have, and probably more than one; but the old
wagoner who furnished most of the data for this chapter could not recall
the names of the old proprietors thereof. It was a long time ago that he
drove a team on the road, and he is verging upon his ninetieth year, and
therefore not to be censured for forgetfulness.

The writer found more difficulty in obtaining information concerning
this portion of the road than any other. In fact, he admits his failure
to obtain the necessary data for producing an accurate history of it. He
wrote to all the postmasters on the Ohio line east of Columbus, for
information concerning the road, and no response came, except in one
instance, and that was to a letter which reached a wrong destination. It
was addressed to the postmaster at Jackson, a village on the road,
called "Jacktown" by the old pike boys, and found its way to the
postmaster of Jackson, Jackson county, a considerable distance south of
the National Road. It happened that the postmaster who received this
letter was a native of Brownsville, Fayette county, Pennsylvania, a
member of the old Sloan family of that place, but he was so far away
from the road that he could furnish no information concerning it. He, at
least, was courteous, a trait for which he is indebted, probably, to the
circumstance of his nativity. A self-important postmaster, especially of
a little town, like the political carpet-bagger, has no respect for
ancient landmarks.

Moving on westwardly, the next point reached is Morristown, the second
stage station west of Wheeling. This town was at its best when the
National Road was the leading avenue of trade and travel. John Barnum
and John Lipping were the old tavern keepers of Morristown, and took
pride in scanning the old way bills, and catering to the wants of hungry
stage passengers.

One mile west of Morristown Christopher Hoover hung out his old sign
board in front of a substantial brick house, on the south side of the
road, and a short distance beyond, Noble Taylor, a combination of
familiar old pike names, entertained the traveling public.

The village of Hindenburg is next reached. This place is on the dividing
line between Belmont and Guernsey counties. It is not and never was a
pretentious town, but its old inhabitants derived much comfort, and not
a little pleasure, from advantages afforded by the National Road.

Passing one or more old taverns whose occupants and owners cannot be
recalled, the traveler comes upon the town of Fairview, a stirring place
in the palmy days of the road. There William Bradshaw was a popular
tavern keeper. He and Isaac Cleaves, formerly of the Woodman's House,
near Wheeling, were the leading tavern keepers in Fairview fifty years
ago.

West of Fairview the old tavern keepers were: William Armstrong, Joseph
Ferrell and Alexander Taylor.

Middletown is next reached, and here Thomas Hays and one Thompson each
kept a tavern in the olden time, and gladdened the heart of many a weary
traveler.

West of Middletown the roll bears the names of Alter Briggs and
Alexander Speers.

Samuel Smith kept the old tavern at Elizabeth town. West of Elizabeth
town, one Cray ton kept a tavern, and beyond him Widow Drake. The widows
never surrender.

The village of Washington is next reached. Here Simon Beamer kept at
the sign of the "Black Bear," and Peter Colley, formerly of Centreville,
kept a tavern in Washington as late as 1854.

West of Washington the old traveler on the road found rest and
refreshment first at the tavern of Widow Slams, and before reaching
Cambridge, excellent entertainment was furnished by Joseph Griffith,
James Smith, John Shaw, Mr. Slater, Mr. McCain, John Nice, Robert Curry,
Mr. Waterhouse, and Joshua Davis.

Cambridge comes next on the line. This is the capital of Guernsey
county, one of the liveliest towns on the road, and surviving its
decline, remains prosperous. The old tavern keepers in Cambridge were
William Ferguson, Wyatt Hutchinson, Bazil Brown, Mr. Nee dam, Mr.
Pollard, Joseph Bute, Elijah Grimes, John Cook, James B. Moore, Captain
Hearsing, John Tingle and George Met calf. The latter kept one of the
stage houses.

Three miles west of Cambridge, Thomas Curran kept an old tavern. Further
west, taverns were kept by Jacob Frank, Mr. Laird, Alex. Leper, Ichabod
Grumman, Mr. Sutton, Frank Dixon, William McDonald and Lewis McDonald.
Lewis McDonald's old tavern was near the dividing line between Guernsey
and Muskingum counties.

After entering the county of Muskingum the first old tavern reached was
kept by William McKinney, and next in line comes the old tavern of
William Wilson, still doing business under the management of Edward
McLeod.

At Norwich Mr. Cinnabar kept a tavern. He was the father of Rev. Hiram
Cinnabar, D. D., for many years a leading member of the Pittsburg
Conference of the Methodist Episcopal church, a man of much learning and
genuine piety, pure in thought, and upright in conduct. The author of
these pages knew him well, and in the whole range of his acquaintance
never met a sincerer friend, or a more just man. He died in Los Angeles,
California, a few years ago. Lightly rest the sod that covers his grave.
He is numbered among the pike boys, as in early life he led horses from
his father's house in Ohio to eastern markets.

Further westward on the road Jacob Probasco hung up his sign in front of
an old tavern, he of Jockey Hollow fame before mentioned. His tavern at
this point was known as the "Ten Mile House," being distant ten miles
from Zanesville.

One mile west of Proboscis's one McNutt, of Irish extraction, and good
fame as a landlord, kept a tavern, and next beyond, on the westward
trend, John Livengood, whose name imports old Pennsylvania Dutch stock,
ministered to the wants of strangers and travelers.

Zanesville is next reached. Zanesville is the county seat of Muskingum
county. It is situate on the Muskingum river, fifty-nine miles east from
Columbus. Mr. Leslie kept a tavern in Zanesville in the olden time, and
entertained the public in a highly satisfactory manner. His house was a
brick building on the north side of the street and road, and at the west
end of the town. When Leslie kept tavern in Zanesville, the town
contained a population of about 7,000. Its population at this date
exceeds 25,000. It survived the decline of the road, and grew rapidly in
population and wealth, but it may be doubted whether its present money
making inhabitants experience as much of the real pleasures and
enjoyments of life as their predecessors of fifty years ago, when the
dashing stage coach woke up the echoes of the dull town, and the heavy
tread of the ponderous broad wheeled wagon told the whole story of
commerce and trade. The illustrious Samuel S. Cox was born and reared in
Zanesville, and therefore, under a definition given in a previous
chapter, a pike boy. He was called "Sunset," by reason of a gushing
description he wrote of the Setting Sun, when a young man, and there is
no doubt that the views which so deeply impressed his youthful mind were
had from points on the National Road, in the vicinity of his native
town. He was one of the brightest stars in the galaxy of American
statesmen.

A writer in a Guernsey county paper gives the following lively
description of scenes on the road in that locality:

"Isaac Cleaves was one of the old tavern keepers in Fairview. His house
was the stage office, where a halt was made for exchange of horses, and
to discharge and take on passengers. The stage offices were places of
public resort, and around the bar-rooms gathered the toper's and
loafers, by day and by night. The old stage drivers were full of fun and
frolic, and could entertain the curious with

     'Tales fearful and awful,
     E'en to name would be unlawful.
     Fast by an Angle blinking Bonni,
     W'ie recanning swats that drank divinely,
     These sorters told their queerest stories,
     And the landlord's laugh was ready chorus.'

"There was Nat Smith, Sam Smith, Jim Smith, Bate Smith, Jo Smith, Quill
Smith, Bill Smith, and more of the Smith family, and Sam Carouse, Jake
Carouse, Sylvester Root, Sam Kirk, Tom Kirk, Tom Bryan, Andy Caster, Tom
Carter, Jim Bryan, Bony Sheldon, Wash Cranford, Jim Bay less, Mart Huck,
Henry Hight, Tom Crawford, John Silvain, Ross Briggs, and a host of
others of the 'knights of the whip and reins,' of those old coaching
days,

     'When hand to hand they cut and strive,
     Devil take the hindmost of the drive.'

"Near by stood the old 'smithy' of Capt. John G. Bell's father, whose
bellows flapped, and red sparks flew, and anvil rang, night and day, to
keep the horses feet in trim, so that down the slope to Honduras, and on
to Borden's hill and Taylor's hill, and o'er Salt Fork's long stretch,
through ice and sleet, these Jehu's could safely, and on time, move on
their load of living freight and the mails sent out by 'Uncle Sam.' John
Skimmings, one of the early settlers at the mouth of Wills Creek, was
the general agent from Columbus to Wheeling, of the great Neil, Moore &
Co., whose lines cobwebbed the State of Ohio. Otho Hinton was the
United States mail agent to look after the mail robbers. He turned out
to be one himself, and was placed under arrest for opening the mails
between Cambridge and Washington. He was indicted and arraigned before
the United States court at Columbus, released on bail, and fled to
Honolulu, where he died in 1856.

"Gen. N. P. Flamage placed on the road what was called the opposition,
or Good Intent, line of stages. This was just after the Washingtonian
temperance movement. He made temperance speeches along the line, and
required his drivers to take the pledge. He stopped at Cambridge and
made a speech in the old Presbyterian church, and sang a song, his
drivers taking up the chorus. We give in substance, if not in word, a
verse:

     'Our horses are true and coaches fine,
       No upsets or runaways;
     Nor drunken drivers to swear and curse,
       For its cold water all the days.

     CHORUS.

     For our agents and drivers
       Are all fully bent,
     To go for cold water,
       On line Good Intent,
     Sing, go it, my hearties,
         Cold water for me.'

"Isaac Cleaves was not behind as a caterer to the inner man, and a
dinner or supper by the stage passengers, after being rocked and tossed
at a six miles per hour rate, was relished even by Tippecanoe and
Corwin, too, and Democrats did not starve nor turn up their noses
because old Isaac was a Whig. He had a famous recipe for the cure of the
ague, which for its queer compound he was often required to give, not so
much for the ingredients; they were very simple; but for the first
preparation for the compound. This was to boil down a quart of water to
a pint. And to the inquiry, 'What is the water boiled down for, Uncle
Isaac?' he would reply, 'to make it stronger.'

"A little further, and last, was Major William Bradshaw, just over in
Belmont county. He was the soul of wit and humour, and gave out many
expressions that have become noted. To all that he did not feel disposed
to entertain, he gave the answer, 'Take the Janesville road.' His toast
drank in honor of the Fairview guards, a military company that had been
parading 'with plumes and banners gay,' just after the close of the
Mexican war, will live in the military history of Guernsey
county--'Soldiers in peace, civilians in war.'"

The Smiths above mentioned all drove stages on the road east of
Wheeling, before going to Ohio, and lived in Brownsville. All the male
members of the family were drivers, including Samuel, the father. His
sons were, Samuel, jr., Gilbert, Quill, Bate and Nat, familiar names in
the early history of the road.

The largest town on the line of the road west of Columbus, in the State
of Ohio, is Springfield, the capital of Clark county. The distance
between Columbus and Springfield is forty-five miles. Springfield
enjoyed for a number of years the advantages of the road, and felt a
pride in being on its line, but its growth and development, the result
of other agencies, have thrown a mantle of oblivion over the time when
the rattle of the stage coach and the rumble of road wagons furnished
the chief excitement of her streets.

The road penetrated Indiana at the boundary line of Wayne county, in
that State. The length of the line through Indiana is one hundred and
forty-nine and one-fourth miles, and the sum of $513,099 was expended on
it for bridges and masonry. Work was begun at Indianapolis and
prosecuted east and west from that point, in obedience to an act of
Congress given in the chapter on Appropriations. The road was completed
through Wayne county in 1827. It was not macadamized or graveled, and in
the year 1850 was absorbed by the Wayne County Turnpike Company, under a
charter granted by State authority. The length of this pike is
twenty-two miles.

The second section of the act incorporating the Wayne County Turnpike
Company reads as follows:

     "The capital stock of said company shall be one hundred thousand
     dollars, divided into shares of fifty dollars each, and shall be
     applied to the construction of a turnpike road in Wayne county,
     commencing at the western terminus of the Richmond turnpike, about
     three miles east of Richmond, and to be continued westward on the
     line of the National Road to the county line between the counties
     of Henry and Wayne; and the State of Indiana hereby relinquishes to
     said Wayne County Turnpike Company all the rights, interests, and
     claims in and to the line of said National Road in said county of
     Wayne; the grade, materials, bridges, constructions of all kinds
     she now has, or may hereafter acquire from the General Government,
     in and to the said National Road: _Provided_, That in case the
     Federal Government should, at any time hereafter, determine to
     resume the ownership and control of said road, said company shall
     relinquish the same to the General Government, on receiving from it
     the full cost of construction as expended by said company."

The section quoted discloses a point which the court of Somerset county,
Pennsylvania, seems to have overlooked when it condemned that portion of
the road lying within the borders of that county, took possession of its
property, and decreed it free from tolls. The several acts of Congress
ceding the road to Pennsylvania and the other States through which it
passed, reserved the right of Congress at any subsequent time to resume
ownership and control, and in case of the exercise of this reserved
right, the question arises, what would become of the decree of the
Somerset county court?

Prior to the construction of the National Road in Indiana, Robert
Morrisson, the founder of the Morrisson Library, of Richmond, and one
of the leading citizens of that place, was mainly instrumental in
causing a gravel road to be made from Richmond to Dayton, Ohio, which
was known as the "Richmond and Short Line Pike." The engineers of the
National Road adopted the line of Morrison's road in Indiana, with the
exception of one mile from a point near Clawson's tavern to the Ohio
State line. The Government survey carried the line east from Clawson's
tavern, and north of Sycamore Valley, over two long and steep hills,
separated by a deep valley. To avoid these hills on the Ohio side,
travel dropped down over a good country road to the Richmond and Short
Line Pike at the State line. This country road was afterwards
macadamized, but the distance between the State line and Clawson's
tavern has remained a gravel road until the present time, kept up and
used as a portion of the National road, instead of the line over the
hills north of Sycamore Valley.

Morrisson's company was merged in the Wayne County Turnpike Company in
1850. This company issued seven hundred and eighty shares of stock of
the par value of fifty dollars each, and operated its road until the
year 1890, when Jackson township, by virtue of a popular vote, purchased
that portion of it lying within her boundaries for the sum of $4,500,
and made it free of tolls. In 1893, Wayne township bought the road
within her boundaries for $11,000, and made it free. The preliminary
steps are now being taken by the citizens of Center township to take a
vote on a proposition to purchase the road within her borders. If this
measure carries the road will be free throughout its entire length in
Wayne county.

The Presidents of the Wayne County Turnpike Company have been Robert
Morrisson, Jacob Brooks, Edmund Laurence, William Parry, and Joseph C.
Ratliff, the last named having served continuously from 1871 to the
present time, a pleasant gentleman of fine executive abilities.

This company has always paid dividends of seven per cent. on its capital
stock of $39,000, and for the last ten years a majority of its
stockholders have been women.

The rate of toll was two cents a mile for horse and buggy and one-half
cent per mile for each additional horse, one cent for a horse and rider
per mile, and one-half cent for a led horse.

The toll houses were small frame structures and the gates simply heavy
poles to raise and let down after the manner of the beam that lowered
and lifted up "the old oaken bucket that hung in the well."

Going westwardly from the Ohio State line, in Indiana, the first tavern
was that of James Neal, at Sycamore Valley. Of Neal but little can be
gleaned beyond the fact that he kept tavern at this point for several
years.

The next tavern was Clawson's, a brick building, erected about the year
1818 by Robert Hill. It stood a little distance north of the road, and
near the western end of the line before mentioned, as having been
located but not used, and was subsequently torn down and rebuilt on the
traveled line. It is said that Robert Hill's daughters hauled the brick
for their father's house in an ox cart. Clawson was a tall, muscular
man, and beyond these facts concerning him, he is lost to the memory of
the oldest inhabitant of Indiana. West of Clawson's the first toll gate
in Indiana was encountered. It stood near Glen Miller Park and almost
within the suburbs of Richmond. This gate was moved several times, but
never over a mile from Richmond.

The city of Richmond is the first large town on the line of the road
within the borders of the State of Indiana, and the road forms its Main
street. It is four miles from the Ohio line, and the county seat of
Wayne county. Its present population is 25,000.

The first tavern of the road in Richmond was kept by Charles W. Starr.
It was a regular old pike tavern, with extensive stabling and drove
yards attached, occupying one-fourth of a square on the northeast corner
of Eighth, formerly Fifth street. The building was of brick, known in
later years as the Tremont Hotel. It is still standing, but not used as
a hotel or tavern. Charles W. Starr was a man of medium size and of
Quaker faith. He wore the Quaker garb, had Quaker habits, and was
esteemed a good citizen. Some of his descendants are still living at
Richmond, and three of his sons are prominent and active business men of
that place.

A short distance below Starr's, and between Sixth and Seventh streets,
stood Sloan's brick stage house, and its proprietor, Daniel D. Sloan,
was at one time postmaster of Richmond. This tavern was headquarters for
two stage lines, one running to Indianapolis and the other to
Cincinnati. The Cincinnati line had opposition, and by cutting rates the
fare was reduced by the competition and during its continuance, from
five dollars to fifty cents for the round trip, distance seventy miles
direct. A portion of Sloan's old tavern still remains, and adjoins
Roling's hardware store. Sloan was heavy set, fleshy, and well poised
for a tavern keeper.

On the south side of the road, between Seventh and Eighth streets,
William Nixon kept a tavern on the site of the present Huntington House.
He was a spare, sinewy man, of the Quaker faith. He kept the tavern at
the point named from 1840 to about 1843.

A noted tavern was Gilbert's, on the northeast corner of Sixth and Main
streets. Joseph W. Gilbert kept this house for many years. It was a
two-story frame building, pebble coated. Gilbert was tall and slim,
polite and affable, and had many friends. He suffered the misfortune of
going blind, and died at Richmond in 1890, in the ninety-second year of
his age. When barely able to distinguish large objects he walked much up
and down the streets, asking persons he met to tell him the time of day,
always pulling out his watch and holding it up for inspection. At one
time when Gilbert was moving a part of his tavern building, Charles
Newman, on passing along, inquired of the old landlord, whose house was
noted for its cleanliness, how many bed bugs he found. Gilbert replied
with indignation, "Not a single one." "I believe you, Joseph," said
Newman, "for they are married and have large families." Most of the
early taverns of Richmond were in the western part of the town.

It is related in the latest history of Indiana, that Jeremiah Cox, one
of the earliest settlers in Richmond, regarded with disfavor the scheme
of building up the town; and is said to have remarked, that he would
rather see a buck's tail than a tavern sign, and his sincerity was made
evident by the fact, that he did not make his addition to the town plat
until two years after the date of Smith's survey, or two years after
Philip Harter had a tavern sign swinging near a log building on lot 6,
South Fifth (Pearl) street.

Another early tavern of Richmond was kept at the northwest corner of
Main and Fifth (Pearl), sign of the green tree, by Jonathan Bayles, and
another, of later date, on Fourth (Front) street, near the southwest
corner of Main, by Ephraim Lacey. Harter soon afterward kept a tavern at
the corner of North Fifth (Pearl) and Main, where the Citizen's bank
afterward stood, then called Harter's corner.

Another tavern was kept on Gilbert's corner, northwest corner of Main
and Sixth (Marion), first, it is believed, by Abraham Jeffries, and
continued afterward by several other persons at different times.

Richard Cheesman, an early settler, lived on South Fourth (Front)
street, kept a tavern several years, and subsequently removed to Center
township, where he died. William, a nephew, remained in Richmond, and
married a Miss Moffitt. He died some years ago, but his widow is still
living.

John Baldwin, an original Carolinian, kept a tavern and store at the
Citizen's bank corner. He went west, and became a trader with the
Indians. Their savage nature having at one time been excited by liquor
which he had sold them, they scalped, or partially scalped him, but he
survived the operation and returned to Wayne county, where he died, six
miles north of Richmond, in 1869. After Baldwin, William H. Vaughan kept
this tavern for several years, and until it ceased to entertain the
public. Vaughan had previously kept the Lacey tavern on Fourth (Front)
street.

Patrick Justice, at an early period, kept a tavern on North Fourth
(Front) street, near Main. He afterward kept a public house which he
built in 1827, near the extreme limits of the town, now the southeast
corner of Main and Fifth streets.

Benjamin Paige, a New Englander, father of Ralph Paige, once a merchant
on Main street, kept a tavern previous to 1830, at the corner originally
owned by John C. Kibbey, an early inn-keeper, and known as Meek's
corner, northeast of Main and Sixth (Marion).

Abraham Jeffries had a tavern on Gilbert's corner, which he kept a
number of years, and was succeeded by Joseph Andrews, his
brother-in-law, who died soon after taking charge.

The last westward tavern in Richmond was kept by Christian Buhl, who
came from Germany, and his house was a three story stone structure where
Minck's brewery now is.

At the west end of Richmond the road crosses Whitewater river over a
handsome and expensive bridge. This bridge has seven arches, and is a
combination truss and arch design, capable of sustaining an immense
weight. On the west side timbers and wool sacks were sunk into a
quicksand upon which to rest the foundations of the abutment.

Toll-gate No. 7 was erected at the fifth mile post west of Richmond and
afterwards moved to a point near Earlham college. This gate was kept by
William Fagan for twenty-three years, and afterwards by Mr. Gardener for
nearly ten years. Mr. Gardener is a New York man and was one of the best
gate-keepers on the road. His wife is a cousin of the late Hon. William
B. Windom, who was Secretary of the Treasury in President Harrison's
administration.

There was a tavern between gate No. 7 and gate No. 8, which was near the
Center township line and East Clear creek. West of this point there is a
curve in the road caused by the refusal of Thomas Croft to remove his
house, which was on the surveyed line. He was offered $500 to remove his
house and declined to take it. The road was then of necessity made
around his house, and so near it as to loosen its foundations, and it
toppled and fell down, causing him to lose his house, and the sum
offered him as damages besides.

At the seventh mile stone, a little beyond West Clear Creek bridge,
stood the shop of Jeremy Mansur, who manufactured the first axes made in
the county of Wayne. When Martin Van Buren made his trip through
Indiana, many persons denounced him as an enemy of the road, and some
one in Richmond, to inflict chastisement upon the distinguished
statesman for his supposed unfriendliness, sawed a double-tree of the
coach in which he was traveling nearly through, and it broke near
Mansur's ax-shop, causing Mr. Van Buren to walk to the top of a hill
through thick mud. The author of this mishap to Mr. Van Buren
subsequently boasted that he had put a mud polish on Gentleman Martin's
boots to give him a realizing sense of the importance of good roads.

Near the ninth mile stone from Richmond were two celebrated taverns,
Eliason's and Estepp's. Both were brick houses and well kept. Joshua
Eliason was a man of medium size, jovial disposition, remarkably
industrious, and a zealous member of the Christian church. His tavern
was on the north side of the road, and, in connection with it, he
maintained two one-story emigrant houses to accommodate families moving
west. The emigrants carried and cooked their own provisions, and paid
Eliason a certain sum for the use of his buildings. Drove yards were
also a profitable feature of Eliason's tavern. He sold grain to the
drovers, and after the cattle were turned out, put his own hogs in the
vacated field to eat up the remnants and refuse.

[Illustration: BRIDGE OVER WHITEWATER, RICHMOND, IND.]

John Estepp's tavern was on the south side of the road, nearly opposite
Eliason's. He had one emigrant house, and did an extensive business.
He was a man of the lean order, but always on the alert to turn an
honest penny.

A short distance beyond Estepp's, Centerville comes in view, near where
Daniel L. Lashley kept the principal tavern. He was a large man, and had
a large patronage.

Centerville boasts of having been a nursery of great men. Here Oliver P.
Morton, when a young man, worked as a hatter, and Gen. A. E. Burnside
pursued the humble trade of a tailor. Gen. Lew Wallace and Gen. Noble
went to school in Centerville, and possibly the germs of Ben Hur had
their origin in this rural village. Hon. George W. Julian, of free soil
notoriety, was at one time a resident of Centerville, and Judge Nimrod
Johnson, of the State Supreme Court, and John S. Newman, ex-president of
the Indiana Central Railroad Company, were among the noted personages
who lived there. Centerville was for many years the county seat of Wayne
county, and the removal of the offices and archives to Richmond produced
a feeling of jealousy between the inhabitants of the places which
lingers in a measure to this day, although Richmond has far outstripped
her ancient rival in growth and improvements.

West of Centerville the road crosses Nolan's Fork, a small Indiana
stream, and a short distance beyond, and near the Poor Farm, a toll-gate
was established, and there was also a tavern at this point. One mile
west of the Poor Farm, Crum Fork is crossed by means of a bridge, and
between this stream and Germantown there was another toll-gate and also
a tavern. There is a bridge over the stream between Germantown and
Cambridge city. West of Cambridge City, and near Dublin, there was a
toll-gate, and a short distance west of Dublin, the road passes out of
Wayne county.

The road forms the main street of Dublin and is called Cumberland
street, by reason of this fact. The first tavern established in Dublin
was by Samuel Schoolfield, an old Virginian, pleasantly remembered on
account of his staunch patriotism. He displayed on his sign-board the
motto: "Our country, right or wrong."

The railroad absorbed all passenger and freight traffic in the year
1852, after which date and to the close of the civil war, outside of
home travel, the main vehicles on the Indiana division were "Prairie
Schooners," or semi-circular bedded, white-covered emigrant wagons, used
by parties moving from Virginia and the Carolinas to Illinois.

Indianapolis as before stated is on the line of the road, but her
proportions as a city are the outgrowth of other agencies. In the early
days of Indiana's capital the National Road was her only commercial
artery, and her pioneer citizens regarded it as a great advantage to
their aspiring town. The railway era dawned so soon after the road was
located through Indianapolis that but few memories cluster about its
history in that locality like those east of the Ohio river.

The last and only remaining large town of Indiana on the road is Terre
Haute, a city like Indianapolis that has outgrown the memories of the
road, and is probably little mindful of the time when her early
inhabitants deemed it a matter of high importance to be located on its
line. Though remote from the active centres of the historic road, Terre
Haute is more or less associated with its stirring scenes and former
prestige.

There was a striking similarity in the habits, manners and pursuits of
the old inhabitants of the towns along the National Road, notably
between Baltimore and Wheeling. The road was a bond that drew them
together and united them as neighbors. There are many persons still
living who remember when Frederic, Hagerstown, Cumberland, Uniontown,
Brownsville, Washington and Wheeling derived their main support from the
road, and their chief distinction from their location on its line. This
feature was also true of the towns on the Appian Way, on authority of
the classic author, Anthon.

Any one familiar with the National Road in its prosperous era, whose
business or other engagements required a divergence from it, invariably
returned to it with a sense of security and a feeling of rest and
relief. This feeling was universal and profound. An illustration is
furnished by Hon. William H. Playford, of Uniontown, who was born and
reared on the road. After his college graduation he went South to teach,
as did many other graduates of northern colleges. When his term as a
teacher ended his heart of course yearned for home, and homeward he set
his sails. He struck the National Road at Terre Haute, and the moment
his eyes flashed upon its familiar surface he felt that he was among old
friends and nearly home. It was the first object he had witnessed since
his departure from the paternal roof that brought him in touch again
with home.

Before the road was completed beyond the western boundary of the State
of Indiana, the steam railway had become the chief agency of
transportation and travel, and our grand old national highway was
practically lost amid the primitive prairies of Illinois, so that
whereas its splendor was favored by the rising, it was dispelled beneath
the Setting Sun.

[Illustration: GEN. GEORGE W. CASS.]




CHAPTER XLII.

  _Superintendents under National Control--Gen. Gratiot, Captains
     Delafield, McKee, Bliss, Hartzell, Williams, Colquit and Cass, and
     Lieuts. Mansfield, Vance and Pickell--The Old Mile
     Posts--Commissioners and Superintendents under State
     Control--William Searight, William Hopkins, and Earlier and Later
     Commissioners and Superintendents--A Pennsylvania Court Wipes Out a
     Section of the Road._


Down to the year 1834, as has been seen, the road was under the control
and supervision of the War Department of the General Government.
Brig.-Gen. Gratiot was the chief officer in immediate charge. The town
of Gratiot on the line of the road in Muskingum county, Ohio, was named
in his honor. Captains Delafield, McKee, Bliss, Bartlett, Hartzell,
Williams, Colquit and Cass, and Lieuts. Mansfield, Vance and Pickell,
all graduates of West Point, were more or less identified with the
construction, management and repairs of the road. These army officers
were all well known to the people along the road sixty years ago. Gen.
Gratiot was probably dead before the beginning of the civil war, or too
old for active service. Mansfield fell at Antietam, a major general of
the Union forces. Williams was killed at the storming of Monterey in the
Mexican war. McKee fell while gallantly leading a regiment in the hot
fight at Buena Vista. Hartzell, promoted to the rank of major, fought
through the Mexican war, and died soon after returning to his home in
Lexington, Kentucky. Bliss and Delafield both died within the current
decade. Colquit, a near relative of the Georgia Senator of that name,
died in the Confederate service. Capt. Geo. W. Cass, while on the road
as an engineer in charge of repairs, married a daughter of the late
George Dawson, of Brownsville, located at that place, and transacted
business there for a number of years. He subsequently went to Pittsburg
as president of the Adams Express Company, and later became president of
the Pittsburg, Ft. Wayne & Chicago Railway Company. He was prominent and
influential in the politics of Pennsylvania, and on several occasions
stood second in the ballotings for the Democratic nomination for
Governor. He died in the city of New York. He was twice married. His
widow surviving him, is a sister of his first wife.

The iron mile posts, so familiar to the traveler on the road, were
turned out in foundries of Connellsville and Brownsville. Major James
Francis had the contract for making and delivering those between
Cumberland and Brownsville. His foundry was at Connellsville,
Pennsylvania. Col. Alex. J. Hill, a well known and popular coke
operator, and Democratic politician of Fayette county, Pennsylvania, is
a son-in-law of Major Francis, the old foundryman. Those between
Brownsville and Wheeling were made at Snowden's old foundry, in
Brownsville, John Snowden, contractor. They were hauled along the road
for distribution in wagons drawn by six horse teams. Within the last two
years they were re-set and re-painted, between Brownsville and the
Maryland State line, under the direction of Commissioner Ewing Searight,
and stand erect in their original sites, silent witnesses of the great
procession that passed in front of them for so many years, and if they
possessed the attributes of speech and memory, could narrate the story
of a great highway, which in incident and interest is without a rival.

WILLIAM SEARIGHT was a commissioner of the road for a number of years in
its prosperous era. His jurisdiction extended over the line within the
limits of Pennsylvania. He was of Irish lineage, and Presbyterian faith.
His parents located in Ligonier Valley, Westmoreland county,
Pennsylvania, about the year 1780. Upon reaching his majority he came to
Fayette county to work out his destiny. He learned the trade of fulling
and dyeing, and started in business on his own account at Hammond's old
mill on Dunlap's creek, long since demolished and forgotten. He
subsequently pursued the same business at Cook's mill, on Redstone
creek. His education was such only as could be procured in his boyhood
by persons of slender means, but his natural endowments were of the
highest and best order. He was honest and industrious. On March 26th,
1826, he married Rachel, a daughter of Thomas Brownfield, proprietor of
the old Swan tavern in Uniontown. At Searights, on the National Road, he
laid the foundation of a considerable fortune, and died in the
sixty-first year of his age. He was a leading Democratic politician of
his day in Fayette county, and in 1827 rode on horseback from Searights
to Harrisburg, to aid in nominating General Jackson for the presidency.
He was a trusted friend of the late Gen. Simon Cameron, when that
unrivalled politician was a leader of the Democratic party in
Pennsylvania. At the date of his death he was the nominee of his party
for the important State office of Canal Commissioner, and would have
been elected, had not death interposed and called him from the active
duties of this life to the realities of another. William Hopkins,
another old commissioner of the road, was nominated to the vacancy thus
made, and elected by a large majority. The death of William Searight
occurred at his home, near Searights, on August 12, 1852. He was a man
of generous impulses and charitable disposition, ever ready to lend his
counsel, his sympathies and his purse, to ameliorate the sufferings of
his fellow men. Although death plucked him from the very threshold of
earthly honors, it caused him no regret. His work was well done, and he
was ready to go. The kingdom he was about to enter presented higher
honors and purer enjoyments. In looking forward and upward he saw--

[Illustration: Wm Searight]

     "No midnight shade, no clouded sun,
     But sacred, high, eternal noon."

A more emphatic eulogy than pen could write, or tongue express, was
furnished by the immense concourse that attended his funeral. The
patriarchs and the youth of the country came to testify their
appreciation of his worth. A few days after his death, a large meeting
of citizens, irrespective of party, convened in the court house at
Uniontown, to give expression to their sorrow for his death. Hon.
Nathaniel Ewing presided. Hon. Daniel Sturgeon, then a United States
Senator, and Zalmon Ludington, esq., were the vice presidents, and Hon.
R. P. Flenniken and John B. Krepps, esq., secretaries. On motion of Hon.
James Veech, a committee was appointed to formulate the feeling of the
meeting, which reported through its distinguished chairman (Mr. Veech)
the following preamble and resolutions, which were unanimously adopted:

     "When a valuable citizen dies, it is meet that the community of
     which he was a member, mourn his loss. A public expression of their
     sorrow at such an event, is due as some solace to the grief of the
     bereaved family and friends, and as an incentive to others to earn
     for their death the same distinction. In the death of William
     Searight, this community has lost such a citizen. Such an event has
     called this public meeting, into which enter no schemes of
     political promotion, no partisan purposes of empty eulogy. Against
     all this, death has shut the door. While yet the tear hangs on the
     cheek of his stricken family, and the tidings of death are unread
     by many of his friends, we, his fellow citizens, neighbors,
     friends, of all parties, have assembled to speak to those who knew
     and loved him best, and to those who knew him not, the words of
     sorrow and truth, in sincerity and soberness. Therefore, as the
     sense of this meeting:

     _Resolved_, That in the death of William Searight, Fayette county
     and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania have lost one of their best
     and most useful citizens. The people at large may not realize their
     loss, but the community in which he lived, over whose comforts and
     interests were diffused the influence of his liberality and
     enterprise, feel it, while his friends of all classes, parties and
     professions, to whom he clung, and who clung to him, mourn it.

     _Resolved_, While we would withhold our steps from the sanctuary of
     domestic grief, we may be allowed to express to the afflicted widow
     and children of the deceased, our unfeigned sorrow and sympathy in
     their great bereavement, and to tender them our assurance that
     while to their hearts the memory of the husband and father will
     ever be cherished, in ours will be kept the liveliest recollections
     of his virtues as a citizen and a friend.

     _Resolved_, That among the elements that must enter into every
     truthful estimate of the character of William Searight, are a warm
     amenity of manner, combined with great dignity of deportment, which
     were not the less attractive by their plainness and lack of
     ostentation, elevated feelings more pure than passionless, high
     purposes with untiring energy in their accomplishment, an ennobling
     sense of honor and individual independence, which kept him always
     true to himself and to his engagements, unfaltering fidelity to his
     friends, a liberality which heeded no restraint, but means and
     merit; great promptness and fearlessness in the discharge of what
     he believed to be a duty, private or public, guided by a rigid
     integrity which stood all tests and scouted all temptations;
     honesty and truthfulness in word and deed, which no seductions
     could weaken, nor assaults overthrow, in all respects the architect
     of his own fortune and fame. These with the minor virtues in full
     proportion, are some of the outlines of character which stamped the
     man whose death we mourn, as one much above the ordinary level of
     his race.

     _Resolved_, That while we have here nothing to do or say as to the
     loss sustained by the political party to which he belonged, and
     whose candidate he was for an office of great honor and
     responsibility, we may be allowed to say that had he lived and been
     successful, with a heart so rigidly set as was his, with feelings
     so high and integrity so firm, and withal an amount of practical
     intelligence so ample as he possessed, his election could have been
     regretted by no citizen who knew him and who placed the public
     interests beyond selfish ends and party success. As a politician we
     knew him to hold to his principles and party predilections with a
     tenacious grasp, yet he was ever courteous and liberal in his
     intercourse with political opponents.

     _Resolved_, That in the life and character of William Searight we
     see a most instructive and encouraging example. Starting the
     struggle of life with an humble business, poor and unbefriended,
     with an honest aim and a true heart, with high purposes and
     unflagging industry, he gained friends and means, which never
     forsook him. He thus won for himself and family ample wealth and
     attained a position among his fellow men which those who have had
     the best advantages our country affords might well envy. That
     wealth and that position he used with a just liberality and
     influence for the benefit of all around and dependent upon him.
     Though dead he yet speaketh to every man in humble business: "Go
     thou and do likewise, and such shall be thy reward in life and in
     death."

[Illustration: COL. WILLIAM HOPKINS.]

WILLIAM HOPKINS was one of the best known of the old commissioners. He
was born in Washington county, Pennsylvania, September 17th, 1804. He
was of Scotch origin, on the paternal line, and his mother was a native
of Ireland, so that he was a genuine Scotch-Irishman. He figured
conspicuously in the public affairs of Pennsylvania, for many years. At
the age of twenty-three he was a justice of the peace, holding a
commission signed by Governor Shultze, one of the early German governors
of the State. In 1831 he was a county auditor. In 1834 he was elected to
the State Legislature, and re-elected four times, consecutively. He was
speaker of the House in 1838, 1839 and 1840. In 1842 he was secretary of
the land office of Pennsylvania. During his first term as speaker, the
public commotion occurred, known as the "Buckshot War." Troops
surrounded the State house, and a bloody collision seemed inevitable.
Speaker Hopkins, on this trying occasion, behaved with distinguished
wisdom and firmness, and he is credited with having averted the horrors
of civil war. In 1852 Colonel Hopkins, as he was invariably called, was
nominated and elected Canal Commissioner, as before stated. In this
important office he fully sustained his high reputation for honesty and
ability. In 1861 he was again elected to the State House of
Representatives, and re-elected in 1862. In 1863 he was elected a State
Senator. The experience of his previous legislative career gave him a
great advantage over others less favored in this regard, and he became,
by common consent, "the Nestor of the Senate." In 1872 he was elected a
member of the convention to revise the Constitution of the State. He was
chairman of the committee to devise and report amendments to the bill of
rights, and author of the preamble that reads thus: "We, the people of
the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, recognizing the sovereignty of God,
and humbly invoking His guidance in our future destiny, ordain and
establish this Constitution for its government." If there was nothing
else to his credit, this alone would immortalize him. While a member of
the Constitutional Convention, he made a visit to his home, and on the
cars contracted a cold which developed into pneumonia, and terminated
fatally, March 5th, 1873. His funeral was one of the largest and most
impressive ever witnessed in Washington.

Rev. Doctor Brownson, the distinguished Presbyterian minister of
Washington, grouped together the leading traits of Colonel Hopkins in
the following terms: "Such a man could not but be extensively known and
respected. In fact, his mental force, discriminating judgment, urbanity,
integrity and kindness, joined with his facility as a writer and
speaker, rising above the defects of early education, were a continual
pledge of public favor and success. He was very firm in adhering to his
own views, but considerate also of the feelings and opinions of others.
In co-operation or in opposition, he commanded respect. In private life,
also, it was impossible not to realize the power of his politeness, and
his delicate regard to the sensibilities of all about him. His fondness
for children seemed to increase with his years, showing itself both in a
desire for their enjoyment and their good. His fine business capacity
was often taxed for the benefit of others, especially widows and
orphans. In the hallowed circle of home, he was the central object of
uncommon reverence and affection, answering to his own peculiar love and
tenderness within his domestic relations. But, better than all, is the
witness he leaves behind him, in his confession and life as a disciple
of Christ, and in the repose of his heart upon the divine promise, when
called down into the valley and shadow of death."

The late Judge Black, one of the most eminent men of his day, spoke of
Colonel Hopkins as follows: "I do not underestimate the very high
qualities of my associates in this body (the Constitutional
Convention). I do not think, indeed, that any man here appreciates
their various abilities and virtues more than I do; but I devoutly
believe that there is no man in this Convention, that we could not have
spared better than him who has gone. I do not propose to give an
analysis of his character, and it is not necessary to repeat his
history. I may say, for I know it, that he was in all respects the best
balanced man that it was ever my good fortune to know. His moral and
personal courage were often tested; he was one of the most fearless men
that ever lived, yet all his measures were in favor of peace, and every
one who knew him testifies to the gentleness and kindness of his
manner."

Mr. Biddle, a Philadelphia member of the Convention, said: "I well
recollect being struck with the commanding figure and strongly marked
countenance, in the lineaments of which were unmistakably written
simplicity and directness of purpose, integrity and unswerving firmness.
He has rounded off a life of great moral beauty, of great usefulness, of
great dignity, by a fitting end, and he has fallen before decay had
begun to impair his faculties."

One who stood very close and was very much endeared to Col. Hopkins,
brings out his great character in form of metaphor, as follows: "There
was a remark in your paper which has given me a great deal of mental
exercise of a reminiscent character. The wheel of time turns only one
way. At the moment I read this, and in the multitude of times it has
since come into my head, my mind ran at once to a point in the
revolution of that wheel which you never could guess. That point is
marked with the year 1838. I had been turned up far enough out of the
darkness of the wheel pit to get a view of the top of the wheel, where
stood a group of men who have over since been 'the heroes I loved and
the chiefs I admired.' In the center of this group, and the most heroic
figure in it, stood WILLIAM HOPKINS. The various members of that group
have gone down beyond sight, as the wheel of time kept turning steadily,
but their virtues and their public services remain fresh in my memory.
They rendered Pennsylvania as great a service as Washington and his
compeers rendered the United Colonies."

Such a man was William Hopkins, once a commissioner of the National
Road, familiar with every mile along its line, and in daily touch with
its moving masses. The writer of these pages had the honor of knowing
Col. Hopkins personally and well, and can and does testify that no word
of eulogy herein quoted concerning him is in the least overwrought.

An act of the Pennsylvania Legislature, approved April 4, 1831, named
William F. Coplan and David Downer of Fayette county, Stephen Hill and
Benjamin Anderson of Washington county, and Thomas Endsley of Somerset
county, to be Commissioners of the Cumberland Road for the term of three
years from the passage of the said act, after which time the right to
appoint said Commissioners shall vest in the Governor of the
Commonwealth. In 1834 the Governor appointed these same gentlemen
Commissioners for another term of three years. In 1835 an act was passed
reducing the number of Commissioners to two, and under this act Stephen
Hill of Washington, and Hugh Keys of Fayette county, were appointed on
May 7th, 1835, until their appointments were suspended or annulled. On
the 9th of January, 1836, the Governor appointed George Craft of Fayette
county, and Benjamin Leonard of Washington county, to act in conjunction
with the other Commissioners appointed in pursuance of an act approved
April 1, 1835. Thompson McKean of Fayette county, and Robert Quail of
Washington county, were appointed Commissioners by the Governor on the
29th day of January, 1839, until appointments were suspended or
annulled. Robert Quail's appointment was suspended by an act of 1840. An
act was approved March 28th, 1840, reducing the number of Commissioners
to one, and William Hopkins was appointed for a term of three years, but
served less than two years, and resigned, to take the position of
secretary of the land office. William Searight was appointed by the
Governor on May 3, 1842, for a term of three years, and on April 19th,
1845, William Hopkins was again appointed. On the 8th of April, 1848, an
act was approved authorizing the courts of Somerset, Fayette and
Washington counties to appoint trustees for the road, with power to
appoint Commissioners. Under this act William Searight was again
appointed, with jurisdiction limited to the line through the counties of
Fayette and Somerset, and served until 1851, when David Hartzell of
Somerset county was appointed. William Roddy of the same county
succeeded Hartzell in 1852. James Marlow succeeded Roddy and died in
commission. Robert McDowell was appointed in 1856. Under the act of
1848, above quoted, Joseph Lawson was appointed for Washington county,
and was succeeded in 1852 by Mark Mitchell, in 1856 by Alexander
Frasher, and in 1858 by John Long. In 1861 the act of 1848 was repealed
in so far as it related to the appointment of Commissioners in Fayette
and Somerset counties, but continued in force as to Washington county,
stripped of the intervention of trustees. In 1862 John Long was
appointed Commissioner for Washington county by the court. In 1864 G. W.
Botkins was appointed; in 1866 John Long was restored, and continued
until 1871, when T. W. Beatty was appointed. In 1872 Joseph Doak was
appointed, and was succeeded in 1876 by George W. Smith. In 1877 the
appointing power, as to Washington county, was restored to the Governor,
and Samuel Kelley was appointed. In 1881 Peter Hickman was appointed, in
1887 James W. Hendrix, in 1890 Marshall Cox, in 1891 John McDowell,
present incumbent. In 1862 the Governor of the State appointed Redding
Bunting Commissioner for the counties of Fayette and Somerset. Bunting
was the famous old stage driver and stage agent, mentioned in previous
chapters. He served as Commissioner until 1864, when the Governor
appointed Sebastian Rush, the old tavern keeper before referred to. Rush
served until 1870, when Solomon Crumrine was appointed, and served
until 1872, when Rush was restored. In 1875 Charles H. Rush, a son of
Sebastian, was appointed, and served until 1881, when William Endsley
was appointed. In 1883 George W. Daniels was appointed. In 1887 David
Johnson was appointed, and in 1891 Ewing Searight was appointed.

As before stated the road east of Cumberland was owned by associations
or companies. Allen Darsie was one of the leading stockholders and
general superintendent as early as 1835. He lived at Poplar Springs,
twenty-six miles west of Baltimore, was the proprietor of a large and
fertile tract of land, and a slave owner. Allen Darsie, jr., succeeded
his father in the superintendency of the road, and remained in charge
down to the date of the civil war. Thomas Bevins of Hancock succeeded
the younger Darsie, and Denton Oliver succeeded Bevins. West of
Cumberland, in the State of Maryland, the superintendents were: Thomas
Thistle, the old tavern keeper near Grantsville; Jonathan Huddleson,
another old tavern keeper, Nathan Dudley, John Swan, Benjamin B.
Edwards, George Cady, Henry Atkinson, Robert Welsh, Edward Doneho and
William Hall. William Otterson was an old Commissioner in charge of the
road through Virginia, and among his successors appear the familiar
names of Moses Thornburg, Lewis Lunsford and Abram Bedillion.

In the year 1888 the court of quarter sessions of Somerset county,
Pennsylvania, condemned that portion of the road lying within the
borders of said county, decreed it exempt from tolls, confiscated all
its belongings, and turned it over to the tender care of the township
supervisors, under authority supposed to be conferred by an act of
assembly, approved June 2d, 1887.




CHAPTER XLIII.

  _Old Contractors--Cost of the Road--Contractors for Repairs--Stone
     Breakers--An Old Stone Breaker Convicted of Murder--The Measuring
     Ring--The Napping Hammer--An Old Stone Breaking Machine--A Second
     Table Showing Heights of Mountains and Hills._


The first contracts in sections for the first ten miles of the road west
of Cumberland were signed April 16th and May 8th, 1811, and were
finished in the fall of 1812. The next letting was in August, 1812, of
eleven miles, extending west as far as Tomlinson's, and these contracts
were completed early in 1815. The work was let from Tomlinson's to
Smithfield, eighteen miles, in August, 1813, and completed in 1817. The
delay was caused by the scarcity of laborers during the war, war prices,
and apprehension of failure of some of the contractors. The next letting
was in September, 1815, embracing the work six miles and a half westward
from Smithfield. This was awarded in sections to John Hagen, Doherty,
McLaughlin and Bradley, and Charles McKinney. In May, 1817, the work was
let to Uniontown, the successful bidders being Hagan and McCann,
Mordecai and James Cochran, Thompson McKean, and Thomas and Matthew
Blakely. From Uniontown to Brownsville, portions were let in September,
1815, to Kinkead, Beck & Evans, who soon thereafter undertook the
residue to Brubaker's. This firm sub-let many sections of the work. Bond
and Gormley had the contract from Brubaker's to Brownsville, and their
work was completed in 1818. George Dawson had the contract for the heavy
stone walls in Brownsville. John Miller and John Kennedy, of Uniontown,
took contracts in the mountains. Miller was a son-in-law of Jacob
Beeson, one of the founders of Uniontown. Mr. Kennedy was the
grandfather of Hon. John K. Ewing, of Uniontown, and after his
experience as a contractor, one of the justices of the Supreme Court of
Pennsylvania. The whole line of the road, for purposes of construction,
was laid off in two divisions, called Eastern and Western. David Shriver
was superintendent of the eastern, and Josias Thompson of the western
division. The dividing line between the two divisions was Brubaker's,
near, and east of, Brownsville. Mr. Shriver lived in Cumberland, and was
the father-in-law of Hon. Andrew Stewart. Mr. Thompson was a Virginian.

In March, 1817, the greater part of the work, from a point two miles
east of Washington to the Virginia line, was let to Thomas McGiffin,
Thomas H. Baird and Parker Campbell, the latter one of the foremost
lawyers of his time. In 1819 the same gentlemen contracted to do the
work, from the point first above named, to a point two miles west of
Brownsville. The work east of Hillsboro was turned over by the
contractors above named, to William and John H. Ewing, who were returned
to the authorities at Washington City as original contractors, and they
finished the work for $6,000 per mile. The remainder of the work west of
Hillsboro was sub-let by McGiffin, Baird and Campbell, to a number of
small contractors.

The road was completed from Cumberland to Uniontown at a cost, including
all expenses of survey and location, salaries, bridges, and some
repairs, of $9,745 per mile. The average cost of the entire road to
Wheeling was nearly $13,000 per mile, showing the Eastern division much
less costly than the Western. This was charged to some prodigality of
work and too liberal contracts, for which Superintendent Thompson was
"investigated" and superseded.

Daniel Steenrod, the old tavern keeper, and Col. Moses Shepherd, were
extensive contractors for construction on the Virginia line of the road.
Colonel Shepherd built Feay's bridge, near Wheeling, one of the best on
the road, and also the bridge over Wheeling creek, near Mrs. Gooding's
old tavern. Capt. Valentine Giesey, a veteran of Brownsville, who is
well remembered by the old citizens of that place, was a large
contractor on the work of taking up the original road bed.

The foregoing were all contractors for work on the original construction
of the road. Among the contractors for repairs, after the road was
completed, and during its prosperous era, the following familiar names
are recalled: Abram Beagle, James McIntyre, William Hastings, John
Whitmire, James Dennison, Henry Masterson, Hiram Freeman, Thomas Egan,
John Robinson, William Paull, Charles Stillwagon, Jacob Stillwagon,
Jacob Dougherty, Anthony Rentz, Henry Murray, James Thompson, Thomas D.
Miller, Daniel Canon, Hugh Graham, Morris Whalen, Perry White, Anthony
Yarnell, John Whollery, Thomas McKean, John Risler, Isaac Nixon, Robert
Brown, Thomas McGrath, Matthew McNeil, Edward Kerven, John Bennington,
William H. Graham, Henry Showalter, John Dickey, John McDonough, Morris
Purcell, Daniel Ward, Daniel Valentine, Jacob Probasco, John Bradfield,
William Reynolds, Thomas Brownfield, Peter Lenhart, James Marlow, John
W. McCollough, Nicholas McCartney, John W. McDowell, Robert McDowell,
James Snyder, Lewis M. Snyder, Samuel Shipley, Elias Gilmore, Samuel
Rush, German D. Hair, Jackson Brown, William C. Stevens, John Gadd,
Robert S. Henderson, Joseph Lawson, Michael Thomas, Charles Rush,
Nicholas Bradley, John Bradley, Daniel Bradley, Henry Show, William
Griffin, Robert McDowell, esq., Adam Speers, James Speers, William
Hatfield, Thomas Brown, Thomas Moxley, Hiram Miller, Matthias Fry, John
Wallace, John Hardin, William Hardin, John G. Burnworth, Henry Sampey,
Henry Clay Rush, Alex. McDowell, Benjamin Miller, Jefferson Miller,
John Worthington, E. W. Clement, John Snider, Hiram Mitchell, John
Mitchell, William Endsley, Daniel Augustine, John M. Oliver, and many
others, some of whose names appear in the accounts of the old
Commissioners in the Appendix to this volume.

[Illustration: DANIEL STEENROD.]

The average result of a stone breaker in a single day was eight perches,
and the price paid was twelve and a half cents per perch. Tradition has
it that Robert S. McDowell, still living in Dunbar, Fayette county,
Pennsylvania, was the speediest stone breaker on the road. He is the
eldest son of "Gate Bob," elsewhere mentioned. In the year 1848, when
Colonel Hopkins was commissioner, Robert S. McDowell broke in one day
sixteen perches and two feet. This was done on a bet, and in a contest
with Capt. Elias Gilmore. A string of stones one rod in length made two
perches, under the gauge in use, and McDowell's string measured eight
rods and two feet. Captain Gilmore, who was one of the most vigorous men
on the road, gave up the contest about the middle of the afternoon, and
yielded the palm to McDowell. Peter Kelley, who lived at Searights, was
one of the best and speediest stone breakers on the road. His
occupation, for many years, was breaking stone on the pike, and near the
close of his life he became an actor in a tragedy, which lost him his
liberty, as well as his former good name. He was not a vicious man, but
on occasions would indulge in immoderate drinking. On one of these
occasions he killed William Thornton, father of the Hon. J. Russell
Thornton, member of the Legislature of Pennsylvania for the county of
Fayette. Kelley and Thornton were returning from Brownsville after
nightfall, and quarrelled. When near the old Brubaker tavern, Thornton
was struck by Kelley, and killed. Kelley was tried, convicted and sent
to the penitentiary for a long term, and never thereafter returned to
the familiar scenes of the old pike. Alexander Campbell, of Somerfield,
was one of the fastest stone breakers on the road, and Robert Hogsett,
the well known millionaire of Fayette county, Pennsylvania, broke stones
on the road when a boy.

In the early work on the road, there was a requirement that stone for
the lower stratum or bed should be broken so that the pieces would pass
through a seven-inch ring, and for the upper stratum, which was six
inches in thickness, would pass through a three-inch ring. Old
contractors provided rings of these dimensions, respectively, and
enforced a strict compliance with the regulation mentioned. Subsequently
the rings fell into disuse, and were ultimately abandoned, but the
stones spread over the surface of the road were always broken to small
pieces. The hammer of the stone breaker was a very simple contrivance.
It was of iron, round as an apple, weighing probably one pound, with a
hole through the center for the insertion of a handle. The handle was of
hickory wood, slender in the middle, with a thick end for the grasp of
the hand. There was also a larger hammer, with a longer and stouter
handle, used for breaking stones thrown into holes. In using this hammer
the breaker stood on his feet, and in using the smaller one, sat on the
stone pile, moving his position as his work advanced. In hot weather
the stone breaker, in many instances, used a ready-made, movable bower,
to ward off the scorching rays of the sun. About the year 1848, some
person whose name is forgotten, supposing himself endowed with inventive
genius, constructed a machine for breaking stones. It was operated by
horse power, proved a failure, and was laid aside to rot on the summit
of Laurel Hill.

The following table showing the heights of mountains and hills on the
road is copied from the sketch by Mr. Veech, accompanying the map of
Fayette county, Pennsylvania, before mentioned. It will be seen that it
differs somewhat from the measurement of the Commissioners who ran the
original lines of the road, but it will be remembered that their
measurement was from a point in the Potomac, near Cumberland, whereas
the table below gives heights above the Atlantic and above Cumberland.
This table also gives heights of hills, west of Uniontown, and the
heights furnished by the old Commissioners, are of mountains and hills
between Cumberland and Uniontown. As to the accuracy of, and authority
for, this table, the author of this volume is not informed, but it seems
to have been sanctioned and adopted by Mr. Veech, whose reputation as a
local historian is unimpeachable.


                                THE TABLE.

                           Above the Atlantic.         Above Cumberland.

     Cumberland                   537 feet
     Wills Mountain              1003  "                      466
     Frostburg                   1792  "                     1255
     Big Savage Mountain         2580  "                     2043
     Little Savage Mountain      2480  "                     1943
     Red Hill                    2437  "                     1900
     Meadow Mountain             2550  "                     2013
     Little Crossings            2000  "                     1463
     Negro Mountain              2825  "                     2288
     Keyser's Ridge              2843  "                     2306
     Winding Ridge               2534  "                     1997
     Smithfield                  1405  "                      868
     Barren Hill                 2450  "                     1813
     Woodcock Hill               2500  "                     1963
     Laurel Hill                 2412  "                     1875
     Monroe                      1065  "                      528
     Uniontown Court House        952  "                      415
     Colley's Hill               1274  "                      737
     Brownsville                  833  "                      296
     Krepps' Knob                1040  "                      503
     Beallsville                 1010  "                      473
     Hillsboro                   1770  "                     1233
     Egg Nog Hill                1532  "                      995
     Washington                  1406  "                      869
     West Alexander              1792  "                     1255
     Wheeling Hill                850  "                      313
     Wheeling City                748  "                      211




CHAPTER XLIV.

  _Two Noted Old Tavern Keepers--Thomas Endsley and William Sheets--The
     Latter the Driver of the First Mail Coach Out from Cumberland--A
     Wedding Party Surprised, and a Marriage Prevented--William M. F.
     Magraw, a well known Man of the Road._


A prominent and widely known man of the road was Thomas Endsley. He was
born near Richmond, Virginia, in 1787. He was the only child of parents
who came from Switzerland and settled in Virginia at an early day. His
mother was of an old family of Gilberts, who were Quakers, well known
and much respected in their day and generation. His wife was Mary
McCloy, to whom he was wedded in the year 1805. The offspring of his
marriage consisted of eight children, five sons and three daughters. The
sons were John, Thomas, James, William and Andrew Jackson. The three
last named are still living, James and William in Somerfield, and Andrew
Jackson in Somerset. The daughters were Mary Ann, who became the wife of
Redding Bunting, the noted old pike boy heretofore mentioned; Nancy, who
was the wife of J. Squire Hagan, another old pike boy; and Julia, who in
1842, married P. R. Sides, and is now living with a son in New Mexico.
Her husband died in Missouri in 1877, or thereabout. Mrs. Hagan died in
Uniontown in 1849, and Mrs. Bunting died in the same place about five
years ago. Nancy Endsley and Squire Hagan were married in 1834. Mrs.
Endsley, wife of Thomas, the subject of this sketch, died in the stone
tavern at Somerfield in 1832, and her husband died in the same house in
1852.

Thomas Endsley was an old wagoner before the Cumberland Road was
constructed. In the years 1812, 1813, 1814, 1815, 1816, 1817 and 1818,
he hauled goods and merchandise from Baltimore to Nashville, Tennesse,
to points in Ohio and to Brownsville, Pennsylvania. He owned two
six-horse teams, one of which he drove himself, and placed the other in
charge of a hired driver. In spring and fall he was frequently compelled
to remain with his teams at the old Smith tavern, near the present town
of Somerfield, for several days awaiting the subsidence of freshets in
the Youghiogheny river, so that he could ford that stream, there being
no other means of crossing at that time. The road was frequently in such
condition by reason of mud, deep cuts, and other obstacles, that a whole
day's progress did not cover a greater distance than three or four
miles. To pass through Jockey Hollow it was often found necessary to
attach twelve horses to one wagon.

In the year 1819 Thomas Endsley moved from Virginia to Frostburg,
Maryland, and at that place commenced a career of tavern keeping, which
terminated only with his death. He leased the old Frost House in
Frostburg, and conducted it for three years. In 1822 he went to the
Tomlinson House, a prominent old landmark twenty-one miles west of
Cumberland. He occupied the Tomlinson House for two years, and while
there enjoyed the patronage of one of the stage lines. In December,
1823, he bought the old Smith farm at Somerfield, lying on both sides of
the road. On this farm was erected the large stone tavern house, at the
eastern end of the big stone bridge which spans the Youghiogheny river.
For this property he paid $8,000 cash down, which shows the enhanced
value of the property at that day by reason of contiguity with the
National Road. He took possession of this property on the first day of
April, 1824. The land was poor, the fences were dilapidated, and the
general outlook unpromising. But Mr. Endsley was a man of great energy
and good judgment, and going to work with determination, soon changed
the aspect of things, and had flowers blooming and grass and grain
growing, where before the eye had rested on nothing but briars, weeds
and rocks, with here and there a scant appearance of sickly oats and
buckwheat. It is said that he was the first man who ever attempted to
raise corn and wheat in the neighborhood of Somerfield, and old settlers
jeered him for trying it. It was not long under his judicious management
until his farm yielded thirty-five and forty bushels of wheat to the
acre, and crops of corn equal to the best of the adjoining county of
Fayette. This farm continues in the possession of the descendants of
Thomas Endsley. The northern portion of it is owned and occupied by the
heirs of Thomas Endsley, jr., deceased, except the stone tavern, which
with the southern portion of the farm, is owned and occupied by William
Endsley.

While assiduous in bringing up his farm, Thomas Endsley was by no means
neglectful of his tavern. He was always attentive and courteous to
guests. His table was spread with well cooked victuals, and his rooms
were clean and neat, so that altogether his house was one of the most
inviting on the whole line of the road. The Stockton line of coaches
stopped at the Endsley House during its entire career on the road, with
the exception of a short time, when it was withdrawn by reason of a
temporary estrangement between Mr. Stockton and Mr. Endsley. Stockton
was of a fiery temper, while Mr. Endsley was not slack in resenting a
supposed wrong, and at one time in going over their accounts they
disagreed, and each gave utterance to expressions not taught in the
Sunday schools. As a result, Mr. Stockton removed his stock from
Endsley's tavern and passed and repassed the house thereafter for awhile
without casting a glance of recognition toward it. It was not long,
however, until Mr. Endsley was surprised to see Mr. Stockton enter his
house, extend his hand, and hear him say: "This foolishness has lasted
long enough; my coaches must stop at this house." "When?" calmly
queried Mr. Endsley. "To-morrow," said Mr. Stockton, and the old terms
of friendship between them were restored, and continued as long as Mr.
Stockton lived. As stated in another chapter Mr. Endsley was a slave
owner, and frequently aided in the capture and return of fugitives. Two
of his slaves, Peter and Phebe Butler, after acquiring their freedom,
settled in Brownsville, and died there. They were well known by the old
people of Brownsville, and held in high esteem. Thomas Endsley, in
1834-'35, in connection with James Black, of Somerfield, had contracts
for taking up the original road bed on Winding Ridge and Negro Mountain,
and proved himself as efficient in this line as in every other line of
business he engaged in. He was imposing in personal appearance, well up
to six feet in height, and weighed about two hundred pounds. He was an
habitual reader, and a subscriber for the _Cumberland Civilian_ and the
_National Intelligencer_, from the time he lived in Frostburg to the
date of his death. He carefully and studiously read the long and prosy
editorials of the _Intelligencer_, as well as the speeches it published
of Henry Clay, Daniel Webster, John C. Calhoun, Thomas H. Benton, and
other noted statesmen of that era.

In 1828 a military company called "The Addison Blues," was organized,
drawing its members from Somerfield, Petersburg and the surrounding
neighborhood, of which Thomas Endsley was elected captain, and ever
thereafter known and hailed as Captain Endsley. At all the old battalion
parades in Somerset, Bedford and Uniontown the "Addison Blues" bore off
the palm for soldierly bearing, and especially for the stalwart size of
its rank and file, all of whom were hardy mountaineers, and known and
honored as "frosty sons of thunder."

WILLIAM SHEETS was a prominent character of the road, more widely known
as a tavern keeper, than in any other relation. He was a remarkable man
in many respects, and in none more than relates to his extreme
longevity. He was born February 2d, 1798, near Martinsburg, Berkeley
county, Virginia, and died May 4th, 1892, in Jefferson county, Iowa. He
was a wagoner before the Cumberland Road was made, and hauled goods from
Baltimore to points west, over the old Braddock road. He also had some
experience as a stage driver. His first venture as a tavern keeper was
at or near the Little Crossings, where he remained but a short time, and
did not do a paying business. Leaving the Little Crossings, he went to
Negro Mountain and took a house there. His first experience at Negro
Mountain was attended by only limited success, and he abandoned tavern
keeping and moved to a small house on Jennings' run, about two miles
west of Uniontown, and near the old Moxley tavern, then kept by William
Cox. In that vicinity he engaged in various pursuits, mostly of a
precarious nature, with a downward tendency, accelerated by too much
indulgence in drinking. This was between the years 1835 and 1840, and
probably a little earlier. He seemed to realize that his fortune was on
the wane, and resolved to retrieve himself. He accordingly, by some
means not ascertainable, secured a new lease on the Negro Mountain house
which he had left, and returned to it. Beginning life anew, as it were,
he quit drinking and devoted himself energetically to business. It was
not long until he established a good reputation and did a large and
profitable business. His house was a favorite stopping place for hog
drovers, and in the latter part of his career on Negro Mountain, the
number of barrels of corn he bought and sold would count up to hundreds
of thousands. The weary and hungry hog drover (pig pelter the pike boys
termed him), as he trudged along the road in snow and slush, urging
forward the lagging, grunting porkers, apparently reluctant to move on
to the sure slaughter awaiting them, would cry out at intervals, and in
despairing tones: "Suboy, suboy, forty cents a day and no dinner; how
far is it to Sheets'?" For many years William Sheets fed the hungry
hogs, and their no less hungry owners and drivers, and while his profits
were small, his business was so large that his accumulations in a few
years aggregated a sum which made him a comfortable fortune. William G.
Beck, the old stage driver living in Fairfield, Iowa, before referred
to, avers that William Sheets drove the first mail coach out from
Cumberland that ever passed over the National Road west of that place.
This was in the year 1818, and on Kinkead's line of coaches. Kinkead was
an uncle of William G. Beck, and a member of the old bridge building
firm of Kinkead, Beck & Evans, and an owner of the first stage line on
the road, as before stated. The wife of William Sheets was Sarah
Wiggins, a sister of Isaac Wiggins, late of South Union township,
Fayette county, Pennsylvania, deceased, and an aunt of James H. Wiggins,
a prosperous and well known farmer of that township. She was an
attractive girl, and had many suitors. One of her lovers was a man by
the name of Bradley, an employe of Kinkead, before mentioned. She gave
her hand to Bradley, and consented to become his wife, and went so far
as to appear upon the floor with Bradley to have the knot tied by the
Rev. William Brownfield. The relatives and friends of Miss Sarah were
stoutly opposed to her alliance with Bradley, and a moment before the
old and renowned Baptist parson began the ceremony of marriage, Col.
Cuthbert Wiggins, an uncle of the would-be-bride, and father of Harrison
Wiggins, the old fox hunter of the mountains, appeared on the scene and
carried Miss Sarah from the floor, thus abruptly terminating the pending
nuptials, to the great astonishment of those in attendance, and causing
much comment and town gossip. This unusual incident happened in a house
on Morgantown street, in Uniontown, about the year 1821. No subsequent
effort was made by the parties most interested, to consummate the
forbidden marriage, and the fair Sarah, in a short time thereafter,
forgetting her affection for Bradley, became the wife of William Sheets.
The after career of Bradley is unknown. He seems to have passed from the
memory of men without making a sign. In the year 1855 William Sheets
took final leave of Negro Mountain and the scenes of the National Road,
and moved to Jefferson county, Iowa, where he made his last
settlement, and died at the date above given. At his death he was the
possessor of a large estate, chiefly in lands, which descends to his two
surviving sons, Isaac and Joseph, and to the heirs of deceased sons and
a deceased daughter. He had six sons and one daughter. Bazil Sheets, one
of his sons, was an old wagoner, well remembered by the old citizens
along the line of the road.

[Illustration: W. M. F. MAGRAW]

One of the smartest, best known and most picturesque men of the road
forty years ago was WILLIAM M. F. MAGRAW. He was probably little known
west of Brownsville, as his business was for the most part on the line
east of that point. He was a native of Maryland, and belonged to an old
and influential family of that State. His brother, Harry, practiced law
for several years in Pittsburg, and served a term as State Treasurer of
Pennsylvania from 1856 to 1859. The Magraws were intimate friends of
James Buchanan, and Harry was a leader in the movements that led up to
the nomination and election of that old time statesman to the
Presidency. W. M. F. Magraw became identified with the National Road as
many others did, through a matrimonial alliance. His wife was a daughter
of Jacob Sides, who owned the Tomlinson tavern. His first business
engagement in the vicinity of Uniontown was with F. H. Oliphant, the old
iron master of Fairchance. Soon after engaging with Mr. Oliphant that
gentleman put on a line of teams and wagons hereinbefore mentioned, to
haul freights between Brownsville and Cumberland, and Magraw was placed
in charge of the line as its general road agent. This put him in
communication with the people along the road, and established him in the
ranks of the pike boys. He was a large, fine looking man, always well
dressed, attracting attention wherever he appeared, and making friends
by reason of his agreeable manners. He was not fleshy, but broad
shouldered, tall and erect, of ruddy complexion, light hair, and
habitually wore gold rimmed spectacles on account of some defect of
vision. He was generous almost to a fault, and lavish in his personal
expenditures. He spent much of his time in Uniontown, making his
headquarters with his friend Joshua Marsh, of the National House. His
habits of living were different from the majority of the old pike boys,
especially in the matter of eating, and he enjoyed a good supper at
midnight, better than any other hour. He brought in game of all kinds
from the mountain and had it served in savory style at the National
House. He kept a carriage, and often had it ordered out as early as
three and four o'clock in the afternoon, to go to the mountain, but
lingered about the town, chatting with friends, until nightfall. He
seemed to delight in driving over the mountain in the night. Leaving
Uniontown about the dusk of the evening, he would reach the Tomlinson
tavern about daybreak the next morning. He called up the old tavern
keepers along the road, all of whom knew him, chatted a while with them,
took a mint julip, or something stiffer, and pushed on, and this was his
habit as long as he remained on the road. He was a southern sympathizer
during the war, and participated as a Confederate partisan, in some of
the irregular skirmishes in Missouri, in the incipient stages of the
long struggle. Notwithstanding his southern sentiments, he was well
liked by his northern acquaintances, and had many warm friends among
them. There was no bitterness in his heart. He was clever and courteous
to all. He had no stauncher friend than Redding Bunting, the good old
stage driver, who was a pronounced Union man. Sometime near the close of
the war, Magraw appeared in Harrisburg. Upon being questioned as to the
object of his mission, he said he had come to see the Governor on behalf
of the appointment of his old friend, Red Bunting, to the office of
Commissioner of the Cumberland Road. He knew the Governor (Curtin)
personally. In fact, he knew nearly all the public men of his time. He
called on the Governor, and was cordially received. "What brought you
here," queried the Governor. "I came," said Magraw, "to solicit the
appointment of Redding Butting as Commissioner of the Cumberland Road."
"How does it come," further queried the Governor, "that all you
copperheads are for Bunting?" "Oh!" said Magraw, "Bunting is a good man,
the right man for the place, and a good Republican." "Well," said the
Governor, "I guess I'll appoint him," and he did. Mr. Bunting was not
aware that Magraw intended to go to Harrisburg in his behalf, which
shows the disposition of the man. During the administration of President
Pierce, Magraw had a contract for carrying the mails from the Missouri
boundary to western points beyond the plains. He suffered much loss by
reason of Indian invasions, and preferred a claim to Congress for a
large sum of money to reimburse him. While his bill was undergoing
consideration by the committee, he appeared before it and emptied upon
the floor a number of bags of mules ears, as evidence of his losses. His
bill was passed. Magraw died suddenly, in Baltimore, a number of years
ago, much lamented. His wife is also dead. He had a daughter, Miss
Sallie, well remembered by the older citizens of Uniontown, who is
living in Kansas City, a widow, in affluent circumstances.




CHAPTER XLV.

  _Dumb Ike--Reminiscences of Uniontown--Isaac Johnson--Squire Hagan--A
     Musician Astride of a Hog--Anecdote of Judges Black and
     Williams--Morgan Miller, an Old Tavern Keeper--Philip Krishbaum, an
     Old Stone Cutter--Crazy Billy--Highway Robbery--Slaves Struggling
     for Liberty--William Willey, an old Friend of the
     Slaves--Unsuccessful Attempts at Suicide by an old Postmaster and
     an old Drover--Tom Marshall, of Kentucky, appears on the Road and
     amuses the boys._


The National Road had its variety, as all the ways of life have, and
this variety added spice to it, and gave it much if not all of its
flavor. There were high types, and low types, and queer types of life on
the road. Every section of the road had its noted character. There was
Marion Smith (Logan), who made his headquarters, for the most part, at
Searights, but a familiar figure all along the line between Uniontown
and Brownsville. He stood ever ready to fetch the gear pole and insert
it between the spokes of the hind wheels of the big wagon, the moment it
was driven upon the yard at the old tavern in the evening, to rest for
the night. He was likewise prompt in carrying the hay and grain to feed
the big six horses that stood with their heads to the long, strong
trough supported by the wagon tongue, and when this little job was done,
his compensation was replete, and his topmost ambition realized in the
big drink he took with the driver at the bar. And Logan was further
noted as an imitator of the rooster, and gave many a long, loud crow
over Democratic victories in the olden time. Bill Hickman will be
readily recalled by the reader who is familiar with the history and
traditions of the road, as an eccentric character. He gravitated between
Chalk Hill and Jockey Hollow, and Billy Brubaker afforded amusement for
the men of the road near Brownsville. It would scarcely be doing justice
to the nomenclature of the old road, without writing this name
"Bluebaker." There were many others of this class, but time and space
will not permit a reference to them, and besides, this sketch is devoted
especially to "Dumb Ike." His name was Isaac Griffin, or Toner, and he
belonged to the queer type in the above enumeration. He was not in fact
dumb, but everybody called him "Dumb Ike." He was opaque and bright by
turns. Dr. Hugh Campbell once asked him why they called him dumb, and he
said "he didn't know, unless because they were dumb themselves."

Isaac was born and reared in Springhill township, Fayette county,
Pennsylvania. The sound of the glories of the old pike reached his ears
at his rural home, and he resolved to cast his lot upon it. It was
previous to the year 1840 that he made his appearance in Uniontown, and
for the first time beheld the National Road. When he shook the dust of
Springhill from his feet, it was with a high resolve to never engage in
hard labor, a resolution he never thereafter broke. His ambition was to
become a stage driver and it was irrepressible. He reached his goal. He
obtained employment as a driver on one of the stage lines and approved
himself a good one. Not given to absolute steadiness of habit, his
employment was not continuous, but he was held in reserve, as it were,
to take the place of regular drivers in cases of accident or emergency.
He could handle the reins and crack the whip equal to the best of
drivers, and took good care of his team. He not only drove stage but was
a driver on the express line, and perched on the high front seat of an
express wagon, drawing the reins over four stout horses, was the
personification of a proud and happy man. A little incident in the old
National House on Morgantown street, when that popular old hostelry was
kept by the kind-hearted and gentle Joshua Marsh, goes to illustrate the
eccentric ways of Isaac. It was in the bar room. Samuel McDonald, a
prominent citizen of the town, had occasion to call there, and among
those in the room at the time was "Dumb Ike," with whom McDonald was
well acquainted, as was every other citizen. McDonald invited Isaac to
take a drink, a proposition quite agreeable to him, and which he
promptly accepted. Standing at the bar with glass in hand, well filled,
Isaac felt it a duty to compliment his entertainer, and said: "McDonald,
I respect you," and hesitating, continued, "and probably I am the only
man in town that does." Isaac intended to be complimentary, and McDonald
knowing this, joined in the loud laughter of the bystanders over Isaac's
bull.

During the prevalence of Asiatic cholera in Uniontown in 1850, some one
was speaking to Isaac in reference to the fatality of the epidemic, and
was much astounded to hear Isaac say it was not cholera. "What then is
it?" queried the other party. "It is death," retorted Isaac. When Isaac
wished to express indignation against a person he thought was putting on
airs, he called him "The Great Nates," and of conceited persons he said
they were "great in their own _estimashing_." The writer has in his
possession a boot jack made and given to him by "Dumb Ike" in 1852. It
is a clumsy specimen of mechanism, but prized on account of the maker
and donor. Isaac's patriotism was accelerated by a drink, and often
under its influence he exclaimed with emphasis of voice and violent
gesticulation of his right arm, "I am going to the District of Columbia
to see the Goddess of Liberty." When the war against the South assumed
the shape of open and active hostilities, "Dumb Ike" volunteered as a
soldier, and proudly marched to the front under the flag of the stars
and stripes. He was assigned to duty in the transportation service, for
which his experience eminently fitted him, and he died in the faithful
discharge of duty, and was buried where he died, near the capitol of
the Republic beneath the shadow of the Goddess of Liberty, at whose
shrine he was a devoted worshipper. At his death a small sum of money
was on deposit to his credit in the old bank of Fayette county, which
was absorbed by claims for nursing and other services in his last
illness. He left neither widow or heirs to survive him. His
administrator was Nathaniel Brownfield, his old friend of the Swan
tavern in Uniontown, where he made his headquarters for many years, and
where he was living when he enlisted as a soldier. There were worse men
and better men than "Dumb Ike," but no one who knew him will begrudge a
good, kind word for his memory.

Isaac Johnson, a former well known and respected citizen, who died at
his residence near Uniontown a number of years since, had occasion to
visit the East in the year 1833, and on his return home walked the
entire distance from Baltimore over the National Road. His mission
carried him as far east as New Castle, Delaware, and from that point to
Frenchtown he rode on the first passenger cars propelled by steam in the
United States. He was a native of Greene county, Pennsylvania, and the
father of David D. Johnson, of Fayette Springs, who was Commissioner of
the road during the administration of Governor Beaver.

Squire Hagan, who died in Uniontown a few years ago, much lamented,
father of Miss Maggie, the popular clerk in the Uniontown postoffice,
was a "Green Mountain Boy," born in Vermont, near Montpelier, the
capital of that State. The fame of the old National Road was carried on
the wings of the wind to the snow-capped hills of his native land, and
he yearned for a share of its glories. His first appearance on the road
was at Somerfield, where, in the year 1834, he owned and conducted a
general store. The leading trait in the character of Squire Hagan was
amiability, and the trend of his mind was toward philosophy. He was
widely known along the line of the road, and highly respected.

William Hunsucker was a hog drover from Greene county, Pennsylvania, and
the boys called him "Suboy Bill." Upon being asked who owned the hogs he
was driving, and where they came from, he replied in words that jingled
thus:

     "Mr. Lindsey is the owner,
       They call me Suboy Bill,
     The hogs came out from Greene county,
       Near the village of Blacksville."

It is said that Joe Williams, a wit, musician, comedian, lawyer, and in
his riper years Chief Justice of the Territorial Court of Iowa, once
straddled a big black hog in a drove, and rode it through the main
street of Uniontown, playing a clarionet. Judge Williams was born in
Somerset county, Pennsylvania, and was a brother of Mrs. William Murphy,
who lives near Uniontown. Hon. Jeremiah S. Black, of national fame, and
Joe Williams were cronies in their boyhood days. Williams visited New
York after he became Chief Justice, and it happened that Judge Black
was in that city at the same time. A morning paper stated that Judge
Black was a guest at the Astor House, and this falling under the eye of
Williams, he proceeded hastily to the hotel to see his old friend. He
walked into his room, to discover that he was out, and seeing writing
material on the table, indited the following lines, which he left in the
room for Judge Black's perusal, on his return:

     "The salutations of the Chief Justice of Iowa, to the Chief Justice
     of Pennsylvania:

          "Oh, Jerry, dear Jerry, I have found you at last!
            How memory, burdened with scenes of the past,
          Restores me to Somerset's mountains of snow,
            When you were but Jerry, and I was but Joe."

Morgan Miller kept a tavern on Morgantown street, Uniontown, as early as
1830, and probably before that time. His house was a dingy frame
structure, painted red, which time and storm made a dead red. The
location was on the hill near the old Baptist church, in that day called
"Prospect Hill." At this old tavern many persons of the neighborhood
were accustomed to spend their evenings in drinking and gossipping.
Among its patrons were Philip Krishbaum, a stone cutter, and Abram
Brown, a farmer. Krishbaum had some aptitude in making rhymes, a talent
he found useful in his business of chiseling tomb-stones. After spending
an hour or two, one evening, in alternate drinking and gossipping with
his friend Brown, he rose from his chair and remarked that he must take
a drink and go, as he had to finish some lettering on a tomb-stone.
"Stay awhile," said Brown, "and write an epitaph for my tomb-stone, and
I will treat." "Agreed," said Krishbaum, who, taking up a pen, wrote
this:

     "Here lies the body of Abram Brown,
     Who lived three miles from Uniontown.
     The more he got, the more he craved,
     Great God! can such a soul be saved!"

Brown paid for the drinks. Seeing that Krishbaum had made a success of
the Brown epitaph, Miller, the landlord, requested him to write one for
his tomb-stone, which he did, as follows:

     "Here lies the body of Morgan Miller,
     Who has drunk the whisky of many a 'stiller.
     He once lived up on Prospect Hill,
     And sold his whisky by the gill."

[Illustration: CRAZY BILLY.]

The well known character brought to mind by the name of "Crazy Billy,"
was at no time in his strange life engaged in any pursuit connected with
the National Road, but his long stay at Uniontown, covering a period of
fifty years and more, entitles him to a place in this history. He was
well known to many of the stage drivers, wagoners and tavern keepers of
the road, and to every man, woman and child in Uniontown. His name
was William Stanford, and he was horn in England. It was evident that he
had been well bred, and had received some education. He was often heard
quoting from the liturgy of the Church of England. He was brought to
Uniontown about the year 1829, and closely confined in the county jail.
His first appearance in Fayette county was in Springhill township,
whither he wandered without any apparent object, and no one knew whence
he came. On a certain day of the year above mentioned, he was discovered
alone in the house of one Crow, in the said township of Springhill. The
Crow family had all been absent during the day, and upon their return in
the evening were surprised to find an occupant within, and the doors and
windows securely fastened. After reconnoitering the premises the family
discovered that it was the manifest intention of the strange intruder to
"hold the fort." In this state of the case Mr. Crow proceeded to a
neighboring justice of the peace, made complaint, and obtained a
warrant, which was placed in the hands of the township constable, who
with the aid of the local _posse comitatus_ hastily summoned, entered
the beleagured dwelling, arrested the intruder, took him to Uniontown,
and lodged him in the county jail, in and around which he remained from
that time until the date of his death, which occurred on the 26th day of
January, 1883. Soon after his incarceration one John Updergraff was
committed to the jail for disorderly conduct on the streets, and after
the keys had been turned, "Billy" fell upon the new prisoner, and killed
him outright. He was indicted and tried for murder, but acquitted on the
plea of insanity, and remanded to jail. Henceforth, and to the time
hereafter mentioned, he was heavily ironed and chained fast to the jail
floor. William Snyder was elected sheriff in 1847, and a few months
after his induction to the office, his wife, who was a good and
discerning woman, observed some redeeming qualities in the nature of the
chained lunatic, and concluded that it would be wise and safe, as well
as humane, to remove his fetters. Accordingly with the aid of her son
James, who was a sort of general deputy about the jail and office, she
released "Billy" from the chains which had so long bound and chafed him,
and permitted him to walk about his dingy cell, untramelled. Gradually
he gained the confidence of the sheriff's family and after a season was
permitted to enter the official mansion, and move about at pleasure. He
showed an inclination to care for the sheriff's horses, and was
permitted to feed and clean them, exhibiting much skill in this line.
About this time, James Snyder having occasion to visit Monroe, told
"Billy" that he might go with him if he chose. Pleased with the
opportunity, "Billy" placed saddles and bridles on two horses, mounted
one himself, and Snyder the other, and off they sped to Monroe. It was
an agreeable trip to "Billy"; the first time in many years, that he had
enjoyed the privilege of seeing the country and snuffing the pure air of
liberty. After this, he rode out frequently with the deputy to various
parts of the county; but his mind was never fully restored. He was
incoherent, and given to unintelligible mutterings. As time wore on, the
people of the town became familiar with "Crazy Billy," and as before
stated everybody knew him. He carried letters, and performed errands for
the county officers, for many years, and up to the date of his last
illness, and his fidelity was proverbial. Nothing could divert him from
the faithful execution of any little mission he undertook. In addition
to his constant mutterings before alluded to, he was a habitual
scribbler. He entered any of the offices in the court house at pleasure,
and invariably sat down and began to scribble. He wrote a fairly good
hand, but there was no intelligence in his writing, or rather no
connected thought. One of his favorite lines was this: "I am a bold boy
in his prime." He would write this as often as a dozen times a day.
Another of his favorite screeds was this:

     "He drew his sword and pistol,
     And made them for to rattle,
     And the lady held the horse,
     While the soldier fought the battle."

The garb in which "Billy" from day to day appeared, was of the shabby
order, and he paid little heed as a rule to personal cleanliness. His
ablutions were periodical, but when he did indulge in them, they were
thorough. He had a habit of rubbing his head with both hands, and would
sit engaged in this exercise as long as an hour at a time, with great
energy. He never would submit to an interview. He talked much, but
always on the run. If approached by anyone with a purpose of conversing
with him, he invariably walked off muttering in loud tones as he moved
away. He wore a full beard, which in his latter years was quite gray. He
had a small foot and hand, and many marks of intellectuality. After his
death his body lay in state in the court house at Uniontown, and was
viewed by thousands. He was buried in Oak Grove Cemetery, near
Uniontown, with the rites of the Episcopal Church, under direction of
the late lamented Rev. R. S. Smith. A section of one of the stone
columns of the old Uniontown court house is made to serve as a monument
over his grave. Maj. Jesse B. Gardner of Uniontown, who attended "Billy"
in his last illness, gives the following pathetic narration of his
closing hours. Until the last ebb, he continued to utter the sonorous
and unintelligible mutterings so familiar to those who knew him, but in
the final throe, he turned his eyes upon his attendant and exclaimed:
"Oh, Gardner, if I could only see my mother!" This was not a lucid
interval, in the ordinary meaning of that phrase, but an expiring
thought, a final flash of affection, a wonderful testimonial to the
sweetest of all names, and a most forcible and striking illustration of
the ineffaceable impression made by a mother's care and love, and all
the more, since at no time before, during his long sojourn at Uniontown,
was he ever known to have mentioned his mother, or his father. A poor,
unfortunate lunatic, separated for more than a half century from the
parental roof, a stranger in a strange land, tossed by the billows of a
hard fate, and lying down to die, light flashes upon his long
distempered mind, and his last and only thought is "MOTHER."

The year 1823 developed one of the most extraordinary examples of grand
larceny that ever occurred on the road, and excited the people all along
the line from Baltimore to the farthest point west. During the early
spring of the year mentioned a merchant whose name was Abraham Boring,
doing business in an Ohio town, took passage in a coach of one of the
regular stage lines for Baltimore to purchase a stock of fresh goods. At
Tomlinson's tavern, west of Cumberland, John Keagy and David Crider,
merchants, of Salisbury, Somerset county, Pennsylvania, took seats in
the same coach that was conveying Boring, destined also for Baltimore,
on a like mission. It required considerable time to reach Baltimore, and
passengers in a stage coach became acquainted, one with another. The
three merchants not only became personally acquainted with each other,
during their long stage ride, but formed strong friendly relations.
Reaching Baltimore they stopped together at the same hotel and talked
over their business, the quality and quantity of goods required by each,
forming the leading topic of their conversation. They went out among the
wholesale stores of the city and bought the goods they desired, the
stock purchased by Mr. Boring being much larger, finer and more varied
than the stock bought by the Somerset county merchants. Upon completing
his purchases, Mr. Boring's first thought was to have his goods safely
shipped upon the best terms obtainable. Messrs. Keagy and Crider kindly
tendered their services to aid him in engaging a trusty wagoner to haul
his goods to Ohio, and introduced one Edward Tissue as the right man for
that purpose. Tissue was engaged, but one wagon bed would not hold all
the goods, and Tissue brought in and introduced another wagoner by the
name of Edward Mitchell, who was engaged to haul the remnant that could
not be handled by Tissue. Mr. Boring having arranged for the
transportation of his goods, said good-bye to his friends Keagy and
Crider, and left for his home in Ohio. His goods, not arriving when due,
he supposed some accident had caused a delay, and that they would be
forthcoming as soon as practicable. But days and weeks passed and Mr.
Boring began to feel uneasy about the long delay, and wrote the
consignors in Baltimore for an explanation. They replied that the goods
had been carefully loaded in the wagons of Tissue and Mitchell,
according to the agreement, and they knew nothing of their destiny
beyond that. Boring then took to the road to find his goods. He went
first to Baltimore and learned that Tissue and Mitchell had left the
city with the goods in their wagons, and proceeded westward. He traced
them as far as Hagerstown, and at that point lost his clue. He proceeded
to Cumberland without tidings of his lost goods. From Cumberland he went
on, making inquiry at every tavern and toll gate, until he reached
Somerfield, but heard nothing of Tissue or his companion, Mitchell. He
put up for the night at a tavern in Somerfield, and while at supper
discovered an important clue. The waiting maid at the table wore a
tortoise shell comb, resembling very much those in a package he had
bought in Baltimore. In polite and delicate terms he inquired of the
girl where she obtained so handsome a comb. She replied, "In a store at
Salisbury." In an instant Mr. Boring recalled his fellow merchants and
recent fellow travelers, Messrs. Keagy and Crider, of Salisbury, but
concluding that they had purchased the same quality of combs in
Baltimore, went to bed, with a purpose of continuing his researches
along the National Road. During the night he changed his purpose, and in
the morning returned to Tomlinson's tavern, and thence directly to
Salisbury. Reaching Salisbury he entered a store, and to his amazement
saw upon the counters and shelves various articles, which he recognized
as belonging to his stock. Investigation disclosed a remarkable example
of criminal conduct. Keagy, Crider, Tissue and Mitchell entered into a
conspiracy to steal Boring's goods. The acquaintance formed in the stage
coach constituted the initial point of the scheme, and Keagy and Crider
found ready confederates in Tissue and Mitchell. There was of course to
be a division of the spoils, but in what proportion never was made
public. The wagoners to avoid identification changed the color of their
wagon beds, and upon reaching Hagerstown diverged from the National Road
and took the country by-ways. The goods were placed at first in a large
barn in the vicinity of Salisbury, and thence carried in small lots to
the store of Keagy & Co. A portion of the goods consisting of fine china
ware, thought to be too expensive for the Salisbury trade, was broken up
and buried under ground. There was a third owner of the Salisbury store
by the name of Markley, who did not accompany his partners on their tour
to raise stock. Boring, after thoroughly satisfying himself that he had
found his goods, proceeded to Somerset and swore out a warrant against
the parties accused. The warrant was placed for execution in the hands
of ---- Philson, the sheriff of Somerset county. Keagy was first
arrested and promptly gave bail for trial, but goaded by the weight of
his offense, soon thereafter committed suicide. Tissue fled the
jurisdiction and was never apprehended. Crider also fled and located in
some of the wilds of that early day in the State of Ohio, where he
married and raised a family, and, it is said, has living descendants to
this day. Markley essayed to flee, but made a failure of it. Giving out
the impression that he had followed in the wake of Tissue and Crider, he
concealed himself in the woods not far from Salisbury, and was supplied
with food by a devoted wife. One Sloan, however, happened to fall upon
his hiding place and he was arrested. Markley owed Sloan a sum of money
and proposed to settle if Sloan would release him from custody. To this
Sloan assented. Markley had no ready money, but owned property and
proffered his note, which Sloan agreed to accept. But no means were at
hand to prepare a note. After canvassing the situation for a while a pen
was made from a stick of wood, ink obtained from stump water, and Sloan
producing a scrap of paper, a note was prepared and duly signed by
Markley for the sum he owed Sloan, and the money subsequently paid by
Markley's wife. Sloan promised Markley that he would not make known his
hiding place, but it leaked out and he was arrested by the sheriff. He
requested permission of the sheriff to go to his house to change his
clothes, which was granted him, and taking advantage of the sheriff's
indulgence, fled to parts unknown. His wife rejoined him in after years
at some point in the West.

Mention was hereinbefore made of the tragical death of Atwell Holland,
killed by a fugitive slave on the 4th of July, 1845, at an old tavern in
the mountain. In this connection it is proper to state, that fugitive
slaves were frequently captured on the National Road, and returned to
their masters. Capt. Thomas Endsley, an old tavern keeper, mentioned
elsewhere, once had a terrible conflict with three powerful fugitive
slaves, at his barn near Somerfield. Without assistance and against most
determined resistance, he succeeded in capturing two of them and
returning them to their owner or master. The third escaped and became a
free man. Capt. Endsley was himself a slave owner as before stated. He
owned and used slaves when he lived at Frostburg, and also during his
incumbency as landlord at the old Tomlinson tavern, and brought eight
with him when he located at Somerfield in 1824. Like all other old slave
owners, he thought there was no wrong in owning slaves and considered it
a conscientious duty to aid in capturing and returning fugitives. His
sons, however, probably from witnessing the struggles of the slaves to
gain their freedom against the efforts of their father, all grew up to
be abolitionists, and abide in the anti-slavery faith to this day.

One of the most untiring and devoted friends of escaping slaves, was
William Willey of Somerfield. He was a shoemaker without means, yet it
is said that he secreted, fed and otherwise aided more fugitive slaves
than any other man on the National Road. He is known to have harbored as
many as eight and ten in a single night, in his lowly tenement. He was a
native of Baltimore, and reared a Democrat. Those of his friends who
survive him regard him as a philanthropist, worthy of a granite
monument. The wife of William E. Beall, the well known manager of the
Uniontown steel mill, a most excellent lady, is a daughter of William
Willey, the old friend of the escaping slaves.

In the year 1829 the postoffice at Somerfield was in the brick house, on
the south side of the street, known as the Irvin house. John Blocher was
postmaster. The old line of coaches, carrying the mail, stopped at the
Endsley House. It was customary for the driver after reaching the tavern
to carry the way mail pouch on his shoulders to the postoffice. One
evening Charley Kemp drove the mail coach in from the west, and upon
going to the office with the mail, found the door locked, and was
unable, after repeated efforts, to gain admittance. Going around to a
window, he looked through the glass into the office, and was horrified
by seeing Blocher, the postmaster, lying on the floor, weltering in
blood, and forcing his way into the room discovered that his throat was
cut. Dr. Frey was summoned, and applied agencies first to arrest the
flow of blood, and then sewed up the gash, and to the surprise of all,
the man recovered and lived for many years thereafter.

In 1834 John Waters, a cattle drover of Ohio, fell sick at Frazer's
tavern, in Somerfield, and languished for many weeks. His mind becoming
affected by reason of his severe bodily suffering, he rose from his bed
one evening when alone, opened his pocketbook and tore into small
fragments a number of good bank notes of the aggregate value of $800. He
then deliberately cut his throat. When discovered he was lying on his
back on the floor, and small pieces of bank notes were seen floating in
blood all around his body. Dr. Frey was summoned on this occasion also,
and under his treatment the much dejected old drover was restored, and
afterward took many droves of cattle over the road to Baltimore. The
fragments of notes were gathered up, carefully cleaned, dried and fitted
together with mucilage, so that the loss of money was inconsiderable.

Some time during the year 1840 or '41 a rather tall and cadaverous
looking individual, presenting the appearance of a man on a protracted
spree, was observed coming down the hill into Somerfield from the east,
walking and leading a beautiful bay horse, equipped with a handsome
saddle and bridle. The quaint looking and quaint moving stranger halted
to converse with a cluster of boys, who were sitting on the pavement in
front of Endsley's tavern, near the stone bridge at the Big Crossings.
He told the boys so many amusing stories, that they reckoned him to be
the clown of a coming circus. That man was Tom Marshall, one of the
brightest of Kentucky's many bright sons, a brilliant lawyer, orator and
statesman, who carried off the palm in every intellectual combat he ever
engaged in save one, and that was when he locked horns with Henry Clay.
The horse led by Marshall was a favorite animal which he kept and used
in Washington, while attending the sittings of Congress. He frequently
passed over the road in the manner described, and often tarried several
days and nights in Uniontown. Many of the surviving pike boys remember
Marshall with distinctness.




CHAPTER XLVI.

  _The Arrest, Trial, Conviction and Sentence of Dr. John F. Braddee,
     the Notorious Mail Robber--George Plitt makes the Information--Bill
     Corman turns on his Chief--Braddee gives Bail--His
     Bondsmen--Strayer and Purnell--The Witnesses--The Indictment--The
     Jury--The Verdict--The Defendant Dies in the Penitentiary._


There is no doubt that Dr. John F. Braddee was the most notorious
individual that ever lived in Uniontown. The exact date of his advent to
that place seems to be unascertainable, but it was more than fifty years
ago. The culmination of his remarkable career occurred in 1841. Of his
early life but little is accurately known. It is certain that he came to
Uniontown from Virginia. Tradition has it that he was born in Kentucky.
The story goes that when quite a youth he engaged himself as a stable
boy, in the service of a gentleman who dealt in horses in the town of
Paris, State of Kentucky. His employer was accustomed to drive horses to
the eastern market for sale, and on one of these occasions young Braddee
was taken along as an assistant. The horses were driven over what was
called the "North Western Pike of Virginia." At some point on this old
road Braddee fell sick and was left behind. Alter his recovery he made
his way to Uniontown, stopping for a while in, or about Morgantown.
Notwithstanding his robust appearance, which will be remembered by his
old acquaintances, it is said that when a boy he was delicate and
inclined to consumption. This is the story, whether true or not is
immaterial in view of his subsequent history. When he reached Uniontown,
he was not known to be the owner of a single dollar, that he might call
his own. Without education or professional training, he announced
himself a physician, and commenced the practice of medicine. His success
was remarkable. He had a commanding personal appearance, a good address,
and by these means alone impressed himself upon the confidence of the
common mind. He gathered around himself a large circle of friends and
admirers, some of doubtful, but not a few of unquestioned reputation.
His fame as a doctor extended far and wide, patients flocked to consult
him from all points. Many came hundreds of miles. Fifty horses have been
seen hitched around his office at one time.

He possessed and cultivated a fondness for fast horses, probably the
result of his early education in the stable at Paris, Kentucky. He
always kept a number of race horses in training for the turf, and often
matched them against others on the race course. In this line his success
was varying, sometimes he won and as often lost, but losses did not
diminish his love for the race course. The accumulations received from
his large practice of medicine, and his winnings on the race course did
not satisfy his greed for gain, and he conceived and carried into
execution an extraordinary scheme for increasing his gains. It was
nothing less than a carefully organized plan to rob the United States
mail. His success as a physician had enabled him to acquire property,
and he had not been living in Uniontown long until he possessed himself
of one of the most handsome and valuable properties in the place, viz:
the property known as the "Old National House," on Morgantown street. He
bought this property from Hon. Thomas Irwin, who afterwards sat as one
of his Judges in the famous trial to be hereafter mentioned. When
Braddee bought this property, it contained only a single building, the
three story brick on the southern side of the lot. He added the wing to
the north, and here he established his headquarters, carrying on his
business, professional and unprofessional, with a high hand. His office
was convenient, in fact immediately adjoining Stockton's stage yard and
coach factory. Into this stage yard, coaches were driven every day.
Stockton had the contract for carrying the mails. The old pike was in
full blast then, and as many as thirty coaches were driven along it both
ways every day. Among the coaches carrying the great and lesser mails,
one William Corman was a driver, and Braddee cultivated his acquaintance
and secured his confidence. He assured him that money could be made
easily by rifling the mail bags, and promised Corman that if he would
hand him the bags, he would "go through them" and divide profits with
him. Corman consented. It was of course soon discovered that the mails
were tampered with, and United States detectives were set upon the
tracks of the offenders. They were not long in ascertaining the guilty
parties. Corman was arrested and told the whole story. Braddee had other
accomplices, viz: P. Mills Strayer, and Dr. Wm. Purnell. Strayer was a
saddler, who carried on a shop in Uniontown, and died only a few years
ago. Purnell was a sort of body servant of Braddee, and for many years
after Braddee's death peddled Braddee's medicine through Fayette and
adjoining counties. Braddee was arrested on information made by Wm.
Corman, and his arrest caused more excitement than any event that ever
transpired in Uniontown.


                         THE INFORMATION.

_Pennsylvania, Fayette County, ss_:

George Plitt, agent of the P. O. Department, being duly sworn, says that
the United States mail from Wheeling, Virginia, to New York, traveling
on the National Road, has been stolen, to-wit: The mails made up at
Wheeling on the 13th, 19th, 23d and 29th of November, 1840, and on the
5th, 12th and 18th of December, 1840, and that he has reason to suspect
and does suspect and believe that Wm. Corman, who on those days drove
the mail stage containing said mail from Washington to Uniontown,
Pennsylvania, is guilty, with others of stealing said mails.

                                        GEO. PLITT, _Agt. P.O. Dept._

Sworn and subscribed this 6th day of January, A. D. 1841, before me.

                                                    N. EWING,
                    _Prest. Judge 14th Judicial District, Pennsylvania_.

Same day warrant issued, directed to the Sheriff of Washington county,
and to all other Sheriffs and Constables within the Fourteenth Judicial
District.

       *       *       *       *       *

George Plitt, agent of the P. O. Department, being duly sworn, says that
the United States Mails from Wheeling, Virginia, to New York, traveling
on the National Road, has been stolen, to-wit: The mails made up at
Wheeling on the 13th, 19th, 23d and 29th of November, 1840, and on the
5th, 12th, and 18th of December, 1840, and that he has reason to
suspect, and does suspect and believe that John F. Braddee, William
Purnell, and Peter Mills Strayer, with others, are guilty of stealing
the mails.

                                        GEO. PLITT, _Agt. P.O. Dept._

Sworn and subscribed this 7th day of January, A. D. 1841, before

                                     N. EWING,
     _Prest. Judge 14th Judicial District, Pennsylvania_.

Same day warrant issued to George Meason, Esq., Sheriff of Fayette
county, and to all constables.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The United States of America vs. John F. Braddee, William Purnell, et
al._

William Corman, being duly sworn, says that more than one year ago John
F. Braddee repeatedly urged him to let him, the said Braddee, have some
of the mail bags from the mail coach, and that he would divide the money
taken from them with said Corman. Said Braddee said he had frequently
known such things done, and that lots of money had thus been made, and
it had never been detected. While said Corman was driving the mail coach
between Smithfield and Uniontown last winter, the said Braddee sent
Peter Mills Strayer frequently in a sleigh after him to get a mail bag
containing a mail--that at length he, said Strayer, took one from the
coach, which was then on runners, while he, the said Corman, was
watering at Snyder's, east of the Laurel Hill. That Braddee afterwards
told him that there was nothing in it.

That he knows of no other mail being taken until within about two months
past, when he, the said Corman, was driving between Uniontown and
Washington, and when at the instance and after repeated and urgent
requests of said Braddee he commenced leaving a mail pouch or bag in the
stage coach, when the coaches were changed at Uniontown, and continued
to do so at intervals of (say) a week, ten days or two weeks, until
within a week or ten days before Christmas. That the said mail bags were
taken from the coach by said Braddee or some one under his direction.
That Braddee after the taking of said mails would sometimes say there
was nothing in them, and again that others had but little money in them.
One he said had but fifteen dollars. The last but one gotten, as before
stated, he said had a large amount of money in it, but he was going to
keep it secretly--bury it until the fuss was over. That said Braddee
said he had a secret place out of doors where he could hide the mail
bags so that they could not be found. That said Braddee from time to
time gave him three dollars or five dollars as he asked for it, and once
ten dollars; and loaned him forty dollars when his (Corman's) wife was
going away. That William Purnell several times after a mail bag had been
taken, would take him, said Corman, aside and whisper to him that the
bag had nothing in it. That on the day before yesterday he was several
times at said Braddee's house and Braddee wished him to leave a mail bag
in the coach for him when he, said Corman, should return from Washington
last night. That said Braddee very often wished him to leave a mail bag
when he did not. That he, Braddee, requested him to leave the large mail
bag in the coach for him, but he never did do it.

                                                  WILLIAM CORMAN.

Sworn and subscribed this 8th day of January, A. D. 1841, before me

                                                    N. EWING,
                    _Pres. Judge of the 14th Jud. Dist., Pa._


Dr. Howard Kennedy also made a preliminary affidavit, which is given in
a previous chapter.

                            WARRANT OF ARREST.

  _The United States of America to George Meason, Esq., High Sheriff of
     Fayette County, Pa., and to all Constables of said County_:

WHEREAS, John F. Braddee, William Purnell and Peter Mills Strayer have
been charged before me, the President Judge of the Fourteenth Judicial
District in the said State, on the oath of George Plitt, an agent of the
Post Office Department, with stealing the United States mails from
Wheeling to New York, these are therefore to command you, and each of
you, to take the said John F. Braddee, William Purnell and Peter Mills
Strayer, and bring them before me, or some other Magistrate having
jurisdiction, to be dealt with according to law.

Witness the hand and seal of the said N. Ewing, President Judge as
aforesaid, at Uniontown, the 7th day of January, A. D. 1841.

                                                    N. EWING, [SEAL.]
                    _Pres. Judge of the 14th Jud. Dist., Pa._

       *       *       *       *       *

_Pennsylvania, Fayette County, ss_:

The examination of Dr. John F. Braddee, of the borough of Uniontown,
Fayette county, Pa., taken before me, N. Ewing, President Judge of the
Fourteenth Judicial District of Pennsylvania, the 8th day of January, A.
D. 1841.

The said John F. Braddee being brought before me by virtue of a warrant
issued by me, on suspicion of stealing the United States Mails from
Wheeling, Va., to New York, made up at Wheeling on the 13th, 19th, 23d
and 29th days of November, 1840; and on the 5th, 12th and 18th days of
December, 1840, says: I know nothing about the alleged stealing of the
mails.

                                               his
                                        JOHN F. x BRADDEE,
                                              mark.

  Taken and subscribed before me,
                                                    N. EWING,
                    January 8, 1841.  _Pres. Judge 14th Jud. Dist. of Pa._

       *       *       *       *       *

_Pennsylvania, Fayette County, ss_:

The examination of Peter Mills Strayer, of the borough of Uniontown,
Fayette county. Pa., taken before me, N. Ewing, President Judge of the
Fourteenth Judicial District of Pennsylvania, on the 8th day of January,
A. D. 1841.

The said Peter Mills Strayer being brought before me by virtue of a
warrant issued by me, on suspicion of stealing the United States Mails
from Wheeling, Va., to New York, made up at Wheeling on the 13th, 19th,
23d and 29th days of November, and on the 5th, 12th, and 18th days of
December, 1840, says: I know nothing about the mail bags or the stealing
of the mails.

                                                  P. M. STRAYER.

  Taken and subscribed before me,
                                                        N. EWING,
                                _Pres. Judge 14th Dist. of Pa._
  January 8, 1841.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The United Stales of America, Fayette County, Pennsylvania, ss_:

The United States of America vs. John F. Braddee. January 8, 1841,
ordered that John F. Braddee enter into security himself in fifty
thousand dollars, and two sufficient sureties in $25,000 each. Prisoner
remanded until Monday, the 11th instant, at 10 o'clock A. M., to afford
time to procure bail.

The same vs. Peter Mills Strayer, January 8th, 1841, ordered that Peter
Mills Strayer enter into security himself in $15,000, and two sufficient
sureties in $7,500 each. Prisoner remanded until Monday, the 11th
instant, at 10 o'clock, to afford time to procure bail.

The same vs. William Purnell. January 8th, 1841. Ordered that William
Purnell enter into security himself in $10,000, and two sufficient
sureties in $5,000 each. Prisoner remanded as above, etc.

January 11, 1841. Monday, 10 o'clock, A.M. Prisoners ordered before the
Judge. Prisoners say they are not provided with bail and ask further
time, until say three o'clock P.M. Three o'clock, P.M., no bail being
offered the defendants are committed to the custody of the Marshal of
the Western District of Pennsylvania.

                                                        N. EWING,
                                _Pres. Judge, 14th Jud. Dist., Pa_.


                                 MITTIMUS.

_The United States of America, Fayette County, Pennsylvania, ss_:

The United States of America to the Marshal of the Western District of
Pennsylvania, Greeting: WHEREAS, John F. Braddee, of the borough of
Uniontown, in the County aforesaid, hath been brought before the Hon.
Nathaniel Ewing, President Judge of the Fourteenth Judicial District of
Pennsylvania, by virtue of the warrant of the Hon. Nathaniel Ewing,
President Judge as aforesaid, charged upon the solemn oath of George
Plitt, agent of the General Post Office department, with stealing the
United States mails made up at Wheeling, Virginia, for New York, on the
13th, 19th, 23d and 29th days of November, 1840--and on the 5th, 12th
and 18th days of December, 1840.

These are therefore to command you the said Marshall to receive the said
John P. Braddee, and keep him in safe custody until he be delivered by
due course of law. Hereof fail not.

Witness the Hon. Nathaniel Ewing, President Judge as aforesaid, at
Uniontown, the eleventh day of January, Anno Domini 1841.

                                                    N. EWING,
                    _Pres. Judge of the 14th Jud. Dist., Pa_.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _The United States of America vs. John F. Braddee, William Purnell,
     Peter Mills Strayer and William Corman, charged on oath of several
     robberies of the U. S. Mail._


George Meason tent in $1,000; William Crawford tent in $1,000; William
Freeman tent in $1,000; James McCune tent in $1,000.

On this condition, that the said George Meason, William Crawford,
William Freeman and James McCune shall be and appear at the next Circuit
Court of the United States, to be held for the Western District of
Pennsylvania on the third Monday of May next, and give testimony in ----
of the said United States against the said John F. Braddee, William
Purnell, Peter Mills Strayer and William Corman, and not depart the
court without leave, otherwise the recognizance to be in full force and
virtue.

                                                  GEO. MEASON, [SEAL.]
                                                  WM. CRAWFORD, [SEAL.]
                                                  JAS. McCUNE, [SEAL.]
                                                  WM. FREEMAN. [SEAL.]

  Taken and acknowledged this 13th day of January, A. D. 1841. _Coram_,

                                                    T. IRWIN,
                    _Dist. Judge of the U. S., Western Dist. of Pa_.


                              U. S. COMMITMENT.

_United States of America, Western District of Pennsylvania, ss_:

The United States of America to the Marshal of the Western District of
Pennsylvania and his deputies, to any constable of the County of
Allegheny, and to the jailer of said County of Allegheny, Greeting:

WHEREAS, John F. Braddee, William Purnell and Peter Mills Strayer are
now brought before me, the Hon. Thomas Irwin, Esquire, Judge of the
District Court of the United States for the Western District of
Pennsylvania, charged on the oath of George Plitt, William Corman and
others, with stealing the United States mail made up at Wheeling on the
13th, 19th, 23d and 29th days of November, A.D. 1840, and on the 5th,
12th and 18th days of December, 1840. These are therefore to command
you, the said marshal, constable or jailer, or either of you, to convey
the said John F. Braddee, William Purnell and Peter Mills Strayer to the
said jailer of Allegheny county, and you, the said jailer, are hereby
commanded to receive and keep safely the said John F. Braddee, William
Purnell and Peter Mills Strayer in your jail until they thence be
discharged by due course of law. For so doing this shall be your
warrant.

In testimony whereof the said Hon. Thomas Irwin, Esq., has hereunto set
his hand and seal, this 13th day of January, A. D. 1841.

  (Signed)
                                                  TH. IRWIN, [SEAL.]
                                                  _District Judge, U. S._

       *       *       *       *       *

                              PITTSBURG, PENNA., 25th of Jan'y, 1841.

Howard Kennedy, special agent of the Post Office Department, in addition
to the testimony given by him before His Honor Judge Ewing, in the case
of the United States against Braddee, Purnell, Strayer and Corman,
relative to the probable loss of money, drafts, &c., in the stolen
mails, further deposes, that since that time he has received reports
from various persons and places in the West of letters mailed at dates
which would have by due course of mail been in the bags stolen,
containing bank notes, scrip, certificates, drafts and checks, amounting
to one hundred and two thousand dollars and upwards; that every mail
brings him additional reports of losses, and that he believes the
amounts reported will not constitute more than one-half of what has been
lost in the mails between the 16th of Nov., and the 18th of Dec., 1840,
on the route from Wheeling to New York.

                                                HOWARD KENNEDY,
                                        _Special Agent P. O. Dep't._

  Sworn and subscribed before me the 25th January, 1841.

                                                  T. IRWIN,
                                                      _District Judge_.


                        PETITIONS FOR HABEAS CORPUS.

  _To the Hon. Thomas Irwin, Judge of the United States Court of the
     Western District of Pennsylvania_:

The petition of William Purnell respectfully represents that your
petitioner is now confined in the jail of Allegheny county, in obedience
to a warrant of commitment, a true copy of which is prefixed to this
petition. Your petitioner humbly prays your Honor to award a _habeas
corpus_, that he may be bailed by sufficient sureties, according to the
first article and ninth section of the Constitution of the United
States, January 29, 1819.

                                                  WILLIAM PURNELL.


  _To the Hon. Thomas Irwin, Judge of the Court of the United States for
     the Western District of Pennsylvania_:

The petition of Doctor John F. Braddee respectfully represents that your
petitioner is now confined in the jail of Allegheny county, in obedience
to a warrant of commitment, a true copy of which is prefixed to this
petition.

Your petitioner humbly prays your Honor to award a _habeas corpus_, that
he may be bailed by sufficient sureties, according to the first article
and ninth section of the Constitution of the United States.

The United States _vs_. John F. Braddee.

                                                         his
                                                  JOHN F. x BRADDEE.
                                                        mark.

Petition for _habeas corpus_ granted, and issued January 28, 1841.

The same _vs._ Wm. Purnell, _alias_ William Purnell, January 29, 1841.

       *       *       *       *       *

_United States vs. Braddee._

Let a _habeas corpus_ issue in this case according to the prayer of the
petitioner, returnable forthwith.

                                            THOMAS IRWIN,
                                                    _District Judge_.

                                            E. J. ROBERTS, Esq., _Clerk_.
                                            January 26, 1841.

_United States vs. Purnell._

Let a _habeas corpus_ issue in this case according to the prayer of the
petitioner, returnable forthwith.

                                             THOMAS IRWIN,
                    _District Judge, Western District of Pennsylvania_.

  E. J. ROBERTS, ESQ., _Cl'k D. Court_.


                        THE WRIT AND JAILER'S RETURN.

_Western District of Pennsylvania, ss_:

The President of the United States to the Marshal of said District, and
the jailer of Allegheny county, greeting:

We command you the body of John F. Braddee in your custody, under safe
and secure conduct before the Hon. Thomas Irwin, Judge of our District
Court, at his chambers in the city of Pittsburgh, together with the day
and cause of his said caption and detention, forthwith then and there to
be subject to whatsoever our said Judge shall consider in that behalf,
and have you then there this writ.

Witness the Hon. Thomas Irwin, Judge of the United States for said
District, at Pittsburg, the twenty-eighth day of January, A. D. eighteen
hundred and forty-one.

                                                  E. J. ROBERTS, _Clerk_.

The body of the above named John F. Braddee I have brought before your
Honor, together with day and cause of his being detained, in obedience
to the writ.

So answers Jas. McCune, jailer of Allegheny county.

To the Hon. Thomas Irwin.


                              BOND AND BONDSMEN.

  _The U. S. vs. John F. Braddee, Application to be admitted to bail,
     Jan. 28, 1841._

The following named persons being sworn, depose, That they are worth
severally as follows: Hugh Graham, $20,000; Benjamin Brownfield,
$18,000; Isaac Hague, $5,000; Henry Smith, $5,000; R. Laughlin, $4,000;
Emanuel Brown, $3,500; B. Brown, $3,000; D. S. Diamond, $1,000; Thomas
Moxley, $2,000; Michael Franks, $2,000; Abraham White, $800; Jacob
Humbert, $200; Peter Humbert, $1,000; Andrew McClelland, $3,000.
_Coram_,

                                                  T. IRWIN.

These amounts were taken from the property lists in the Commissioners
Office of Fayette county, Pa. Abraham Brown, $3,400; Benjamin Brown,
$4,050; Emanuel Brown, $2,925; Benjamin Brownfield, $6,869; Michael
Franks, $1,400; Henry Smith, $2,272; Andrew McClelland, $1,170; Peter
Humbert, $1,200; Isaac Hague, $3,170; Isaac Brown, $3,552; *Hugh Graham,
$3,868; Samuel Hatfield, $4,500; Thomas Moxley, $2,000; *David Chipps,
$200. Names marked with a star, are already security for Hugh Keys,
Canal Commissioner, with Wm. Searight, for $50,000, and also on the bond
of Thompson McKean, late Road Commissioner, for a large amount.


          POINTS RAISED BEFORE THE COMMITTING MAGISTRATE:

Quere.--Can bail be given on any other species of property than real
estate?

Quere.--Are not these persons indemnified? If so, how? Would it be
policy to recognize them as witnesses on the part of the United States?

Quere.--The order is that two sureties in $25,000 each should be
furnished--will any other members be taken?

       *       *       *       *       *

_The United States vs. John F. Braddee._

In the Circuit and District Courts of the United States, for the Western
District of Pennsylvania, charged with the larceny of the U. S. mail or
mails and stealing therefrom. Hugh Graham, Benjamin Brownfield, Isaac
Hague, Henry Smith, Robert Laughlin, Emanuel Brown, Daniel Diamond,
Thomas Moxley, Michael Franks, Abraham White, Jacob Humbert, Peter
Humbert, Andrew McClelland, Lewis Williams, James McLean, David Chipps,
James Douglass, John Hague, Abraham Brown, Daniel Franks, John
McClelland and William Hague acknowledge themselves to be held and
firmly bound unto the United States in the sum of sixty thousand dollars
each, lawful money of the United States, to be levied of your goods and
chattels, lauds and tenements, upon condition that the said John F.
Braddee be and appear at a session of the Circuit Court of the United
States to be held at the city of Pittsburg the third Monday in May next,
to answer the said charges, and such other matters as shall then and
there be preferred against him, and that he shall not depart the court
without leave. Taken and acknowledged. _Coram_.

                                                  T. IRWIN,
                                                    _District Judge._
  January 28, 1841.


                              THE INDICTMENT.

In the Circuit Court of the United States of America, holden in and for
the Western District of Pennsylvania, at May sessions, in the year of
our Lord one thousand eight hundred and forty-one. Western District of
Pennsylvania, to-wit:

The grand inquest of the United States of America, inquiring for the
Western District of Pennsylvania, upon their oaths and affirmations
respectively do present and say: That John F. Braddee, late of said
Western District of Pennsylvania, a practitioner of medicine, did on the
twenty-fifth day of January, in the year eighteen hundred and forty, at
Uniontown, in the said Western District of Pennsylvania, procure,
advise and assist Peter Mills Strayer to steal, take and carry away the
mail of the United States of America, then in progress of transmission
from the postoffice in Washington City, in the District of Columbia, to
the postoffice at Wheeling, in the Western District of Virginia,
contrary to the form of the act of Congress of the United States, in
such case made and provided, and against the peace, government and
dignity of the United States.

                                                  C. DARRAGH,
             _U. S. Attorney for the Western District of Pennsylvania_.

True bill--JAMES RIDDLE, Foreman.

       *       *       *       *       *

May 24th, 1841.--The Grand Jury came into court and presented a bill of
indictment against Wm. Purnell for stealing a letter from the mail and
other offenses. Same day John F. Braddee by his bail, Hugh Graham, is
surrendered into Court and Hugh Graham discharged from his recognizance.
Same day, on the motion of Mr. Austin, and affidavit of John M. Austin,
filed, habeas corpus ad satisfaciendum, issued to the jailor and Sheriff
of Fayette county for the body of William Collins. United States vs.
John F. Braddee, No. 3 of May Term, 1841. Stealing from the United
States mails. And now, to-wit: May 25th, 1841, a jury being called came,
to-wit: George Fortune, William Plummer, Samuel Cooper, William Raymond,
Edward A. Reynolds, Arnold Eichbaum, James Stewart, John Clemens, Joseph
Alexander, Thomas F. Mitchell, Thomas S. Cunningham and Samuel A.
Roberts, twelve good and lawful men, duly sworn, summoned and balloted
for, and sworn and affirmed, do say on their oaths and affirmations that
the defendant is guilty on the first, second and fourth counts in the
indictment, and not guilty on the third count. Verdict given on the 4th
day of June, 1841. The jury was polled at the instance of defendant's
counsel.


                              EXCEPTIONS.

The Court referred to the trial of Robinson, which had taken place at
the present term, and in which some of the jurors now empanneled had
rendered a verdict of guilty. It was not pretended that this trial had
the remotest connection with the mail robbery at Uniontown, or that the
case of Robinson involved any principle of evidence, or consideration as
to the credibility of witnesses, analogous to the case under
consideration; yet the Court asked the jury to reflect how it would
look, out of doors, after the conviction of a poor friendless boy like
Robinson, to acquit such a prisoner as was then on trial; that it might
countenance the reproach which had been cast upon the law of permitting
big fish to escape while little ones were caught, and that the Court
would be deeply mortified at such an appearance. These remarks, which
could afford no possible grounds for salutary reflection, were
calculated to make the jury forget their oaths; to lead them away from
a conscientious and fearless examination of the testimony to
calculations upon the probable opinions of others, founded not upon oath
or upon a full hearing of the testimony. This, too, in a case where it
had been made to appear that the most infamous attempts were resorted to
for the purpose of inflaming the public mind by falsehoods through the
press. The jury to reflect that if they took a course unpopular at the
moment, the whole odium must rest upon them, and that their characters,
motives and conduct would be placed in striking contrast with the more
popular tone of the Court.

2. That the Court whilst forbearing altogether to notice, or noticing
very slightly, the considerations which took all weight from the
testimony of Corman and Strayer (witnesses for the prosecution), told
the jury it would be a farce to pay any attention to the testimony of
Collins and Owens, witnesses for the accused, although the latter stood
infinitely fairer before the jury, and had no such powerful inducements
as Corman and Strayer to give false testimony.

3. The offense, if any, established against the prisoner, was that of
taking the mail with the consent of the person having charge thereof.
Yet the Court declined to give the prisoner the benefit of this
discrimination.

4. The charge of the Court that the testimony of Turk, as to the
non-arrival of the mail at New York, derived from the register, was
sufficient, without the production of the register or any copy thereof,
or extract therefrom.

       *       *       *       *       *

United States _vs._ Braddee. Reasons in arrest of judgment.

1. The indictment did not pursue the language of the Act of Congress,
but mingles together words which in the act are intended to describe
different offences. The accused is consequently not apprised of the
clause under which he is indicted, and the especial character of the
offence which he must prepare himself to meet. These crimes being
statutory, must turn altogether on the language of the Act of Congress.
Suppose the same count had charged the accused with robbing, stealing
and taking?

The indictment does not allege that the mail stolen or taken contained
any valuable thing.

Overruled.


                              THE SENTENCE.

United States vs. John F. Braddee. May sessions, 1841. Sentence on the
first count of the indictment: That you, John F. Braddee, be imprisoned
in the Western Penitentiary of Pennsylvania, at hard labor, for and
during the term of ten years, and in all respects be subject to the same
discipline and treatment as convicts sentenced by the Courts of the
State; and that you pay the costs of this prosecution, and stand
committed until this sentence be complied with. And while so confined
therein you shall be exclusively under the constraint of the officers
having charge of said Penitentiary.


                              DOCKET ENTRIES.

May 27th, 1841.--Test. for United States: J. H. Phillips, J. H. Dicus,
Henry H. Beeson, Frederick Byrer, John Keffer, Samuel McLean, Peter
Mills Strayer, Amos Jolliff, Samuel Costello, William Wagner. May
28th--Test. for Defendant: John Warner, Thomas Moxley, Adam George, John
Hendricks, Uriah Hoke, Aaron Wyatt, James McLean, James Smith, Jacob F.
Brant, Robert Carr, Thomas Rowland, Abraham White, Isaac Hague, Jacob
Eckel, Decatur Wolfe. May 29th--Test. for Defendant: John Haney, William
Collins, Francis Wilkinson, Jesse King, H. Mitchell, David Chipps, Wm.
D. Swearingen, Henry Hally, Margaret Collins, William Purnell, John
Imbre, John Campbell, John M. Crane, Alfred Core, Seth Holl, John
Woodward, Henry Smith, Matthias C. Baker, James Marinder, Madison
Mooney, James Owens. May 31st--Test. for Defendant: Jesse Jones, Wm.
Hall, T. Shaw, William Ebert, Gideon John, Alexander I. Fowler, John F.
Sangston, Benjamin Brownfield. June 1st--Test. for United States: Brown
Snyder, George Meason, Robert L. Barry, John Keffer, Alfred McClelland,
Ellis Baily, Isaac Nixon, William Nixon, Samuel Nixon, Geo. Rider, J. T.
Williams, Jas. McGayen, Wm. Reddick.

June 1. Court took a recess for half an hour. Mr. Black (Col. S. W.), on
behalf of the United States, addressed the Court and jury. Mr. William
Austin, for defence, addressed the Court and jury. Mr. Darragh, district
attorney, addressed the Court and jury. June 2. Mr. Darragh continued
and concluded his address. Mr. McCandless, for defense, addressed the
Court and jury; Court took a recess for half an hour. Mr. McCandless
continued and concluded his address. Mr. Biddle, for the defense,
commenced his address to the Court and jury. June 8. Mr. Biddle
continued and concluded his address. Mr. Loomis, on behalf of the United
States, commenced his address to the Court and jury. The jury, having
been charged by Judge Baldwin, retired. Same day rendered a verdict as
before mentioned. Mr. McCandless moved the Court in arrest of judgment
and for a new trial.

June 5. Affidavits as to the ownership of a portion of the money in the
hands of Messrs. Darragh and Kennedy filed. Mr. Finley for Edward H.
Brags, moves to take the money out of Court found in the mail stolen,
and identified by the affidavits filed. Same gentleman makes the same
motion for John J. Young. Both motions referred by the Court to Messrs.
Darragh and Kennedy as auditors. Amos Jolliff discharged from his
recognizance to attend as a witness. The following report was made to
the Court by Messrs. Darragh and Kennedy viz: Pittsburg, June 5, 1841.
The undersigned beg leave to report that they have paid out on
affidavits to individuals claiming, or their order, the following sums
from the money recovered on the premises of John F. Braddee: E. H.
Pandell, $250; Timothy Goodman, $1,060; Silas D. Force, $100; James
Sproul, $690; H. S. Abbott, $647.10; Sibbett & Jones, $1,127; Haney St.
John, $1,455; B. S. Williams, $30; G. G. Moore, $170; A. H. Bangs,
$934.90; John S. Young, $190; Chas. S. Bradford, $300; in all $7,154.60.
Whole amount recovered, $10,398.60, leaving $3,244 undistributed.
Report of auditors confirmed, and claimants who have been paid are
directed to give receipts, and the balance unclaimed be deposited in the
Bank of Pittsburg to abide the further order of the Court.

United States vs. William Purnell. Wm. Freeman, James McCune, O. T.
Moore, H. H. Turk, A. McClelland and William Crawford each bound in a
recognizance of $500 to appear at the next term of the Circuit Court of
the United States for the Western District of Pennsylvania, on the 3d
Monday of November next, to testify in the above case. J. M. Austin
moves the Court to direct the Marshal to pay the witnesses subp[oe]naed
on the part of the defendant in the case of the United States _vs._ John
F. Braddee. Court refused, and ordered that the expenses of compulsory
process be paid to the officers by the United States.

United States _vs._ William Purnell. Defendant tent in $4,000 on
condition that he be and appear at the next term of the Circuit Court of
the United States, to be held in the city of Pittsburg, on the first
Monday of November, next. James L. Bugh, Benjamin Watson and John
Hendricks each tent in $1,000 on condition that defendant be and appear
as aforesaid.

June 7. The Court overruled the motion for a new trial in the case of
the United States _vs_. Braddee, and also a motion by John M. Austin,
esq., to postpone sentence, and the Court sentenced the defendant as
before mentioned.

November 16, 1841. The United States vs. Margaret Collins. Stealing from
the United States mails. Witnesses sworn before the grand jury: E. S.
Harris, Johnze Dicus, A. McClelland, D. H. Phillips, William Ebert, John
P. Sturgis, Henry H. Beeson, Abraham Alexander and Dr. Howard Kennedy.

Same _vs._ Same. Charged with receiving a $500 Treasury note, stolen
from the mail, knowing the same to have been stolen.

November 17. Recognizance of William Purnell and his sureties called and
forfeited, and the witnesses in this case discharged from their
recognizances. The grand jury came into Court and presented true bills
of indictment against Margaret Collins.

November 22. Defendant pleads not guilty. Tried and jury could not
agree, and were discharged. Margaret Collins was Braddee's
mother-in-law. Purnell and Corman were pardoned by the President before
trial.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus ended the great Braddee trial; an affair that caused more
excitement than any local event that ever interested the people of
Uniontown. The actors are all dead. Judges Baldwin and Irwin, who heard
the cause, are both dead. All the lawyers who were concerned are dead;
some of the witnesses are still living. The bondsmen are all dead.
Braddee died in the penitentiary about ten years after his
incarceration. Many persons believe that he did not die in the
penitentiary, but in some manner escaped therefrom. There can be no
doubt, however, that he died in the penitentiary.

[Illustration: THE GERMAN D. HAIR HOUSE.]




CHAPTER XLVII.

  _John Quincy Adams visits Uniontown--He is Welcomed by Dr. Hugh
     Campbell--The National Road a Monument of a Past Age--A Comparison
     Between the National Road and the Appian Way._


          "We hear no more of the clanging hoof,
            And the stage coach, rattling by;
          For the steam king rules the traveled world,
            And the old pike's left to die."

The foregoing lines were written by one who mourned the departing
glories of the old road. When they were written the steam car had taken
the place of the four-horse coach, and the writer was giving vent to his
grief over the change. Steam has since encountered a formidable
competitor in the shape of electricity, and the time is coming when the
steam car will follow in the wake of the old stage coach. Progress is
the inspiring watchword of the hour, and while there may be nothing new
under the sun, old things are certainly presented in a new light, and
old agencies applied to new work.

No sound greets the ear of the pike boy now, like the clink of other
days. The glory of the old road has departed, but the memory of its
better days fades not away. The old tavern has gone with all the rest.
The incidents and anecdotes, accidents and episodes of the road have all
passed to the domain of history.

In the month of May, 1837, John Quincy Adams visited Uniontown, on his
return from Cincinnati, where he had gone to participate in the
inauguration of the observatory on Mount Adams, near that city. Dr. Hugh
Campbell was appointed to deliver the address of welcome to Mr. Adams on
his arrival at Uniontown. The following opening sentences are quoted
from Dr. Campbell's address:

"_Venerable Sir_: I have the honor of being the organ of this community
to express for them and myself our hearty welcome of you among us. You
see here, sir, an assembly of people of every political faith, come
together spontaneously as one man to express their respect and
veneration for one who has filled so large and distinguished, and I may
add, beneficial space in the history and councils of this nation. We
stand here, sir, upon the CUMBERLAND ROAD, which has, to some extent,
broken down the great wall of the Appallachian mountains, which served
to form so natural a barrier between what might have been two great
rival nations. This road constitutes we trust, an indissoluble chain of
Union, connecting forever as one, the East and the West. As a people
directly interested in this great national work, we are glad to have the
opportunity of expressing our acknowledgments to you in person. It is a
part of that great system which has always received your support, known
as the American System, the happy influence of which you have recently
had the pleasure of witnessing in the rapid and extraordinary
development of the resources of the West."

Dr. Campbell proceeded at some length in a well conceived and happily
expressed address, and concluded as follows:

"Again, sir, I bid you welcome to the hospitalities of our town, and may
the God of all grace prolong your existence, and finally receive you to
himself."

It is noteworthy, because out of the ordinary line, that two of the
ablest debaters and most popular public speakers of Western
Pennsylvania, fifty years ago, were physicians--Dr. F. J. Lemoyne, of
Washington, and Dr. Hugh Campbell, of Uniontown, the first named an
Abolitionist and the other a Whig. Those who have heard them on the
stump aver that they never heard better speakers. They were both highly
educated, masters of logic, forceful in delivery, and in the modern
phrase, "clean cut" in all their utterances.

In the latest map of Fayette county, Pennsylvania, there is a sketch of
the National Road, written by the late Hon. James Veech, in which that
able man said:

"It is a monument of a past age; but like all other monuments, it is
interesting, as well as venerable. It carried thousands of population
and millions of wealth into the West; and more than any other material
structure in the land, served to harmonize and strengthen, if not to
save, the Union."

There was a popular belief, in the olden time, that the National Road
was a bond of union between the States, and that it served to harmonize
and bring together on friendly terms, people of remote sections, and of
different pursuits. This will be seen by the quoted remarks of Dr.
Campbell and Mr. Veech. The generation of to-day regards the affection
of the old pike boy for the old road, as a mere memory, the recollection
of the animated scenes of trade and transportation on the old highway.
It is something more. The old pike boy sincerely and truly believes that
the old pike was a bond of union, that for years it kept the peace
between discordant interests, and prolonged the evil day when the
outbreak of disunion came.

[Illustration: DR. HUGH CAMPBELL.]

The Appian Way was a great road, and is invested with much classic and
historic interest, but, unlike the National Road, it did not yield its
place to greater lines of progress and improvement. The Appian Way was
designed to gratify the pomp and vanity of consuls and pro-consuls,
kings and princes, emperors and empires. The National Road was designed
to meet the wants of a free and progressive people, and to aid in
building up and strengthening a great and growing republic. The Appian
Way had more vitality than the government that built it. It outlived its
country. The National Road served its purpose grandly, was a complete
success, the pride and glory of its day and generation, and when it lost
its place as a national thoroughfare, the government that made it was
all the stronger because it had been made. The average width of the
Appian Way was from eighteen to twenty feet, so as to admit of two
carriages passing each other, and the expense of constructing the first
section of it was so great that it exhausted the public treasury of
Rome. The National Road was sixty feet wide, and eight carriages could
pass each other within its borders, while the cost of its construction,
although a very large sum of money, made so light a draught upon the
resources of the public treasury of the United States, in comparison
with subsequent appropriations for other objects, as to be scarcely
worthy of observation. The Appian Way derived its name from Appius, who
was consul of Rome at the time of the undertaking. Its initial southern
terminus was Capua, distant from Rome one hundred and twenty-five miles,
very nearly the same as the distance from Cumberland to Wheeling. It was
subsequently constructed as far as Beneventum, and ultimately to
Brundisium, a seaport town of the Adriatic, distant from Rome three
hundred and seventy-eight miles. We are informed by Anthon, an ancient
classic author of high renown, that the city of Beneventum derived great
importance from its position on the Appian Way, and the same can be
truthfully said of the towns and cities which were so fortunate as to be
located on the National Road.

Paul the apostle traveled over a portion of the Appian Way on his
journey from Jerusalem to Rome to carry up his appeal from Agrippa to
Caesar. He intersected the Appian Way at Puteoli, where he remained seven
days, and his brethren having learned that he had reached that point,
came to meet him as far as Appii Forum and the Three Taverns. The Appii
Forum was a station, and the Three Taverns a house for the entertainment
of strangers and travelers on the Appian Way. The latter may have been
three distinct houses moulded into one, as is sometimes done, or a
cluster of taverns consisting of three. That they were taverns, or a
tavern, is unquestionable. There was an old tavern on the Mountain
division of the National Road, in Fayette county, Pennsylvania, called
the Three Cabins. The cabins were put up for boarding and lodging
workmen engaged in the construction of the road, and when the work was
finished, united and made one. This grotesque old tavern enjoyed a large
patronage, and was a source of no little profit to its old-fashioned
proprietor.

Horace, as before intimated, was an occasional traveler on the Appian
Way, not infrequently accompanied by Virgil, and apparently with no
other object than the mere pleasure afforded by the jaunt. These
illustrious authors of classic verse were, it is said, given to
convivial habits, and we have the word of Horace himself that the wine
on the Appian Way was "thick." From some other things said by Horace, it
is very evident that the taverns of the Appian Way were inferior to
those of the National Road. As an instance, he says that "the bustling
landlord of the inn at Beneventum almost burned himself in roasting some
lean thrushes." Lean thrushes never entered the well stored larders of
the old taverns of the National Road. Fatness was the leading feature of
flesh and fowl and bird of every kind that passed inspection of the
old-time landlord of our National highway, and fatness distinguished all
the surroundings of his overflowing hostelry. Nor was it the habit of
our old tavern keepers to do the cooking and roasting of their
establishments. All that pertained to the dominion of the landlady, who,
as a rule, was tidy and robust, and felt a just pride in her calling.
Horace also complained that at an inn at Canusium, on the Appian Way, he
was served with "gritty bread." Shades of John N. Dagg, Joseph Hallam,
Daniel Brown, Charles Miller, James Workman, Alfred McClelland, Joshua
Marsh and Boss Rush, defend us forever against the thought of gritty
bread! Horace, in further deprecation of some things on the Appian Way,
mentions a little town where "water is sold, though the worst in the
world." Generosity was a leading trait of the old tavern keepers of the
National Road. There was an inexhaustible supply of water along its
line, the best and purest in the world, and no man ever heard of a cup
of it being sold for a price. One of the most attractive features of the
National Road was the big water-trough that stood by the side of every
tavern, filled with fresh, sparkling water, and absolutely free to all
comers and goers.

[Illustration: THE BIG WATER-TROUGH ON LAUREL HILL.]




                              APPENDIX.

  _A Digest of the Laws of Pennsylvania, relating to the Cumberland
     Road--Unexpended Balances in Indiana--Accounts of Two Old
     Commissioners--Rates of Toll--Letters of Albert Gallatin, Ebenezer
     Finley and Thomas A. Wiley--Curiosities of the old Postal Service._


  1807. Act of April 9th gives the State's consent to the making of the
        road within its limits, provided the route be changed to pass
        through Uniontown and Washington; also gives the United States
        authorities full power to enter upon lands, dig, cut and carry
        away materials, etc., for the purpose of completing and
        _forever_ keeping in repair said road. Pamphlet Laws, page 185.

  1828. February 7th. Joint resolution authorizes the Government of the
        United States to erect toll gates, enforce the collection of
        tolls, and to do and perform every other act and thing which may
        be deemed necessary to insure the PERMANENT repair and
        preservation of the road. Andrew Shultz, Governor, Nerr
        Middleswarth, Speaker of the House of Representatives, Daniel
        Sturgeon, Speaker of the Senate. Pamphlet laws, page 500.

  1831. Act of April 11th. Preamble: "Whereas, that part of the
        Cumberland Road lying within the State of Pennsylvania is in
        many parts in bad condition for want of repairs, and as doubts
        have been entertained whether the United States have authority
        to erect toll gates on said road and collect toll, and as a
        large proportion of the people of this commonwealth are
        interested in said road, ITS CONSTANT CONTINUANCE AND
        PRESERVATION, therefore, etc." The act then goes on and
        authorizes the erection of at least six gates, designates
        classes and persons exempt from toll, provides for the erection
        of directors (boards ordering teams, etc., to pass to the
        right), establishes rates of tolls, regulates the manner of
        collecting the same, etc. Pamphlet Laws, page 419. For a
        judicial construction of this act, see case of Hopkins vs.
        Stockton, 2 Watts and Sargeant, page 163.

  1835. Act of April 1st requires supervisors of highways to make paved
        valleys or stone culverts where other roads intersect the
        Cumberland Road and this act also signifies the State's
        acceptance of the road from the General Government. Pamphlet
        Laws, page 102.

  1836. Act of June 13th provides for payment of half toll by persons
        carrying the United States mail, and fixes penalties for
        attempts to defraud the State of toll. Pamphlet Laws, page 534.
        This act declared inoperative by the Supreme Court of the United
        States, in so far as it levies toll on mail coaches.

  1837. Act of April 4th exempts persons hauling coal for home
        consumption from payment of tolls. Pamphlet Laws, page 353.

  1839. Act of February 5th in form of a joint resolution requires
        Commissioners to give bond in the sum of $6,000. Pamphlet Laws,
        page 637. Changed by subsequent acts.

  1839. Act of June 17th, in form of a joint resolution, fixes the
        compensation of Commissioners at $3 per diem, not to exceed one
        hundred and fifty days in any one year. Pamphlet Laws, page 679.
        Changed by subsequent acts.

  1840. Act of March 24th authorizes the appointment of one Commissioner
        by the Governor for a term of three years, at a compensation of
        $3.00 per diem, requiring him to give bond in the sum of
        $10,000, to keep an account of receipts and expenditures, and
        publish the same; and further provides for auditors to adjust
        accounts. Pamphlet Laws, page 207. Partially repealed by
        subsequent acts.

  1843. Act of April 5th authorizes Commissioners to stop mail coaches
        to enforce payment of tolls. Pamphlet Laws, page 164. This act
        held to be void by the Supreme Court of the United States, and
        supplied by act of April 14th, 1845, _postea_.

  1845. Act of April 14th (Omnibus Bill).

          "Preamble: Whereas, it has lately been decided by the Supreme
          Court of the United States, that the acts of assembly of this
          Commonwealth, relating to the collection of tolls on that part
          of the Cumberland Road which is within this State, passed June
          13th, 1836, and April 5th, 1843, do not authorize the
          collection of any amount of tolls whatever for the passage
          upon said road of any stage, coach, or other vehicle carrying
          passengers with their baggage and goods, if such stage, coach,
          or other vehicle, is at the same time carrying any of the
          mails or property of the United States; and whereas, the said
          court sanctions the power of Pennsylvania to provide for the
          repairs of said road by a general assessment of tolls upon
          persons traveling thereon, which it is deemed just and right
          should be paid; and whereas, also, it is found to be
          impracticable to keep said road in good repair and out of
          debt by the tolls collectable under the existing laws of this
          Commonwealth, as interpreted by said Court, therefore," &c.
          This act then goes on and in section 12 imposes a toll of not
          less than two nor more than fifteen cents, as shall be fixed
          and determined by the Commissioner, upon every person riding
          or traveling in any vehicle carrying the United States mails,
          for every fourteen miles over which such person shall have
          been a passenger or traveler, and in proportion for shorter
          distances, provided that no toll shall be demanded from any
          guard to the mails, agent of the postoffice, bearer of
          dispatches for the General or State Government, nor any naval
          or military officer of the United States or this State,
          traveling in the discharge of official duty. Section 13
          provides the manner of collecting tolls under this act.
          Section 14 imposes a penalty of fifty dollars on any driver
          who neglects to report at every gate the number of passengers
          in his carriage or coach. Section 15 provides that in case of
          refusal of passengers to pay or neglect of drivers to report,
          collectors shall charge in a book all unpaid tolls and sue for
          the same. Section 16 provides that in every case where a
          collector may be unable from omission or neglect of drivers or
          passengers to ascertain the number of passengers liable to
          toll under this act, he may charge and recover for so many as
          the carriage shall be capable of carrying. Section 17 provides
          a penalty of twenty dollars for every fraudulent attempt to
          evade the payment of toll imposed by this act. Pamphlet Laws,
          pages 430-1. This act is still in force, though mail coaches
          (rather hacks) have been carrying passengers and freights for
          many years without paying toll.

  1847. Act of March 16th authorizes the Governor to appoint a
        Commissioner on each side of the Monongahela river, at a salary
        of $350 each. Pamphlet Laws, page 477. Subsequently repealed.

  1848. Act of April 8th provides for the appointment of trustees by the
        courts of Somerset, Fayette and Washington counties (one in
        each), said trustees to appoint one or more Commissioners.
        Pamphlet Laws, page 523. Repealed.

  1850. Act of May 3d authorizes the Commissioner and the Court of
        Quarter Sessions to determine what travel and transportation
        shall be in part or in whole exempt from toll; also authorizes
        the imposition of toll upon persons using the road who do not
        pass through the gates thereon, and prescribes the manner of
        collecting the same; also authorizes the Commissioner to change
        the location of gates, and to sell and convey toll houses and
        grounds, and to purchase sites. Pamphlet Laws, page 682. This
        act remains in force.

  1856. Act of April 22, authorizes the Courts of Fayette and Washington
        counties to appoint superintendents. Pamphlet Laws, page 523.
        Prior to the date of this act, the officer in charge of the road
        was invariably called Commissioner. This act repealed as to that
        portion of the road east of the Monongahela by Act of May 1,
        1861. _Postea._

  1861. Act of May 1, authorizes the Governor to appoint one person as
        Superintendent for so much of the road as lies within the
        counties of Fayette and Somerset, and repeals part of the act of
        April 22, 1856, _supra_. Pamphlet Laws, page 678.

  1864. Act of April 13th, requires Superintendents to appropriate fifty
        per cent. of the tolls to the payment of old debts. Pamphlet
        Laws, page 408. Repealed.

  1865. Act of March 21, repeals so much of the act of April 13th, 1864,
        _supra_, as requires Superintendents to apply fifty per cent. of
        tolls to the payment of old debts, and provides that _bona fide_
        holders of certificates of indebtedness for repairs shall be
        allowed credit for tolls on their certificates. Pamphlet Laws,
        page 474.

  1865. Act of November 27th, provides for the adjudication and payment
        of certain claims against the road. Appendix to Pamphlet Laws of
        1866, page 1,226.

  1867. Act of January 7th, repeals outright _in toto_ the act of April
        13th, 1864, _supra_. Pamphlet Laws, page 1,543.

  1868. Act of March 20th, authorizes and _requires_ the Superintendent
        to repair the road, and keep it in repair, where it passes
        through any town or borough forming a street thereof in the
        county of Fayette. Pamphlet Laws, page 444. In force.

  1877. Act of April 4th, authorizes the Governor to appoint a
        Commissioner for that portion of the road lying between the
        Monongahela river and the line of the State of West Virginia for
        a term of three years from the termination of the term of
        incumbent, at a salary of $3.00 per diem, not to exceed $300 per
        annum, to account under oath to the auditors of Washington
        county. Pamphlet Laws, page 53.

  1893. Act of June 2d, appropriates $1,500 to repair the great stone
        bridge at the Big Crossings. Pamphlet Laws, page 213.

The following communications and statements show the unexpended
balances in 1834 of appropriations made by Congress in preceding
years, for constructing the road through the State of Indiana:

     WASHINGTON, Jan. 20th, 1835.

     _Sir_:--I have the honor to transmit herewith a report from the
     Chief Engineer respecting the unexpended balance of the
     appropriation for the Cumberland Road in Indiana, in answer to the
     resolution of the House of Representatives, of the 17th instant.

     Very respectfully, your most obedient servant,

                                        MAHLON DICKERSON,
                                              Acting Secretary of War.

  TO HON. JOHN BELL,
      Speaker of the House of Representatives.

       *       *       *       *       *

                              ENGINEER DEPARTMENT, Jan. 19th, 1835.

     _Hon. Lewis Cass, Secretary of War_:

     SIR:--In obedience to the resolution of the House of
     Representatives of the 17th instant, I have the honor to hand you
     the enclosed statement, explaining the difference in the amount of
     unexpended appropriations on account of the National Road, in the
     State of Indiana, and furnishing the information called for
     therein. I beg leave to remark that it is often necessary to close
     the annual statement of the fiscal operations of the Engineer
     Department before the returns, &c., from all the work are received.
     The Department, therefore, can only act on the information before
     it. This was the case in the present instance, as well as some
     others included in the same statement.

     I have the honor to be, sir, your most obedient servant,

                                           C. GRATIOT, Chief Engineer.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the tabular statement of the fiscal operations, under the Engineer
Department for the year ending the 30th of September, 1834, the
unexpended balance of former appropriations is thus stated, relating to
the Cumberland Road in Indiana:

  Amount undrawn from the Treasury, 30th of September          $160,882 00
  Amount in the hands of agents, 30th of September               17,631 09
                                                               -----------
  Total                                                        $178,513 09

  Which amount was ascertained from the statement of
      balances from the Treasury, on the 30th of Sept    $160,882 00

  And an acknowledged balance in the hands of
      Captain Ogden, on 30th of September      $1,925 79

  And from the accounts of Mr. Milroy,
      which had been rendered only to
      the first quarter of 1834, inclusive,
      which showed a balance in
      his hands, after deducting        $7,218 38

  Paid over to Capt. Ogden, credited in
      his account current for the 3d quarter
      of 1834, of                             $15,705 30
                                              ----------$17,631 09
                                                        ----------
                                                               $178,513 09

  Since preparing the annual statement and its transmission to
      the War Department, Mr. Milroy has rendered accounts for
      the 2d quarter, and part of the 3d quarter of 1834, by
      which he shows a balance due him of                        $1,147 89

  So that, had Mr. Milroy's accounts been received to the time
      of preparing the statement, the amount in the hands of
      agents would have been, instead of $17,631 09, only           777 90

  Which added to the amount in the Treasury,
      on the 1st of Oct., 1834                                 $160,882 00
                                                               ===========
  Would make available for the service of the 4th quarter of
        1834, and the year 1835                                $161,659 90
                                                               ===========
  The balance in the Treasury on the 1st of October, 1834, was $160,882 00

  Since which there has been drawn and remitted to the Superintendent,
  as follows:

  October 21, 1834, to Captain Ogden    $30,000 00
  November 25, 1834, to Captain Ogden    17,520 00
  January 10, 1835, to Captain Ogden     30,000 00
                                                                $77,320 00
                                                                ----------
  Remaining in the Treasury on the 19th of January, 1835        $83,562 00


The following accounts of two of the old Commissioners are interesting
as showing the amount of tolls received and disbursements made for
repairs and maintenance at the dates covered, and disclosing the once
familiar names of many who had contracts and were otherwise employed on
the road:

                  ACCOUNT OF WILLIAM HOPKINS,

_Commissioner of the Cumberland Road in Pennsylvania, from Nov. 10th,
1840, to Nov. 10th, 1841._

EASTERN DIVISION, EMBRACED IN FAYETTE AND SOMERSET COUNTIES, VIZ:

                                                                       DR.
  To cash received from the National Road Stage Co       $2,378 12
   "   "      "      "  Holt & Maltby, supposed             113 94
   "   "      "      at Gate No. 1, Wm. Condon, collector 1,758 87
   "   "      "      "  Gate No. 2, Hiram Seaton,   "     1,948 24
   "   "      "      "  Gate No. 3, Wm. D. Beggs,   "       769 27
   "   "      "      "  Gate No. 3, Jas. Reynold,   "     1,125 29
   "   "      "      a fine collected by Wm. Bradley          5 00
   "   "      "          "      "      " John Tunsell         5 00

  Total amount received from Nov. 10, 1840, to Nov. 10,
  1841                                                    -------$8,103 73

  BY DISBURSEMENTS, VIZ.                                               CR.

  Cash paid Thompson McKean, late Superintendent            $50 00
   "    "   Henry Woolery in full for work                   15 62-1/2
   "    "   Thompson McKean, late Superintendent             40 00
   "    "   Jackson Brown in full for work                   20 75
   "    "   George Hensell  ditto                             8 22
   "    "   Jesse Sachett   ditto                            90 00
   "    "   John Smalley, hauling stone                      34 20
   "    "   Peter Leonard, quarry leave                       8 62-1/2
   "    "   Elijah Crabb, work                              197 95
   "    "   Samuel Dean                                      15 00
   "    "   George Colley, quarry leave                     100 00
   "    "   J. & W. W. Woolery, work                        242 40
   "    "   Hugh Wilson,          "                           2 50
   "    "   William Jeffries,     "                          83 37
   "    "   Isaac Brownfield,     "                          59 85
   "    "   Thos. McKean,         "                         300 00
   "    "   John Brownfield,      "                          41 25
   "    "   John Risler,          "                           3 90
   "    "   John Dean,            "                         106 88
   "    "   James Spears,         "                          23 25
   "    "   Isaac Nixon,          "                         125 22
   "    "   Elias Gilmore,        "                         168 20
   "    "   Ephraim Conway,       "                          20 00
   "    "   A. McDowell,          "                          94 63-1/2
   "    "   McClean & Emberson,   "                          28 92
   "    "   C. Rush,              "                           4 89
   "    "   John Deford, quarry leave                         9 04
   "    "   Rich'd Beeson, costs, Com. vs. Stockton          11 83
   "    "   S. D. Skeen, in full for work                     4 60
   "    "   Thomas Prentice,          "                       6 00
   "    "   James Amos,               "                     135 31
   "    "   Jno. Hatzman,             "                      52 84
   "    "   William Reynolds,         "                     982 66
   "    "   Michael S. Miller,        "                      38 37-1/2
   "    "   James Watkins,            "                       2 20
   "    "   Jos. M. Sterling,         "                      60 00
   "    "   Samuel Rush,              "                     881 89
   "    "   Hiram Hanse,              "                       8 00
   "    "   Thomas Brown,             "                     324 60
   "    "   Upton Shaw,               "                     314 37
   "    "   John Bennington,          "                     130 00
   "    "   William C. Stevens,       "                       5 18-3/4
   "    "   Hugh Graham, work                   $300 00
   "    "    "     "  toll house                 200 00     500 00
   "    "   James Snyder, on account for work               235 41-1/2
   "    "      same          in full                         28 06
   "    "   Charles Kemp, jr.,  "                            32 00
   "    "   I. & R. Hill,       "                            39 64
   "    "   Wm. H. Graham,      "                           395 67-1/2
   "    "   George Colley,      "                            80 80
   "    "   James Marlow,       "                           651 70
   "    "   John Bradfield,     "                         1,508 64
   "    "   John M. Claybaugh,  "                           107 63
   "    "   Henry G. Brown,     "                            24 69
   "    "   Joseph Dillon,      "                            49 64
   "    "   Charles Rush,       "                            23 85
   "    "   Sam'l McReynolds,   "                            29 33
   "    "   M. H. Jones,        "                            23 32
   "    "   Hiram Hayney,       "                            50 00
   "    "   Morris Mauler,      "                            69 47-1/2
   "    "   Huston Todd, hauling stone                       20 00
                                                        ---------$8,722 41

The foregoing items of expenditures were contracts made by Thompson
McKean, Esq., late Commissioner, and paid on his certificate.

  Cash paid Adam Speer, for work on road                $  5 00
   "     "  William D. Beggs, do                           1 50
   "     "     same           do                           1 00
   "     "     same     salary for keeping Gate No. 3     83 30
   "     "  James Reynolds, work on road                   1 50
   "     "  E. Crable,           do                        2 00
   "     "  Rush & McCollough,   do                       25 00
   "     "  E. H. Showalter, on account of work on road  100 00
   "     "  N. Bradley,        "        "        "         2 50
   "     "  William Milligan,  "        "        "        14 00
   "     "  A. L. Pentland, Esq., costs, Com. v. Stockton  5 00
   "     "  Wilson McCandless, Esq., Prof. services       20 00
   "     "     same                   "       "           30 00
   "     "  R. P. Flenniken, Esq.,    "       "           56 62-1/2
   "     "  John Irons, for advertising                    4 00
   "     "  Upton Shaw, work on road                      30 62-1/2
   "     "  Samuel McReynolds, work on road                1 25
   "     "  Samuel Lazure,      "       "                    25
   "     "  Robert McDowell                               20 00
   "     "  John Bradfield                                67 50
   "     "  William Reynolds                             273 00
   "     "  John L. Dawson, Esq.                          33 62-1/2
   "     "  Nicholas Bradley                              58 75
   "     "  William Condon, Gate No. 1, salary           200 00
   "     "  George Farney, for work on road                2 62-1/2
   "     "  John Nelson,    "    "    "                    1 50
   "     "  Jas. Reynolds, Gate No. 3, salary            116 66
   "     "  Hiram Seaton, Gate No. 2, salary             200 00
   "     "  McCollough & Rush, for work on road          169 55-3/4
   "     "  Robert S. Brown,       "       "             169 90-1/2
   "     "  Anthony Yarnell,       "       "             150 00
   "     "  Sam'l Dean,            "       "              50 00
   "     "  Henry Showalter,       "       "             137 50
   "     "  Jackson Brown,         "       "              65 00
   "     "  John H. Deford, Prof. services                20 00
   "     "  John Risler, for stone                         6 40

  Total amount of expenditures on Eastern division     -----$10,847 98-1/4

           WESTERN DIVISION, LYING IN WASHINGTON COUNTY.

  To cash received from Good Intent Stage Co.         $4,246 25
    "       "       "  Moore & Henderson                 512 16
    "       "       "  Wm. R. Cope                        70 00
    "   at Gate No. 4, Stephen Phelps, col.            1,694 23
    "   "   "   No. 5, Wm. Hill                        1,773 36
    "   "   "   No. 6, David Guinea                    1,569 44
    "   "   "   No. 5, in Oct, 1840, under R. Quail      150 41
    "   "   "   No. 6, Sept. and Oct., 1840, R. Quail    304 67
    "   a fine collected by John Freeman, Esq.             5 00

  Total amount received                                -----$10,325 52

               BY DISBURSEMENTS ON WESTERN DIVISION, VIZ:

  Cash paid Egan & Dickey, in full for work on road   $1,387 00
   "    "   John McDonough,   "       "       "          249 22-1/2
   "    "   John Dickey,      "       "       "           50 62-1/2
   "    "   Henry Murry,      "       "       "          889 04
   "    "   same,  alleged error in settlement           150 00
   "    "   Morris Pursell, in full for work on road     215 87
   "    "   Bradley & Morgan,  "       "       "         234 27
   "    "   Daniel Ward,       "       "       "         746 66
   "    "   Brown & Valentine, "       "       "         287 00
   "    "   David Guinea, Gate No. 6, salary             133 18
   "    "   Wm. Hill, Gate No. 5                          66 72
                                                       -----$ 4 409 49

The above items of expenditure were on contracts made by R. Quail, late
Commissioner, and paid on his certificate.

  Cash paid T. H. Baird, Esq., Prof. services        $    5 00
   "    "   I. P. Morgan, digging well                   32 50
   "    "   Joel Lamborn, building chimney               11 00
   "    "   William Craven, smith work                   15 80
   "    "   J. T. Rogen, powder                           5 60
   "    "   Amos Griffith, pump                          40 50
   "    "   A. J. Harry, stove pipe                       2 96
   "    "   Robert Bradley, in full work at well         60 12-1/2
   "    "   Griffith Taylor, wheelbarrow                  1 75
   "    "   John McMath, in full work on road             8 59
   "    "   John Bausman, printing                        4 00
   "    "   Grayson & Kaine, "                           10 25
   "    "   H. Winten, in full for work on road          27 00
   "    "   Samuel Adams,           "        "            4 50
   "    "   James P. Morgan,        "        "           35 31
   "    "   J. Worrell, on account                        7 30
   "    "     same,  in full                              2 75
   "    "   J. McGuire, on account                       57 70
   "    "   Jacob Shaffer, stove pipe                     1 37
   "    "   Robert Sprowl, on account work on road      253 00
   "    "   Thomas Egan, in full                        253 68
   "    "   Henry Murray, stone                          36 86
   "    "   Jacob Stillwagon, on acct. stone            227 00
   "    "   Anthony Rentz,         "      "              59 84
   "    "   David Andrews, work                         128 00
   "    "   Joseph Miller, in full, stone                62 50
   "    "   John Huston, work                            42 00
   "    "   Joseph T. Rogers, powder                      5 50
   "    "   Isaac Leet, Prof. services                   10 00
   "    "   William Watkins, acct. stone                 15 00
   "    "   Stephen Phelps, Gate No. 4, salary          200 00
   "    "   Robert Bradley, work in full        122 96
   "    "     same          on account           81 16  204 12
   "    "   William Hill, Gate No. 5, salary            200 00
   "    "   David Guinea, Gate No. 6,   "               200 00
   "    "   on acct. book for Superintendent              3 00
   "    "   counterfeit money received                   11 00
   "    "   Superintendent, for his services, per
            account filed, 309 days at $3.00 per day    927 00
   "    "   Auditors, for settling and stating this
            account, viz:
              H. Langley                       $2 00
              J. K. Wilson                      5 00
              S. Cunningham                     5 00     12 00
    Total expenditures on Western division            -----$7,594 09-1/2

                       RECAPITULATION.                                 DR.

  To amount received on the Eastern Division        $ 8,103 73
  To amount received on the Western Division         10,325 52
                                                     ------$18,429 25

                                                                       CR.

  By cash paid out on the Eastern Division,
      per statement                                  $10,847 98-1/4
  By cash paid on the Western Division,
      per statement                                    7,594 09-1/2
                                                      ------$18,442 07-3/4

  Balance due Wm. Hopkins, Esq., Superintendent, on the
      10th Nov., 1841                                   $ 12 82-3/4

The undersigned, auditors appointed by the Court of Common Pleas for the
county of Washington, Pennsylvania, on the 9th day of November, 1841, to
audit, settle and adjust the account of William Hopkins, Esq.,
Commissioner of the Cumberland Road, having carefully examined the
accounts submitted to them by said Commissioner (a full statement of
which is herewith presented), and having compared the vouchers with said
account, do find that the said William Hopkins, Commissioner as
aforesaid, has expended up to the 10th day of November, 1841, the sum of
twelve dollars and eighty-two 3/4 cents more than came into his hands,
and that said sum of twelve dollars and eighty-two 3/4 cents was due to
him on said day.

In testimony whereof, we have hereto set our hands and seals the 22d day
of January, A.D. 1842.

                                    SAMUEL CUNNINGHAM, (SEAL)
                                    JOHN K. WILSON,    (SEAL) _Auditors._
                                    HENRY LANGLY,      (SEAL)


   WASHINGTON COUNTY, 88.
       THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA.

I, John Grayson, prothonotary of the Court of Common Pleas for said
county, certify that at a Court of Common Pleas for the county
aforesaid, held on the 9th day of November, Anno Domini 1841, Samuel
Cunningham, John K. Wilson and Henry Langly were appointed by said Court
auditors to settle and adjust the account of William Hopkins, Esq.,
Commissioner of the Cumberland Road, as appears of record in our said
Court.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and affixed the seal
of said Court, the 22d day of January, 1842.

  [SEAL]                             JOHN GRAYSON, _Prothy._

                             ACCOUNT OF WILLIAM SEARIGHT,

_Commissioner of the Cumberland Road in Pennsylvania, from the 1st of
May, 1843, to the 31st of December, 1844, inclusive._

  TO TOLLS RECEIVED ON THE EASTERN DIVISION, VIZ:                DR.

  To tolls received from Thos. Grier, Gate No. 1      $4,466 24
  "   "     "        "   Robert McDowell, Gate No. 2   4,102 70
  "   "     "        "   James Reynolds, Gate No. 3    4,410 43
  "   "     "        "   National Road Stage Co        3,200 00
  "   "     "        "   Express Co                      254 00
                                                       --------
  Total amount received on Eastern Division                   $16,433 37

  TO TOLLS RECEIVED ON THE WESTERN DIVISION, VIZ:

  From David Mitchell, Gate No. 4                     $3,509 32
  "    Wm. Hill,        "   No. 5                      3,843 87
  "    Wm. McCleary,    "   No. 6                      4,105 81
  "    Good Intent Stage Co                            8,447 30
  Cash received from John S. Brady, on account of Quail's
  securities                                             769 44
                                                      ---------
                                                               $20,675 74
                                                               ----------
  Total receipts                                               $37,109 11

                                                                       CR.
  By cash paid Thomas Grier, collector at Gate No. 1    $333 33
  "      "     Robt. McDowell,   "     "   "   No. 2     333 33
  "      "     Jas. Reynolds,    "     "   "   No. 3     333 33
  "      "     Dan'l Kaine, for certifying auditors        1 00
  "      "     D. Kaine, Wm. P. Wells and Joseph Gadd     12 00
  "      "     William Jeffries                           65 62
  "      "     Geo. Craft, costs                           6 60
  "      "     Thos. and Robert Brown                    330 63
  "      "     Wm. Hager                                   3 00
  "      "     Elias Gilmore                           2,737 40
  "      "     George Palmer                              55 25
  "      "     William C. Stevens                         16 80
  "      "     Peter Kerney                                1 50
  "      "     James Dougan                               42 77
  "      "     Thomas Brownfield                       1,922 98
  "      "     Robert S. Henderson                       150 00
  "      "     John Malone                                30 62
  "      "     Sam'l Shipley, admr. of S. Rush           216 03
  "      "     Andrew Bryson                               3 00
  "      "     John McCalpin                               7 50
  "      "     Thomas McGrath                            485 94
  "      "     Samuel Harrah                               4 87
  "      "     John Bradfield                          1,748 82
  "      "     Robert McDowell                         1,041 80
  "      "     Calvin Perry                               44 25
  "      "     Wilson Fee                                 79 93
  "      "     Thomas D. Miller                          403 66
  "      "     James Dolan                                92 25
  "      "     Upton Shaw                                 65 75
  "      "     Elijah Crable                              36 00
  "      "     Samuel Shipley                            833 38
  "      "     Matthew McNeil                            107 44
  "      "     Fall & Herbertson                          24 53
  "      "     James White                                 8 80
  "      "     Jackson Brown                                 50
  "      "     J. L. Wylie & Co                            1 44
  "      "     Byers & Gregg                              35 00
  "      "     William Reynolds                          698 87
  "      "     James Marlow                               65 15
  "      "     Rudolph Brinkman                           82 12
  "      "     William Spaw                               99 90
  "      "     Sebastian Rush                             92 75
  "      "     John McDowell                             809 14
  "      "     Edward G. Roddy                            49 84
  "      "     Isaac McLaughlin                            5 25
  "      "     George W. Cass                             70 00
  "      "     John Irons, printing                       21 50
  "      "     Samuel McDonald, printing                  10 00
  "      "     J. & G. S. Gideon                          24 00
  "      "     James Veech, professional services        100 00
  "      "     R. P. Flenniken   "         "             100 00
  "      "     Edward Kerven                             140 73
  "      "     Thomas Hougan                              30 00
  "      "     Thomas Dougan                              51 75
  "      "     John Powell                                37 75
  "      "     George Parmertor                           71 75
  "      "     Daniel Cannon                             329 75
  "      "     Hugh Graham                               233 95
  "      "     Morris Whalen                             118 28
  "      "     Nicholas Bradley                           91 78
  "      "     Perry White                               116 06
  "      "     Simon Deal                                 96 39
  "      "     William McClean                            73 23
  "      "     James Collins                              27 37
  "      "     James McCartney                            82 08
  "      "     Anthony Yarnell                           192 65
  "      "     William Conard                              1 25
  "      "     Thomas McCoy                               33 00
  "      "     James Reynolds                              9 47
  "      "     John M. Claybaugh                          20 43
  "      "     Robert McDowell                           300 44
  "      "     Gadd & Henderson                        2,531 50
  "      "     Francis L. Wilkinson                       12 29
  "      "     Kerney & Redfern                           44 62
  "      "     Matthias Fry                              442 67
  Depreciated money on hand                               10 00
  Balance due Commissioner on former settlement        1,580 00
  Salary of Commissioner, from May 1st, 1843, to 31st
      of December, 1844, being 513 days at $3.00 per
      day                                              1,539 00

  Whole amount expended on Eastern Division            -------$22,066 53

  BY THE FOLLOWING SUMS EXPENDED ON THE WESTERN DIVISION.

                                                                     CR.
  By cash paid David Mitchell, collector Gate No. 4   $  333 33
   "      "    William Hill,       "      " No. 5        333 33
   "      "    Wm. McCleary,       "      " No. 6        333 33
   "      "    E. L. Blaine, for use of Patrick Egan      34 96
   "      "    J. S. Brady, on account of Wm. Paull       41 84
   "      "    William McCleary                            7 00
   "      "    James Denison                             213 90
   "      "    Henry Masterson                           307 87
   "      "    Hiram Freeman                           1,402 37
   "      "    Charles Kern                              136 72
   "      "    Thomas Egan                               263 32
   "      "    John McCollough                           956 58
   "      "    Robert Sprowl                           2,995 38
   "      "    Adam Fishburn                               1 50
   "      "    John Robinson                             303 07
   "      "    Joseph Lawson                           1,962 50
   "      "    Patrick Egan                              203 00
   "      "    John Bradley, admr. of R. Bradley         221 25
   "      "    Thomas Hagerty                             87 95
   "      "    John Huston                                20 25
   "      "    George Irvin                              162 07
   "      "    William Hill                                2 81
   "      "    William Paull                             161 00
   "      "    Samuel Rodgers                              3 00
   "      "    Michael Monahan                            55 00
   "      "    Thomas Finley                              36 25
   "      "    John Curry                                  6 00
   "      "    Michael Dougan                              9 00
   "      "    McCollough & Gilmore                      980 22
   "      "    Charles Murphy                             70 00
   "      "    Charles Stillwagon,                        75 00
   "      "    Jacob Stillwagon                          305 21
   "      "    Jacob Daugherty                           229 00
   "      "    Anthony Rentz                             534 25
   "      "    Baldwin Miller                              3 75
   "      "    William Pepper                             13 41
   "      "    Henry Murry                               170 66
   "      "    James Thompson                            291 17
   "      "    James Hurley                              280 63
   "      "    J. J. Armstrong                            58 12
   "      "    B. Forester                                25 00
   "      "    John Mitchell                              62 71
   "      "    Mark M. Passmore                           33 75
   "      "    Grayson & Kaine, printing                  17 00
   "      "    John Bausman       "                       15 00
   "      "    Richard Biddle                             60 00
   "      "    Michael Price                              21 00
   "      "    William Scott                              15 00
   "      "    William Hopkins                            52 50
   "      "    E. L. Blaine, costs                        11 01
   "      "    Thomas Sprout                              14 94
   "      "    John Wheeler                               62 87
   "      "    Robert Patrick                             45 95
   "      "    Cornelius Daly                             37 85
   "      "    James McIntyre                            226 50
   "      "    William Hastings                          125 62
   "      "    Jacob Dixon                                 6 10
   "      "    Michael Bail                               16 00
   "      "    Keyran Tolbert                             55 52
   "      "    David Butts                                 2 00
   "      "    James Redman                              160 00
   "      "    John Gadd                               1,556 53
   "      "    Thomas Hagan                               34 50
   "      "    James Gainer                              185 56
   "      "    John Whitmire                             150 00
   "      "    Peter Kerney                               51 50
  Depreciated money on hand                                5 00
  Whole amount expended on Western Division            -------$16,655 41

  Whole amount expended on Eastern Division                    22,066 53
                                                               ---------
  Whole amount expended on both divisions                     $38,721 94

  Balance due Commissioner, December 31, 1844.       $ 1,612 83

FAYETTE COUNTY, SS.

We, the undersigned, auditors appointed by the Court of Common Pleas of
Fayette county for that purpose, having examined the accounts and
vouchers relating to the receipts and expenditures of Wm. Searight,
Esq., Superintendent of the Cumberland Road, from the 1st day of May,
1843, to the 31st of December, 1844, inclusive, have found the foregoing
statement of the same to be correct and true.

                                                  H. CAMPBELL,
                                                  JOHN HUSTON,
                                                  RICHARD BEESON.
                                                        _Auditors._

     NOTE.--Gate No. 1 was located at the east end of Petersburg, Gate
     No. 2 was near Mt. Washington, Gate No. 3 was near Searights, Gate
     No. 4 was near Beallsville, Gate No. 5 was near Washington, and
     Gate No. 6 near West Alexander.


                           RATES OF TOLL.

The following were the rates of toll fixed by the act of April 11th,
1831, which were subsequently, however, changed: For every score of
sheep or hogs, six cents; for every score of cattle, twelve cents; for
every led or driven horse, three cents; for every horse and rider, four
cents; for every sleigh or sled, for each horse or pair of oxen drawing
the same, three cents; for every dearborn, sulky, chair or chaise, with
one horse, six cents; for every chariot, coach, coachee, stage, wagon,
phaeton, chaise, with two horses and four wheels, twelve cents; for
either of the carriages last mentioned with four horses, eighteen cents;
for every other carriage of pleasure, under whatever name it may go, the
like sum, according to the number of wheels and horses drawing the same;
for every cart or wagon whose wheels shall exceed two and one-half
inches in breadth, and not exceeding four inches, four cents; for every
horse or pair of oxen drawing the same, and every other cart or wagon,
whose wheels shall exceed four inches, and not exceeding five inches in
breadth, three cents; for every horse or pair of oxen drawing the same,
and for every other cart or wagon whose wheels shall exceed six inches,
and not more than eight inches, two cents; for every horse or pair of
oxen drawing the same, all other carts or wagons whose wheels shall
exceed eight inches in breadth, shall pass the gates free of tolls, and
no tolls shall be collected from any person or persons passing or
repassing from one part of his farm to another, or to or from a mill, or
to or from any place of public worship, funeral, militia training,
elections, or from any student or child going to or from any school or
seminary of learning, or from persons and witnesses going to and
returning from courts, or from any wagon or carriage laden with the
property of the United States, or any canon or military stores belonging
to the United States, or to any State. The reader will note that the
exemptions provided for by this act are changed by force of the act of
May 3, 1850, which authorized the commissioner and the court of quarter
sessions to determine who and what shall be exempt from the payment of
toll. A large wide board, having the appearance of a mock window, was
firmly fixed in the walls of every toll house, displaying in plain
letters the rates above given, so that the wayfarer might not err
therein.


  MR. GALLATIN DEFINES HIS ATTITUDE AS TO THE LOCATION OF THE ROAD, AND
     GIVES INSTRUCTIONS TO DAVID SHRIVER, SUPERINTENDENT.

When the road was authorized to be constructed by Congress, Mr. Gallatin
was Secretary of the Treasury, and a citizen of Fayette county,
Pennsylvania. His home was "Friendship Hill," in Springhill township,
near New Geneva, about fifteen miles south of Uniontown, afterward the
home of Hon. John L. Dawson. It was intimated in various quarters that
Mr. Gallatin was desirous of having the road located through or near his
place, and that he used his official influence to further his desire in
this regard. The following letter, however, to his old friend David
Acheson, of Washington, Pennsylvania, shows that the intimations
mentioned were without foundation:

                                        NEW YORK, September 1, 1808.
DAVID ACHESON, ESQ., Washington, Pa.

_Dear Sir_: On receipt of your letter respecting the Western Road, I
immediately transmitted it to the President at Monticello. I was under
the impression that he had previously directed the Commissioners to
examine both routes and to report to him. It seems, however, that it
had not then been yet done. But on the 6th ultimo he wrote to them to
make an examination of the best route through Washington to Wheeling,
and also to Short Creek, or any other point on the river offering a more
advantageous route towards Chillicothe and Cincinnati, and to report to
him the material facts with their opinion for consideration.

That it is the sincere wish of the President to obtain all the necessary
information in order that the road should pursue the route which will be
of the greatest public utility no doubt can exist. So far as relates to
myself, after having, with much difficulty, obtained the creation of a
fund for opening a great western road, and the act pointing out its
general direction, it is sufficiently evident from the spot on the
Monongahela which the road strikes, that if there was any subsequent
interference on my part it was not of a selfish nature. But the fact is
that in the execution of the law I thought myself an improper person,
from the situation of my property, to take the direction which would
naturally have been placed in my hands, and requested the President to
undertake the general superintendence himself. Accept the assurance of
friendly remembrance, and of my sincere wishes for your welfare and
happiness.

                                        Your obedt servant,
                                                    ALBERT GALLATIN.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                   TREASURY DEPARTMENT, March 9th, 1813.

_Sir_: You will herewith receive the plot of the road as laid by the
Commissioners from the 21st mile to Uniontown.

I approve of having a stone bridge across Little Youghiogheny, and the
measures necessary to secure masons should be adopted, but the site
cannot be fixed until you have examined whether any alterations in the
course be practicable. In that respect I beg leave to refer you to my
former letters. As soon as your examination of the ground has taken
place, and the alterations you may have found practicable shall have
been received and approved, public notice may be given inviting
proposals to contract for completing the road as far as Big
Yioughiogheny river; an additional appropriation of $140,000 having been
made by Congress. You will therefore perceive that in every point of
view your examination of the ground is the first object to attend to.

I have the honor to be, respectfully, sir,

                                        Your obt. servant,
                                                     ALBERT GALLATIN.

  D. Shriver, jr., Cumberland, Md.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                  TREASURY DEPARTMENT, April 17th, 1813.

_Sir_: Your letter of the 3d inst. has been duly received. The principal
object in finally fixing the course of the road is its permanency and
durability without the necessity of perpetual and expensive repairs. To
select, therefore, the best ground which that mountainous country will
afford, avoiding, as far as practicable, cutting along the side of steep
and long hills, always exposed to be washed away, appears to be one of
first importance. The other considerations, subordinate to the selection
of the best ground, but to be also attended to, are, the expense of
making the road, the shortness of the distance and the accommodation (by
intersecting lateral roads) of important settlements not on the line of
the road.

As an erroneous location would be an irreparable evil, it is better that
the contracts for the ensuing twenty miles should be delayed, than to
make them before you have had time to take a complete view of the
ground. Examine it well before you decide and make your first report.
This is more important because it is probable that I will be absent when
that report is made, and that it will be decisive, as the acting
secretary, to whom the subject will be new and the localities unknown,
cannot have time to investigate it critically, and will probably adopt
it on your responsibility. If a decisive advantage should arise from an
alteration in the last sections already contracted for, and the
contractors assent to it, you may, in your report, propose such an
alteration. You are authorized for the purpose of facilitating your
review of the road, without neglecting the duties of general
superintendence, to employ John S. Shriver, or some other able
assistant, with a reasonable compensation. You have not stated what this
should be, but it is presumed that you will not, in that respect, exceed
what is necessary for obtaining the services of a well qualified person.
You are authorized to draw for a further sum of twenty thousand dollars;
whenever this is nearly exhausted you will apply for a new credit.

With respect to details, they are left at your discretion. You are
sensible of the great confidence placed in your abilities and integrity,
and I am sure you will not disappoint our expectations.

With perfect consideration and sincere wishes for your welfare, I have
the honor to be, sir,

                              Your obedient servant,
                                             ALBERT GALLATIN.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                    TREASURY DEPARTMENT, April 20th, 1813.

_Sir_: You are authorized to employ a surveyor to view the most
proper road from Brownsville to Washington in Pennsylvania, and
thence to examine the routes to Charlestown, Steubenville, mouth of
Short Creek and Wheeling, and report a correct statement of distance
and ground on each. If the county road as now established
from Brownsville to Washington is not objectionable, it would be
eligible to prefer it to any other which might be substituted. The
surveyor thus employed will meet with every facility by applying to
the gentlemen at Washington who have this alteration in the western
road much at heart.

I am respectfully, sir, your obedient servant,

                                                  ALBERT GALLATIN.
  D. SHRIVER, JR., Cumberland, Md.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                    TREASURY DEPARTMENT, April 23rd, 1811.

_Sir_: Mr. Cochran has signed his contract and bonds for the third and
fourth sections of the road at the price agreed on, that is to say, at
the rate of twenty-two dollars and fifty cents per rod for the third
section, and of sixteen dollars and fifty cents per rod for the fourth
section.

I now enclose the contracts and bonds for the first and second sections;
that for the first in the name of Henry McKinley, and at the rate of
twenty-one dollars and twenty-five cents per rod. The proposal of Mr.
Reade was at the rate of thirteen dollars for a road covered with a
stratum of stones twelve inches thick, all the stones to pass through a
three-inch ring. He did not stay here or return here to complete the
business and was not present when the road was altered to a stratum of
stones fifteen inches thick. The same additional price, viz: one dollar
and a half per rod, is allowed him for that alteration which was by
agreement given to all the other contractors, making fourteen dollars
and a half as set down in the contract, instead of thirteen. The
contracts and bonds are in every respect (the names of sections and
difference of price only excepted) verbatim the same as both those
signed by Mr. Cochran, and they were as you will perceive all executed
by me, and signed by the President. After they shall have been signed by
the contractors respectively, they will each keep a copy of their own
contracts, and you will return the other copy, together with the bond
(both being signed by the contractors respectively) to this office.

If either of the contractors should for any reason whatever refuse to
sign the contract, you will return the same to this office, notify the
person thus refusing that he is not considered as a contractor, forbid
his doing any work, and immediately advertise in Cumberland that you
will receive proposals for making the section of the road thus not
contracted for. You will afterward transmit the proposals which may
accordingly be made.

I also enclose a copy of the contracts for your own use in order that
you may in every case be able to secure the additions agreed on.

I have the honor to be with consideration, sir,

                                        Your obedient servant,
                                                    ALBERT GALLATIN.

The dates were the only blanks left in the contracts and bonds
and must be filled at the time of signing, by the contractors.

                                                              A. G.
  MR. DAVID SHRIVER, JR., Cumberland, Md.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                  TREASURY DEPARTMENT, April 30th, 1811.

_Sir_: Your letter of the 22d inst. has been received. The President has
confirmed the alteration in the first section of the road. It will be
proper to have a short endorsement to that effect entered on the
contract with Mr. McKinley, and signed by him and yourself.

You are authorized to contract for the bridges and mason work on the
terms mentioned in your letter, with the exception of the bridges across
Clinton's Fork of Braddock's Run, which may perhaps be avoided by the
alteration which you contemplate, and which, if necessary, we may,
perhaps, considering other expenses, be obliged to contract of cheaper
materials. It is left to your discretion to contract for the other mason
work as above stated, either with Mr. Kinkead or with the road
contractors.

If you shall find it necessary to employ a temporary assistant, you are
authorized to do it, provided he shall be employed and paid only when
actually necessary. I should think that one dollar and twenty-five, or
at most, fifty cents, a day, would in that part of the country be ample
compensation.

Respecting side walls no decisive opinion can be given until you shall
have matured your ideas on the subject, and formed some estimate of the
extent to which they must be adopted and of the expense.

I have the honor to be respectfully, sir,

                              Your obedient servant,
                                      ALBERT GALLATIN.

  MR. DAVID SHRIVER, JR.,
  Superintendent of the Cumberland Road, Cumberland, Md.


LETTER FROM EBENEZER FINLEY.

                                        RELEASE, September 1, 1891.

HON. T. B. SEARIGHT,

_My much respected friend_: In our conversation the other day, I spoke
from memory entirely, as I had no statistics from which to quote. Your
father bought the stone tavern house at Searights from Joseph Frost. It
was unfinished when your father bought it. I knew Joseph Frost, but have
no recollection of the family he came from. Your father was a single
man, when he bought the house, but married shortly after.

In relation to Mr. Stewart's and Mr. Benton's colloquy about the
National Road, Mr. Stewart said that "hay stacks and corn shocks would
walk over it." Mr. Benton replied that "he could not conceive how hay
stacks and corn shocks could walk over this bowling green road." "Ah!"
rejoined Mr. Stewart, "I do not expect to see them walk in the shape of
stacks and shocks, but in the shape of fat cattle, hogs, horses and
mules from the Western and Southern States." This was in a discussion in
Congress, over an appropriation bill for repairing the road. Another
conversation with you at some time, would be very much enjoyed by your
unworthy scribbler.

P. S. Now, Colonel, since writing the above, many things have come
crowding on my memory, and I will mention some of the principal hotels
with which I was more or less acquainted. I frequently traveled over the
National Road in my younger days. I went often to Cumberland and
occasionally to Baltimore. I will begin at Big Crossings (Somerfield).
Coming this way, Thomas Brown kept a tavern on the hillside. Next Daniel
Collier, then Inks, and next Widow Tantlinger (Boss Rush's place). Next
James Sampey at Mt. Washington, then several stopping places before
reaching the Stewart stone house, a hotel that was not largely
patronized by travelers on the road. Next the Chalk Hill house and then
Jimmy Snyder's. Next the first house to the left as you come to Monroe,
built by Mr. Deford. Then several other hotels before you come to
Uniontown. In Uniontown, the Walker House (now Feather's) was well
patronized. Then James Seaton's and Thomas Brownfield's wagon stands.
Next the Cuthbert Wiggins wagon stand (later Moxley's), and next the
Searight house. Over the hill, next was a house kept by Samuel
Woolverton and Hugh Thompson. Then the Robert Johnson (later Hatfield)
stone house. Next old Peter Colley, father of Abel, Solomon and John
Colley. Then the Bowman house, kept by John Gribble, and next the
Brubaker house. Then the first house to the left as you go into
Brownsville, kept by Darra Auld, and next the Workman House. But I
presume you have all these.

                                        Respectfully,
                                            EB. FINLEY.


LETTER FROM THOMAS A. WILEY, A NATIVE OF UNIONTOWN, WHO RODE THE PONY
EXPRESS.

                    BALTIMORE AND OHIO R. R. CO.,
                            GEN. TICKET AGENT'S OFFICE,
                                  BALTIMORE, July 16, 1892.

T. B. SEARIGHT, ESQ.--_Dear Sir_:--I have been receiving from some one
the _Jeffersonian Democrat_, a paper published in my old favorite
Uniontown, and have read with great pleasure your publication of things
that transpired along the National Road. I knew a great many of the old
wagoners, stage drivers and tavern keepers you mention. When I was
working for the stage company the Baltimore and Ohio railroad was only
completed to Frederic, Maryland, and I used to travel the old pike very
often. I hope to be able to come once more to Uniontown before I go
hence, where nearly all the rest have gone, and would delight in a long
talk with you about old times on the road. In looking over the paper you
sent me I scarcely see any names that I used to know in Uniontown. When
last in Uniontown I met William Wilson, Ewing Brownfield and Greenberry
Crossland, and did not get a chance to see my old friend and shop-mate,
Philip Bogardus. He and I worked for the Stockton stage company. The
shops were on Morgantown street. I understand that since I was out my
old friend, Bogardus, has passed away. I recollect the lady he married
was a Miss Lincoln, and I also recollect his boy, Winfield Scott. I have
been with the Baltimore and Ohio company since October 10th, 1852, and
am still in its service. Again thanking you for the paper you sent me, I
close, in the hope that God will bless you and spare your life and mine,
that we may meet in old time-honored Uniontown, and talk over the
glories of the old pike.

                                        Yours most respectfully,
                                                THOMAS A. WILEY.


PROPOSALS FOR CARRYING THE MAILS.

                                    WASHINGTON CITY, September 26, 1831.

We will agree to convey the mail on route No. 1,031, from Philadelphia
to Pittsburg, daily in four-horse post coaches, agreeable to
advertisement, for the yearly compensation of seven thousand dollars.

Or we will make the following improvements: To convey two daily mails
from Philadelphia to Pittsburg: First mail to leave Philadelphia at two
o'clock A. M. and arrive at Pittsburg in two days and five hours, so as
to arrive in Pittsburg at seven o'clock A. M., and extend the route to
Wheeling so as to arrive, including route 1,170, at Wheeling the third
day by nine o'clock P. M., from the first of April to first of December,
and, from first of December to first of April, to Pittsburg in three and
Wheeling in four days; and return from Wheeling by Washington,
Pittsburg, and Chambersburg, to Philadelphia within the same time;
changing the mail as follows: at Lancaster, Harrisburg, Chambersburg,
Bedford, Somerset, Mount Pleasant, and at any other office that is or
may be established on the route. The second mail to leave Philadelphia
at seven A. M., or immediately after the arrival of the New York mail,
and reach Pittsburg in three days and five hours, so as to arrive in
Pittsburg by noon, changing the mail at all way offices.

We will agree to carry the mail on route No. 1,198, from Bedford to
Washington, Pa., via White House, Somerset, Donegal, Mount Pleasant,
McKean's, Old Stand, Robbstown, Gambles, and Parkinson's Ferry, to
Washington, Pa., as advertised, for the yearly compensation of
twenty-nine hundred dollars.

We do agree to carry the mail on route No. 1,230, from Bedford, Pa., to
Cumberland, Md., three times a week in coaches, from the first of April
to the first of October, and once a week on horseback from the first of
October to the first of April, so as to connect with the Winchester mail
at Cumberland, and the Great Eastern and Western mail at Bedford, which
is much wanted during the summer season, for the yearly compensation of
thirteen hundred dollars.

                                                  JAMES REESIDE,
                                                  SAMUEL R. SLAYMAKER,
                                                  J. TOMLINSON.
  To the Hon. WM. T. BARRY,
                        Postmaster General.


CONTRACT.

This contract, made the fifteenth day of October, in the year one
thousand eight hundred and thirty-one, between James Reeside, of
Philadelphia, Samuel R. Slaymaker, of Lancaster, and Jesse Tomlinson, of
Philadelphia, contractors for carrying the mail of the United States, of
one part, and the Postmaster General of the United States of the other
part, witnesseth, that said parties have mutually covenanted as follows,
viz.: The said contractors covenant with the Postmaster General:

To carry the mails from Pittsburg to Harriottsville, Cannonsburg,
Washington, Claysville, West Alexander, and Triadelphia, Va., to
Wheeling and back, daily, in four-horse post coaches, the first mail to
be changed at each county town through which it passes; the second mail
at every office on the route; and to furnish armed guards for the whole,
when required by the department, at the rate of six thousand seven
hundred and fifty dollars for every quarter of a year, during the
continuance of this contract; to be paid in drafts on postmasters on the
route above mentioned, or in money, at the option of the Postmaster
General, in the months of May, August, November, and February.

That the mails shall be duly delivered at, and taken from each
postoffice now established, or that may be established on any post route
embraced in this contract, under a penalty of ten dollars for each
offence; and a like penalty shall be incurred for each ten minutes'
delay in the delivery of the mail after the time fixed for its delivery
at any postoffice specified in the schedule hereto annexed; and it is
also agreed that the Postmaster General may alter the times of arrival
and departure fixed by said schedule, and alter the route (he making an
adequate compensation for any extra expense which may be occasioned
thereby); and the Postmaster General reserves the right of annulling
this contract, in case the contractors do not promptly adopt the
alteration required.

If the delay of the arrival of said mail continue until the hour for the
departure of any connecting mail, whereby the mails destined for such
connecting mails shall miss a trip, it shall be considered a whole trip
lost, and a forfeiture of one hundred dollars shall be incurred; and a
failure to take the mail, or to make the proper exchange of mails at
connecting points, shall be considered a whole trip lost; and for any
delay or failure equal to a trip lost, the Postmaster General shall have
full power to annul this contract.

That the said contractors shall be answerable for the persons to whom
they shall commit the care and transportation of the mail, and
accountable for any damage which may be sustained through their
unfaithfulness or want of care.

That seven minutes after the delivery of the mail at any postoffice on
the aforesaid route named on the annexed schedule, shall be allowed the
postmaster for opening the same, and making up another mail to be
forwarded.

The contractors agree to discharge any driver or carrier of said mail
whenever required to do so by the Postmaster General.

That when the said mail goes by stage, such stage shall be suitable for
the comfortable accommodation of at least seven travelers; and the mail
shall invariably be carried in a secure dry boot, under the driver's
feet, or in the box which constitutes the driver's seat, under a penalty
of fifty dollars for each omission; and when it is carried on horseback,
or in a vehicle other than a stage, it shall be covered securely with an
oil cloth or bear skin, against rain or snow, under a penalty of twenty
dollars for each time the mail is wet, without such covering.

_Provided always_, That this contract shall be null and void in case the
contractors or any person that may become interested in this contract,
directly or indirectly, shall become a postmaster or an assistant
postmaster. No member of Congress shall be admitted to any share or part
of this contract or agreement, or to any benefit to arise thereupon; and
this contract shall, in all its parts, be subject to its terms and
requisitions of an act of Congress, passed on the 21st day of April, in
the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and eight, entitled, "An
act concerning public contracts."

And it is mutually covenanted and agreed by the said parties that this
contract shall commence on the first day of January next, and continue
in force until the thirty-first day of December, inclusively, which will
be in the year one thousand eight hundred and thirty-five.

_In witness whereof_, They have hereunto interchangeably set their hands
and seals the day and year first above written.

                                    (Signed.)  JAMES REESIDE.      (Seal.)
                                               SAM'L R. SLAYMAKER. (Seal.)
                                               JESSE TOMLINSON.    (Seal.)

Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of

                                                  ROB'T D. CARSON.
                                                  JACOB SHEARER.


BOND.

_Know all men by these presents_, That James Reeside, as principal, and
Richard Morris and David Dorrance, as sureties, are held and firmly
bound unto the Postmaster General of the United States of America, in
the just and full sum of two thousand nine hundred dollars, value
received, to be paid unto the Postmaster General or his successors in
office, or to his or their assigns; to which payment, well and truly to
be made, we bind ourselves, our heirs, executors, and administrators,
jointly and severally, firmly by these presents. Sealed with our seals,
dated the seventeenth day of December, in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and thirty-one.

The condition of this obligation is such that whereas the above bounden
James Reeside, by a certain contract bearing date the fifteenth day of
October, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
thirty-one, covenanted with the said Postmaster General to carry the
mail of the United States from Bedford to Washington (Pennsylvania), as
per contract annexed, commencing the first day of January, one thousand
eight hundred and thirty-two, and ending the thirty-first day of
December, which will be in the year one thousand eight hundred and
thirty-five.

Now, if the said James Reeside shall well and truly perform the
covenants in the said indenture expressed on his part to be performed,
and shall account for all penalties, and shall promptly repay all
balances that may at any time be found due from him, then this bond is
to be void; otherwise to remain in full force.

                                        (Signed.) JAMES REESIDE,  (Seal.)
                                                  RICHARD MORRIS, (Seal.)
                                                  DAVID DORRANCE, (Seal.)

Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of

                                        (Signed.) R. C. WHITESIDE.

A true copy from the original on file in the General Postoffice.

                                        MW. ST. CLAIR CLARKE, Secretary.


CLAIM FOR EXTRA ALLOWANCE.

                                        WASHINGTON CITY, December 28, 1831.

_Sir_: For the four years which I have been your contractor for
transporting the great Eastern mail from New York to Philadelphia, it
has happened almost every week, and several times in a week, that
arrivals from foreign countries have brought thousands of ship letters
to the office of New York just before the time for my departure, and the
importance of their being forwarded without delay to the Southern cities
has required my detention from one to two hours beyond the ordinary time
for me to leave New York. This detention I have been required to gain in
speed, and that increased speed has required me always to keep on that
route two extra teams of horses, at an extra expense of not less than
one thousand dollars per year for each team. During the first year your
predecessor made me an extra allowance for this expense, but during the
last three years I have received nothing for it. I now submit the
subject to you, in the expectation that you will allow the claim; it is
certainly but just that I should be relieved, at least in part, of this
burden, for the last three years it has subjected me to an expense of
not less than six thousand dollars, which I hope you will direct to be
paid to me, at least in part, if you do not think me entitled to the
whole. I have also, within the same time, transported to New York all
the large mail bags which are made in Philadelphia and sent to New York,
not with mails, but to be used in New York, and to be sent from New York
to other places. These within three years will amount to about five
hundred pounds a week, as will appear from accounts of the manufacturers
in your office. Wherever I could procure transportation for those bags
in wagons, I have uniformly paid $2.50 per hundred pounds for carrying
them, rather than overload my coaches in which we carry the great mail.
For this service, I hope you will not consider my claim unreasonable, if
I charge ten dollars per week for three years. All of which is submitted
to your sense of justice for decision.

                              Very respectfully, your obedient servant,
                                                      JAMES REESIDE.
  HON. WM. T. BARRY.

Endorsement--Allowed. Allow $4,500. The residue of the
claim is reserved for future consideration. Allow the remaining
$1,500.


COULDN'T AFFORD TO CARRY NEWSPAPERS.

                                        WASHINGTON, July 12, 1832.

_Sir_: When we entered into contract with you to run two daily mails
between Philadelphia and Pittsburg, one with unexampled rapidity, and
the other in three and one-half days, we had no idea whatever of
carrying the newspaper mail in our most rapid line, nor do we suppose it
was ever contemplated by the department. It was our intention and we so
expressed it in all our conversation with you, and with the
superintendent of mail contracts, to carry the principal letter mail
only in the most rapid line, not believing it practicable to carry the
heavy load of newspapers sent to the West with sufficient rapidity to
reach Pittsburg in the shortest time specified. Indeed, if we could have
supposed that it would ever become necessary to carry the newspapers
with that rapidity, we should not have undertaken it for less that
fifteen thousand dollars a year beyond what we now receive; but
experience soon taught us that great complaints were made against the
department and ourselves when the newspapers were not received as soon
as the letters, and that these complaints were not confined to
Pittsburg, but extended all over the West. To satisfy the public, and
sustain the credit of both the department and ourselves as its servant,
we made the experiment of trying to carry the newspapers with our most
rapid line. We have partially succeeded, but with very great loss. For
three days in the week we are compelled to exclude all passengers, to
the loss of not less than one hundred dollars a day. We are willing to
perform our contract to the full extent of its meaning, but we must
relinquish carrying the newspaper mails by our most rapid line, unless
we can in part be remunerated for it. If, however, the Postmaster
General is willing to silence the public clamor, which is so great when
we carry them in our slow line, we will carry all the newspaper mails,
together with the letter mail, in our most rapid line to Pittsburg and
Wheeling, in the shortest time specified in our contract, and so arrange
the connection of the Baltimore mail at Chambersburg with our swift
line, as to carry the newspapers as well as letter mail, from Baltimore
to Pittsburg in two days, for the additional allowance of ten thousand
dollars per year, from the first of April last. The increased expense to
us will not be less than fifteen thousand dollars a year, and for our
own credit and for the credit of the department, we will make one-third
of the sacrifice and perform the service for ten thousand dollars a
year. We would gladly do it for a less sum if we could afford it, but we
cannot, and at that rate our sacrifice will be as much as we can bear.
It would be much more gratifying to us if the public would be satisfied
without it, but they will not, and our own feelings will not suffer us
to perform a service in which we cannot give satisfaction to the public.

Very respectfully, your obedient servants,

                                                  JAS. REESIDE,
                                                  SAM'L R. SLAYMAKER.
  To the HON. W. T. BARRY,
  Postmaster General.

A true copy from the original on file in the General Postoffice.

(The above letter is marked "Granted.")

                                        MW. ST. CLAIR CLARKE, Secretary.


MR. REESIDE DEFIES ALL COMPETITORS.

                                        PHILADELPHIA, January 25, 1833.

_Dear Sir_: Your favor dated the 22d inst. has just come to hand, which
I have examined with much care, but must confess myself at a loss to
come to the exact meaning it is extended to convey.

That there is at present, and has been for some time back, an express
carried on horseback between this city and New York, is a fact which is
well known, and which is publicly acknowledged by the newspapers in New
York. That it is impossible to carry the whole of the great Eastern mail
through in coaches or otherwise with the same speed as a small package
can be carried through on horseback is a fact that requires no comment.

Not having pointed out this matter clearly in your letter whether it was
the wish of the department that a certain portion of mails should be
sent by express to New York at an earlier hour than it now does.

Should it be the latter, I would at once assure the department of the
impossibility of having it carried through in as short a time as it is
now carried by express on horseback.

In either case the department may rest assured of my willingness and
determination to use every exertion in order to meet the views and
wishes of the department. Should you desire it to be sent by express, I
have no hesitation in saying that I can have it sent through in a
shorter time than it can be done by any other individual in the country.
This will be handed to you by Mr. Ewing, whom I have sent on with
directions to ascertain from you personally your views of this matter,
and who will give you all the information respecting the express that
has been sent from this place to New York alluded to in your letter.

     With respect, your obedient servant,
                                                  JAMES REESIDE.

N. B. I will say to a certainty I will go from this city to New York in
six hours, or faster than any other one can do it.

                                                  JAMES REESIDE.
  To Hon. O. B. BROWN,
        Superintendent of Mail Contracts,
                              Washington, D. C.


TEAMS READY FOR THE NATIONAL ROAD.

                                        TRENTON, February 25, 1833.

_Dear Sir_: You will perceive by the enclosed that I have attended to
your directions as far as practicable. It is their own exposition of the
matter, and such as they gave me.

I neglected to mention to you in my letter of yesterday that the cause
of the private express beating that of the Government alluded to in Mr.
Mumford's letter, was owing to but one cause.

Their express came through from Washington.

The Government express from Philadelphia, after the arrival of the
steamship, giving the newspaper express the start of six hours in
advance of that of the Government. The lateness of the succeeding
arrivals originated from the cause mentioned in the enclosed letter. No
mail having arrived from the South, they supposed, from the lateness of
the arrival of the express the following night, that there would not be
any more.

This was caused by the late arrival of the steamboat, and no preparation
was made on the road for taking it on. This is their excuse; whether it
will pass current is for you to determine. I have just received a letter
from Mr. Washington on the subject. He attaches the blame to Thompson's
bad horse, &c.

I think we shall be able to get the mail through in time to connect with
the boat, should the roads not get worse than they now are.

The mail arrived in Philadelphia this morning at 6 o'clock. I have good
reasons for believing that it will continue, unless a change should take
place in the roads.

The mail has left Jersey City the last few days at a few minutes past
three o'clock P. M., and will continue to leave at that hour unless you
direct otherwise: that is three o'clock.

The teams intended for the National Road are here to-night, and start
to-morrow for the West; they are twelve in number, Jersey stock.

                                        Yours respectfully,
                                                             D. EWING.

  COLONEL JAMES REESIDE.

P. S. No opposition express for the last four days. Your express horses
are in good order, with but two exceptions.

                                                              D. E.


COPY OF AN ACCOUNT AGAINST COL. JAMES REESIDE.

  COL. JAMES REESIDE,           TO HUTCHINSON & WEART,            _Dr._

  1833.

  January 31.--To one horse on express                           $  5 00
  February 1.   " two horses   "                                   10 00
      "    2.   " two horses   "                                   10 00
      "    3.   " two horses   "                                   10 00
      "    3.   " horses and gig, Eastward, making arrangements
                   for regular express                              5 00
  March 7.--To two horses on express                                5 00
    "   7.   " running express one month and four days, from
                  February 4 to this date, inclusive, between
                  Trenton and New Brunswick                     1,885 71
                                                                --------
                                                               $1,970 71

The above is a true copy from our books, so far as relates to expresses,
and has been paid to us by Col. Reeside.

                                        HUTCHINSON & WEART.


BEDFORD, PA., GETS A DAILY MAIL.

                                                February 14, 1833.

_Sir_: The citizens of Bedford, Pennsylvania, desire that a daily mail
be run between Bedford and Hollidaysburg. The latter being a place of
great importance, being at the junction of the Pennsylvania Canal and
Railroad, and an intercourse of communication very great between the two
points, I will agree to perform the service for a pro rata allowance,
and put the arrangement into effect in ten days.

                    Very respectfully, etc.,
                                       JAMES REESIDE.

  HON. W. T. BARRY, Postmaster General.

No. 1215, Pennsylvania. James Reeside proposes to run daily for pro
rata; Postmaster General says within "granted;" James Reeside written to
25th February, 1833.




Transcriber's End Notes

Several illustrations ("ROAD WAGON" and "STAGE COACH") appear in the
table of illustrations but do not have captions in the images
themselves. These have been added. The table of illustrations indicates
that a portrait of Ellis B. Woodward was to appear after p. 119, where
he is mentioned. In fact, the portrait was bound between pages 132 and
133. It has been placed in its intended position.

In Chapter XIV and in the Appendix, accounting reports include balances
carried over to the following page. Since this text will not contain
page breaks, these are superfluous, and they have been eliminated.

The spelling of place names vary locally, e.g., Allegany / Allegheny.

The word "phaeton" appears both with and without the "ae" ligature. In
both cases, the spelling here is "phaeton".

Hyphenation can be variable and is retained as found. Where the sole
instance of a hyphenated word occurs on a line break, modern usage is
followed.

For Chapters XXIX, XXXII, the chapter summary fails to consistently use
the conventional '--' separator between topics. These omissions have
been corrected.

The following list contains typographical or spelling errors which were
noted, by the original pagination: (29) excelerating, (145) sapplings,
(155) ignominously, (157) wood-be robber, (166) Gautemala, (252)
whatsomever, (269) germaine, (290) Abram, (297) from widow Goodings,
(323) Tennesse, (327) mint julip, (328) Butting, (333), beleagured,
(349) empanneled.

Punctuation and spacing errors have been corrected to follow usage
elsewhere in the text.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Old Pike, by Thomas B. Searight

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OLD PIKE ***

***** This file should be named 41799.txt or 41799.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/7/9/41799/

Produced by KD Weeks, Odessa Paige Turner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

