Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, February 1667/68, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, February 1667/68

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: December 1, 2004 [EBook #4186]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                FEBRUARY
                                1667-1668

February 1st.  Up, and to the office pretty betimes, and the Board not
meeting as soon as I wished, I was forced to go to White Hall in
expectation of a Committee for Tangier, but when I come it was put off,
and so home again to the office, and sat till past two o'clock; where at
the Board some high words passed between Sir W. Pen and I, begun by me,
and yielded to by him, I being in the right in finding fault with him for
his neglect of duty.  At noon home to dinner, and after dinner out with my
wife, thinking to have gone to the Duke of York's playhouse, but was, to
my great content in the saving my vow, hindered by coming a little too
late; and so, it being a fine day, we out to Islington, and there to the
old house and eat cheese-cakes and drank and talked, and so home in the
evening, the ways being mighty bad, so as we had no pleasure in being
abroad at all almost, but only the variety of it, and so to the office,
where busy late, and then home to supper and to bed, my head mighty full
of business now on my hands: viz., of finishing my Tangier Accounts; of
auditing my last year's Accounts; of preparing answers to the
Commissioners of Accounts; of drawing up several important letters to the
Duke of York and the Commissioners of the Treasury; the marrying of my
sister; the building of a coach and stables against summer, and the
setting many things in the Office right; and the drawing up a new form of
Contract with the Victualler of the Navy, and several other things, which
pains, however, will go through with, among others the taking care of Kate
Joyce in that now she is in at present for saving her estate.

2nd (Lord's day).  Wife took physick this day, I all day at home, and all
the morning setting my books in order in my presses, for the following
year, their number being much increased since the last, so as I am fain to
lay by several books to make room for better, being resolved to keep no
more than just my presses will contain.  At noon to dinner, my wife coming
down to me, and a very good dinner we had, of a powdered leg of pork and a
loin of lamb roasted, and with much content she and I and Deb. After
dinner, my head combed an hour, and then to work again, and at it, doing
many things towards the setting my accounts and papers in order, and so in
the evening Mr. Pelling supping with us, and to supper, and so to bed.

3rd.  Up, and to the office, where with my clerks all the morning very
busy about several things there wherein I was behindhand.  At noon home to
dinner, and thence after dinner to the Duke of York's house, to the play,
"The Tempest," which we have often seen, but yet I was pleased again, and
shall be again to see it, it is so full of variety, and particularly this
day I took pleasure to learn the tune of the seaman's dance, which I have
much desired to be perfect in, and have made myself so.  So home with my
wife and Deb., and there at the office met to my trouble with a warrant
from the Commissioners of Accounts for my attending them and Cocke two
days hence, which I apprehend by Captain Cocke's being to go also, to be
about the prizes.  But, however, there is nothing of crime can be laid to
my charge, and the worst that can be is to refund my L500 profit, and who
can help it.  So I resolve not to be troubled at it, though I fear I
cannot bear it so, my spirit being very poor and mean as to the bearing
with trouble that I do find of myself. So home, and there to my chamber
and did some business,--and thence to supper and to bed.

4th.  Up, and to the office, where a full Board sat all the morning, busy
among other things concerning a solemn letter we intend to write to the
Duke of York about the state of the things of the Navy, for want of money,
though I doubt it will be to little purpose.  After dinner I abroad by
coach to Kate Joyce's, where the jury did sit where they did before, about
her husband's death, and their verdict put off for fourteen days longer,
at the suit of somebody, under pretence of the King; but it is only to get
money out of her to compound the matter.  But the truth is, something they
will make out of Stillingfleete's sermon, which may trouble us, he
declaring, like a fool, in his pulpit, that he did confess that his losses
in the world did make him do what he did.  This do vex me to see how
foolish our Protestant Divines are, while the Papists do make it the duty
of Confessor to be secret, or else nobody would confess their sins to
them.  All being put off for to-day, I took my leave of Kate, who is
mightily troubled at it for her estate sake, not for her husband; for her
sorrow for that, I perceive, is all over.  I home, and, there to my office
busy till the evening, and then home, and there my wife and Deb. and I and
Betty Turner, I employed in the putting new titles to my books, which we
proceeded on till midnight, and then being weary and late to bed.

5th.  Up, and I to Captain Cocke's, where he and I did discourse of our
business that we are to go about to the Commissioners of Accounts about
our prizes, and having resolved to conceal nothing but to confess the
truth, the truth being likely to do us most good, we parted, and I to
White Hall, where missing of the Commissioners of the Treasury, I to the
Commissioners of Accounts, where I was forced to stay two hours before I
was called in, and when come in did take an oath to declare the truth to
what they should ask me, which is a great power; I doubt more than the Act
do, or as some say can, give them, to force a man to swear against
himself; and so they fell to enquire about the business of prize-goods,
wherein I did answer them as well as I could, answer them in everything
the just truth, keeping myself to that.  I do perceive at last, that, that
they did lay most like a fault to me was, that I did buy goods upon my
Lord Sandwich's declaring that it was with the King's allowance, and my
believing it, without seeing the King's allowance, which is a thing I will
own, and doubt not to justify myself in.  That that vexed me most was,
their having some watermen by, to witness my saying that they were rogues
that they had betrayed my goods, which was upon some discontent with one
of the watermen that I employed at Greenwich, who I did think did discover
the goods sent from Rochester to the Custom-House officer; but this can do
me no great harm.  They were inquisitive into the minutest particulars,
and the evening great information; but I think that they can do me no
hurt, at the worst, more than to make me refund, if it must be known, what
profit I did make of my agreement with Captain Cocke; and yet, though this
be all, I do find so poor a spirit within me, that it makes me almost out
of my wits, and puts me to so much pain, that I cannot think of anything,
nor do anything but vex and fret, and imagine myself undone, so that I am
ashamed of myself to myself, and do fear what would become of me if any
real affliction should come upon me.  After they had done with me, they
called in Captain Cocke, with whom they were shorter; and I do fear he may
answer foolishly, for he did speak to me foolishly before he went in; but
I hope to preserve myself, and let him shift for himself as well as he
can.  So I away, walked to my flageolet maker in the Strand, and there
staid for Captain Cocke, who took me up and carried me home, and there
coming home and finding dinner done, and Mr. Cooke, who come for my Lady
Sandwich's plate, which I must part with, and so endanger the losing of my
money, which I lent upon my thoughts of securing myself by that plate.
But it is no great sum--but L60: and if it must be lost, better that, than
a greater sum.  I away back again, to find a dinner anywhere else, and so
I, first, to the Ship Tavern, thereby to get a sight of the pretty
mistress of the house, with whom I am not yet acquainted at all, and I do
always find her scolding, and do believe she is an ill-natured devil, that
I have no great desire to speak to her. Here I drank, and away by coach to
the Strand, there to find out Mr. Moore, and did find him at the Bell Inn,
and there acquainted him with what passed between me and the Commissioners
to-day about the prize goods, in order to the considering what to do about
my Lord Sandwich, and did conclude to own the thing to them as done by the
King's allowance, and since confirmed.  Thence to other discourse, among
others, he mightily commends my Lord Hinchingbroke's match and Lady,
though he buys her L10,000 dear, by the jointure and settlement his father
makes her; and says that the Duke of York and Duchess of York did come to
see them in bed together, on their wedding-night, and how my Lord had
fifty pieces of gold taken out of his pocket that night, after he was in
bed.  He tells me that an Act of Comprehension is likely to pass this
Parliament, for admitting of all persuasions in religion to the public
observation of their particular worship, but in certain places, and the
persons therein concerned to be listed of this, or that Church; which, it
is thought, will do them more hurt than good, and make them not own, their
persuasion.  He tells me that there is a pardon passed to the Duke of
Buckingham, my Lord of Shrewsbury, and the rest, for the late duell and
murder;

     [The royal pardon was thus announced in the "Gazette" of February
     24th, 1668: "This day his Majesty was pleased to declare at the
     Board, that whereas, in contemplation of the eminent services
     heretofore done to his Majesty by most of the persons who were
     engaged in the late duel, or rencounter, wherein William Jenkins was
     killed, he Both graciously pardon the said offence: nevertheless, He
     is resolved from henceforth that on no pretence whatsoever any
     pardon shall be hereafter granted to any person whatsoever for
     killing of any man, in any duel or rencounter, but that the course
     of law shall wholly take place in all such cases."  The warrant for
     a pardon to George, Duke of Buckingham, is dated January 27th, 1668;
     and on the following day was issued, "Warrant for a grant to
     Francis, Earl of Shrewsbury, of pardon for killing William Jenkins,
     and for all duels, assaults, or batteries on George, Duke of
     Buckingham, Sir John Talbot, Sir Robert Holmes, or any other,
     whether indicted or not for the same, with restitution of lands,
     goods, &c."  ("Calendar of State Papers," 1667-68, pp. 192,193).]

which he thinks a worse fault than any ill use my late Lord Chancellor
ever put the Great Seal to, and will be so thought by the Parliament, for
them to be pardoned without bringing them to any trial: and that my Lord
Privy-Seal therefore would not have it pass his hand, but made it go by
immediate warrant; or at least they knew that he would not pass it, and so
did direct it to go by immediate warrant, that it might not come to him.
He tells me what a character my Lord Sandwich hath sent over of Mr.
Godolphin, as the worthiest man, and such a friend to him as he may be
trusted in any thing relating to him in the world; as one whom, he says,
he hath infallible assurances that he will remaine his friend which is
very high, but indeed they say the gentleman is a fine man.  Thence, after
eating a lobster for my dinner, having eat nothing to-day, we broke up,
here coming to us Mr. Townsend of the Wardrobe, who complains of the
Commissioners of the Treasury as very severe against my Lord Sandwich, but
not so much as they complain of him for a fool and a knave, and so I let
him alone, and home, carrying Mr. Moore as far as Fenchurch Street, and I
home, and there being vexed in my mind about my prize businesses I to my
chamber, where my wife and I had much talk of W. Hewer, she telling me
that he is mightily concerned for my not being pleased with him, and is
herself mightily concerned, but I have much reason to blame him for his
little assistance he gives me in my business, not being able to copy out a
letter with sense or true spelling that makes me mad, and indeed he is in
that regard of as little use to me as the boy, which troubles me, and I
would have him know it,--and she will let him know it.  By and by to
supper, and so to bed, and slept but ill all night, my mind running like a
fool on my prize business, which according to my reason ought not to
trouble me at all.

6th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning,, and among other
things Sir H. Cholmly comes to me about a little business, and there tells
me how the Parliament, which is to meet again to-day, are likely to fall
heavy on the business of the Duke of Buckingham's pardon; and I shall be
glad of it: and that the King hath put out of the Court the two Hides, my
Lord Chancellor's two sons, and also the Bishops of Rochester and
Winchester, the latter of whom should have preached before him yesterday,
being Ash Wednesday, and had his sermon ready, but was put by; which is
great news: He gone, we sat at the office all the morning, and at noon
home to dinner, and my wife being gone before, I to the Duke of York's
playhouse; where a new play of Etherige's, called "She Would if she
Could;" and though I was there by two o'clock, there was 1000 people put
back that could not have room in the pit: and I at last, because my wife
was there, made shift to get into the 18d. box, and there saw; but, Lord!
how full was the house, and how silly the play, there being nothing in the
world good in it, and few people pleased in it.  The King was there; but I
sat mightily behind, and could see but little, and hear not all.  The play
being done, I into the pit to look (for) my wife, and it being dark and
raining, I to look my wife out, but could not find her; and so staid going
between the two doors and through the pit an hour and half, I think, after
the play was done; the people staying there till the rain was over, and to
talk with one another.  And, among the rest, here was the Duke of
Buckingham to-day openly sat in the pit; and there I found him with my
Lord Buckhurst, and Sidly, and Etherige, the poet; the last of whom I did
hear mightily find fault with the actors, that they were out of humour,
and had not their parts perfect, and that Harris did do nothing, nor could
so much as sing a ketch in it; and so was mightily concerned while all the
rest did, through the whole pit, blame the play as a silly, dull thing,
though there was something very roguish and witty; but the design of the
play, and end, mighty insipid.  At last I did find my wife staying for me
in the entry; and with her was Betty Turner, Mercer, and Deb.  So I got a
coach, and a humour took us, and I carried them to Hercules Pillars, and
there did give them a kind of a supper of about 7s., and very merry, and
home round the town, not through the ruines; and it was pretty how the
coachman by mistake drives us into the ruines from London-wall into
Coleman Street: and would persuade me that I lived there.  And the truth
is, I did think that he and the linkman had contrived some roguery; but it
proved only a mistake of the coachman; but it was a cunning place to have
done us a mischief in, as any I know, to drive us out of the road into the
ruines, and there stop, while nobody could be called to help us.  But we
come safe home, and there, the girls being gone home, I to the office,
where a while busy, my head not being wholly free of my trouble about my
prize business, I home to bed.  This evening coming home I did put my hand
under the coats of Mercer and did touch her thigh, but then she did put by
my hand and no hurt done, but talked and sang and was merry.

7th.  Up, and to the office, to the getting of my books in order, to carry
to the Commissioners of Accounts this morning.  This being done, I away
first to Westminster Hall, and there met my cozen, Roger Pepys, by his
desire, the first time I have seen him since his coming to town, the
Parliament meeting yesterday and adjourned to Monday next; and here he
tells me that Mr. Jackson, my sister's servant, is come to town, and hath
this day suffered a recovery on his estate, in order to the making her a
settlement.  The young man is gone out of the Hall, so I could not now see
him, but here I walked a good while with my cozen, and among other things
do hear that there is a great triall between my Lord Gerard and Carr
to-day, who is indicted for his life at the King's Bench, for running from
his colours; but all do say that my Lord Gerard, though he designs the
ruining of this man, will not get any thing by it.  Thence to the
Commissioners of Accounts, and there presented my books, and was made to
sit down, and used with much respect, otherwise than the other day, when I
come to them as a criminal about the business of the prizes.  I sat here
with them a great while, while my books were inventoried.  And here do
hear from them by discourse that they are like to undo the Treasurer's
instruments of the Navy by making it a rule that they shall repay all
money paid to wrong parties, which is a thing not to be supported by these
poor creatures the Treasurer's instruments, as it is also hard for seamen
to be ruined by their paying money to whom they please.  I know not what
will be the issue of it.  I find these gentlemen to sit all day, and only
eat a bit of bread at noon, and a glass of wine; and are resolved to go
through their business with great severity and method.  Thence I, about
two o'clock, to Westminster Hall, by appointment, and there met my cozen
Roger again, and Mr. Jackson, who is a plain young man, handsome enough
for Pall, one of no education nor discourse, but of few words, and one
altogether that, I think, will please me well enough.  My cozen had got me
to give the odd sixth L100 presently, which I intended to keep to the
birth of the first child: and let it go--I shall be eased of the care, and
so, after little talk, we parted, resolving to dine together at my house
tomorrow.  So there parted, my mind pretty well satisfied with this plain
fellow for my sister, though I shall, I see, have no pleasure nor content
in him, as if he had been a man of reading and parts, like Cumberland, and
to the Swan, and there sent for a bit of meat and eat and drank, and so to
White Hall to the Duke of York's chamber, where I find him and my fellows
at their usual meeting, discoursing about securing the Medway this year,
which is to shut the door after the horse is stole.  However, it is good.
Having done here, my Lord Brouncker, and W. Pen, and I, and with us Sir
Arnold Breames, to the King's playhouse, and there saw a piece of "Love in
a Maze," a dull, silly play, I think; and after the play, home with W. Pen
and his son Lowther, whom we met there, and then home and sat most of the
evening with my wife and Mr. Pelting, talking, my head being full of
business of one kind or other, and most such as do not please me, and so
to supper and to bed.

8th.  Up, and to the office, where sat all day, and at noon home, and
there find cozen Roger and Jackson by appointment come to dine with me,
and Creed, and very merry, only Jackson hath few words, and I like him
never the worse for it.  The great talk is of Carr's coming off in all his
trials, to the disgrace of my Lord Gerard, to that degree, and the ripping
up of so many notorious rogueries and cheats of my Lord's, that my Lord,
it is thought, will be ruined; and, above all things, do skew the madness
of the House of Commons, who rejected the petition of this poor man by a
combination of a few in the House; and, much more, the base proceedings
(just the epitome of all our publick managements in this age), of the
House of Lords, that ordered him to stand in the pillory for those very
things, without hearing and examining what he hath now, by the seeking of
my Lord Gerard himself, cleared himself of, in open Court, to the gaining
himself the pity of all the world, and shame for ever to my Lord Gerard.
We had a great deal of good discourse at table, and after dinner we four
men took coach, and they set me down at the Old Exchange, and they home,
having discoursed nothing today with cozen or Jackson about our business.
I to Captain Cocke's, and there discoursed over our business of prizes,
and I think I shall go near to state the matter so as to secure myself
without wrong to him, doing nor saying anything but the very truth.
Thence away to the Strand, to my bookseller's, and there staid an hour,
and bought the idle, rogueish book, "L'escholle des filles;" which I have
bought in plain binding, avoiding the buying of it better bound, because I
resolve, as soon as I have read it, to burn it, that it may not stand in
the list of books, nor among them, to disgrace them if it should be found.
Thence home, and busy late at the office, and then home to supper and to
bed.  My wife well pleased with my sister's match, and designing how to be
merry at their marriage.  And I am well at ease in my mind to think that
that care will be over.  This night calling at the Temple, at the
Auditor's, his man told me that he heard that my account must be brought
to the view of the Commissioners of Tangier before it can be passed, which
though I know no hurt in it, yet it troubled me lest there should be any
or any designed by them who put this into the head of the Auditor, I
suppose Auditor Beale, or Creed, because they saw me carrying my account
another way than by them.

9th (Lord's day).  Up, and at my chamber all the morning and the office
doing business, and also reading a little of "L'escholle des filles,"
which is a mighty lewd book, but yet not amiss for a sober man once to
read over to inform himself in the villainy of the world.  At noon home to
dinner, where by appointment Mr. Pelting come and with him three friends,
Wallington, that sings the good base, and one Rogers, and a gentleman, a
young man, his name Tempest, who sings very well indeed, and understands
anything in the world at first sight.  After dinner we into our
dining-room, and there to singing all the afternoon.  (By the way, I must
remember that Pegg Pen was brought to bed yesterday of a girl; and, among
other things, if I have not already set it down, that hardly ever was
remembered such a season for the smallpox as these last two months have
been, people being seen all up and down the streets, newly come out after
the smallpox.) But though they sang fine things, yet I must confess that I
did take no pleasure in it, or very little, because I understood not the
words, and with the rests that the words are set, there is no sense nor
understanding in them though they be English, which makes me weary of
singing in that manner, it being but a worse sort of instrumental musick.
We sang until almost night, and drank mighty good store of wine, and then
they parted, and I to my chamber, where I did read through "L'escholle des
filles," a lewd book, but what do no wrong once to read for information
sake .  .  .  .  And after I had done it I burned it, that it might not be
among my books to my shame, and so at night to supper and to bed.

10th.  Up, and by coach to Westminster, and there made a visit to Mr.
Godolphin, at his chamber; and I do find him a very pretty and able
person, a man of very fine parts, and of infinite zeal to my Lord
Sandwich; and one that says he is, he believes, as wise and able a person
as any prince in the world hath.  He tells me that he meets with
unmannerly usage by Sir Robert Southwell, in Portugall, who would sign
with him in his negociations there, being a forward young man: but that my
Lord mastered him in that point, it being ruled for my Lord here, at a
hearing of a Committee of the Council.  He says that if my Lord can
compass a peace between Spain and Portugall, and hath the doing of it and
the honour himself, it will be a thing of more honour than ever any man
had, and of as much advantage.  Thence to Westminster Hall, where the Hall
mighty full: and, among other things, the House begins to sit to-day, and
the King come.  But, before the King's coming, the House of Commons met;
and upon information given them of a Bill intended to be brought in, as
common report said, for Comprehension, they did mightily and generally
inveigh against it, and did vote that the King should be desired by the
House (and the message delivered by the Privy-counsellers of the House)
that the laws against breakers of the Act of Uniformity should be put in
execution: and it was moved in the House that, if any people had a mind to
bring any new laws into the House, about religion, they might come, as a
proposer of new laws did in Athens, with ropes about their necks.  By and
by the King comes to the Lords' House, and there tells them of his league
with Holland, and the necessity of a fleete, and his debts; and,
therefore, want of money; and his desire that they would think of some way
to bring in all his Protestant subjects to a right understanding and peace
one with another; meaning the Bill of Comprehension.  The Commons coming
to their House, it was moved that the vote passed this morning might be
suspended, because of the King's speech, till the House was full and
called over, two days hence: but it was denied, so furious they are
against this Bill: and thereby a great blow either given to the King or
Presbyters, or, which is the rather of the two, to the House itself, by
denying a thing desired by the King, and so much desired by much the
greater part of the nation.  Whatever the consequence be, if the King be a
man of any stomach and heat, all do believe that he will resent this vote.
Thence with Creed home to my house to dinner, where I met with Mr.
Jackson, and find my wife angry with Deb., which vexes me.  After dinner
by coach away to Westminster; taking up a friend of Mr. Jackson's, a young
lawyer, and parting with Creed at White Hall.  They and I to Westminster
Hall, and there met Roger Pepys, and with him to his chamber, and there
read over and agreed upon the Deed of Settlement to our minds: my sister
to have L600 presently, and she to be joyntured in L60 per annum; wherein
I am very well satisfied.  Thence I to the Temple to Charles Porter's
lodgings, where Captain Cocke met me, and after long waiting, on
Pemberton,

     [Francis Pemberton, afterwards knighted, and made Lord Chief Justice
     of the King's Bench in 1679.  His career was a most singular one, he
     having been twice removed from the Bench, and twice imprisoned by
     the House of Commons.  He twice returned to the bar, and after his
     second return he practised with great success as a serjeant for the
     next fourteen years till his death, June 10th, 1697.  Evelyn says,
     "He was held to be the most learned of the judges and an honest man"
     ("Diary," October 4th, 1683).]

an able lawyer, about the business of our prizes, and left the matter with
him to think of against to-morrow, this being a matter that do much
trouble my mind, though there be no fault in it that I need fear the
owning that I know of.  Thence with Cocke home to his house and there left
him, and I home, and there got my wife to read a book I bought to-day, and
come out to-day licensed by Joseph Williamson for Lord Arlington, shewing
the state of England's affairs relating to France at this time, and the
whole body of the book very good and solid, after a very foolish
introduction as ever I read, and do give a very good account of the
advantage of our league with Holland at this time.  So, vexed in my mind
with the variety of cares I have upon me, and so to bed.

11th.  At the office all the morning, where comes a damned summons to
attend the Committee of Miscarriages to-day, which makes me mad, that I
should by my place become the hackney of this Office, in perpetual trouble
and vexation, that need it least.  At noon home to dinner, where little
pleasure, my head being split almost with the variety of troubles upon me
at this time, and cares, and after dinner by coach to Westminster Hall,
and sent my wife and Deb. to see "Mustapha" acted.  Here I brought a book
to the Committee, and do find them; and particularly Sir Thomas Clarges,
mighty hot in the business of tickets, which makes me mad to see them bite
at the stone, and not at the hand that flings it, and here my Lord
Brouncker unnecessarily orders it that he is called in to give opportunity
to present his report of the state of the business of paying by ticket,
which I do not think will do him any right, though he was made believe
that it did operate mightily, and that Sir Fresh. Hollis did make a mighty
harangue and to much purpose in his defence, but I believe no such effects
of it, for going in afterward I did hear them speak with prejudice of it,
and that his pleading of the Admiral's warrant for it now was only an
evasion, if not an aspersion upon the Admirall, and therefore they would
not admit of this his report, but go on with their report as they had
resolved before.  The orders they sent for this day was the first order
that I have yet met with about this business, and was of my own single
hand warranting, but I do think it will do me no harm, and therefore do
not much trouble myself with it, more than to see how much trouble I am
brought to who have best deported myself in all the King's business.
Thence with Lord Brouncker, and set him down at Bow Streete, and so to the
Duke of York's playhouse, and there saw the last act for nothing, where I
never saw such good acting of any creature as Smith's part of Zanger; and
I do also, though it was excellently acted by---------, do yet want
Betterton mightily.  Thence to the Temple, to Porter's chamber, where
Cocke met me, and after a stay there some time, they two and I to
Pemberton's chamber, and there did read over the Act of calling people to
account, and did discourse all our business of the prizes; and, upon the
whole, he do make it plainly appear, that there is no avoiding to give
these Commissioners satisfaction in everything they will ask; and that
there is fear lest they may find reason to make us refund for all the
extraordinary profit made by those bargains; and do make me resolve rather
to declare plainly, and, once for all, the truth of the whole, and what my
profit hath been, than be forced at last to do it, and in the meantime
live in gain, as I must always do: and with this resolution on my part I
departed, with some more satisfaction of mind, though with less hopes of
profit than I expected.  It was pretty here to see the heaps of money upon
this lawyer's table; and more to see how he had not since last night spent
any time upon our business, but begun with telling us that we were not at
all concerned in that Act; which was a total mistake, by his not having
read over the Act at all.  Thence to Porter's chamber, where Captain Cocke
had fetched my wife out of the coach, and there we staid and talked and
drank, he being a very generous, good-humoured man, and so away by coach,
setting Cocke at his house, and we with his coach home, and there I to the
office, and there till past one in the morning, and so home to supper and
to bed, my mind at pretty good ease, though full of care and fear of loss.
This morning my wife in bed told me the story of our Tom and Jane:--how
the rogue did first demand her consent to love and marry him, and then,
with pretence of displeasing me, did slight her; but both he and she have
confessed the matter to her, and she hath charged him to go on with his
love to her, and be true to her, and so I think the business will go on,
which, for my love to her, because she is in love with him, I am pleased
with; but otherwise I think she will have no good bargain of it, at least
if I should not do well in my place.  But if I do stand, I do intend to
give her L50 in money, and do them all the good I can in my way.

12th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning drawing up my
narrative of my proceedings and concernments in the buying of prize-goods,
which I am to present to the Committee for Accounts; and being come to a
resolution to conceal nothing from them, I was at great ease how to draw
it up without any inventions or practise to put me to future pain or
thoughts how to carry on, and now I only discover what my profit was, and
at worst I suppose I can be made but to refund my profit and so let it go.
At noon home to dinner, where Mr. Jackson dined with me, and after dinner
I (calling at the Excise Office, and setting my wife and Deb. at her
tailor's) did with Mr. Jackson go to find my cozen Roger Pepys, which I
did in the Parliament House, where I met him and Sir Thomas Crew and Mr.
George Montagu, who are mighty busy how to save my Lord's name from being
in the Report for anything which the Committee is commanded to report to
the House of the miscarriages of the late war.  I find they drive
furiously still in the business of tickets, which is nonsense in itself
and cannot come to any thing.  Thence with cozen Roger to his lodgings,
and there sealed the writings with Jackson, about my sister's marriage:
and here my cozen Roger told me the pleasant passage of a fellow's
bringing a bag of letters to-day, into the lobby of the House, and left
them, and withdrew himself without observation.  The bag being opened, the
letters were found all of one size, and directed with one hand: a letter
to most of the Members of the House.  The House was acquainted with it,
and voted they should be brought in, and one opened by the Speaker;
wherein if he found any thing unfit to communicate, to propose a Committee
to be chosen for it.  The Speaker opening one, found it only a case with a
libell in it, printed: a satire most sober and bitter as ever I read; and
every letter was the same.  So the House fell a-scrambling for them like
boys: and my cozen Roger had one directed to him, which he lent me to
read.  So away, and took up my wife, and setting Jackson down at Fetter
Lane end, I to the old Exchange to look Mr. Houblon, but, not finding him,
did go home, and there late writing a letter to my Lord Sandwich, and to
give passage to a letter of great moment from Mr. Godolphin to him, which
I did get speedy passage for by the help of Mr. Houblon, who come late to
me, and there directed the letter to Lisbon under cover of his, and here
we talked of the times, which look very sad and distracted, and made good
mirth at this day's passage in the House, and so parted; and going to the
gate with him, I found his lady and another fine lady sitting an hour
together, late at night, in their coach, while he was with me, which is so
like my wife, that I was mighty taken with it, though troubled for it.  So
home to supper and to bed.  This day Captain Cocke was with the
Commissioners of Accounts to ask more time for his bringing in his answer
about the prize goods, and they would not give him 14 days as he asks, but
would give only two days, which was very hard, I think, and did trouble me
for fear of their severity, though I have prepared my matter so as to defy
it.

13th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon home to
dinner, and thence with my wife and Deb. to White Hall, setting, them at
her tailor's, and I to the Commissioners of the Treasury, where myself
alone did argue the business of the East India Company against their whole
Company on behalf of the King before the Lords Commissioners, and to very
good effect, I think, and with reputation.  That business being over, the
Lords and I had other things to talk about, and among the rest, about our
making more assignments on the Exchequer since they bid us hold, whereat
they were extraordinary angry with us, which troubled me a little, though
I am not concerned in it at all.  Waiting here some time without, I did
meet with several people, among others Mr. Brisband, who tells me in
discourse that Tom Killigrew hath a fee out of the Wardrobe for cap and
bells,

     [The Lord Chamberlain's Records contain a copy of a warrant dated
     July 12th, 1661, "to deliver to Mr. Killegrew thirty yards of
     velvett, three dozen of fringe, and sixteene yards of Damaske for
     the year 1661."  The heading of this entry is "Livery for ye jester"
     (Lowe's "Betterton," p. 70).]

under the title of the King's Foole or jester; and may with privilege
revile or jeere any body, the greatest person, without offence, by the
privilege of his place.  Thence took up my wife, and home, and there busy
late at the office writing letters, and so home to supper and to bed. The
House was called over to-day.  This morning Sir G. Carteret come to the
Office to see and talk with me: and he assures me that to this day the
King is the most kind man to my Lord Sandwich in the whole world; that he
himself do not now mind any publick business, but suffers things to go on
at Court as they will, he seeing all likely to come to ruin: that this
morning the Duke of York sent to him to come to make up one of a Committee
of the Council for Navy Affairs; where, when he come, he told the Duke of
York that he was none of them: which shews how things are now-a-days
ordered, that there should be a Committee for the Navy; and the Lord
Admiral not know the persons of it!  And that Sir G. Carteret and my Lord
Anglesey should be left out of it, and men wholly improper put into it.  I
do hear of all hands that there is a great difference at this day between
my Lord Arlington and Sir W. Coventry, which I am sorry for.

14th (Valentine's day).  Up, being called up by Mercer, who come to be my
Valentine, and so I rose and my wife, and were merry a little, I staying
to talk, and did give her a guinny in gold for her Valentine's gift. There
comes also my cozen Roger Pepys betimes, and comes to my wife, for her to
be his Valentine, whose Valentine I was also, by agreement to be so to her
every year; and this year I find it is likely to cost L4 or L5 in a ring
for her, which she desires.  Cozen Roger did come also to speak with Sir
W. Pen, who was quoted, it seems, yesterday by Sir Fr. Hollis to have said
that if my Lord Sandwich had done so and so, we might have taken all the
Dutch prizes at the time when he staid and let them go. But Sir W. Pen did
tell us he should say nothing in it but what would do my Lord honour, and
he is a knave I am able to prove if he do otherwise. He gone, I to my
Office, to perfect my Narrative about prize-goods; and did carry it to the
Commissioners of Accounts, who did receive it with great kindness, and
express great value of, and respect to me: and my heart is at rest that it
is lodged there, in so full truth and plainness, though it may hereafter
prove some loss to me.  But here I do see they are entered into many
enquiries about prizes, by the great attendance of commanders and others
before them, which is a work I am not sorry for. Thence I away, with my
head busy, but my heart at pretty good ease, to the Old Exchange, and
there met Mr. Houblon.  I prayed him to discourse with some of the
merchants that are of the Committee for Accounts, to see how they do
resent my paper, and in general my particular in the relation to the
business of the Navy, which he hath promised to do carefully for me and
tell me.  Here it was a mighty pretty sight to see old Mr. Houblon, whom I
never saw before, and all his sons about him, all good merchants.  Thence
home to dinner, and had much discourse with W. Hewer about my going to
visit Colonel Thomson, one of the Committee of Accounts, who, among the
rest, is mighty kind to me, and is likely to mind our business more than
any; and I would be glad to have a good understanding with him.  Thence
after dinner to White Hall, to attend the Duke of York, where I did let
him know, too, the troublesome life we lead, and particularly myself, by
being obliged to such attendances every day as I am, on one Committee or
another.  And I do find the Duke of York himself troubled, and willing not
to be troubled with occasions of having his name used among the
Parliament, though he himself do declare that he did give directions to
Lord Brouncker to discharge the men at Chatham by ticket, and will own it,
if the House call for it, but not else.  Thence I attended the King and
Council, and some of the rest of us, in a business to be heard about the
value of a ship of one Dorrington's:--and it was pretty to observe how Sir
W. Pen making use of this argument against the validity of an oath,
against the King, being made by the master's mate of the ship, who was but
a fellow of about 23 years of age--the master of the ship, against whom we
pleaded, did say that he did think himself at that age capable of being
master's mate of any ship; and do know that he, himself, Sir W: Pen, was
so himself, and in no better degree at that age himself: which word did
strike Sir W. Pen dumb, and made him open his mouth no more; and I saw the
King and Duke of York wink at one another at it.  This done, we into the
gallery; and there I walked with several people, and among others my Lord
Brouncker, who I do find under much trouble still about the business of
the tickets, his very case being brought in; as is said, this day in the
Report of the Miscarriages. And he seems to lay much of it on me, which I
did clear and satisfy him in; and would be glad with all my heart to serve
him in, and have done it more than he hath done for himself, he not
deserving the least blame, but commendations, for this.  I met with my
cozen Roger Pepys and Creed; and from them understand that the Report was
read to-day of the Miscarriages, wherein my Lord Sandwich is [named] about
the business I mentioned this morning; but I will be at rest, for it can
do him no hurt.  Our business of tickets is soundly up, and many others:
so they went over them again, and spent all the morning on the first,
which is the dividing of the fleete; wherein hot work was, and that among
great men, Privy-Councillors, and, they say, Sir W. Coventry; but I do not
much fear it, but do hope that it will shew a little, of the Duke of
Albemarle and the Prince to have been advisers in it: but whereas they
ordered that the King's Speech should be considered today, they took no
notice of it at all, but are really come to despise the King in all
possible ways of chewing it.  And it was the other day a strange saying,
as I am told by my cozen Roger Pepys, in the House, when it was moved that
the King's speech should be considered, that though the first part of the
Speech, meaning the league that is there talked of, be the only good
publick thing that hath been done since the King come into England, yet it
might bear with being put off to consider, till Friday next, which was
this day.  Secretary Morrice did this day in the House, when they talked
of intelligence, say that he was allowed but L70 a-year for
intelligence,--[Secret service money]--whereas, in Cromwell's time, he
[Cromwell] did allow L70,000 a-year for it; and was confirmed therein by
Colonel Birch, who said that thereby Cromwell carried the secrets of all
the princes of Europe at his girdle.  The House is in a most broken
condition; nobody adhering to any thing, but reviling and finding fault:
and now quite mad at the Undertakers, as they are commonly called,
Littleton, Lord Vaughan, Sir R. Howard, and others that are brought over
to the Court, and did undertake to get the King money; but they despise,
and would not hear them in the House; and the Court do do as much, seeing
that they cannot be useful to them, as was expected.  In short, it is
plain that the King will never be able to do any thing with this
Parliament; and that the only likely way to do better, for it cannot do
worse, is to break this and call another Parliament; and some do think
that it is intended.  I was told to-night that my Lady Castlemayne is so
great a gamester as to have won L5000 in one night, and lost L25,000 in
another night, at play, and hath played L1000 and L1500 at a cast.  Thence
to the Temple, where at Porter's chamber I met Captain Cocke, but lost our
labour, our Counsellor not being within, Pemberton, and therefore home and
late at my office, and so home to supper and to bed.

15th.  Up betimes, and with Captain Cocke my coach to the Temple to his
Counsel again about the prize goods in order to the drawing up of his
answer to them, where little done but a confirmation that our best
interest is for him to tell the whole truth, and so parted, and I home to
the office, where all the morning, and at noon home to dinner, and after
dinner all the afternoon and evening till midnight almost, and till I had
tired my own backe, and my wife's, and Deb.'s, in titleing of my books for
the present year, and in setting them in order, which is now done to my
very good satisfaction, though not altogether so completely as I think
they were the last year, when my mind was more at leisure to mind it. So
about midnight to bed, where my wife taking some physic overnight it
wrought with her, and those coming upon her with great gripes, she was in
mighty pain all night long, yet, God forgive me!  I did find that I was
most desirous to take my rest than to ease her, but there was nothing I
could do to do her any good with.

16th (Lord's day).  Up, and to my chamber, where all the morning making a
catalogue of my books, which did find me work, but with great pleasure, my
chamber and books being now set in very good order, and my chamber washed
and cleaned, which it had not been in some months before, my business and
trouble having been so much.  At noon Mr. Holliard put in, and dined with
my wife and me, who was a little better to-day.  His company very good.
His story of his love and fortune, which hath been very good and very bad
in the world, well worth hearing.  Much discourse also about the bad state
of the Church, and how the Clergy are come to be men of no worth in the
world; and, as the world do now generally discourse, they must be
reformed; and I believe the Hierarchy will in a little time be shaken,
whether they will or no; the King being offended with them, and set upon
it, as I hear.  He gone, after dinner to have my head combed, and then to
my chamber and read most of the evening till pretty late, when, my wife
not being well, I did lie below stairs in our great chamber, where I slept
well.

17th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning till noon getting some
things more ready against the afternoon for the Committee of Accounts,
which did give me great trouble, to see how I am forced to dance after
them in one place, and to answer Committees of Parliament in another.  At
noon thence toward the Committee, but meeting with Sir W. Warren in Fleet
Street he and I to the Ordinary by Temple Bar and there dined together,
and to talk, where he do seem to be very high now in defiance of the
Board, now he says that the worst is come upon him to have his accounts
brought to the Committee of Accounts, and he do reflect upon my late
coldness to him, but upon the whole I do find that he is still a cunning
fellow, and will find it necessary to be fair to me, and what hath passed
between us of coldness to hold his tongue, which do please me very well.
Thence to the Committee, where I did deliver the several things they
expected from me, with great respect and show of satisfaction, and my mind
thereby eased of some care.  But thence I to Westminster Hall, and there
spent till late at night walking to and again with many people, and there
in general I hear of the great high words that were in the House on
Saturday last, upon the first part of the Committee's Report about the
dividing of the fleete; wherein some would have the counsels of the King
to be declared, and the reasons of them, and who did give them; where Sir
W. Coventry laid open to them the consequences of doing that, that the
King would never have any honest and wise men ever to be of his Council.
They did here in the House talk boldly of the King's bad counsellors, and
how they must be all turned out, and many of them, and better; brought in:
and the proceedings of the Long-Parliament in the beginning of the war
were called to memory: and the King's bad intelligence was mentioned,
wherein they were bitter against my Lord Arlington, saying, among other
things, that whatever Morrice's was, who declared he had but L750 a-year
allowed him for intelligence, the King paid too dear for my Lord
Arlington's, in giving him L10,000 and a barony for it.  Sir W. Coventry
did here come to his defence, in the business of the letter that was sent
to call back Prince Rupert, after he was divided from the fleete, wherein
great delay was objected; but he did show that he sent it at one in the
morning, when the Duke of York did give him the instructions after supper
that night, and did clear himself well of it: only it was laid as a fault,
which I know not how he removes, of not sending it by an express, but by
the ordinary post; but I think I have heard he did send it to my Lord
Arlington's; and that there it lay for some hours; it coming not to Sir
Philip Honiwood's hand at Portsmouth till four in the afternoon that day,
being about fifteen or sixteen hours in going; and about this, I think, I
have heard of a falling out between my Lord Arlington, heretofore, and W.
Coventry. Some mutterings I did hear of a design of dissolving the
Parliament; but I think there is no ground for it yet, though Oliver would
have dissolved them for half the trouble and contempt these have put upon
the King and his councils.  The dividing of the fleete, however, is, I
hear, voted a miscarriage, and the not building a fortification at
Sheernesse: and I have reason every hour to expect that they will vote the
like of our paying men off by ticket; and what the consequence of that
will be I know not, but I am put thereby into great trouble of mind.  I
did spend a little time at the Swan, and there did kiss the maid, Sarah.
At noon home, and there up to my wife, who is still ill, and supped with
her, my mind being mighty full of trouble for the office and my
concernments therein, and so to supper and talking with W. Hewer in her
chamber about business of the office, wherein he do well understand
himself and our case, and it do me advantage to talk with him and the rest
of my people. I to bed below as I did last night.

18th.  Up by break of day, and walked down to the old Swan, where I find
little Michell building, his booth being taken down, and a foundation laid
for a new house, so that that street is like to be a very fine place.  I
drank, but did not see Betty, and so to Charing Cross stairs, and thence
walked to Sir W. Coventry's,

     [Sir William Coventry's love of money is said by Sir John Denham to
     have influenced him in promoting naval officers, who paid him for
     their commissions.

               "Then Painter! draw cerulian Coventry
               Keeper, or rather Chancellor o' th' sea
               And more exactly to express his hue,
               Use nothing but ultra-mariuish blue.
               To pay his fees, the silver trumpet spends,
               And boatswain's whistle for his place depends.
               Pilots in vain repeat their compass o'er,
               Until of him they learn that one point more
               The constant magnet to the pole doth hold,
               Steel to the magnet, Coventry to gold.
               Muscovy sells us pitch, and hemp, and tar;
               Iron and copper, Sweden; Munster, war;
               Ashley, prize; Warwick, custom;
               Cart'ret, pay;
               But Coventry doth sell the fleet away."--B.]

and talked with him, who tells me how he hath been persecuted, and how he
is yet well come off in the business of the dividing of the fleete, and
the sending of the letter.  He expects next to be troubled about the
business of bad officers in the fleete, wherein he will bid them name whom
they call bad, and he will justify himself, having never disposed of any
but by the Admiral's liking.  And he is able to give an account of all
them, how they come recommended, and more will be found to have been
placed by the Prince and Duke of Albemarle than by the Duke of York during
the war, and as no bad instance of the badness of officers he and I did
look over the list of commanders, and found that we could presently
recollect thirty-seven commanders that have been killed in actuall service
this war.  He tells me that Sir Fr. Hollis is the main man that hath
persecuted him hitherto, in the business of dividing the fleete, saying
vainly that the want of that letter to the Prince hath given him that,
that he shall remember it by to his grave, meaning the loss of his arme;
when, God knows! he is as idle and insignificant a fellow as ever come
into the fleete.  He tells me that in discourse on Saturday he did repeat
Sir Rob. Howard's words about rowling out of counsellors, that for his
part he neither cared who they rowled in, nor who they rowled out, by
which the word is become a word of use in the House, the rowling out of
officers.  I will remember what, in mirth, he said to me this morning,
when upon this discourse he said, if ever there was another Dutch war,
they should not find a Secretary; "Nor," said I, "a Clerk of the Acts, for
I see the reward of it; and, thanked God! I have enough of my own to buy
me a good book and a good fiddle, and I have a good wife;"--"Why," says
he, "I have enough to buy me a good book, and shall not need a fiddle,
because I have never a one of your good wives."  I understand by him that
we are likely to have our business of tickets voted a miscarriage, but
[he] cannot tell me what that will signify more than that he thinks they
will report them to the King and there leave them, but I doubt they will
do more.  Thence walked over St. James's Park to White Hall, and thence to
Westminster Hall, and there walked all the morning, and did speak with
several Parliament-men-among others, Birch, who is very kind to me, and
calls me, with great respect and kindness, a man of business, and he
thinks honest, and so long will stand by me, and every such man, to the
death.  My business was to instruct them to keep the House from falling
into any mistaken vote about the business of tickets, before they were
better informed.  I walked in the Hall all the morning with my Lord
Brouncker, who was in great pain there, and, the truth is, his business
is, without reason, so ill resented by the generality of the House, that I
was almost troubled to be seen to walk with him, and yet am able to
justify him in all, that he is under so much scandal for.  Here I did get
a copy of the report itself, about our paying off men by tickets; and am
mightily glad to see it, now knowing the state of our case, and what we
have to answer to, and the more for that the House is like to be kept by
other business to-day and to-morrow, so that, against Thursday, I shall be
able to draw up some defence to put into some Member's hands, to inform
them, and I think we may [make] a very good one, and therefore my mind is
mightily at ease about it.  This morning they are upon a Bill, brought in
to-day by Sir Richard Temple, for obliging the King to call Parliaments
every three years; or, if he fail, for others to be obliged to do it, and
to keep him from a power of dissolving any Parliament in less than forty
days after their first day of sitting, which is such a Bill as do speak
very high proceedings, to the lessening of the King; and this they will
carry, and whatever else they desire, before they will give any money; and
the King must have money, whatever it cost him.  I stepped to the Dog
Tavern, and thither come to me Doll Lane, and there we did drink together,
and she tells me she is my valentine .  .  .  .  Thence, she being gone,
and having spoke with Mr. Spicer here, whom I sent for hither to discourse
about the security of the late Act of 11 months' tax on which I have
secured part of my money lent to Tangier.  I to the Hall, and there met
Sir W. Pen, and he and I to the Beare, in Drury Lane, an excellent
ordinary, after the French manner, but of Englishmen; and there had a good
fricassee, our dinner coming to 8s., which was mighty pretty, to my great
content; and thence, he and I to the King's house, and there, in one of
the upper boxes, saw "Flora's Vagarys," which is a very silly play; and
the more, I being out of humour, being at a play without my wife, and she
ill at home, and having no desire also to be seen, and, therefore, could
not look about me.  Thence to the Temple, and there we parted, and I to
see Kate Joyce, where I find her and her friends in great ease of mind,
the jury having this day given in their verdict that her husband died of a
feaver.  Some opposition there was, the foreman pressing them to declare
the cause of the feaver, thinking thereby to obstruct it: but they did
adhere to their verdict, and would give no reason; so all trouble is now
over, and she safe in her estate, which I am mighty glad of, and so took
leave, and home, and up to my wife, not owning my being at a play, and
there she shews me her ring of a Turky-stone set with little sparks of
dyamonds,

     [The turquoise.  This stone was sometimes referred to simply as the
     turkey, and Broderip ("Zoological Recreations") conjectured that the
     bird (turkey) took its name from the blue or turquoise colour of the
     skin about its head.]

which I am to give her, as my Valentine, and I am not much troubled at it.
It will cost me near L5--she costing me but little compared with other
wives, and I have not many occasions to spend on her.  So to my office,
where late, and to think upon my observations to-morrow, upon the report
of the Committee to the Parliament about the business of tickets, whereof
my head is full, and so home to supper and to bed.

19th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning drawing up an answer
to the Report of the Committee for miscarriages to the Parliament touching
our paying men by tickets, which I did do in a very good manner I think.
Dined with my clerks at home, where much good discourse of our business of
the Navy, and the trouble now upon us, more than we expected. After dinner
my wife out with Deb., to buy some things against my sister's wedding, and
I to the office to write fair my business I did in the morning, and in the
evening to White Hall, where I find Sir W. Coventry all alone, a great
while with the Duke of York, in the King's drawing-room, they two talking
together all alone, which did mightily please me.  Then I did get Sir W.
Coventry (the Duke of York being gone) aside, and there read over my
paper, which he liked and corrected, and tells me it will be hard to
escape, though the thing be never so fair, to have it voted a miscarriage;
but did advise me and my Lord Brouncker, who coming by did join with us,
to prepare some members in it, which we shall do.  Here I do hear how La
Roche, a French captain, who was once prisoner here, being with his ship
at Plymouth, hath played some freakes there, for which his men being beat
out of the town, he hath put up his flag of defiance, and also, somewhere
thereabout, did land with his men, and go a mile into the country, and did
some pranks, which sounds pretty odd, to our disgrace, but we are in
condition now to bear any thing. But, blessed be God! all the Court is
full of the good news of my Lord Sandwich's having made a peace between
Spain and Portugall, which is mighty great news, and, above all, to my
Lord's honour, more than any thing he ever did; and yet I do fear it will
not prevail to secure him in Parliament against incivilities there.
Thence, took up my wife at Unthanke's, and so home, and there my mind
being full of preparing my paper against to-morrow for the House, with an
address from the office to the House, I to the office, very late, and then
home to supper and to bed.

20th.  Up, and to the office a while, and thence to White Hall by coach
with Mr. Batelier with me, whom I took up in the street.  I thence by
water to Westminster Hall, and there with Lord Brouncker, Sir T. Harvy,
Sir J. Minnes, did wait all the morning to speak to members about our
business, thinking our business of tickets would come before the House
to-day, but we did alter our minds about the petition to the House,
sending in the paper to them.  But the truth is we were in a great hurry,
but it fell out that they were most of the morning upon the business of
not prosecuting the first victory; which they have voted one of the
greatest miscarriages of the whole war, though they cannot lay the fault
anywhere yet, because Harman is not come home.  This kept them all the
morning, which I was glad of.  So down to the Hall, where my wife by
agreement stayed for me at Mrs. Michell's, and there was Mercer and the
girl, and I took them to Wilkinson's the cook's in King Street (where I
find the master of the house hath been dead for some time), and there
dined, and thence by one o'clock to the King's house: a new play, "The
Duke of Lerma," of Sir Robert Howard's: where the King and Court was; and
Knepp and Nell spoke the prologue most excellently, especially Knepp, who
spoke beyond any creature I ever, heard.  The play designed to reproach
our King with his mistresses, that I was troubled for it, and expected it
should be interrupted; but it ended all well, which salved all.  The play
a well-writ and good play, only its design I did not like of reproaching
the King, but altogether a very good and most serious play.  Thence home,
and there a little to the office, and so home to supper, where Mercer with
us, and sang, and then to bed.

21st.  At the office all the morning to get a little business done, I
having, and so the whole office, been put out of doing any business there
for this week by our trouble in attending the Parliament.  Hither comes to
me young Captain Beckford, the slopseller, and there presents me a little
purse with gold in it, it being, as he told me, for his present to me, at
the end of the last year.  I told him I had not done him any service I
knew of.  He persisted, and I refused, but did at several denials; and
telling him that it was not an age to take presents in, he told me he had
reason to present me with something, and desired me to accept of it,
which, at his so urging me, I did, and so fell to talk of his business,
and so parted.  I do not know of any manner of kindness I have done him
this last year, nor did expect any thing.  It was therefore very welcome
to me, but yet I was not fully satisfied in my taking it, because of my
submitting myself to the having it objected against me hereafter, and the
rather because this morning Jacke Fen come and shewed me an order from the
Commissioners of Accounts, wherein they demand of him an account upon oath
of all the sums of money that have been by him defalked or taken from any
man since their time, of enquiry upon any payments, and if this should, as
it is to be feared, come to be done to us, I know not what I shall then
do, but I shall take counsel upon it. At noon by coach towards
Westminster, and met my Lord Brouncker, and W. Pen, and Sir T. Harvey, in
King's Street, coming away from the Parliament House; and so I to them,
and to the French ordinary, at the Blue Bells, in Lincolne's Inn Fields,
and there dined and talked.  And, among other things, they tell me how the
House this day is still as backward for giving any money as ever, and do
declare they will first have an account of the disposals of the last
Poll-bill, and eleven months' tax: and it is pretty odde that the very
first sum mentioned in the account brought in by Sir Robert Long, of the
disposal of the Poll-bill money, is L5000 to my Lord Arlington for
intelligence; which was mighty unseasonable, so soon after they had so
much cried out against his want of intelligence. The King do also own but
L250,000, or thereabouts, yet paid on the Poll-bill, and that he hath
charged L350,000 upon it.  This makes them mad; for that the former
Poll-bill, that was so much less in its extent than the last, which took
in all sexes and qualities, did come to L350,000. Upon the whole, I
perceive they are like to do nothing in this matter to please the King, or
relieve the State, be the case never so pressing; and, therefore, it is
thought by a great many that the King cannot be worse if he should
dissolve them: but there is nobody dares advise it, nor do he consider any
thing himself.  Thence, having dined for 20s., we to the Duke of York at
White Hall, and there had our usual audience, and did little but talk of
the proceedings of the Parliament, wherein he is as much troubled as we;
for he is not without fears that they do ayme at doing him hurt; but yet
he declares that he will never deny to owne what orders he hath given to
any man to justify him, notwithstanding their having sent to him to desire
his being tender to take upon him the doing any thing of that kind.
Thence with Brouncker and T. Harvey to Westminster Hall, and there met
with Colonel Birch and Sir John Lowther, and did there in the lobby read
over what I have drawn up for our defence, wherein they own themselves
mightily satisfied; and Birch, like a particular friend, do take it upon
him to defend us, and do mightily do me right in all his discourse.  Here
walked in the Hall with him a great while, and discoursed with several
members, to prepare them in our business against to-morrow, and meeting my
cozen Roger Pepys, he showed me Granger's written confession,

     [Pepys here refers to the extraordinary proceedings which occurred
     between Charles, Lord Gerard, and Alexander Fitton, of which a
     narrative was published at the Hague in 1665.  Granger was a witness
     in the cause, and was afterwards said to be conscience-stricken from
     his perjury.  Some notice of this case will be found in North's
     "Examen," p. 558; but the copious and interesting note in Ormerod's
     "History of Cheshire," Vol.  iii., p.  291, will best satisfy the
     reader, who will not fail to be struck by the paragraph with which
     it is closed-viz., "It is not improbable that Alexander Fitton, who,
     in the first instance, gained rightful possession of Gawsworth under
     an acknowledged settlement, was driven headlong into unpremeditated
     guilt by the production of a revocation by will which Lord Gerard
     had so long concealed.  Having lost his own fortune in the
     prosecution of his claims, he remained in gaol till taken out by
     James II. to be made Chancellor of Ireland (under which character
     Hume first notices him), was knighted, and subsequently created Lord
     Gawsworth after the abdication of James, sat in his parliament in
     Dublin in 1689, and then is supposed to have accompanied his fallen
     master to France.  Whether the conduct of Fitton was met, as he
     alleges, by similar guilt on the part of Lord Gerard, God only can
     judge; but his hand fell heavily on the representatives of that
     noble house.  In less than half a century the husbands of its two
     co-heiresses, James, Duke of Hamilton, and Charles, Lord Mohun, were
     slain by each other's hands in a murderous duel arising out of a
     dispute relative to the partition of the Fitton estates, and
     Gawsworth itself passed to an unlineal hand, by a series of
     alienations complicated beyond example in the annals of this
     country."--B.]

of his being forced by imprisonment, &c., by my Lord Gerard, most
barbarously to confess his forging of a deed in behalf of Fitton, in the
great case between him [Fitton] and my Lord Gerard; which business is
under examination, and is the foulest against my Lord Gerard that ever any
thing in the world was, and will, all do believe, ruine him; and I shall
be glad of it.  Thence with Lord Brouncker and T. Harvey as far as the New
Exchange, and there at a draper's shop drawing up a short note of what
they are to desire of the House for our having a hearing before they
determine any thing against us, which paper is for them to show to what
friends they meet against to-morrow, I away home to the office, and there
busy pretty late, and here comes my wife to me, who hath been at Pegg
Pen's christening, which, she says, hath made a flutter and noise; but was
as mean as could be, and but little company, just like all the rest that
that family do.  So home to supper and to bed, with my head full of a
defence before the Parliament tomorrow, and therein content myself very
well, and with what I have done in preparing some of the members thereof
in order thereto.

22nd.  Up, and by coach through Ducke Lane, and there did buy Kircher's
Musurgia, cost me 35s., a book I am mighty glad of, expecting to find
great satisfaction in it.  Thence to Westminster Hall and the lobby, and
up and down there all the morning, and to the Lords' House, and heard the
Solicitor-General plead very finely, as he always do; and this was in
defence of the East India Company against a man that complains of wrong
from them, and thus up and down till noon in expectation of our business
coming on in the House of Commons about tickets, but they being busy about
my Lord Gerard's business I did give over the thoughts of ours coming on,
and so with my wife, and Mercer, and Deb., who come to the Hall to me, I
away to the Beare, in Drury Lane, and there bespoke a dish of meat; and,
in the mean time, sat and sung with Mercer; and, by and by, dined with
mighty pleasure, and excellent meat, one little dish enough for us all,
and good wine, and all for 8s., and thence to the Duke's playhouse, and
there saw "Albumazar," an old play, this the second time of acting.  It is
said to have been the ground of B. Jonson's "Alchymist;" but, saving the
ridicuiousnesse of Angell's part, which is called Trinkilo, I do not see
any thing extraordinary in it, but was indeed weary of it before it was
done.  The King here, and, indeed, all of us, pretty merry at the mimique
tricks of Trinkilo.  So home, calling in Ducke Lane for the book I bought
this morning, and so home, and wrote my letters at the office, and then
home to supper and to bed.

23rd (Lord's day).  Up, and, being desired by a messenger from Sir G.
Carteret, I by water over to Southwarke, and so walked to the Falkon, on
the Bank-side, and there got another boat, and so to Westminster, where I
would have gone into the Swan; but the door was locked; and the girl could
not let me in, and so to Wilkinson's in King Street, and there wiped my
shoes, and so to Court, where sermon not yet done I met with Brisband; and
he tells me, first, that our business of tickets did come to debate
yesterday, it seems, after I was gone away, and was voted a miscarriage in
general.  He tells me in general that there is great looking after places,
upon a presumption of a great many vacancies; and he did shew me a fellow
at Court, a brother of my Lord Fanshaw's, a witty but rascally fellow,
without a penny in his purse, that was asking him what places there were
in the Navy fit for him, and Brisband tells me, in mirth, he told him the
Clerke of the Acts, and I wish he had it, so I were well and quietly rid
of it; for I am weary of this kind of trouble, having, I think, enough
whereon to support myself.  By and by, chapel done, I met with Sir W.
Coventry, and he and I walked awhile together in the Matted Gallery; and
there he told me all the proceedings yesterday: that the matter is found,
in general, a miscarriage, but no persons named; and so there is no great
matter to our prejudice yet, till, if ever, they come to particular
persons.  He told me Birch was very industrious to do what he could, and
did, like a friend; but they were resolved to find the thing, in general,
a miscarriage; and says, that when we shall think fit to desire its being
heard, as to our own defence, it will be granted.  He tells me how he
hath, with advantage, cleared himself in what concerns himself therein, by
his servant Robson, which I am glad of.  He tells me that there is a
letter sent by conspiracy to some of the House, which he hath seen, about
the matter of selling of places, which he do believe he shall be called
upon to-morrow for: and thinks himself well prepared to defend himself in
it; and then neither he, nor his friends for him, are afeard of anything
to his prejudice. Thence by coach, with Brisband, to Sir G. Carteret's, in
Lincoln's Inn Fields, and there dined: a good dinner and good company; and
after dinner he and I alone, discoursing of my Lord Sandwich's matters;
who hath, in the first business before the House, been very kindly used
beyond expectation, the matter being laid by, till his coming home and old
Mr. Vaughan did speak for my Lord, which I am mighty glad of.  The
business of the prizes is the worst that can be said, and therein I do
fear something may lie hard upon him; but, against this, we must prepare
the best we can for his defence.  Thence with G. Carteret to White Hall,
where I, finding a meeting of the Committee of the Council for the Navy,
his Royal Highness there, and Sir W. Pen, and, some of the Brethren of the
Trinity House to attend, I did go in with them; and it was to be informed
of the practice heretofore, for all foreign nations, at enmity one with
another, to forbear any acts of hostility to one another, in the presence
of any of the King of England's ships, of which several instances were
given: and it is referred to their further enquiry, in order to the giving
instructions accordingly to our ships now, during the war between Spain
and France.  Would to God we were in the same condition as heretofore, to
challenge and maintain this our dominion!  Thence with W. Pen homeward,
and quite through to Mile End, for a little ayre; the days being now
pretty long, but the ways mighty dirty, and here we drank at the Rose, the
old house, and so back again, talking of the Parliament and our trouble
with them and what passed yesterday.  Going back again, Sir R. Brookes
overtook us coming to town; who hath played the jacke with us all, and is
a fellow that I must trust no more, he quoting me for all he hath said in
this business of tickets; though I have told him nothing that either is
not true, or I afeard to own.  But here talking, he did discourse in this
stile: "We,"--and "We" all along,--"will not give any money, be the
pretence never so great, nay, though the enemy was in the River of Thames
again, till we know what is become of the last money given;" and I do
believe he do speak the mind of his fellows, and so let them, if the King
will suffer it.  He gone, we home, and there I to read, and my belly being
full of my dinner to-day, I anon to bed, and there, as I have for many
days, slept not an hour quietly, but full of dreams of our defence to the
Parliament and giving an account of our doings.  This evening, my wife did
with great pleasure shew me her stock of jewells, encreased by the ring
she hath made lately as my Valentine's gift this year, a Turky stone' set
with diamonds: and, with this and what she had, she reckons that she hath
above L150 worth of jewells, of one kind or other; and I am glad of it,
for it is fit the wretch should have something to content herself with.

24th.  Up, and to my office, where most of the morning, entering my
journal for the three days past.  Thence about noon with my wife to the
New Exchange, by the way stopping at my bookseller's, and there leaving my
Kircher's Musurgia to be bound, and did buy "L'illustre Bassa," in four
volumes, for my wife.  Thence to the Exchange and left her; while meeting
Dr. Gibbons there, he and I to see an organ at the Dean of Westminster's
lodgings at the Abby, the Bishop of Rochester's; where he lives like a
great prelate, his lodgings being very good; though at present under great
disgrace at Court, being put by his Clerk of the Closet's place.  I saw
his lady, of whom the 'Terrae Filius' of Oxford was once so merry;

     [A scholar appointed to make a satirical and jesting speech at an
     Act in the University of Oxford.  Mr. Christopher Wordsworth gives,
     in his "Social Life at the English Universities in the Eighteenth
     Century," 1874, a list of terra-filii from 1591 to 1713 (pp. 296-
     298, 680).  The 'terrae filius' was sometimes expelled the
     university on account of the licence of his speech.  The practice
     was discontinued early in the eighteenth century.]

and two children, whereof one a very pretty little boy, like him, so fat
and black.  Here I saw the organ; but it is too big for my house, and the
fashion do not please me enough; and therefore will not have it.  Thence
to the 'Change back again, leaving him, and took my wife and Deb.  home,
and there to dinner alone, and after dinner I took them to the
Nursery,--[Theatre company of young actors in training.]--where none of us
ever were before; where the house is better and the musique better than we
looked for, and the acting not much worse, because I expected as bad as
could be: and I was not much mistaken, for it was so.  However, I was
pleased well to see it once, it being worth a man's seeing to discover the
different ability and understanding of people, and the different growth of
people's abilities by practise.  Their play was a bad one, called
"Jeronimo is Mad Again," a tragedy.  Here was some good company by us, who
did make mighty sport at the folly of their acting, which I could not
neither refrain from sometimes, though I was sorry for it.  So away hence
home, where to the office to do business a while, and then home to supper
and to read, and then to bed.  I was prettily served this day at the
playhouse-door, where, giving six shillings into the fellow's hand for us
three, the fellow by legerdemain did convey one away, and with so much
grace faced me down that I did give him but five, that, though I knew the
contrary, yet I was overpowered by his so grave and serious demanding the
other shilling, that I could not deny him, but was forced by myself to
give it him.  After I come home this evening comes a letter to me from
Captain Allen, formerly Clerk of the Ropeyard at Chatham, and whom I was
kind to in those days, who in recompense of my favour to him then do give
me notice that he hears of an accusation likely to be exhibited against me
of my receiving L50 of Mason, the timber merchant, and that his wife hath
spoke it.  I am mightily beholden to Captain Allen for this, though the
thing is to the best of my memory utterly false, and I do believe it to be
wholly so, but yet it troubles me to have my name mentioned in this
business, and more to consider how I may be liable to be accused where I
have indeed taken presents, and therefore puts me on an enquiry, into my
actings in this kind and prepare against a day of accusation.

25th.  Up, having lain the last night the first night that I have lain
with my wife since she was last ill, which is about eight days.  To the
office, where busy all the morning.  At noon comes W. Howe to me, to
advise what answer to give to the business of the prizes, wherein I did
give him the best advice I could; but am sorry to see so many things,
wherein I doubt it will not be prevented but Sir Roger Cuttance and Mr.
Pierce will be found very much concerned in goods beyond the distribution,
and I doubt my Lord Sandwich too, which troubles me mightily.  He gone I
to dinner, and thence set my wife at the New Exchange, and I to Mr.
Clerke, my solicitor, to the Treasury chamber, but the Lords did not sit,
so I by water with him to the New Exchange, and there we parted, and I
took my wife and Deb. up, and to the Nursery, where I was yesterday, and
there saw them act a comedy, a pastorall, "The Faythful Shepherd," having
the curiosity to see whether they did a comedy better than a tragedy; but
they do it both alike, in the meanest manner, that I was sick of it, but
only for to satisfy myself once in seeing the manner of it, but I shall
see them no more, I believe.  Thence to the New Exchange, to take some
things home that my wife hath bought, a dressing-box, and other things for
her chamber and table, that cost me above L4, and so home, and there to
the office, and tell W. Hewer of the letter from Captain Allen last night,
to give him caution if any thing should be discovered of his dealings with
anybody, which I should for his sake as well, or more than for my own, be
sorry for; and with great joy I do find, looking over my memorandum books,
which are now of great use to me, and do fully reward me for all my care
in keeping them, that I am not likely to be troubled for any thing of the
kind but what I shall either be able beforehand to prevent, or if
discovered, be able to justify myself in, and I do perceive, by Sir W.
Warren's discourse, that they [the House] do all they can possibly to get
out of him and others, what presents they have made to the Officers of the
Navy; but he tells me that he hath denied all, though he knows that he is
forsworn as to what relates to me.  So home to supper and to bed.

26th.  Up, and by water to Charing Cross stairs, and thence to W. Coventry
to discourse concerning the state of matters in the Navy, where he
particularly acquainted me with the trouble he is like to meet with about
the selling of places, all carried on by Sir Fr. Hollis, but he seems not
to value it, being able to justify it to be lawful and constant practice,
and never by him used in the least degree since he upon his own motion did
obtain a salary of L500 in lieu thereof.  Thence to the Treasury Chamber
about a little business, and so home by coach, and in my way did meet W.
Howe going to the Commissioners of Accounts.  I stopped and spoke to him,
and he seems well resolved what to answer them, but he will find them very
strict, and not easily put off: So home and there to dinner, and after
dinner comes W. Howe to tell me how he sped, who says he was used civilly,
and not so many questions asked as he expected; but yet I do perceive
enough to shew that they do intend to know the bottom of things, and where
to lay the great weight of the disposal of these East India goods, and
that they intend plainly to do upon my Lord Sandwich.  Thence with him by
coach and set him down at the Temple, and I to Westminster Hall, where, it
being now about six o'clock, I find the House just risen; and met with Sir
W. Coventry and the Lieutenant of the Tower, they having sat all day; and
with great difficulty have got a vote for giving the King L300,000, not to
be raised by any land-tax.  The sum is much smaller than I expected, and
than the King needs; but is grounded upon Mr. Wren's reading our estimates
the other day of L270,000, to keep the fleete abroad, wherein we demanded
nothing for setting and fitting of them out, which will cost almost
L200,000, I do verily believe: and do believe that the King hath no cause
to thank Wren for this motion.  I home to Sir W. Coventry's lodgings, with
him and the Lieutenant of the Tower, where also was Sir John Coventry, and
Sir John Duncomb, and Sir Job Charleton.  And here a great deal of good
discourse: and they seem mighty glad to have this vote pass, which I did
wonder at, to see them so well satisfied with so small a sum, Sir John
Duncomb swearing, as I perceive he will freely do, that it was as much as
the nation could beare.  Among other merry discourse about spending of
money, and how much more chargeable a man's living is now more than it was
heretofore, Duncomb did swear that in France he did live of L100 a year
with more plenty, and wine and wenches, than he believes can be done now
for L200, which was pretty odd for him, being a Committee-man's son, to
say.  Having done here, and supped, where I eat very little, we home in
Sir John Robinson's coach, and there to bed.

27th.  All the morning at the office, and at noon home to dinner, and
thence with my wife and Deb. to the King's House, to see "The Virgin
Martyr," the first time it hath been acted a great while: and it is mighty
pleasant; not that the play is worth much, but it is finely acted by Becke
Marshall.  But that which did please me beyond any thing in, the whole
world was the wind-musique when the angel comes down, which is so sweet
that it ravished me, and indeed, in a word, did wrap up my soul so that it
made me really sick, just as I have formerly been when in love with my
wife; that neither then, nor all the evening going home, and at home, I
was able to think of any thing, but remained all night transported, so as
I could not believe that ever any musick hath that real command over the
soul of a man as this did upon me: and makes me resolve to practice
wind-musique, and to make my wife do the like.

28th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning doing business, and
after dinner with Sir W. Pen to White Hall, where we and the rest of us
presented a great letter of the state of our want of money to his Royal
Highness.  I did also present a demand of mine for consideration for my
travelling-charges of coach and boat-hire during the war, which, though
his Royal Highness and the company did all like of, yet, contrary to my
expectation, I find him so jealous now of doing any thing extraordinary,
that he desired the gentlemen that they would consider it, and report
their minds in it to him.  This did unsettle my mind a great while, not
expecting this stop: but, however, I shall do as well, I know, though it
causes me a little stop.  But that, that troubles me most is, that while
we were thus together with the Duke of York, comes in Mr. Wren from the
House, where, he tells us, another storm hath been all this day almost
against the Officers of the Navy upon this complaint,--that though they
have made good rules for payment of tickets, yet that they have not
observed them themselves, which was driven so high as to have it urged
that we should presently be put out of our places: and so they have at
last ordered that we shall be heard at the bar of the House upon this
business on Thursday next.  This did mightily trouble me and us all; but
me particularly, who am least able to bear these troubles, though I have
the least cause to be concerned in it.  Thence, therefore, to visit Sir H.
Cholmly, who hath for some time been ill of a cold; and thence walked
towards Westminster, and met Colonel Birch, who took me back to walk with
him, and did give me an account of this day's heat against the Navy
Officers, and an account of his speech on our behalf, which was very good;
and indeed we are much beholden to him, as I, after I parted with him, did
find by my cozen Roger, whom I went to: and he and I to his lodgings.  And
there he did tell me the same over again; and how much Birch did stand up
in our defence; and that he do see that there are many desirous to have us
out of the Office; and the House is so furious and passionate, that he
thinks nobody can be secure, let him deserve never so well.  But now, he
tells me, we shall have a fair hearing of the House, and he hopes justice
of them: but, upon the whole, he do agree with me that I should hold my
hand as to making any purchase of land, which I had formerly discoursed
with him about, till we see a little further how matters go.  He tells me
that that made them so mad to-day first was, several letters in the House
about the Fanatickes, in several places, coming in great bodies, and
turning people out of the churches, and there preaching themselves, and
pulling the surplice over the Parsons' heads: this was confirmed from
several places; which makes them stark mad, especially the hectors and
bravadoes of the House, who shew all the zeal on this occasion.  Having
done with him, I home vexed in my mind, and so fit for no business, but
sat talking with my wife and supped with her; and Nan Mercer come and sat
all the evening with us, and much pretty discourse, which did a little
ease me, and so to bed.

29th.  Up, and walked to Captain Cocke's, where Sir G. Carteret promised
to meet me and did come to discourse about the prize-business of my Lord
Sandwich's, which I perceive is likely to be of great ill consequence to
my Lord, the House being mighty vehement in it.  We could say little but
advise that his friends should labour to get it put off, till he comes. We
did here talk many things over, in lamentation of the present posture of
affairs, and the ill condition of all people that have had anything to do
under the King, wishing ourselves a great way off: Here they tell me how
Sir Thomas Allen hath taken the Englishmen out of "La Roche," and taken
from him an Ostend prize which La Roche had fetched out of our harbours;
and at this day La Roche keeps upon our coasts; and had the boldness to
land some men and go a mile up into the country, and there took some goods
belonging to this prize out of a house there; which our King resents, and,
they say, hath wrote to the King of France about; and everybody do think a
war will follow; and then in what a case we shall be for want of money,
nobody knows.  Thence to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at
noon home to dinner, and to the office again in the afternoon, where we
met to consider of an answer to the Parliament about the not paying of
tickets according to our own orders, to which I hope we shall be able to
give a satisfactory answer, but that the design of the House being
apparently to remove us, I do question whether the best answer will
prevail with them.  This done I by coach with my wife to Martin, my
bookseller's, expecting to have had my Kercher's Musurgia, but to my
trouble and loss of trouble it was not done.  So home again, my head full
of thoughts about our troubles in the office, and so to the office.  Wrote
to my father this post, and sent him now Colvill's--[The Goldsmith.]--note
for L600 for my sister's portion, being glad that I shall, I hope, have
that business over before I am out of place, and I trust I shall be able
to save a little of what I have got, and so shall not be troubled to be at
ease; for I am weary of this life.  So ends this month, with a great deal
of care and trouble in my head about the answerings of the Parliament, and
particularly in our payment of seamen by tickets.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Being very poor and mean as to the bearing with trouble
     Bite at the stone, and not at the hand that flings it
     Burned it, that it might not be among my books to my shame
     Come to see them in bed together, on their wedding-night
     Fear what would become of me if any real affliction should come
     Force a man to swear against himself
     L'escholle des filles, a lewd book
     Live of L100 a year with more plenty, and wine and wenches
     No pleasure--only the variety of it





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, February 1667/68
by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4186.txt or 4186.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/8/4186/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
