Project Gutenberg's Diary of Samuel Pepys, Apr/May 1669, by Samuel Pepys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Diary of Samuel Pepys, Apr/May 1669

Author: Samuel Pepys

Release Date: November 28, 2004 [EBook #4198]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***




Produced by David Widger





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                               APRIL & MAY
                                  1669

April 1st.  Up, and with Colonel Middleton, at the desire of Rear-Admiral
Kempthorne, the President, for our assisting them, to the Court-martiall
on board a yacht in the River here, to try the business of the Purser's
complaints, Baker against Trevanion, his Commander, of "The Dartmouth."
But, Lord! to see what wretched doings there were among all the Commanders
to ruin the Purser, and defend the Captain in all his rogueries, be it to
the prejudice of the King or Purser, no good man could bear!  I confess I
was pretty high, which did not at least the young gentlemen Commander
like; and Middleton did the like.  But could not bring it to any issue
this day, sitting till two o'clock; and therefore we being sent for, went
to Sir W. Pen's by invitation to dine; where my wife was, and my Lord
Brouncker and his mistress, and Sir J. Minnes and his niece; and here a
bad dinner, and little mirth, I being little pleased with my host.
However, I made myself sociable; and so, after dinner, my wife and I, with
my Lord Brouncker and his mistress, they set us down at my cozen Turner's,
and there we staid awhile and talked; and particularly here we met with
Dr. Ball, the Parson of the Temple, who did tell me a great many pretty
stories about the manner of the Parsons being paid for their preaching at
Paul's heretofore, and now, and the ground of the Lecture, and heretofore
the names of the founders thereof, which were many, at some 5s., some 6s.
per annum towards it: and had their names read in the pulpit every sermon
among those holy persons that the Church do order a collect for, giving
God thanks for.  By and by comes by my desire Commissioner Middleton's
coach and horses for us, and we went with it towards the Park, thinking to
have met The. Turner and Betty, but did not; so turned back again to their
lodging, and there found them and Mr. Batelier, and there, after a little
talk, we took leave, and carry Batelier home with us.  So to supper, and
so to bed.

2nd.  Up, and by water to White Hall, and there with the Office attended
the Duke of York, and staid in White Hall till about noon, and so with W.
Hewer to the Cocke, and there he and I dined alone with great content, he
reading to me, for my memory's sake, my late collections of the history of
the Navy, that I might represent the same by and by to the Duke of York;
and so, after dinner, he and I to White Hall, and there to the Duke of
York's lodgings, whither he, by and by, by his appointment come: and alone
with him an hour in his closet, telling him mine and W. Coventry's advice
touching the present posture of the Navy, as the Duke of Buckingham and
the rest do now labour to make changes therein; and that it were best for
him to suffer the King to be satisfied with the bringing in of a man or
two which they desire.  I did also give the Duke of York a short account
of the history of the Navy, as to our Office, wherewith he was very well
satisfied: but I do find that he is pretty stiff against their bringing in
of men against his mind, as the Treasures were, and particularly against
Child's' coming in, because he is a merchant.  After much discourse with
him, we parted; and [he to] the Council, while I staid waiting for his
telling me when I should be ready to give him a written account of the
administration of the Navy.  This caused me to wait the whole afternoon,
till night.  In the mean time, stepping to the Duchess of York's side to
speak with Lady Peterborough; I did see the young Duchess,

          [The Princess Mary, afterwards Queen of England.]

a little child in hanging sleeves; dance most finely, so as almost to
ravish me, her ears were so good: taught by a Frenchman that did
heretofore teach the King, and all the King's children, and the
Queen-Mother herself, who do still dance well.  Thence to the council door
and Mr. Chevins took me into the back stairs, and they with his friend,
Mr. Fowkes, for whom he is very solicitous in some things depending in
this Office, he did make me, with some others that he took in (among
others, Alderman Back well), eat a pickled herring, the largest I ever
saw, and drink variety of wines till I was almost merry; but I did keep in
good tune; and so, after the Council was up, I home; and there find my
wife not yet come home from Deptford, he she hath been all this day to see
her mother, but she come and by, and so to talk, and supper, and to bed.
This night I did bring home from the King's potticary's, in White Hall by
Mr. Cooling's direction, a water that he says did him mighty good for his
eyes.  I pray God it may do me good; but, by his description, his disease
was the same as mine, and this do encourage me to use it.

3rd.  Up, and to the Council of War again, with Middleton: but the
proceedings of the Commanders so devilishly bad, and so professedly
partial to the Captain, that I could endure it no longer, but took
occasion to pretend business at the Office, and away, and Colonel
Middleton with me, who was of the same mind, and resolved to declare our
minds freely to the Duke of York about it.  So to the office, where we sat
all the morning.  Then home to dinner, and so back to the office, where
busy late till night, and so home to supper and to bed.

4th (Lord's day).  Up, and to church, where Alderman Backewell's wife, by
my invitation with my head, come up with her mother, and sat with us, and
after sermon I did walk with them home, and there left them, and home to
dinner, and after dinner with Sir J. Minnes and T. Middleton to White
Hall, by appointment; and at my Lord Arlington's the Office did attend the
King and Cabal, to discourse the further quantity of victuals fit to be
declared for, which was 2,000 men for six months; and so without more ado
or stay, there, hearing no news but that Sir Thomas Allen is to be
expected every hour at home with his fleete, or news of his being gone
back to Algier, and so home, where got my wife to read to me; and so after
supper to bed.  The Queen-Mother hath been of late mighty ill, and some
fears of her death.

5th.  Up, and by coach, it being very cold, to White Hall, expecting a
meeting of Tangier, but it did not.  But, however, did wait there all the
morning, and, among other things, I spent a little time with Creed walking
in the garden, and talking about our Office, and Child's coming in to be a
Commissioner; and, being his friend, I did think he might do me a kindness
to learn of him what the Duke of Buckingham and the faction do design
touching me, and to instil good words concerning me, which he says, and I
believe he will: and it is but necessary; for I have not a mind indeed at
this time to be put out of my Office, if I can make any shift that is
honourable to keep it; but I will not do it by deserting the Duke of York.
At noon by appointment comes Mr. Sheres, and he and I to Unthanke's, where
my wife stays for us in our coach, and Betty Turner with her; and we to
the Mulberry Garden, where Sheres is to treat us with a Spanish Olio,

     [An olio is a mixed dish of meat and vegetables, and, secondarily,
     mixture or medley.]

by a cook of his acquaintance that is there, that was with my Lord in
Spain: and without any other company, he did do it, and mighty nobly; and
the Olio was indeed a very noble dish, such as I never saw better, or any
more of.  This, and the discourse he did give us of Spain, and description
of the Escuriall, was a fine treat.  So we left other good things, that
would keep till night, for a collation; and, with much content, took coach
again, and went five or six miles towards Branford, the Prince of Tuscany,
who comes into England only to spend money and see our country, comes into
the town to-day, and is much expected; and we met him, but the coach
passing by apace, we could not see much of him but he seems a very jolly
and good comely man.  By the way, we overtook Captain Ferrers upon his
fine Spanish horse, and he is a fine horse indeed; but not so good, I
think, as I have seen some.  He did ride by us most of the way, and with
us to the Park, and there left us, where we passed the evening, and
meeting The. Turner, Talbot, W. Batelier, and his sister, in a coach, we
anon took them with us to the Mulberry Garden; and there, after a walk, to
supper upon what was left at noon; and very good; only Mr. Sheres being
taken suddenly ill for a while, did spoil our mirth; but by and by was
well again, and we mighty merry: and so broke up, and left him at Charing
Cross, and so calling only at my cozen Turner's, away home, mightily
pleased with the day's work, and this day come another new mayd, for a
middle mayd, but her name I know not yet; and, for a cookmaid, we have,
ever since Bridget went, used a blackmoore of Mr. Batelier's, Doll, who
dresses our meat mighty well, and we mightily pleased with her.  So by and
by to bed.

6th.  Up, and to the Office, and thence to the Excise Office about some
business, and so back to the office and sat till late, end thence to Mr.
Batelier's to dinner, where my cozen Turner and both her daughters, and
Talbot Pepys and my wife, and a mighty fine dinner.  They at dinner before
I come; and, when I had dined, I away home, and thence to White Hall,
where the Board waited on the Duke of York to discourse about the
disposing of Sir Thomas Allen's fleete, which is newly come home to
Portsmouth; and here Middleton and I did in plain terms acquaint the Duke
of York what we thought and had observed in the late Court-martiall, which
the Duke did give ear to; and though he thinks not fit to revoke what is
already done in this case by a Court-martiall, yet it shall bring forth
some good laws in the behaviour of Captains to their under Officers for
the time to come.  Thence home, and there, after a while at the Office, I
home, and there come home my wife, who hath been with Batelier's late, and
been dancing with the company, at which I seemed a little troubled, not
being sent for thither myself, but I was not much so, but went to bed well
enough pleased.

7th.  Up, and by coach to my cozen Turner's, and invited them to dine at
the Cocke to-day, with my wife and me; and so to the Lords of the
Treasury, where all the morning, and settled matters to their liking about
the assignments on the Customes, between the Navy Office and Victualler,
and to that end spent most of the morning there with D. Gawden, and thence
took him to the Cocke, and there left him and my clerk Gibson together
evening their reckonings, while I to the New Exchange to talk with Betty,
my little sempstress; and so to Mrs. Turner's, to call them to dinner, but
my wife not come, I back again, and was overtaken by a porter, with a
message from my wife that she was ill, and could not come to us: so I back
again to Mrs. Turner's, and find them gone; and so back again to the
Cocke, and there find Mr: Turner, Betty, and Talbot Pepys, and they dined
with myself Sir D. Gawden and Gibson, and mighty merry, this house being
famous for good meat, and particularly pease-porridge and after dinner
broke up, and they away; and I to the Council-Chamber, and there heard the
great complaint of the City, tried against the gentlemen of the Temple,
for the late riot, as they would have it, when my Lord Mayor was there.
But, upon hearing the whole business, the City was certainly to blame to
charge them in this manner as with a riot: but the King and Council did
forbear to determine any thing it, till the other business of the title
and privilege be decided which is now under dispute at law between them,
whether Temple be within the liberty of the City or no.  But I, sorry to
see the City so ill advised as to complain in a thing where their proofs
were so weak.  Thence to my cousin Turner's, and thence with her and her
daughters, and her sister Turner, I carrying Betty in my lap, to Talbot's
chamber at the Temple, where, by agreement, the poor rogue had a pretty
dish of anchovies and sweetmeats for them; and hither come Mr. Eden, who
was in his mistress's disfavour ever since the other night that he come in
thither fuddled, when we were there.  But I did make them friends by my
buffoonery, and bringing up a way of spelling their names, and making
Theophila spell Lamton, which The. would have to be the name of Mr. Eden's
mistress, and mighty merry we were till late, and then I by coach home,
and so to bed, my wife being ill of those, but well enough pleased with my
being with them.  This day I do hear that Betty Turner is to be left at
school at Hackney, which I am mightily pleased with; for then I shall, now
and then, see her.  She is pretty, and a girl for that, and her relations,
I love.

8th.  Up, and to White Hall, to the King's side, to find Sir T. Clifford,
where the Duke of York come and found me, which I was sorry for, for fear
he should think I was making friends on that side.  But I did put it off
the best I could, my being there: and so, by and by, had opportunity alone
to shew Sir T. Clifford the fair account I had drawn up of the Customes,
which he liked, and seemed mightily pleased with me; and so away to the
Excise-Office, to do a little business there, and so to the Office, where
all the morning.  At noon home to dinner, and then to the office again
till the evening, and then with my wife by coach to Islington, to pay what
we owe there, for the late dinner at Jane's wedding; and so round by
Kingsland and Hogsden home, pleased with my. wife's singing with me, by
the way, and so to the office again a little, and then home to supper and
to bed.  Going this afternoon through Smithfield, I did see a coach run
over the coachman's neck, and stand upon it, and yet the man rose up, and
was well after it, which I thought a wonder.

9th.  Up, and by water to White Hall, end there, with the Board, attended
the Duke of York, and Sir Thomas Allen with us (who come to town
yesterday); and it is resolved another fleete shall go to the Streights
forthwith, and he command it.  But his coming home is mighty hardly talked
on by the merchants, for leaving their ships there to the mercy of the
Turks: but of this more in my White-Booke. Thence out, and slipped out by
water to Westminster Hall  and there thought to have spoke with Mrs.
Martin, but she was not there, nor at home.  So back again, and with W.
Hewer by coach home and to dinner, and then to the office, and out again
with W. Hewer to the Excise-Office, and to several places; among others,
to Mr. Faythorne's, to have seen an instrument which he was said to have,
for drawing perspectives, but he had it not: but here I did see his
work-house, and the best things of his doing he had by him, and so to
other places among others to Westminster Hall, and I took occasion to make
a step to Mrs. Martin's, the first time I have been with her since her
husband went last to sea, which is I think a year since .  .  .  . But,
Lord!  to hear how sillily she tells the story of her sister Doll's being
a widow and lately brought to bed; and her husband, one Rowland Powell,
drowned, sea with her husband, but by chance dead at sea, cast When God
knows she hath played the whore, and forced at this time after she was
brought to bed, this story.  Thence calling at several places by the
home, and there to the office, and then home to supper and to bed.

10th.  Up, and to the Excise-Office, and thence to White Hall a little,
and so back again to the 'Change, but nobody there, it being over, and so
walked home to dinner, and after dinner comes Mr. Seymour to visit me, a
talking fellow: but I hear by him that Captain Trevanion do give it out
every where, that I did overrule the whole Court-martiall against him, as
long as I was there; and perhaps I may receive, this time, some wrong by
it: but I care not, for what I did was out of my desire of doing justice.
So the office, where late, and then home to supper and to bed.

11th (Lord's day.  Easter day).  Up, and to Church; where Alderman
Backewell's wife, and mother, and boy, and another gentlewoman, did come,
and sit in our pew; but no women of our own there, and so there was room
enough.  Our Parson made a dull sermon, and so home to dinner; and, after
dinner, my wife and I out by coach, and Balty with us, to Loton, the
landscape-drawer, a Dutchman, living in St. James's Market, but there saw
no good pictures.  But by accident he did direct us to a painter that was
then in the house with him, a Dutchman, newly come over, one Evarelst, who
took us to his lodging close by, and did shew us a little flower-pot of
his doing, the finest thing that ever, I think, I saw in my life; the
drops of dew hanging on the leaves, so as I was forced, again and again,
to put my finger to it, to feel whether my eyes were deceived or no.  He
do ask L70 for it: I had the vanity to bid him L20; but a better picture I
never saw in my whole life; and it is worth going twenty miles to see it.
Thence, leaving Balty there, I took my wife to St. James's, and there
carried her to the Queen's Chapel, the first time I ever did it; and heard
excellent musick, but not so good as by accident I did hear there
yesterday, as I went through the Park from White Hall to see Sir W.
Coventry, which I have forgot to set down in my journal yesterday. And
going out of the Chapel, I did see the Prince of Tuscany' come out, a
comely, black, fat man, in a mourning suit; and my wife and I did see him
this afternoon through a window in this Chapel.  All that Sir W. Coventry
yesterday did tell me new was, that the King would not yet give him leave
to come to kiss his hand; and he do believe that he will not in a great
while do it, till those about him shall see fit, which I am sorry for.
Thence to the Park, my wife and I; and here Sir W. Coventry did first see
me and my wife in a coach of our own; and so did also this night the Duke
of York, who did eye my wife mightily.  But I begin to doubt that my being
so much seen in my own coach at this time, may be observed to my
prejudice; but I must venture it now.  So home, and by night home, and so
to my office, and there set down my journal, with the help of my left eye
through my tube, for fourteen days' past; which is so much, as, I hope, I
shall not run in arrear again, but the badness of my eyes do force me to
it.  So home to supper and to bed.

12th.  Up, and by water to White Hall, where I of the whole Office
attended the Duke of York at his meeting with Sir Thomas Allen and several
flag-officers, to consider of the manner of managing the war with Algiers;
and, it being a thing I was wholly silent in, I did only observe; and find
that; their manner of discourse on this weighty affair was very mean and
disorderly, the Duke of York himself being the man that I thought spoke
most to the purpose.  Having done here, I up and down the house, talking
with this man and that, and: then meeting Mr. Sheres, took him to see the
fine flower-pot I saw yesterday, and did again offer L20 for it; but he
[Verelst] insists upon L50.  Thence I took him to St. James's, but there
was no musique, but so walked to White Hall, and, by and by to my wife at
Unthanke's, and with her was Jane, and so to the Cocke, where they, and I,
and Sheres, and Tom dined, my wife having a great desire to eat of their
soup made of pease, and dined very well, and thence by water to the
Bear-Garden, and there happened to sit by Sir Fretcheville Hollis, who is
still full of his vain-glorious and prophane talk.  Here we saw a prize
fought between a soldier and country fellow, one Warrell, who promised the
least in his looks, and performed the most of valour in his boldness and
evenness of mind, and smiles in all he did, that ever I saw and we were
all both deceived and infinitely taken with him.  He did soundly beat the
soldier, and cut him over the head.  Thence back to White Hall, mightily
pleased, all of us, with this sight, and particularly this fellow, as a
most extraordinary man for his temper and evenness in fighting.  And there
leaving Sheres, we by our own coach home, and after sitting an hour,
thrumming upon my viall, and singing, I to bed, and left my wife to do
something to a waistcoat and petticoat she is to wear to-morrow.  This
evening, coming home, we overtook Alderman Backewell's coach and his lady,
and followed them to their house, and there made them the first visit,
where they received us with extraordinary civility, and owning the
obligation.  But I do, contrary to my expectation, find her something a
proud and vain-glorious woman, in telling the number of her servants and
family and expences: he is also so, but he was ever of that strain.  But
here he showed me the model of his houses that he is going to build in
Cornhill and Lumbard Street; but he hath purchased so much there, that it
looks like a little town, and must have cost him a great deal of money.

13th.  Up, and at the Office a good while, and then, my wife going down
the River to spend the day with her mother at Deptford, I abroad, and
first to the milliner's in Fenchurch Street, over against Rawlinson's, and
there, meeting both him and her in the shop, I bought a pair of gloves,
and fell to talk, and found so much freedom that I stayed there the best
part of the morning till towards noon, with great pleasure, it being a
holiday, and then against my will away and to the 'Change, where I left W.
Hewer, and I by hackney-coach to the Spittle, and heard a piece of a dull
sermon to my Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and thence saw them all take horse
and ride away, which I have not seen together many a-day; their wives also
went in their coaches; and, indeed, the sight was mighty pleasing.  Thence
took occasion to go back to this milliner's [in Fenchurch Street], whose
name I now understand to be Clerke; and there, her husband inviting me up
to the balcony, to see the sight go by to dine at Clothworker's-Hall, I
did go up and there saw it go by: and then; there being a good piece of
cold roast beef upon the tables and one Margetts, a young merchant that
lodges there, and is likely to marry a sister of hers, I staid and eat,
and had much good conversation with her, who hath the vanity to talk of
her great friends and father, one Wingate, near Welling;, that hath been a
Parliament-man.  Here also was Stapely: the rope-merchant, and dined with
us; and, after spending most of the afternoon also, I away home, and there
sent for W. Hewer, and he and I by water to White Hall to loop among other
things, for Mr. May, to unbespeak his dining with me to-morrow.  But here
being in the court-yard, God would have it, I spied Deb., which made my
heart and head to work, and I presently could not refrain, but sent W.
Hewer away to look for Mr. Wren (W. Hewer, I perceive, did see her, but
whether he did see me see her I know not, or suspect my sending him away I
know not, but my heart could not hinder me), and I run after her and two
women and a man, more ordinary people, and she in her old clothes, and
after hunting a little, find them in the lobby of the chapel below stairs,
and there I observed she endeavoured to avoid me, but I did speak to her
and she to me, and did get her pour dire me ou she demeurs now, and did
charge her para say nothing of me that I had vu elle, which she did
promise, and so with my heart full of surprize and disorder I away, and
meeting with Sir H. Cholmley walked into the Park with him and back again,
looking to see if I could spy her again in the Park, but I could not.  And
so back to White Hall, and then back to the Park with Mr. May, but could
see her, no more, and so with W. Hewer, who I doubt by my countenance
might see some disorder in me, we home by water, and there I find Talbot
Pepys, and Mrs. Turner, and Betty, come to invite us to dinner on
Thursday; and, after drinking, I saw them to the water-side, and so back
home through Crutched Friars, and there saw Mary Mercer, and put off my
hat to her, on the other side of the way, but it being a little darkish
she did not, I think, know me well, and so to my office to put my papers
in order, they having been removed for my closet to be made clean, and so
home to my wife, who is come home from Deptford.  But, God forgive me, I
hardly know how to put on confidence enough to speak as innocent, having
had this passage to-day with Deb., though only, God knows, by accident.
But my great pain is lest God Almighty shall suffer me to find out this
girl, whom indeed I love, and with a bad amour, but I will pray to God to
give me grace to forbear it.  So home to supper, where very sparing in my
discourse, not giving occasion of any enquiry where I have been to-day, or
what I have done, and so without any trouble to-night more than my fear,
we to bed.

14th.  Up, and with W. Hewer to White Hall, and there I did speak with the
Duke of York, the Council sitting in the morning, and it was to direct me
to have my business ready of the Administration of the Office against
Saturday next, when the King would have a hearing of it.  Thence home, W.
Hewer with me, and then out with my own coach to the Duke of York's
play-house, and there saw "The Impertinents," a play which pleases me well
still; but it is with great trouble that I now see a play, because of my
eyes, the light of the candles making it very troublesome to me.  After
the play;: my wife and I towards the Park, but it being too late we to
Creed's, and there find him and her [his wife] together alone, in their
new house, where I never was before, they lodging before at the next door,
and a pretty house it is; but I do not see that they intend to keep any
coach.  Here they treat us like strangers, quite according to the
fashion--nothing to drink or eat, which is a thing that will spoil our
ever having any acquaintance with them; for we do continue the old freedom
and kindness of England to all our friends.  But they do here talk
mightily of my Lady Paulina making a very good end, and being mighty
religious in her lifetime; and hath left many good notes of sermons and
religion; wrote with her own hand, hand, which nobody ever knew of; which
I am glad of: but she was always a peevish lady.  Thence home, and there
to talk and to supper and to bed, all being very safe as to my seeing of
poor Deb. yesterday.

15th.  Up, and to the office, and thence before the office sat to the
Excise Office with W. Hewer, but found some occasion to go another way to
the Temple upon business, and I by Deb.'s direction did know whither in
Jewen Street to direct my hackney coachman, while I staid in the coach in
Aldgate Street, to go thither just to enquire whether Mrs. Hunt, her aunt,
was in town, who brought me word she was not; thought this was as much as
I could do at once, and therefore went away troubled through that I could
do no more but to the office I must go and did, and there all the morning,
but coming thither I find Bagwell's wife, who did give me a little note
into my hand, wherein I find her para invite me para meet her in
Moorfields this noon, where I might speak with her, and so after the
office was up, my wife being gone before by invitation to my cozen
Turner's to dine, I to the place, and there, after walking up and down by
the windmills, I did find her and talk with her, but it being holiday and
the place full of people, we parted, leaving further discourse and doing
to another time.  Thence I away, and through Jewen Street, my mind, God
knows, running that way, but stopped not, but going down Holborne hill, by
the Conduit, I did see Deb. on foot going up the hill.  I saw her, and she
me, but she made no stop, but seemed unwilling to speak to me; so I away
on, but then stopped and 'light, and after her and overtook her at the end
of Hosier lane in Smithfield, and without standing in the street desired
her to follow me, and I led her into a little blind alehouse within the
walls, and there she and I alone fell to talk and baiser la and toker su
mammailles, but she mighty coy, and I hope modest .  .  .  . I did give
her in a paper 20s., and we did agree para meet again in the Hall at
Westminster on Monday next; and so giving me great hopes by her carriage
that she continues modest and honest, we did there part, she going home
and I to Mrs. Turner's, but when I come back to the place where I left my
coach it was gone, I having staid too long, which did trouble me to abuse
the poor fellow, so that taking another coach I did direct him to find out
the fellow and send him to me.  At my cozen Turner's I find they are gone
all to dinner to Povy's, and thither I, and there they were all, and W.
Batelier and his sister, and had dined; but I had good things brought me,
and then all up and down the house, and mightily pleased to see the fine
rooms: but, the truth is, there are so many bad pictures, that to me make
the good ones lose much of the pleasure in seeing them.  The. and Betty
Turner in new flowered tabby gowns, and so we were pretty merry, only my
fear upon me for what I had newly done, do keep my content in.  So, about
five or six o'clock, away, and I took my wife and the two Bateliers, and
carried them homeward, and W. Batelier 'lighting, I carried the women
round by Islington, and so down Bishopsgate Street home, and there to talk
and sup, and then to bed.

16th.  Up, and to my chamber, where with Mr. Gibson all the morning, and
there by noon did almost finish what I had to write about the
Administration of the Office to present to the Duke of York, and my wife
being gone abroad with W. Hewer, to see the new play to-day, at the Duke
of York's house, "Guzman," I dined alone with my people, and in the
afternoon away by coach to White Hall; and there the Office attended the
Duke of York; and being despatched pretty soon, and told that we should
not wait on the King, as intended, till Sunday, I thence presently to the
Duke of York's playhouse, and there, in the 18d. seat, did get room to see
almost three acts of the play; but it seemed to me but very ordinary.
After the play done, I into the pit, and there find my wife and W. Hewer;
and Sheres got to them, which, so jealous is my nature, did trouble me,
though my judgment tells me there is no hurt in it, on neither side; but
here I did meet with Shadwell, the poet, who, to my great wonder, do tell
me that my Lord of [Orrery] did write this play, trying what he could do
in comedy, since his heroique plays could do no more wonders.  This do
trouble me; for it is as mean a thing, and so he says, as hath been upon
the stage a great while; and Harris, who hath no part in it, did come to
me, and told me in discourse that he was glad of it, it being a play that
will not take.  Thence home, and to my business at the office, to finish
it, but was in great pain about yesterday still, lest my wife should have
sent her porter to enquire anything, though for my heart I cannot see it
possible how anything could be discovered of it, but yet such is fear as
to render me full of doubt and disgust.  At night to supper and to bed.

17th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon at home to
dinner, and there find Mr. Pierce, the surgeon, and he dined with us; and
there hearing that "The Alchymist" was acted, we did go, and took him with
us to the King's house; and it is still a good play, having not been acted
for two or three years before; but I do miss Clun, for the Doctor. But
more my eyes will not let me enjoy the pleasure I used to have in a play.
Thence with my wife in hackney to Sir W. Coventry's, who being gone to the
Park we drove after him, and there met him coming out, and followed him
home, and there sent my wife to Unthanke's while I spent on hour with him
reading over first my draught of the Administration of the Navy, which he
do like very well; and so fell to talk of other things, and among the rest
of the story of his late disgrace, and how basely and in what a mean
manner the Duke of Buckingham hath proceeded against him--not like a man
of honour.  He tells me that the King will not give other answer about his
coming to kiss his hands, than "Not yet."  But he says that this that he
desires, of kissing the King's hand, is only to show to the world that he
is not discontented, and not in any desire to come again into play, though
I do perceive that he speaks this with less earnestness than heretofore:
and this, it may be, is, from what he told me lately, that the King is
offended at what is talked, that he hath declared himself desirous not to
have to do with any employment more. But he do tell me that the leisure he
hath yet had do not at all begin to be burdensome to him, he knowing how
to spend his time with content to himself; and that he hopes shortly to
contract his expence, so as that he shall not be under any straits in that
respect neither; and so seems to be in very good condition of content.
Thence I away over the Park, it being now night, to White Hall, and there,
in the Duchess's chamber, do find the Duke of York; and, upon my offer to
speak with him, he did come to me, and withdrew to his closet, and there
did hear and approve my paper of the Administration of the Navy, only did
bid me alter these words, "upon the rupture between the late King and the
Parliament," to these, "the beginning of the late Rebellion;" giving it me
as but reason to shew that it was with the Rebellion that the Navy was put
by out of its old good course, into that of a Commission.  Having done
this, we fell to other talk; he with great confidence telling me how
matters go among our adversaries, in reference to the Navy, and that he
thinks they do begin to flag; but then, beginning to talk in general of
the excellency of old constitutions, he did bring out of his cabinet, and
made me read it, an extract out of a book of my late Lord of
Northumberland's, so prophetic of the: business of Chatham, as is almost
miraculous.  I did desire, and he did give it me to copy out, which
pleased me mightily, and so, it being late, I away and to my wife, and by
hackney; home, and there, my eyes being weary with reading so much: but
yet not so much as I was afeard they would, we home to supper and to bed.

18th (Lord's day).  Up, and all the morning till 2 o'clock at my Office,
with Gibson and Tom, about drawing up fair my discourse of the
Administration of the Navy, and then, Mr. Spong being come to dine with
me, I in to dinner, and then out to my Office again, to examine the fair
draught; and so borrowing Sir J. Minnes's coach, he going with Colonel
Middleton, I to White Hall, where we all met and did sign it and then to
my Lord Arlington's, where the King, and the Duke of York, and Prince
Rupert, as also Ormond and the two Secretaries, with my Lord Ashly and Sir
T. Clifton was. And there, by and by, being called in, Mr. Williamson did
read over our paper, which was in a letter to the Duke of York, bound up
in a book with the Duke of York's Book of Instructions.  He read it well;
and, after read, we were bid to withdraw, nothing being at all said to it.
And by and by we were called in again, and nothing said to that business;
but another begun, about the state of this year's action, and our wants of
money, as I had stated the same lately to our Treasurers; which I was bid,
and did largely, and with great content, open.  And having so done, we all
withdrew, and left them to debate our supply of money; to which, being
called in, and referred to attend on the Lords of the Treasury, we all
departed.  And I only staid in the House till the Council rose; and then
to the Duke of York, who in the Duchess's chamber come to me, and told me
that the book was there left with my Lord Arlington, for any of the Lords
to view that had a mind, and to prepare and present to the King what they
had to say in writing, to any part of it, which is all we can desire, and
so that rested.  The Duke of York then went to other talk; and by and by
comes the Prince of Tuscany to visit him, and the Duchess; and I find that
he do still remain incognito, and so intends to do all the time he stays
here, for avoiding trouble to the King and himself, and expence also to
both.  Thence I to White Hall Gate, thinking to have found Sir J. Minnes's
coach staying for me; but, not being there, and this being the first day
of rain we have had many a day, the streets being as dusty as in summer, I
forced to walk to my cozen Turner's, and there find my wife newly gone
home, which vexed me, and so I, having kissed and taken leave of Betty,
who goes to Putney to school to-morrow, I walked through the rain to the
Temple, and there, with much ado, got a coach, and so home, and there to
supper, and Pelling comes to us, and after much talk, we parted, and to
bed.

19th.  Up, and with Tom (whom, with his wife, I, and my wife, had this
morning taken occasion to tell that I did intend to give him L40 for
himself, and L20 to his wife, towards their setting out in the world, and
that my wife would give her L20 more, that she might have as much to begin
with as he) by coach to White Hall, and there having set him work in the
Robe Chamber, to write something for me, I to Westminster Hall, and there
walked from 10 o'clock to past 12, expecting to have met Deb., but whether
she had been there before, and missing me went away, or is prevented in
coming, and hath no mind to come to me (the last whereof, as being most
pleasing, as shewing most modesty, I should be most glad of), I know not,
but she not then appearing, I being tired with walking went home, and my
wife being all day at Jane's, helping her, as she said, to cut out linen
and other things belonging to her new condition, I after dinner out again,
and, calling for my coach, which was at the coachmaker's, and hath been
for these two or three days, to be new painted, and the window-frames gilt
against May-day, went on with my hackney to White Hall, and thence by
water to Westminster Hall, and there did beckon to Doll Lane, now Mrs.
Powell, as she would have herself called, and went to her sister Martin's
lodgings, the first time I have been there these eight or ten months, I
think, and her sister being gone to Portsmouth to her Y husband, I did
stay and talk and drink with Doll . .  .  .  So away:; and to White Hall,
and there took my own coach, which was now come, and so away home, and
there to do business, and my wife being come home we to talk and to sup,
there having been nothing yet like discovery in my wife of what hath
lately passed with me about Deb., and so with great content to bed

20th.  Up; and to the Office, and my wife abroad with Mary Batelier, with
our own coach, but borrowed Sir J Minnes's coachman, that so our own might
stay at home, to attend at dinner; our family being mightily disordered by
our little boy's falling sick the last night; and we fear it will prove
the small-pox.  At noon comes my guest, Mr. Hugh May, and with him Sir
Henry Capell, my old Lord Capel's son, and Mr. Parker; and I had a pretty
dinner for them; and both before and after dinner had excellent discourse;
and shewed them my closet and my Office, and the method of it to their
great content; and more extraordinary, manly discourse and opportunity of
shewing myself, and learning from others, I have not, in ordinary
discourse, had in my life, they being all persons of worth, but especially
Sir H. Capell, whose being a Parliament-man, and hearing my discourse in
the Parliament-house, hath, as May tells me, given him along desire to
know and discourse with me.  In the afternoon we walked to the Old
Artillery-Ground' near the Spitalfields, where I never was before, but
now, by Captain Deane's invitation, did go to see his new gun tryed, this
being the place where the Officers of the Ordnance do try all their great
guns; and when we come, did find that the trial had been made; and they
going away with extraordinary report of the proof of his gun, which, from
the shortness and bigness, they do call Punchinello.  But I desired
Colonel Legg to stay and give us a sight of her performance, which he did,
and there, in short, against a gun more than as long and as heavy again,
and charged with as much powder again, she carried the same bullet as
strong to the mark, and nearer and above the mark at a point blank than
theirs, and is more easily managed, and recoyles no more than that, which
is a thing so extraordinary as to be admired for the happiness of his
invention, and to the great regret of the old Gunners and Officers of the
Ordnance that were there, only Colonel Legg did do her much right in his
report of her.  And so, having seen this great and first experiment, we
all parted, I seeing my guests into a hackney coach, and myself, with
Captain Deane, taking a hackney coach, did go out towards Bow, and went as
far as Stratford, and all the way talking of this invention, and he
offering me a third of the profit of the invention; which, for aught I
know, or do at present think, may prove matter considerable to us: for
either the King will give him a reward for it, if he keeps it to himself,
or he will give us a patent to make our profit of it: and no doubt but it
will be of profit to merchantmen and others, to have guns of the same
force at half the charge.  This was our talk: and then to talk of other
things, of the Navy in general: and, among other things, he did tell me
that he do hear how the Duke of Buckingham hath a spite at me, which I
knew before, but value it not: and he tells me that Sir T. Allen is not my
friend; but for all this I am not much troubled, for I know myself so
usefull that, as I believe, they will not part with me; so I thank God my
condition is such that I can; retire, and be able to live with comfort,
though not with abundance.  Thus we spent the evening with extraordinary
good discourse, to my great content, and so home to the Office, and there
did some business, and then home, where my wife do come home, and I vexed
at her staying out so late, but she tells me that she hath been at home
with M. Batelier a good while, so I made nothing of it, but to supper and
to bed.

21st.  Up; and with my own coach as far as the Temple, and thence sent it
to my cozen Turner, who, to ease her own horses, that are going with her
out of town, do borrow mine to-day.  So I to Auditor Wood's, and thereto
meet, and met my Lord Bellassis upon some business of his accounts, and
having done that did thence go to St. James's, and attended the Duke of
York a little, being the first time of my waiting on him at St. James's
this summer, whither he is now newly gone and thence walked to White Hall;
and so, by and by, to the Council-Chamber, and heard a remarkable cause
pleaded between the Farmers of the Excise of Wiltshire, in complaint
against the justices of Peace of Salisbury: and Sir H. Finch was for the
former.  But, Lord! to see how he did with his admirable eloquence order
the matter, is not to be conceived almost: so pleasant a thing it is to
hear him plead.  Then at noon by coach home, and thither by and by comes
cozen Turner, and The., and Joyce, in their riding-clod: they being come
from their lodgings to her husbands chamber, at the Temple, and there do
lie, and purpose to go out of town on Friday next; and here I had a good
dinner for them.  After dinner by water to White Hall, where the Duke of
York did meet our Office, and went with us to the Lords Commissioners of
the Treasury; and there we did go over all the business of the state I had
drawn up, of this year's action and expence, which I did do to their
satisfaction, and convincing them of the necessity of providing more
money, if possible, for us.  Thence the Duke of York being gone, I did
there stay walking with Sir H. Cholmly in the Court, talking of news;
where he told me, that now the great design of the Duke of Buckingham is
to prevent the meeting, since he cannot bring about with the King the
dissolving, of this Parliament, that the King may not need it; and
therefore my Lord St. Albans is hourly expected with great offers of a
million of money,--[From Louis XIV. See April 28th]--to buy our breach
with the Dutch: and this, they do think, may tempt the King to take the
money, and thereby be out of a necessity of calling the Parliament again,
which these people dare not suffer to meet again: but this he doubts, and
so do I, that it will be to the ruin of the nation if we fall out with
Holland.  This we were discoursing when my boy comes to tell me that his
mistress was at the Gate with the coach, whither I went, and there find my
wife and the whole company.  So she, and Mrs. Turner, and The., and
Talbot, in mine: and Joyce, W. Batelier, and I, in a hackney, to Hyde
Park, where I was ashamed to be seen; but mightily pleased, though
troubled, with a drunken coachman that did not remember when we come to
'light, where it was that he took us up; but said at Hammersmith, and
thither he was carrying of us when we come first out of the Park.  So I
carried them all to Hercules-Pillars, and there did treat them: and so,
about ten at night, parted, and my wife, and I, and W. Batelier, home; and
he gone, we to bed.

22nd.  Up, and to the Office, where all the morning.  At noon home to
dinner, and Captain Deane with us; and very good discourse, and
particularly about my getting a book for him to draw up his whole theory
of shipping, which, at my desire, he hath gone far in, and hath shewn me
what he hath done therein, to admiration.  I did give him a Parallelogram,
which he is mightily taken with; and so after dinner to the Office, where
all the afternoon till night late, and then home. Vexed at my wife's not
being come home, she being gone again abroad with M. Batelier, and come
not home till ten at night, which vexed me, so that I to bed, and lay in
pain awake till past one, and then to sleep.

23rd.  Going to rise, without saying anything, my wife stopped me; and,
after a little angry talk, did tell me how she spent all day yesterday
with M. Batelier and her sweetheart, and seeing a play at the New Nursery,
which is set up at the house in Lincoln's Inn Fields, which was formerly
the King's house.  So that I was mightily pleased again, and rose a with
great content; and so by water to White Hall, and there to the
Council-Chamber, and heard two or three causes: among others, that of the
complaint of Sir Philip Howard and Watson, the inventors, as they pretend,
of the business of varnishing and lackerworke, against the Company of
Painters, who take upon them to do the same thing; where I saw a great
instance of the weakness of a young Counsel not used to such an audience,
against the Solicitor-General and two more able Counsel used to it.
Though he had the right of, his side, and did prevail for what he
pretended to against the rest, yet it was with much disadvantage and
hazard.  Here, also I heard Mr. Papillion' make his defence to the King,
against some complaints of the Farmers of Excise; but it was so weak, and
done only by his own seeking, that it was to his injury more than profit,
and made his case the worse, being ill managed, and in a cause against the
King.  Thence at noon, the Council rising, I to Unthanke's, and there by
agreement met my wife, and with her to the Cocke, and did give her a
dinner, but yet both of us but in an ill humour, whatever was the matter
with her, but thence to the King's playhouse, and saw "The Generous
Portugalls," a play that pleases me better and better every time we see
it; and, I thank God! it did not trouble my eyes so much as I was afeard
it would.  Here, by accident, we met Mr. Sheres, and yet I could not but
be troubled, because my wife do so delight to talk of him, and to see him.
Nevertheless, we took him with us to our mercer's, and to the Exchange,
and he helped me to choose a summer-suit of coloured camelott, coat and
breeches, and a flowered tabby vest very rich; and so home, where he took
his leave, and down to Greenwich, where he hath some friends; and I to see
Colonel Middleton, who hath been ill for a day or two, or three; and so
home to supper, and to bed.

24th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning, and at noon home to
dinner, Mr. Sheres dining with us by agreement; and my wife, which
troubled me, mighty careful to have a handsome dinner for him; but yet I
see no reason to be troubled at it, he being a very civil and worthy man,
I think; but only it do seem to imply some little neglect of me.  After
dinner to the King's house, and there saw "The General" revived--a good
play, that pleases me well, and thence, our coach coming for us, we parted
and home, and I busy late at the office, and then home to supper and to
bed.  Well pleased to-night to have Lead, the vizard-maker, bring me home
my vizard, with a tube fastened in it, which, I think, will do my
business, at least in a great measure, for the easing of my eyes.

25th (Lord's day).  Up, and to my Office awhile, and thither comes Lead
with my vizard, with a tube fastened within both eyes; which, with the
help which he prompts me to, of a glass in the tube, do content me
mightily.  So to church, where a stranger made a dull sermon, but I
mightily pleased to looks upon Mr. Buckworth's little pretty daughters,
and so home to, dinner, where W. Howe come and dined with us; and then I
to my Office, he being gone, to write down my journal for the last twelve
days: and did it with the help of my vizard and tube fixed to it, and do
find it mighty manageable, but how helpfull to my eyes this trial will
shew me.  So abroad with my wife, in the afternoon, to the Park, where
very much company, and the weather very pleasant.  I carried my wife to
the Lodge, the first time this year, and there in our coach eat a
cheese-cake and drank a tankard of milk.  I showed her this day also first
the Prince of Tuscany, who was in the Park, and many very fine ladies, and
so home, and after supper to bed.

26th.  Up, having lain long, and then by coach with W. Hewer to the Excise
Office, and so to Lilly's, the Varnishes; who is lately dead, and his wife
and brother keep up the trade, and there I left my French prints to be put
on boards:, and, while I was there, a fire burst out in a chimney of a
house over against his house, but it was with a gun quickly put out.  So
to White Hall, and did a little business there at the Treasury chamber,
and so homeward, calling at the laceman's for some lace for my new suit,
and at my tailor's, and so home, where to dinner, and Mr. Sheres dined,
with us, who come hither to-day to teach my wife the rules of perspective;
but I think, upon trial, he thinks it too hard to teach her, being
ignorant of the principles of lines.  After dinner comes one Colonel
Macnachan, one that I see often at Court, a Scotchman, but know him not;
only he brings me a letter from my Lord Middleton, who, he says, is in
great distress for L500 to relieve my Lord Morton with, but upon, what
account I know not; and he would have me advance it without order upon his
pay for Tangier, which I was astonished at, but had the grace to deny him
with an excuse.  And so he went away, leaving me a little troubled that I
was thus driven, on a sudden, to do any thing herein; but Creed, coming
just now to see me, he approves of what I have done.  And then to talk of
general matters, and, by and by, Sheres being gone, my wife, and he, and I
out, and I set him down at Temple Bar, and myself and wife went down the
Temple upon seeming business, only to put him off, and just at the Temple
gate I spied Deb. with another gentlewoman, and Deb. winked on me and
smiled, but undiscovered, and I was glad to see her.  So my wife and I to
the 'Change, about things for her; and here, at Mrs. Burnett's shop, I am
told by Betty, who was all undressed, of a great fire happened in
Durham-Yard last night, burning the house of one Lady Hungerford, who was
to come to town to it this night; and so the house is burned, new
furnished, by carelessness of the girl sent to take off a candle from a
bunch of candles, which she did by burning it off, and left the rest, as
is supposed, on fire.  The King and Court were here, it seems, and stopped
the fire by blowing up of the next house.  The King and Court went out of
town to Newmarket this morning betimes, for a week.  So home, and there to
my chamber, and got my wife to read to me a little, and so to supper and
to bed.  Coming home this night I did call at the coachmaker's, and do
resolve upon having the standards of my coach gilt with this new sort of
varnish, which will come but to 40s.; and, contrary to my expectation, the
doing of the biggest coach all over comes not to above L6, which is [not]
very much.

27th.  Up, and to the Office, where all the morning.  At noon home to
dinner, and then to the Office again, where the afternoon busy till late,
and then home, and got my wife to read to me in the Nepotisme,

     [The work here mentioned is a bitter satire against the Court Rome,
     written in Italian, and attributed to Gregorio Leti.  It was first
     printed in 1667, without the name or place of printer, but it is
     from the press of the Elzevirs.  The book obtained by Pepys was
     probably the anonymous English translation, "Il Nipotismo di Roma:
     or the history of the Popes nephews from the time of Sixtus the IV.
     to the death the last Pope Alexander the VII. In two parts.  Written
     originally Italian in the year 1667 and Englished by W. A. London,
     1669" 8vo. From this work the word Nepotism is derived, and is
     applied to the bad practice of statesmen, when in power, providing
     lucrative places for their relations.]

which is very pleasant, and so to supper and to bed.  This afternoon was
brought to me a fresh Distringas upon the score of the Tangier accounts
which vexes me, though I hope it will not turn to my wrong.

28th.  Up, and was called upon by Sir H. Cholmly to discourse about some
accounts of his, of Tangier: and then other talk; and I find by him that
it is brought almost effect ([through] the late endeavours of the Duke of
York Duchess, the Queen-Mother, and my Lord St. Albans, together with some
of the contrary faction, my Lord Arlington), that for a sum of money we
shall enter into a league with the King of France, wherein, he says, my
Lord Chancellor--[Clarendon; then an exile in France.]--is also concerned;
and that he believes that, in the doing hereof, it is meant that he
[Clarendon] shall come again, and that this sum of money will so help the
King that he will not need the Parliament; and that, in that regard it
will be forwarded by the Duke of Buckingham and his faction, who dread the
Parliament.  But hereby we must leave the Dutch, and that I doubt will
undo us; and Sir H. Cholmly says he finds W. Coventry do think the like.
Lady Castlemayne is instrumental in this matter, and, he say never more
great with the King than she is now.  But this a thing that will make the
Parliament and kingdom mad, and will turn to our ruine: for with this
money the King shall wanton away his time in pleasures, and think nothing
of the main till it be too late.  He gone, I to the office, where busy
till noon, and then home to dinner, where W. Batelier dined with us, and
pretty merry, and so I to the office again.  This morning Mr. Sheres sent
me, in two volumes, Mariana his History of Spaine, in Spanish, an
excellent book; and I am much obliged for it to him.

29th.  Up, and to the Office, where all the morning, and at noon dined at
home, and then to the Office again, there to despatch as much business as
I could, that I might be at liberty to-morrow to look after my many things
that I have to do, against May-day.  So at night home to supper and to
bed.

30th.  Up, and by coach to the coachmaker's: and there I do find a great
many ladies sitting in the body of a coach that must be ended by
to-morrow: they were my Lady Marquess of Winchester, Bellassis, and other
great ladies; eating of bread and butter, and drinking ale.  I to my
coach, which is silvered over, but no varnish yet laid on, so I put it in
a way of doing; and myself about other business, and particularly to see
Sir W. Coventry, with whom I talked a good while to my great content; and
so to other places-among others, to my tailor's: and then to the
belt-maker's, where my belt cost me 55s., of the colour of my new suit;
and here, understanding that the mistress of the house, an oldish woman in
a hat hath some water good for the eyes, she did dress me, making my eyes
smart most horribly, and did give me a little glass of it, which I will
use, and hope it will do me good.  So to the cutler's, and there did give
Tom, who was with me all day a sword cost me 12s. and a belt of my owne;
and set my own silver-hilt sword a-gilding against to-morrow.  This
morning I did visit Mr. Oldenburgh, and did see the instrument for
perspective made by Dr. Wren, of which I have one making by Browne; and
the sight of this do please me mightily.  At noon my wife come to me at my
tailor's, and I sent her home and myself and Tom dined at Hercules'
Pillars; and so about our business again, and particularly to Lilly's, the
varnisher about my prints, whereof some of them are pasted upon the
boards, and to my full content.  Thence to the frame-maker's one Morris,
in Long Acre, who shewed me several forms of frames to choose by, which
was pretty, in little bits of mouldings, to choose by.  This done, I to my
coach-maker's, and there vexed to see nothing yet done to my coach, at
three in the afternoon; but I set it in doing, and stood by it till eight
at night, and saw the painter varnish which is pretty to see how every
doing it over do make it more and more yellow; and it dries as fast in the
sun as it can be laid on almost; and most coaches are, now-a-days done so,
and it is very pretty when laid on well, and not pale, as some are, even
to shew the silver.  Here I did make the workmen drink, and saw my coach
cleaned and oyled; and, staying among poor people there in the alley, did
hear them call their fat child Punch, which pleased me mightily that word
being become a word of common use for all that is thick and short.  At
night home, and there find my wife hath been making herself clean against
to-morrow; and, late as it was, I did send my coachman and horses to fetch
home the coach to-night, and so we to supper, myself most weary with
walking and standing so much, to see all things fine against to-morrow,
and so to bed.  God give a blessing to it! Meeting with Mr. Sheres, he
went with me up and down to several places, and, among others, to buy a
perriwig, but I bought none; and also to Dancre's, where he was about my
picture of Windsor, which is mighty pretty, and so will the prospect of
Rome be.





                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

   TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                  MAY
                                  1669

May 1st.  Up betimes.  Called up by my tailor, and there first put on a
summer suit this year; but it was not my fine one of flowered tabby vest,
and coloured camelott tunique, because it was too fine with the gold lace
at the hands, that I was afeard to be seen in it; but put on the stuff
suit I made the last year, which is now repaired; and so did go to the
Office in it, and sat all the morning, the day looking as if it would be
fowle.  At noon home to dinner, and there find my wife extraordinary fine,
with her flowered tabby gown that she made two years ago, now laced
exceeding pretty; and, indeed, was fine all over; and mighty earnest to
go, though the day was very lowering; and she would have me put on my fine
suit, which I did.  And so anon we went alone through the town with our
new liveries of serge, and the horses' manes and tails tied with red
ribbons, and the standards there gilt with varnish, and all clean, and
green refines, that people did mightily look upon us; and, the truth is, I
did not see any coach more pretty, though more gay, than ours, all the
day.  But we set out, out of humour--I because Betty, whom I expected, was
not come to go with us; and my wife that I would sit on the same seat with
her, which she likes not, being so fine: and she then expected to meet
Sheres, which we did in the Pell Mell, and, against my will, I was forced
to take him into the coach, but was sullen all day almost, and little
complaisant: the day also being unpleasing, though the Park full of
coaches, but dusty and windy, and cold, and now and then a little
dribbling rain; and, what made it worst, there were so many
hackney-coaches as spoiled the sight of the gentlemen's; and so we had
little pleasure.  But here was W. Batelier and his sister in a borrowed
coach by themselves, and I took them and we to the lodge; and at the door
did give them a syllabub, and other things, cost me 12s., and pretty
merry.  And so back to the coaches, and there till the evening, and then
home, leaving Mr. Sheres at St. James's Gate, where he took leave of us
for altogether, he; being this night to set out for Portsmouth post, in
his way to Tangier, which troubled my wife mightily, who is mighty, though
not, I think, too fond of him.  But she was out of humour all the evening,
and I vexed at her for it, and she did not rest almost all the night, so
as in the night I was forced; to take her and hug her to put her to rest.
So home, and after a little supper, to bed.

2nd (Lord's day).  Up, and by water to White Hall, and there visit my Lord
Sandwich, who, after about two months' absence at Hinchingbroke, come to
town last night.  I saw him, and very kind; and I am glad he is so, I
having not wrote to him all the time, my eyes indeed not letting me.  Here
with Sir Charles Herbert [Harbord], and my Lord Hinchingbroke, and Sidney,
we looked upon the picture of Tangier, designed: by Charles Herbert
[Harbord], and drawn by Dancre, which my Lord Sandwich admires, as being
the truest picture that ever he's saw in his life: and it is indeed very
pretty, and I will be at the cost of having one of them. Thence with them
to White Hall, and there walked out the sermon, with one or other; and
then saw the Duke of York after sermon, and he talked to me a little; and
so away back by water home, and after dinner got my wife to read, and then
by coach, she and I, to the Park, and there spent the evening with much
pleasure, it proving clear after a little shower, and we mighty fine as
yesterday, and people mightily pleased with our coach, as I perceived; but
I had not on my fine suit, being really afeard to wear it, it being so
fine with the gold lace, though not gay.  So home and to supper, and my
wife to read, and Tom, my Nepotisme, and then to bed.

3rd.  Up, and by coach to my Lord Brouncker's, where Sir G. Carteret did
meet Sir J. Minnes and me, to discourse upon Mr. Deering's business, who
was directed, in the time of the war, to provide provisions at Hamburgh,
by Sir G. Carteret's direction; and now G. Carteret is afeard to own it,
it being done without written order.  But by our meeting we do all begin
to recollect enough to preserve Mr. Deering, I think, which, poor silly
man!  I shall be glad of, it being too much he should suffer for
endeavouring to serve us.  Thence to St. James's, where the Duke of York
was playing in the Pell Mell; and so he called me to him most part of the
time that he played, which was an hour, and talked alone to me; and, among
other things, tells me how the King will not yet be got to name anybody in
the room of Pen, but puts it off for three or four days; from whence he do
collect that they are brewing something for the Navy, but what he knows
not; but I perceive is vexed that things should go so, and he hath reason;
for he told me that it is likely they will do in this as in other
things--resolve first, and consider it and the fitness of it afterward.
Thence to White Hall, and met with Creed, and I took him to the Harp and
Balls, and there drank a cup of ale, he and I alone, and discoursed of
matters; and I perceive by him that he makes no doubt but that all will
turn to the old religion, for these people cannot hold things in their
hands, nor prevent its coming to that; and by his discourse fits himself
for it, and would have my Lord Sandwich do so, too, and me.  After a
little talk with him, and particularly about the ruinous condition of
Tangier, which I have a great mind to lay before the Duke of York, before
it be too late, but dare not, because of his great kindness to Lord
Middleton, we parted, and I homeward; but called at Povy's, and there he
stopped me to dinner, there being Mr. Williamson, the Lieutenant of the
Tower, Mr. Childe, and several others.  And after dinner, Povy and I
together to talk of Tangier; and he would have me move the Duke of York in
it, for it concerns him particularly, more than any, as being the head of
us; and I do think to do it.  Thence home, and at the office busy all the
afternoon, and so to supper and to bed.

4th.  Up, and to the office, and then my wife being gone to see her mother
at Deptford, I before the office sat went to the Excise Office, and thence
being alone stepped into Duck Lane, and thence tried to have sent a porter
to Deb.'s, but durst not trust him, and therefore having bought a book to
satisfy the bookseller for my stay there, a 12d. book, Andronicus of Tom
Fuller, I took coach, and at the end of Jewen Street next Red Cross Street
I sent the coachman to her lodging, and understand she is gone for
Greenwich to one Marys's, a tanner's, at which I, was glad, hoping to have
opportunity to find her out; and so, in great fear of being seen, I to the
office, and there all the morning, dined at home, and presently after
dinner comes home my wife, who I believe is jealous of my spending the
day, and I had very good fortune in being at home, for if Deb. had been to
have been found it is forty to one but I had been abroad, God forgive me.
So the afternoon at the office, and at night walked with my wife in the
garden, and my Lord Brouncker with us, who is newly come to W. Pen's
lodgings; and by and by comes Mr. Hooke; and my Lord, and he, and I into
my Lord's lodgings, and there discoursed of many fine things in
philosophy, to my great content, and so home to supper and to bed.

5th.  Up, and thought to have gone with Lord Brouncker to Mr. Hooke this
morning betimes; but my Lord is taken ill of the gout, and says his new
lodgings have infected him, he never having had any symptoms of it till
now.  So walked to Gresham College, to tell Hooke that my Lord could not
come; and so left word, he being abroad, and I to St. James's, and thence,
with the Duke of York, to White Hall, where the Board waited on him all
the morning: and so at noon with Sir Thomas Allen, and Sir Edward Scott,
and Lord Carlingford, to the Spanish Embassador's, where I dined the first
time.  The Olio not so good as Sheres's.  There was at the table himself
and a Spanish Countess, a good, comely, and witty lady-three Fathers and
us.  Discourse good and pleasant.  And here was an Oxford scholar in a
Doctor of Law's gowne, sent from the College where the Embassador lay,
when the Court was there, to salute him before his return to Spain:  This
man, though a gentle sort of scholar, yet sat like a fool for want of
French or Spanish, but [knew] only Latin, which he spoke like an
Englishman to one of the Fathers.  And by and by he and I to talk, and the
company very merry at my defending Cambridge against Oxford: and I made
much use of my French and Spanish here, to my great content.  But the
dinner not extraordinary at all, either for quantity or quality.  Thence
home, where my wife ill of those upon the maid's bed, and troubled at my
being abroad.  So I to the office, and there till night, and then to her,
and she read to me the Epistle of Cassandra, which is very good indeed;
and the better to her, because recommended by Sheres.  So to supper, and
to bed.

6th.  Up, and by coach to Sir W. Coventry's, but he gone out.  I by water
back to the Office, and there all the morning; then to dinner, and then to
the Office again, and anon with my wife by coach to take the ayre, it
being a noble day, as far as the Greene Man, mightily pleased with our
journey, and our condition of doing it in our own coach, and so home, and
to walk in the garden, and so to supper and to bed, my eyes being bad with
writing my journal, part of it, to-night.

7th.  Up, and by coach to W. Coventry's; and there to talk with him a
great deal with great content; and so to the Duke of York, having a great
mind to speak to him about Tangier; but, when I come to it, his interest
for my Lord Middleton is such that I dare not.  So to the Treasury
chamber, and then walked home round by the Excise Office, having by
private vows last night in prayer to God Almighty cleared my mind for the
present of the thoughts of going to Deb. at Greenwich, which I did long
after.  I passed by Guildhall, which is almost finished, and saw a poor
labourer carried by, I think, dead with a fall, as many there are, I hear.
So home to dinner, and then to the office a little, and so to see my Lord
Brouncker, who is a little ill of the gout; and there Madam Williams told
me that she heard that my wife was going into France this year, which I
did not deny, if I can get time, and I pray God I may.  But I wondering
how she come to know it, she tells me a woman that my wife spoke to for a
maid, did tell her so, and that a lady that desires to go thither would be
glad to go in her company.  Thence with my wife abroad, with our coach,
most pleasant weather; and to Hackney, and into the marshes, where I never
was before, and thence round about to Old Ford and Bow; and coming through
the latter home, there being some young gentlewomen at a door, and I
seeming not to know who they were, my wife's jealousy told me presently
that I knew well enough it was that damned place where Deb. dwelt, which
made me swear very angrily that it was false, as it was, and I carried
[her] back again to see the place, and it proved not so, so I continued
out of humour a good while at it, she being willing to be friends, so I
was by and by, saying no more of it.  So home, and there met with a letter
from Captain Silas Taylor, and, with it, his written copy of a play that
he hath wrote, and intends to have acted.--It is called "The Serenade, or
Disappointment," which I will read, not believing he can make any good of
that kind.  He did once offer to show Harris it, but Harris told him that
he would judge by one Act whether it were good or no, which is indeed a
foolish saying, and we see them out themselves in the choice of a play
after they have read the whole, it being sometimes found not fit to act
above three times; nay, and some that have been refused at one house is
found a good one at the other.  This made Taylor say he would not shew it
him, but is angry, and hath carried it to the other house, and he thinks
it will be acted there, though he tells me they are not yet agreed upon
it.  But I will find time to get it read to me, and I did get my wife to
begin a little to-night in the garden, but not so much as I could make any
judgment of it.  So home to supper and to bed.

8th.  Up, and to the Office, and there comes Lead to me, and at last my
vizards are done, and glasses got to put in and out, as I will; and I
think I have brought it to the utmost, both for easiness of using and
benefit, that I can; and so I paid him 15s. for what he hath done now
last, in the finishing them, and they, I hope, will do me a great deal of
ease.  At the Office all the morning, and this day, the first time, did
alter my side of the table, after above eight years sitting on that next
the fire.  But now I am not able to bear the light of the windows in my
eyes, I do begin there, and I did sit with much more content than I had
done on the other side for a great while, and in winter the fire will not
trouble my back.  At noon home to dinner, and after dinner all the
afternoon within, with Mr. Hater, Gibson, and W. Hewer, reading over and
drawing up new things in the Instructions of Commanders, which will be
good, and I hope to get them confirmed by the Duke of York, though I
perceive nothing will effectually perfect them but to look over the whole
body of the Instructions, of all the Officers of a ship, and make them all
perfect together.  This being done, comes my bookseller, and brings me
home bound my collection of papers, about my Addresse to the Duke of York
in August, which makes me glad, it being that which shall do me more right
many years hence than, perhaps, all I ever did in my life: and therefore I
do, both for my own and the King's sake, value it much.  By and by also
comes Browne, the mathematical instrument maker, and brings me home my
instrument for perspective, made according to the description of Dr.
Wren's, in the late Transactions; and he hath made it, I think, very well,
and that, that I believe will do the thing, and therein gives me great
content; but have I fear all the content that must be received by my eyes
is almost lost.  So to the office, and there late at business, and then
home to supper and to bed.

9th (Lord's day).  Up; and, after dressing in my best suit with gold
trimming, I to the Office, and there with Gibson and Tom finishing against
to-morrow my notes upon Commanders' Instructions; and, when church-time,
to church with my wife, leaving them at work.  Dr. Mills preached a dull
sermon, and so we home to dinner; and thence by coach to St. Andrew's,
Holborne, thinking to have heard Dr. Stillingfleete preach, but we could
not get a place, and so to St. Margaret's, Westminster, and there heard a
sermon, and did get a place, the first we have heard there these many
years, and here at a distance I saw Betty Michell, but she is become much
a plainer woman than she was a girl.  Thence towards the Park, but too
soon to go in, so went on to Knightsbridge, and there eat and drank at
"The World's End," where we had good things, and then back to the Park,
and there till night, being fine weather, and much company, and so home,
and after supper to bed.  This day I first left off both my waistcoats by
day, and my waistcoat by night, it being very hot weather, so hot as to
make me break out, here and there, in my hands, which vexes me to see, but
is good for me.

10th.  Troubled, about three in the morning, with my wife's calling her
maid up, and rising herself, to go with her coach abroad, to gather
May-dew, which she did, and I troubled for it, for fear of any hurt, going
abroad so betimes, happening to her; but I to sleep again, and she come
home about six, and to bed again all well, and I up and with Mr. Gibson by
coach to St. James's, and thence to White Hall, where the Duke of York met
the Office, and there discoursed of several things, particularly the
Instructions of Commanders of ships.  But here happened by chance a
discourse of the Council of Trade, against which the Duke of York is
mightily displeased, and particularly Mr. Child, against whom he speaking
hardly, Captain Cox did second the Duke of York, by saying that he was
talked of for an unfayre dealer with masters of ships, about freight: to
which Sir T. Littleton very hotly and foolishly replied presently, that he
never heard any honest man speak ill of Child; to which the Duke of York
did make a smart reply, and was angry; so as I was sorry to hear it come
so far, and that I, by seeming to assent to Cox, might be observed too
much by Littleton, though I said nothing aloud, for this must breed great
heart-burnings.  After this meeting done, the Duke of York took the
Treasurers into his closet to chide them, as Mr. Wren tells me; for that
my Lord Keeper did last night at the Council say, when nobody was ready to
say any thing against the constitution of the Navy, that he did believe
the Treasurers of the Navy had something to say, which was very foul on
their part, to be parties against us.  They being gone, Mr. Wren [and I]
took boat, thinking to dine with my Lord of Canterbury; but, when we come
to Lambeth, the gate was shut, which is strictly done at twelve o'clock,
and nobody comes in afterwards: so we lost our labour, and therefore back
to White Hall, and thence walked my boy Jacke with me, to my Lord Crew,
whom I have not seen since he was sick, which is eight months ago, I think
and there dined with him: he is mightily broke. A stranger a country
gentleman, was with him: and he pleased with my discourse accidentally
about the decay of gentlemen's families in the country, telling us that
the old rule was, that a family might remain fifty miles from London one
hundred years, one hundred miles from London two hundred years, and so
farther, or nearer London more or less years. He also told us that he hath
heard his father say, that in his time it was so rare for a country
gentleman to come to London, that, when he did come, he used to make his
will before he set out.  Thence: to St. James's, and there met the Duke of
York, who told me, with great content, that he did now think he should
master our adversaries, for that the King did tell him that he was;
satisfied in the constitution of the Navy, but that it was well to give
these people leave to object against it, which they having not done, he
did give order to give warrant to the Duke of York to direct Sir Jeremy
Smith to be a Commissioner of the Navy in the room of Pen; which, though
he be an impertinent fellow, yet I am glad of it, it showing that the
other side is not so strong as it was: and so, in plain terms, the Duke of
York did tell me, that they were every day losing ground; and particularly
that he would take care to keep out Child: at all which I am glad, though
yet I dare not think myself secure, as the King may yet be wrought upon by
these people to bring changes in our Office, and remove us, ere it be
long.  Thence I to White Hall, an there took boat to Westminster, and to
Mrs. Martin's, who is not come to town from her husband at Portsmouth.  So
drank only at Cragg's with Doll, and so to the Swan, and there baiser a
new maid that is there, and so to White Hall again, to a Committee of
Tangier, where I see all things going to rack in the business of the
Corporation, and consequently in the place, by Middleton's going.  Thence
walked a little with Creed, who tells me he hears how fine my horses and
coach are, and advises me to avoid being noted for it, which I was vexed
to hear taken notice of, it being what I feared and Povy told me of my
gold-lace sleeves in the Park yesterday, which vexed me also, so as to
resolve never to appear in Court with them, but presently to have them
taken off, as it is fit I should, and so to my wife at Unthanke's, and
coach, and so called at my tailor's to that purpose, and so home, and
after a little walk in the garden, home to supper and to bed.

11th.  My wife again up by four o'clock, to go to gather May-dew; and so
back home by seven, to bed, and by and by I up and to the office, where
all the morning, and dined at noon at home with my people, and so all the
afternoon.  In the evening my wife and I all alone, with the boy, by
water, up as high as Putney almost, with the tide, and back again, neither
staying going nor coming; but talking, and singing, and reading a foolish
copy of verses upon my Lord Mayor's entertaining of all the bachelors,
designed in praise to my Lord Mayor, and so home and to the office a
little, and then home to bed, my eyes being bad.  Some trouble at Court
for fear of the Queen's miscarrying; she being, as they all conclude, far
gone with child.

12th.  Up, and to Westminster Hall, where the term is, and this the first
day of my being there, and here by chance met Roger Pepys, come to town
the last night: I was glad to see him.  After some talk with him and
others, and among others Sir Charles Harbord and Sidney Montagu, the
latter of whom is to set out to-morrow towards Flanders and Italy, I
invited them to dine with me to-morrow, and so to Mrs. Martin's lodging,
who come to town last night, and there je did hazer her, she having been a
month, I think, at Portsmouth with her husband, newly come home from the
Streights.  But, Lord!  how silly the woman talks of her great
entertainment there, and how all the gentry come to visit her, and that
she believes her husband is worth L6 or L700, which nevertheless I am glad
of, but I doubt they will spend it a fast.  Thence home, and after dinner
my wife and I to the Duke of York's playhouse, and there, in the side
balcony, over against the musick, did hear, but not see, a new play, the
first day acted, "The Roman Virgin," an old play, and but ordinary, I
thought; but the trouble of my eyes with the light of the candles did
almost kill me.  Thence to my Lord Sandwich's, and there had a promise
from Sidney to come and dine with me to-morrow; and so my wife and I home
in our coach, and there find my brother John, as I looked for, come to
town from Ellington, where, among other things, he tell me the first news
that my [sister Jackson] is with child, and fat gone, which I know not
whether it did more trouble or please me, having no great care for my
friends to have children; though I love other people's.  So, glad to see
him, we to supper, and so to bed.

13th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning, it being a rainy foul
day.  But at noon comes my Lord Hinchingbroke, and Sidney, and Sir Charles
Harbord, and Roger Pepys, and dined with me; and had a good dinner, and
very merry with; us all the afternoon, it being a farewell to Sidney; and
so in the evening they away, and I to my business at the Office and so to
supper, and talk with my brother, and so to bed.

14th.  Up, and to St. James's to the Duke of York, and thence to White
Hall, where we met about office business, and then at noon with Mr. Wren
to Lambeth, to dinner with the Archbishop of Canterbury; the first time I
was ever there and I have long longed for it; where a noble house, and
well furnished with good pictures and furniture, and noble attendance in
good order, and great deal of company, though an ordinary day; and
exceeding great cheer, no where better, or so much, that ever I think I
saw, for an ordinary table: and the Bishop mighty kind to me, particularly
desiring my company another time, when less company there. Most of the
company gone, and I going, I heard by a gentleman of a sermon that was to
be there; and so I staid to hear it, thinking it serious, till by and by
the gentleman told me it was a mockery, by one Cornet Bolton, a very
gentleman-like man, that behind a chair did pray and preach like a
Presbyter Scot that ever I heard in my life, with all the possible
imitation in grimaces and voice.  And his text about the hanging up their
harps upon the willows: and a serious good sermon too, exclaiming against
Bishops, and crying up of my good Lord Eglinton, a till it made us all
burst; but I did wonder to have the Bishop at this time to make himself
sport with things of this kind, but I perceive it was shewn him as a
rarity; and he took care to have the room-door shut, but there were about
twenty gentlemen there, and myself, infinitely pleased with the novelty.
So over to White Hall, to a little Committee of Tangier; and thence
walking in the Gallery, I met Sir Thomas Osborne, who, to my great
content, did of his own accord fall into discourse with me, with so much
professions of value and respect, placing the whole virtue of the Office
of the Navy upon me, and that for the Comptroller's place, no man in
England was fit for it but me, when Sir J. Minnes, as he says it is
necessary, is removed: but then he knows not what to do for a man in my
place; and in discourse, though I have no mind to the other, I did bring
in Tom Hater to be the fittest man in the world for it, which he took good
notice of.  But in the whole I was mightily pleased, reckoning myself now
fifty per cent. securer in my place than I did before think myself to be.
Thence to Unthanke's, and there find my wife, but not dressed, which vexed
me, because going to the Park, it being a most pleasant day after
yesterday's rain, which lays all the dust, and most people going out
thither, which vexed me.  So home, sullen; but then my wife and I by
water, with my brother, as high as Fulham, talking and singing, and
playing the rogue with the Western barge-men, about the women of Woolwich,
which mads them, an so back home to supper and to bed.

15th.  Up, and at the Office all the morning.  Dined at home and Creed
with me home, and I did discourse about evening some reckonings with him
in the afternoon; but I could not, for my eyes, do it, which troubled me,
and vexed him that would not; but yet we were friends, I advancing him
more without it, and so to walk all the afternoon together in the garden;
and I perceive still he do expect a change in of matters, especially as to
religion, and fits himself for it by professing himself for it in his
discourse.  He gone, I to my business at my Office, and so at night home
to supper, and to bed.

16th (Lord's day).  My wife and I at church, our pew filled with Mrs.
Backewell, and six more that she brought with her, which vexed me at her
confidence.  Dined at home and W. Batelier with us, and I all the
afternoon drawing up a foul draught of my petition to the Duke of York,
about my eyes, for leave to spend three or four months out of the Office,
drawing it so as to give occasion to a voyage abroad which I did, to my
pretty good liking; and then with my wife to Hyde Park, where a good deal
of company, and good weather, and so home to supper and to bed.

17th.  Up, and to several places doing business, and the home to dinner,
and then my wife and I and brother John by coach to the King's playhouse,
and saw "The Spanish Curate" revived, which is a pretty good play, but my
eyes troubled with seeing it, mightily.  Thence carried them and Mr.
Gibson, who met me at my Lord Brouncker's with a fair copy of my petition,
which I thought to shew the Duke of York this night, but could not, and
therefore carried them to the Park, where they had never been, and so home
to supper and to bed.  Great the news now of the French taking St.
Domingo, in Spaniola, from the Spaniards, which troubles us, that they
should have it, and have the honour of taking it, when we could not.

18th.  Up, and to St. James's and other places, and then to the office,
where all the morning.  At noon home and dined in my wife's chamber, she
being much troubled with the tooth-ake, and I staid till a surgeon of hers
come, one Leeson, who hath formerly drawn her mouth, and he advised her to
draw it: so I to the Office, and by and by word is come that she hath
drawn it, which pleased me, it being well done.  So I home, to comfort
her, and so back to the office till night, busy, and so home to supper and
to bed.

19th.  With my coach to St. James's; and there finding the Duke of York
gone to muster his men, in Hyde Park, I alone with my boy thither, and
there saw more, walking out of my coach as other gentlemen did, of a
soldier's trade, than ever I did in my life: the men being mighty fine,
and their Commanders, particularly the Duke of Monmouth; but me-thought
their trade but very easy as to the mustering of their men, and the men
but indifferently ready to perform what was commanded, in the handling of
their arms.  Here the news was first talked of Harry Killigrew's being
wounded in nine places last night, by footmen, in the highway, going from
the Park in a hackney-coach towards Hammersmith, to his house at Turnham
Greene: they being supposed to be my Lady Shrewsbury's men, she being by,
in her coach with six horses; upon an old grudge of his saying openly that
he had lain with her.  Thence by and by to White Hall, and there I waited
upon the King and Queen all dinner-time, in the Queen's lodgings, she
being in her white pinner and apron, like a woman with child; and she
seemed handsomer plain so, than dressed.  And by and by, dinner done, I
out, and to walk in the Gallery, for the Duke of York's coming out; and
there, meeting Mr. May, he took me down about four o'clock to Mr.
Chevins's lodgings, and all alone did get me a dish of cold chickens, and
good wine; and I dined like a prince, being before very hungry and empty.
By and by the Duke of York comes, and readily took me to his closet, and
received my petition, and discoursed about my eyes, and pitied me, and
with much kindness did give me his consent to be absent, and approved of
my proposition to go into Holland to observe things there, of the Navy;
but would first ask the King's leave, which he anon did, and did tell me
that the King would be a good master to me, these were his words, about my
eyes, and do like of my going into Holland, but do advise that nobody
should know of my going thither, but pretend that I did go into the
country somewhere, which I liked well.  Glad of this, I home, and thence
took out my wife, and to Mr. Holliard's about a swelling in her cheek, but
he not at home, and so round by Islington and eat and drink, and so home,
and after supper to bed.  In discourse this afternoon, the Duke of York
did tell me that he was the most amazed at one thing just now, that ever
he was in his life, which was, that the Duke of Buckingham did just now
come into the Queen's bed-chamber, where the King was, and much mixed
company, and among others, Tom Killigrew, the father of Harry, who was
last night wounded so as to be in danger of death, and his man is quite
dead; and [Buckingham] there in discourse did say that he had spoke with
some one that was by (which all the world must know that it must be his
whore, my Lady Shrewsbury), who says that they did not mean to hurt, but
beat him, and that he did run first at them with his sword; so that he do
hereby clearly discover that he knows who did it, and is of conspiracy
with them, being of known conspiracy with her, which the Duke of York did
seem to be pleased with, and said it might, perhaps, cost him his life in
the House of Lords; and I find was mightily pleased with it, saying it was
the most impudent thing, as well as the most foolish, that ever he knew
man do in all his life.

20th.  Up and to the Office, where all the morning.  At noon, the whole
Office--Brouncker, J. Minnes, T. Middleton, Samuel Pepys, and Captain Cox
to dine with the Parish, at the Three Tuns, this day being Ascension-day,
where exceeding good discourse among the merchants, and thence back home,
and after a little talk with my wife, to my office did a great deal of
business, and so with my eyes might weary, and my head full of care how to
get my accounts and business settled against my journey, home to supper,
and bed.  Yesterday, at my coming home, I found that my wife had, on a
sudden, put away Matt upon some falling out, and I doubt my wife did call
her ill names by my wife's own discourse; but I did not meddle to say
anything upon it, but let her go, being not sorry, because now we may get
one that speaks French, to go abroad with us.

21st.  I waited with the Office upon the Duke of York in the morning.
Dined at home, where Lewis Phillips the friend of his, dined with me. In
the afternoon at the Office.  In the evening visited by Roger Pepys and
Philip Packer and so home.

22nd.  Dined at home, the rest of the whole day at office.

23rd (Lord's day).  Called up by Roger Pepys and his son who to church
with me, and then home to dinner.  In the afternoon carried them to
Westminster, and myself to James's, where, not finding the Duke of York,
back home, and with my wife spent the evening taking the ayre about
Hackney, with great pleasure, and places we had never seen before.

24th.  To White Hall, and there all the morning, and they home, and giving
order for some business and setting my brother to making a catalogue of my
books, I back again to W. Hewer to White Hall, where I attended the Duke
of York and was by him led to [the King], who expressed great sense of my
misfortune in my eyes, and concernment for their recovery; and accordingly
signified, not only his assent to desire therein, but commanded me to give
them rest summer, according to my late petition to the Duke of York.  W.
Hewer and I dined alone at the Swan; and thence having thus waited on the
King, spent till four o'clock in St. James's Park, when I met my wife at
Unthanke's, and so home.

25th.  Dined at home; and the rest of the day, morning and afternoon, at
the Office.

26th.  To White Hall, where all the morning.  Dined with Mr. Chevins, with
Alderman Backewell, and Spragg.  The Court full of the news from Captain
Hubbert, of "The Milford," touching his being affronted in the Streights,
shot at, and having eight men killed him by a French man-of-war, calling
him "English dog," and commanding him to strike, which he refused, and, as
knowing himself much too weak for him, made away from him.  The Queen, as
being supposed with child, fell ill, so as to call for Madam Nun, Mr.
Chevins's sister, and one of her women, from dinner from us; this being
the last day of their doubtfulness touching her being with child; and they
were therein well confirmed by her Majesty's being well again before
night.  One Sir Edmund Bury Godfry, a woodmonger and justice of Peace in
Westminster, having two days since arrested Sir Alexander Frazier for
about L30 in firing, the bailiffs were apprehended, committed to the
porter's lodge, and there, by the King's command, the last night severely
whipped; from which the justice himself very hardly escaped, to such an
unusual degree was the King moved therein.  But he lies now in the lodge,
justifying his act, as grounded upon the opinion of several of the judges,
and, among others, my Lord Chief-Justice; which makes the King very angry
with the Chief-Justice, as they say; and the justice do lie and justify
his act, and says he will suffer in the cause for the people, and do
refuse to receive almost any nutriment.  The effects of it may be bad to
the Court.  Expected a meeting of Tangier this afternoon, but failed.  So
home, met by my wife at Unthanke's.!

27th.  At the office all the morning, dined at home, Mr. Hollier with me.
Presented this day by Mr. Browne with a book of drawing by him, lately
printed, which cost me 20s. to him.  In the afternoon to the Temple, to
meet with Auditor Aldworth about my interest account, but failed meeting
him.  To visit my cozen Creed, and found her ill at home, being with
child, and looks poorly.  Thence to her husband, at Gresham College, upon
some occasions of Tangier; and so home, with Sir John Bankes with me, to
Mark Lane.

28th.  To St. James's, where the King's being with the Duke of York
prevented a meeting of the Tangier Commission.  But, Lord! what a deal of
sorry discourse did I hear between the King and several Lords about him
here!  but very mean methought.  So with Creed to the Excise Office, and
back to White Hall, where, in the Park, Sir G. Carteret did give me an
account of his discourse lately, with the Commissioners of Accounts, who
except against many things, but none that I find considerable; among
others, that of the Officers of the Navy selling of the King's goods, and
particularly my providing him with calico flags, which having been by
order, and but once, when necessity, and the King's apparent profit,
justified it, as conformable to my particular duty, it will prove to my
advantage that it be enquired into.  Nevertheless, having this morning
received from them a demand of an account of all monies within their
cognizance, received and issued by me, I was willing, upon this hint, to
give myself rest, by knowing whether their meaning therein might reach
only to my Treasurership for Tangier, or the monies employed on this
occasion.  I went, therefore, to them this afternoon, to understand what
monies they meant, where they answered me, by saying, "The eleven months'
tax, customs, and prizemoney," without mentioning, any more than I
demanding, the service they respected therein; and so, without further
discourse, we parted, upon very good terms of respect, and with few words,
but my mind not fully satisfied about the monies they mean.  At noon Mr.
Gibson and I dined at the Swan, and thence doing this at Brook house, and
thence caking at the Excise Office for an account of payment of my tallies
for Tangier, I home, and thence with my wife and brother spent the evening
on the water, carrying our supper with us, as high as Chelsea; so home,
making sport with the Westerne bargees, and my wife and I singing, to my
great content.

29th.  The King's birth-day.  To White Hall, where all very gay; and
particularly the Prince of Tuscany very fine, and is the first day of his
appearing out of mourning, since he come.  I heard the Bishop of
Peterborough' preach but dully; but a good anthem of Pelham's.  Home to
dinner, and then with my wife to Hyde Park, where all the evening; great
store of company, and great preparations by the Prince of Tuscany to
celebrate the night with fire-works, for the King's birth-day.  And so
home.

30th (Whitsunday).  By water to White Hall, and thence to Sir W. Coventry,
where all the morning by his bed-side, he being indisposed. Our discourse
was upon the notes I have lately prepared for Commanders' Instructions;
but concluded that nothing will render them effectual, without an
amendment in the choice of them, that they be seamen, and not gentleman
above the command of the Admiral, by the greatness of their relations at
Court.  Thence to White Hall, and dined alone with Mr. Chevins his sister:
whither by and by come in Mr. Progers and Sir Thomas Allen, and by and by
fine Mrs. Wells, who is a great beauty; and there I had my full gaze upon
her, to my great content, she being a woman of pretty conversation.
Thence to the Duke of York, who, with the officers of the Navy, made a
good entrance on my draught of my new Instructions to Commanders, as well
expressing general [views] of a reformation among them, as liking of my
humble offers towards it.  Thence being called by my wife, Mr. Gibson and
I, we to the Park, whence the rain suddenly home.

31st.  Up very betimes, and so continued all the morning with W. Hewer,
upon examining and stating my accounts, in order to the fitting myself to
go abroad beyond sea, which the ill condition of my eyes, and my neglect
for a year or two, hath kept me behindhand in, and so as to render it very
difficult now, and troublesome to my mind to do it; but I this day made a
satisfactory entrance therein.  Dined at home, and in the afternoon by
water to White Hall, calling by the way at Michell's, where I have not
been many a day till just the other day, and now I met her mother there
and knew her husband to be out of town.  And here je did baiser elle, but
had not opportunity para hazer some with her as I would have offered if je
had had it.  And thence had another meeting with the Duke of York, at
White Hall, on yesterday's work, and made a good advance: and so, being
called by my wife, we to the Park, Mary Batelier, and a Dutch gentleman, a
friend of hers, being with us.  Thence to "The World's End," a
drinking-house by the Park; and there merry, and so home late.

And thus ends all that I doubt I shall ever be able to do with my own eyes
in the keeping of my journal, I being not able to do it any longer, having
done now so long as to undo my eyes almost every time that I take a pen in
my hand; and, therefore, whatever comes of it, I must forbear: and,
therefore, resolve, from this time forward, to have it kept by my people
in long-hand, and must therefore be contented to set down no more than is
fit for them and all the world to know; or, if there be any thing, which
cannot be much, now my amours to Deb. are past, and my eyes hindering me
in almost all other pleasures, I must endeavour to keep a margin in my
book open, to add, here and there, a note in short-hand with my own hand.

And so I betake myself to that course, which is almost as much as to see
myself go into my grave: for which, and all the discomforts that will
accompany my being blind, the good God prepare me!

May 31, 1669.

END OF THE DIARY.



                              PREFACE

              [This moved, by the editor, to the end
              where it seems to fit more comfortably.]

First issue of this edition June, 1896. Reprinted 1897.

In the present volume the Diary is completed, and we here take leave
of a writer who has done so much to interest and enlighten successive
generations of English readers, and who is now for the first time
presented to the world as he really drew his own portrait day by day.

No one who has followed the daily notes of Samuel Pepys from January,
1660, to May, 1669, but must feel sincere regret at their abrupt
conclusion, more particularly as the writer lays down his pen while in an
unhappy temper.

It is evident from the tone of his later utterances that Pepys thought
that he was going blind, a belief which was happily falsified.  The
holiday tour in which Charles II. and James, Duke of York, took so much
interest appears to have had its desired effect in restoring the Diarist
to health.

The rest of his eventful life must be sought in the history of the English
Navy which he helped to form, and in his numerous letters, which on some
future occasion the present editor hopes to annotate.  The details to be
obtained from these sources form, however, but a sorry substitute for the
words written in the solitude of his office by Pepys for his own eye
alone, and we cannot but feel how great is the world's loss in that he
never resumed the writing of his journal.  All must agree with Coleridge
when he wrote on the margin of a copy of the Diary: "Truly may it be said
that this was a greater and more grievous loss to the mind's eye of
posterity than to the bodily organs of Pepys himself. It makes me restless
and discontented to think what a Diary equal in minuteness and truth of
portraiture to the preceding from 1669 to 1688 or 1690 would have been for
the true causes, process and character of the Revolution."

Most works of this nature are apt to tire when they are extended over a
certain length of time, but Pepys's pages are always fresh, and most
readers wish for more.  For himself the editor can say that each time he
has read over the various proofs he has read with renewed interest, so
that it is with no ordinary feelings of regret that he comes to the end of
his task, and he believes that every reader will feel the same regret that
he has no more to read.

In reviewing the Diary it is impossible not to notice the growth of
historical interest as it proceeds.  In the earlier period we find Pepys
surrounded by men not otherwise known, but as the years pass, and his
position becomes more assured, we find him in daily communication with the
chief men of his day, and evidently every one who came in contact with him
appreciated his remarkable ability.  The survival of the Diary must ever
remain a marvel.  It could never have been intended for the reading of
others, but doubtless the more elaborate portraits of persons in the later
pages were intended for use when Pepys came to write his projected history
of the Navy.

The only man who is uniformly spoken well of in the Diary is Sir William
Coventry, and many of the characters introduced come in for severe
castigation.  It is therefore the more necessary to remember that many of
the judgments on men were set down hastily, and would probably have been
modified had occasion offered.  At all events, we know that, however much
he may have censured them, Pepys always helped on those who were dependent
upon him.

H. R. W.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Drawing up a foul draught of my petition to the Duke of York
     Last day of their doubtfulness touching her being with child
     Quite according to the fashion--nothing to drink or eat






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys, Apr/May 1669
by Samuel Pepys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, ***

***** This file should be named 4198.txt or 4198.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/4/1/9/4198/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
