The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Nursery, August 1881, Vol. XXX, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Nursery, August 1881, Vol. XXX
       A Monthly Magazine for Youngest Readers

Author: Various

Release Date: February 22, 2013 [EBook #42157]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NURSERY, AUGUST 1881, VOL. XXX ***




Produced by Emmy, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net Music
transcribed by Veronika Redfern.








THE

NURSERY

_A Monthly Magazine_

FOR YOUNGEST READERS.

VOLUME XXX.--No. 2.

    BOSTON:
    THE NURSERY PUBLISHING COMPANY,
    NO. 36 BROMFIELD STREET.
    1881.




    Entered according to act of Congress, in the year 1881, by
    THE NURSERY PUBLISHING COMPANY,
    In the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington.

[Illustration: JOHN WILSON & SON UNIVERSITY PRESS]




[Illustration: Contents.]


IN PROSE.

                                                PAGE
    The Young Fisherman                          225
    A slight Mistake                             227
    Two Games                                    231
    More about "Zip Coon"                        232
    Sam and his Goats                            234
    Mary's Squirrel                              240
    Drawing-Lesson                               241
    The Chimney-sweep                            244
    Billy and Bruiser                            246
    "If I were only a King"                      248
    Use before Beauty                            249
    Ten Minutes with Johnny                      251
    A Cat Story                                  252
    Tom's Apple                                  254


IN VERSE.

    The Hen-Yard Door                            228
    Toy-Land                                     238
    A Turtle Show                                242
    Two Little Maidens                           247
    Summer Rambles                               250
    See-Saw (_with music_)                       256




[Illustration]




THE YOUNG FISHERMAN.


WHEN Charley was eight years old, his father gave him, for a birthday
present, a nice fishing-line.

The little boy was greatly pleased. He had fished often in a tub of
water with a pin-hook; but now, for the first time, he had a real
fishing-line and pole, and was able to go a-fishing in earnest.

The very first pleasant day, he got leave from his father to go to the
pond and try his luck.

"Be sure to bring home a good mess of fish, Charley," said his father.

"Oh, yes! papa," said Charley, and with his fishing-pole on his shoulder
out he went.

What fun it was! First he dug some worms for bait; then he baited his
hook nicely; then he took his stand on a little platform, made on
purpose for the use of fishermen, and threw out his hook.

There he stood, in the shade of the old willow-tree, and waited for the
fish to bite. As he looked down into the calm, clear water, he saw a
boy, just about his own size, looking up at him. He had no other
company.

He kept close watch of the pretty painted cork, expecting every moment
to see it go under water. But for a long, long time it floated almost
without motion.

Charley's patience began to give out. "I don't believe there are any
fish here," thought he. Just then the cork dipped a little on one side.
Then it stopped. Then it dipped again.

"Hurrah!" said Charley, and he pulled up the line with a jerk. Was there
a fish on it? Not a bit of one. But the bait was all gone.

"Never mind!" said Charley, "I'll catch him next time." He baited the
hook, and threw it out again. The sport was getting exciting.

Pretty soon the cork bobbed under, as before. "Now I have him!" said
Charley. He pulled up once more, and this time with such a jerk that he
tossed the hook right over his head, and it caught in the weeds behind
him. But there was no fish on it.

"The third time never fails," said Charley, as he threw out his line
again. He waited now until the cork was pulled clear under water; then
he lifted it out, without too much haste, and, sure enough, he had
caught a fish.

How long do you suppose it had taken him to do it? Pretty nearly all the
forenoon. No matter! he had one fish to carry home, and he had had a
real good time besides.

Charley has caught many a mess of fish since then; but I doubt if he has
ever enjoyed the sport more than he did in catching that one fish.

                                              UNCLE SAM.





[Illustration]




A SLIGHT MISTAKE.


A DONKEY walking with a lion, fancied himself a lion also, and pretended
not to know his own brother.




[Illustration]




THE HEN-YARD DOOR.


    WHEN careless Tommy fed the fowls,
      He did not shut the door;
    Out came the rooster and the hens;
      Out came the pullets four;
    Out came old Speckle-wings, with six
      Bewitching little Bantam chicks.

    At once the hens began to cluck,
      The cock began to crow,
    And here and there, and everywhere,
      They seemed possessed to go;
    They pecked the turnips; in a patch
    Of spinach they began to scratch:
    And when to drive them in we tried
    They straightway to our neighbors hied.

[Illustration]

    Upon our right, a new-made lawn
      Was just with grass-seed sown;
    Upon our left, a garden-plot
      With pinks and lilies shone.
    In rushed our right-hand neighbor's son,
      With flaming face, and said,
    "'Shut up your hens,' my father says,
      Or he will shoot them dead."
    Our left-hand neighbor wrote a note,--
      "I all the spring have toiled
    To rear the lovely flowers I find
      Your roving fowls have spoiled."

    To get them home, the livelong day
    We tried, till evening gathered gray:
    Then back to roost returned the cock,
    But some were missing from his flock.
    Four hens were with him; where were two?
    Perhaps our right-hand neighbor knew!
    Back came the pullets, having fed
    On dainty pinks, and roses red;
    Back came old Speckle; of her six
    The cat had caught three little chicks.

    We shut the door, and made it fast;
    We all were glad the day was past:
    We'd lost our hens, and lost our friends;
      Our neighbors smile no more;
    And all because our careless Tom
      Forgot to shut the door!

                             MARIAN DOUGLAS.

[Illustration]




TWO GAMES.


[Illustration]

HERE is a boy, full ten years old, playing with a peg-top. What a sight!
He might find some better game, I should think. Why is he not out of
doors playing baseball? He is big enough to use his arms and legs?

[Illustration]

This girl could teach him a much better game than peg-top. She is out on
the lawn, all ready to play croquet. She will have fun and fresh air at
the same time. Those are two things that all girls and boys need.

                                                   C. B. A.




MORE ABOUT "ZIP COON."


"ZIP COON: he bites!" This is what I told you was printed in large red
letters on the door of Zip's house, after he had grown so cross and
snappish that he had to be chained up in the wood-shed.

A big countryman came one day with a load of potatoes. Zippy was inside
his house, pretending to take a nap. The man saw the printed letters on
the little door, and said to himself, "Zip Coon! where is he? I'd like
to see him." So he stooped down, and thrust his hand into the house.

You know you can never catch a coon asleep any more than you can a
weasel. Zippy's bright little eyes were wide open: so, when the
countryman's big hand came bouncing in at the door, Zip, quick as
lightning, seized it in his teeth, and gave it a terribly hard bite.

"Goodness, gracious sakes!" cried the man, pulling out his bleeding
hand. "What surprisin' chaps them coons be!" He hadn't seen Zippy; but
he felt enough of him: so he hurried down cellar with his potatoes, and
when he came back had the empty bag wound about his smarting hand.

Zip Coon was very fond of raw eggs. He would take one up in both his
hands, and pound it down hard on the wood-house floor. This would crack
the shell. Then he would turn the egg around, hold it to his mouth, and
suck the inside out, just as you would suck an orange. After he had
sucked the shell clean, he would put one little hand inside, scrape the
empty shell, and then lick his fingers so as to eat every bit of the
egg-meat.

One day, Isabella's sister Ellen gave Zippy a nice, large, fresh egg. He
was very glad to get it, you may be sure, and ate it as I have told you.
Then he wanted another, just as you sometimes want another orange. So
he took hold of Ellen's hand with one of his hands, and with the other
felt way up her sleeve and peeped up with his sharp eyes.

When he found no egg in the sleeve he was angry. He looked up in Ellen's
face in a very wicked way, then stooped down and buried his teeth in her
wrist. Then he turned and ran into the house, clanking his chain after
him.

[Illustration]

Zippy was not always so wicked as this, even after he had to be chained
up; but he was very mischievous. Once, the servants in the kitchen
heard a terrible racket in the wood-house. They went out there and found
Zippy on a high shelf where the blacking-brushes were kept. He was
throwing the blacking-boxes and brushes down, as fast as he could, and
there they lay scattered about the floor. His chain was so long, that he
had climbed up on the shelf and was having a good time.

But, after a while, Zip Coon became so fierce that Isabella didn't know
what to do with him. She was afraid he would do something terrible to
somebody: so she gave him to a man who carried him way off where
Isabella and her sisters never saw him any more. And this is all I have
to tell you about Zip Coon.

                                             HELEN MARR.




SAM AND HIS GOATS.


SAM was a boy about five years old. He lived in the country, and had a
nice little black-and-tan dog, Jack, to play with him. Sam wanted a
goat. He thought that if he could only have a goat, he would be
perfectly happy.

One day, when Sam was playing in the yard, his papa came driving home
from town, with something tied in the bottom of the wagon. When he saw
Sam, he stopped the horse and called, "Sam, come here, I have something
for you."

Sam ran there as fast as he could, and--what do you think?--papa lifted
two little goats out of the wagon, and put them down on the ground. One
goat was black and one was white. Sam was so glad he did not know what
to to do. He just jumped up and down with delight.

Then the dog Jack came running out to see the goats too; but he did not
like them much. He barked at them as hard as he could; but the goats did
not mind him at all.

Pretty soon mamma came to see what Sam had. When she saw the goats, she
said, "Why, papa, what will become of us if we have two goats on the
place?" But she was glad because Sam was glad; and Sam gave his papa
about a hundred kisses to thank him for the goats.

For some weeks, the goats ran about the yard, and ate the grass; and Sam
gave them water to drink, out of his little pail, and salt to eat, out
of his hand. He liked to feel their soft tongues on his hand as they ate
the salt. The goats would jump and run and play, and Sam thought it was
fine fun to run and play with them. Jack would run too, and bark all the
time.

[Illustration]

But by and by Sam began to get tired of his goats, and his mamma was
more tired of them than Sam was. They ate the tops off of her nice
rose-bushes; they ran over her flower-beds; and one day, when the door
was open, one of them ran into the parlor and jumped up on the best
sofa.

Mamma said this would never do: so the next day papa found a man who
said he would give Sam fifty cents for the white goat. As Sam wanted to
buy a drum, he was glad to sell the goat; and with fifty cents in his
pocket he felt very rich.

Then the other goat was put in the orchard, and he liked it there very
much. He liked to have Sam come and play with him. As soon as he saw Sam
coming, he would run to meet him, and push him with his head, in play,
and try to jump on him.

The goat grew very fast,--much faster than Sam did; so that soon he was
quite a big goat, while Sam was still a very small boy. He got to be so
much stronger that Sam, that Sam was a little afraid of him.

[Illustration]

One day, when they were playing, the goat hit Sam with his head, and
knocked him down. Sam was scared. He got up, fast as he could, and tried
to run to the gate; but the goat ran after him, and Sam had to climb
into a tree. It was a nice apple-tree. Sam had often sat up there
before, and liked it; but, now that he was forced to sit there, he did
not like it at all.

The goat staid at the foot of the tree, and, when Sam tried to come
down, he would shake his head at him, as if to say, "Come down if you
dare." Sam did not dare. "Oh, dear!" said he, "what shall I do?"

There were some green apples on the tree; and Sam thought, that, if he
threw them at the goat, he could drive him away: so he began to pick the
apples, and throw them at the goat.

[Illustration]

The first one hit the goat right on his head; but it did not hurt him at
all. He just went to where the apple lay, and ate it up; and every time
that Sam threw an apple at him the goat would eat it, and then look at
Sam, as if to say, "That is good. Give me some more."

At last Sam said, "Oh, you bad, bad goat! I wish you would go away. If
you don't go away, I'm afraid I shall cry." Then he thought of Jack, and
called, "Here, Jack! Here, Jack!" Jack came running up to see what Sam
wanted. Sam said, "At him, Jack! At him, Jack!"

Jack ran at the goat, and barked at him and tried to bite him; but the
goat kept turning his head to Jack, so that Jack could not get a chance
to bite him. At last the goat got tired of hearing Jack bark, and
thought he would give him one hard knock, and drive him away.

So he took a step or two back, and then ran forward, as hard as he
could, to hit Jack. But, when his head got to where Jack had been, Jack
was not there: he had jumped away. The goat was going so fast, that he
could not stop himself, but tumbled over his head, and came down on his
back with his legs sticking up in the air.

Sam laughed so hard that he almost fell out of the tree, and Jack was so
glad, that he jumped and barked, and tried to bite the goat's legs. At
last the goat got up and walked over to the other side of the orchard as
far as he could go. Then Sam jumped down out of the tree, and ran to
tell his mamma all about it.

                                               MARY DEY.




TOY-LAND.


    AND how do you get to Toy-land?
    To all little people the joy-land.
        Just follow your nose,
        And go on tip-toes:
    It's only a minute to Toy-land.

    And oh! but it's gay in Toy-land,--
    This bright, merry girl-and-boy-land;
        And woolly dogs white
        That never will bite
    You'll meet on the highways in Toy-land.

    Society's fine in Toy-land;
    The dollies all think it a joy-land;
        And folks in the ark
        Stay out after dark;
      And tin soldiers regulate Toy-land.

    There's fun all the year in Toy-land:
    To sorrow 'twas ever a coy-land;
        And steamboats are run,
        And steam-cars, for fun:
    They're wound up with keys down in Toy-land.

    Bold jumping-jacks thrive in Toy-land;
    Fine castles adorn this joy-land;
        And bright are the dreams,
        And sunny the beams,
    That gladden the faces in Toy-land.

    How long do we live in Toy-land?--
    This bright, merry girl-and-boy-land;
        A few days, at best,
        We stay as a guest,
    Then good-by forever to Toy-land!

                     GEORGE COOPER.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




MARY'S SQUIRREL.


I WANT to tell you about the little squirrel we have. His name is
Frisky. He came from New Jersey, and was quite tame when we got him. We
thought it would be better to let him out in the fresh air among the
trees; so we let him out.

I was away at aunt Lizzie's; but I came home early. Just as Henry and I
were going to bed,--Henry is my brother,--the cook called me, and, of
course, Henry came after me to see what was the matter.

I could not understand what it was at first; but pretty soon I saw it
was Frisky up in one of the trees on our place. Frisky never bites: so
it was not much trouble to catch him.

All the servants were there; but they could not catch him, because he
did not know them: so I made them stand back, and held out a peanut to
him. He came down and ate it; then he trusted me, and came down and ate
another. As soon as I got him within reach, I seized him and gave him to
William, the gardener, who, while I held the door open, popped him into
his cage. I am eight years old, and my name is

                                             MARY WINSOR.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: DRAWING-LESSON.

VOL. XXX.--NO. 2.]




A TURTLE SHOW.


    DOWN in the pond, where willows grow
    Along the shore in a golden row,
      Is a single rock with its mossy ridge,
    And a log as mossy, resting there
    Half in the water, and half in the air,
      From shore to islet a beautiful bridge;
    And the lily-pads on either side
    Might tempt the little green frogs to ride;
    And the lily-blooms, so purely made,
    Do tempt the little white feet to wade.

    What do you think I saw one day
    In the month of June, as I passed that way?
    Five little turtles, all in a row,
    On the top of the log,--a funny show,--
    For they carried their houses on their backs,
    And tucked their toes out through the cracks
    Under the eaves! while their heads and tails
    Played hide-and-seek behind the scales.

    They had golden dots on every shell;
    And they stood so still, and "dressed" so well,
    You might think they were called up to spell;
    And a "master" turtle, big and brown,
    On the top of the rock sat looking down
    In a learned way, as you might say
    To "put out words,"--and perhaps 'twas so,
    Though I heard no word,--but this, I know,
    The five little heads looked so very wise
    With their little bead eyes, they must have heard
    If ever the master pronounced a word.

[Illustration]

    In school or not, it was getting hot;
    And by and by, as the sun rose high,
    With the June-like drowsiness it sheds,
    They could not keep from going to sleep;
    And what do you think they did with their heads?
    Swallowed them! Oh, then, laugh, if you will;
    But true it is, still:
    Into their necks, as a sailor would slide
    His spy-glass into its leathern hide,
    They slid their five little heads away
    From the sight of man and the light of day.

    While I stood watching them, still as a mouse,
    Pleased at their comical way to keep house,
      I heard a terrible splash and croak,
    As a great bull-frog leapt up on the log,
      In a way to frighten such simple folk.
    Five little turtles, quick as a wink,
    Into the water slip and sink;
    And one big turtle, just as quick,
    Off from the log goes down like a brick.

    Ah, well! my turtles are not like boys,
    They can live in the pond, and they do hate noise!

                                 GEORGE S. BURLEIGH.




THE CHIMNEY-SWEEP.


LITTLE Mary in the picture is afraid of Jacob, the chimney-sweep. He
does look black and ugly; but he is a good boy, for all that, and Mary
ought not to be afraid of him.

His parents died when he was very small, and he was bound out to a
master, who taught him how to clean chimneys. Jacob did not like the
work at first, and was afraid to go up the chimney; but now that he has
got used to it, he likes it quite well. He sometimes sings a merry song
while he is at work.

[Illustration]

Mary's mother has sent for him to come and clean out her chimney; for it
is choked up with soot, and she cannot make her fire burn.

                                           LEONORA, from the German.




[Illustration]




BILLY AND BRUISER.


BILLY is a small boy: Bruiser is a big dog. They are great friends.
Billy gets on Bruiser's back, and treats him as if he were a horse.

Bruiser takes this as a good joke. He likes to have Billy play with him
in this way. But it would not be safe for anybody else to do it.

Bruiser is a grand watch-dog. One day the old dog gave a fierce growl to
keep off a butterfly.

He thought the butterfly was going to attack Billy. Billy had a good
laugh at this; for, small as he is, he thinks he is a match for a
butterfly.

                                             UNCLE CHARLES.




TWO LITTLE MAIDENS.


    THIS little maiden is out for a walk,
    A fair little maiden is she;
    And I really believe she is having a talk
    With a bird flying down from a tree.
    She asks him to tell of his home in the woods;
    He sings of the summer so gay;
    While a very tall maiden sits by on the grass,
    And hears every word that they say.

                                       F. E. D.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




"IF I WERE ONLY A KING."


ONE fine, warm, summer day, four children were playing together in the
garden.

"Oh!" said one of them, "if I were only a king, I would live in a
beautiful castle that should reach up to the clouds."

"And I," said another, "would wear nothing but gold and silver clothes."

"If I were one," cried a little boy, "I would do nothing but eat cake
and pudding all day long."

"And I," said a little girl, blushing, "would give money to all the poor
children I saw, so that they might buy food and clothes."

Which of these children do you think would have made the best ruler?

                                           LEONORA, from the German.




USE BEFORE BEAUTY.


THE hens and turkeys were scratching for their breakfast in front of the
barn-door; while the dog lay lazily looking on. The proud peacock stood
on the fence near by, and spread his tail out, that the morning sun
might shine on it, and make it still more beautiful.

[Illustration]

"Ah!" said the peacock to one of the hens, "do you not wish that you
were as handsome as I am? Then you would never have to scratch for your
food, but would be fed and taken care of and admired."

"I wish nothing of the kind," said the hen. "There is something which
men prize more than beauty, and that is usefulness. If I were as fine
and gay as you are, men would miss the eggs I lay."

"That is just my view of the case," said a goose. "If I were not a
goose, I should like to be a hen. I would not be a lazy peacock."

"She is quite right," said the dog. "You are very beautiful to look at,
Master Peacock, but that is all you are good for. Take comfort in your
fine feathers, but don't boast."

                                           LEONORA, from the German.




SUMMER RAMBLES.


    BRING the children to the fields,
      Where the sheep are straying;
    With the birds and butterflies
      Let them now be playing,--
    In the hollow on the hill,
      All the green lawn over,
    Through the yellow buttercups,
      Down among the clover.

    With the sunshine in their hearts,
      In their cheeks the roses,
    Let them breathe the balmy air,
      Let them gather posies.
    In the merry month of June,
      Summer's fairest weather,
    Let the children and the flowers
      Bud and bloom together.

                    ANNA LIVINGSTON.

[Illustration]




TEN MINUTES WITH JOHNNY.


"DO grandpa's cows chew gum, like Mr. Connor's cows, mamma?" asked
Johnny, a few days ago, as he stood emptying his pockets of hay-seed on
the dining-room carpet, after a visit to the barn.

"Cuds you mean, don't you, dear?" asked mamma.

"No, gum. Mr. Connor says it's gum; and they're his cows: so he knows."

"No, grandpa's cows chew cuds, like all good grass-eating cows. Perhaps
Mr. Connor's cows do not eat grass or hay."

"Yes, they do," said Johnny. "I've seen 'em."

"Well, then," said mamma, "they must chew cuds."

"What are cuds, mamma?"

"Why, after the cow has chewed the fresh green grass or the dry hay in
her mouth, she sends it down into a large stomach, to be soaked; then
she sends it into another stomach, to be rolled into balls; then up it
goes into her mouth again, to be chewed over; and each little ball is a
cud."

"Doesn't she have any other stomach for it to go into then, mamma?"

"Yes, two more. Do you have four stomachs, like a cow?"

"No, of course I don't. I don't chew cuds."

"Well, you may get a brush and dust-pan, and brush up that hay-seed from
the carpet; then come with me, and I'll show you a picture of a giant
kangaroo with her baby in a fur bag."

"Oh! where does she live, mamma?"

"Brush up that hay-seed, then I'll tell you all about her," said mamma.
With this promise in view, Johnny hastened to brush up the litter he
had made, talking to himself the while, somewhat after this wise,--

"Chew away, old cow! You'll have to keep your big teeth going all night
to keep all those stomachs at work. One stomach, two stomachs,
three-e-e, four-r-r. All ready, mamma!"

                                             MRS. G. I. HOPKINS.




A CAT STORY.


DID you ever see a cat laugh? Look at the cat in the picture, and see if
she is not laughing. It is plain to me that she is.

What is she laughing at? Why, that is plain enough too. She is amused at
the talk of those two little girls about her kittens.

There are four kittens,--just two for each; but little Jenny wants to
take them all up in her arms, though she can hardly hold more than one.
This is what pleases the old cat.

Now I am going to tell you a cat story.

Once, when I taught school in the country, I boarded at farmer Clark's
house, where there were sixteen cats,--Yes, sixteen cats! There was a
big yellow cat, and a big gray cat, and a big black-and-white cat, and
lots of little kittens.

The big gray cat was named Gussy. She was the grandmother of them all.
She lived in the house. The rest staid around the barn. Farmer Clark was
a good man, and did not believe in killing any thing that was not
dangerous to life or property. So no little kittens were drowned, if he
knew it.

Mrs. Clark taught me how to make butter; and I was told to feed the
skimmed milk to the cats. There were two large dish-pans that I used
for this purpose. They were shallow and leaky; but precious little time
there was for the milk to leak.

[Illustration]

As soon as I appeared at the door, and called, "Tom, Tom!" the cats came
tumbling, pell-mell, mewing, and rubbing against me. It was a sight to
see.

First, there would be a thick row of cats around the pans,--so thick
that only sixteen tails and thirty-two hind-legs could be seen. The next
minute the heads would go lower, and the fore-paws would go up on the
edge of the pans.

Then a kitten would jump in. Then they would all fight, and push, and
spit, and snarl to get to the lower side of the pan, where the milk was
the deepest.

And then it was all gone. And the pans would be licked clean. And then
sixteen tongues licked sixteen jaws, and thirty-two eyes appealed for
more. But it was no use to beg. Then sixty-four legs trotted off, and
only old Gussy went into the house; while the others went to the barn.

There were no rats or mice around those premises, I tell you. I often
wonder how many cats there are at farmer Clark's now. And sometimes I
dream about them. This is a true story.

                                             AUNT FAN.




TOM'S APPLE.


"BAH! ugh! oh!" cried little Tom. "There's a worm in my red apple,
mamma."

"Is he a pretty worm?" asked his mamma, looking up from her sewing.

"Pretty, mamma! Who ever heard of a worm being pretty? No, no! he's a
horrid crawling thing. I sha'n't eat any more of the apple. I couldn't,
now I've seen him in it."

"Let me see him," said mamma: so Tommy brought the apple to his mother.

"Why, yes, he's a beauty," said she. "Just look at that little red cap
he wears, and see how soft and white his skin is. If nobody had picked
that apple, he would have spun a little rope from out his body, and let
himself down from the high tree, down, down, to the earth.

"Then he would have crawled into a little hole in the ground. When he
had covered himself all over with a gray sheet, he would sleep, sleep,
sleep. But by and by he would awaken.

"He would come out of the tight shroud, and find that he had airy, gauzy
wings with which he could fly: so he would go flitting and fluttering up
into the warm sunshine to find an apple-blossom."

"What would he want of an apple-blossom?" asked Tommy, much interested
now in his apple-worm.

"Oh, to lay an egg in," said mamma. "And, when the apple-blossoms grew,
the egg would be softly wrapped within its pink heart. And when the
blossom turned into an apple there would be a tiny baby-worm to feed
upon the white pulp. Then some day, perhaps, some other little boy would
exclaim, 'Bah! ugh! oh!' about him, as my little boy did just now about
the mamma-worm."

"Oh!" said Tom thoughtfully. "I'm glad nobody will have that chance:
here goes."

And he tossed the apple, worm and all, out of the window.

                                             MRS. G. I. HOPKINS.

[Illustration]




SEE-SAW.

    Words by GEORGE COOPER.             Music by T. CRAMPTON.

[Illustration: Music]

    1. See-saw! high and low,
       That's the way we love to go.
           With a bound,
             Up we fly,
           From the ground
             To the sky;
           From the ground
             To the sky.
       All aboard for Fun-land, oh!
       See-saw! high and low.

    2. See-saw! birdies play
       On the tree-tops, just this way;
           And the bees
             Rock the rose,
           When they please
             With their toes!
       And the winds the wavelets blow,
       See-saw! high and low.

    3. See-saw! oh, what sport!
       Wish the days were not so short!
           Girls and boys,
             Everywhere,
           Rosy joys,
             Earth so fair!
       Gayer playmates do you know?
       See-saw! high and low.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes: Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

The original text for the July issue had a table of contents that
spanned six issues. This was divided amongst those issues.

Additionally, only the July issue had a title page. This page was copied
for the remaining five issues. Each issue had the number added on the
title page after the Volume number.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Nursery, August 1881, Vol. XXX, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NURSERY, AUGUST 1881, VOL. XXX ***

***** This file should be named 42157.txt or 42157.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/1/5/42157/

Produced by Emmy, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net Music
transcribed by Veronika Redfern.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
