The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Pit Town Coronet, Volume III (of 3), by
Charles James Wills


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Pit Town Coronet, Volume III (of 3)
       A Family Mystery.


Author: Charles James Wills



Release Date: February 23, 2013  [eBook #42169]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PIT TOWN CORONET, VOLUME III
(OF 3)***


E-text prepared by Robert Cicconetti, Sue Fleming, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images
generously made available by Internet Archive/American Libraries
(http://archive.org/details/americana)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/American Libraries. See
      http://archive.org/details/pittowncoronetfa03will


      Project Gutenberg has the other two volumes of this work.
      Volume I: see http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/42167
      Volume II: see http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/42168





THE PIT TOWN CORONET:

A Family Mystery.

by

CHARLES J. WILLS,

Author of
"In the Land of the Lion and Sun," etc.

In Three Volumes.

VOL. III.







Ward and Downey,
12, York Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.
1888

[The right of translation is reserved, and the Dramatic Copyright
protected.]

Printed by
Kelly and Co., Gate Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, W.C.;
and Middle Mill, Kingston-on-Thames.




CONTENTS.


  CHAP.                                    PAGE

     I.--AFTER SEVENTEEN YEARS                1

    II.--AT MONTE CARLO                      25

   III.--AN ANONYMOUS LETTER                 52

    IV.--PALLIDA MORS                        76

     V.--A LITTLE RED BOX                   100

    VI.--LUCIUS HAGGARD IS BEWILDERED       131

   VII.--ENTER MR. BROOKES                  158

  VIII.--THE HOLLOW BEECH TREE              179

    IX.--MR. CAPT LEAVES SERVICE            203




  THE PIT TOWN CORONET.




  CHAPTER I.

  AFTER SEVENTEEN YEARS.


Seventeen uneventful years had passed and had streaked Georgie Haggard's
abundant chestnut locks with grey. A lovely woman still. The innocent,
healthful, girlish beauty had developed into the sweet matronly dignity
which is so frequently seen among the happy wives and mothers of the
English aristocracy. Haggard was still proud of his wife, because even
he couldn't fail to see her beauty; and as for the old lord, he idolized
her much as old Squire Warrender had idolized her twenty years ago at
The Warren. Georgie Haggard was not demonstrative. Always quiet, she was
rather timid and subdued in her husband's presence; but with the old
lord, though perhaps a little more staid and dignified than of yore, she
was still the lovely and affectionate woman of the old happy times. Hers
was the beauty of the happy mother, the sweet matronly loveliness which
is perhaps the more touching when tinged by the slight dash of sadness
which idealises it and saves it from the commonplace. The smile was not
ever present, but it was none the less beautiful and touching from its
rarity.

Reginald Haggard and his family had been installed at Walls End Castle
ever since Lord Hetton's death. They had come originally upon a visit;
Mrs. Haggard's health had suddenly broken down, and at the old lord's
urgent entreaty the visit had been indefinitely prolonged. Although
Haggard was, as we know, a wealthy man, he could not afford to disregard
any suggestion of his great-uncle. At first he had looked on the whole
thing as a confounded nuisance; he had objected to his wife that they
might make themselves ridiculous by a too abject obedience to the whims
of the old nobleman.

But after all it was not so very bad for the Haggards. Lord Pit Town
took care to make it very apparent to everybody that it was at his
special desire that Haggard and his family remained at the Castle.
He let it be very plainly perceived that he considered Reginald
Haggard almost as his son, as well as his heir; for the permanent
under-secretary at the Home Office, at the conclusion of his official
duties, had quite enough to occupy his mind with his eternal whist at
the club till the small hours of the morning. The odd trick was far more
to him than the possession of Walls End Castle and the Pit Town title.
But Mr. Lancelot Haggard remained a plain esquire till his death, which
occurred seven years after that of the unfortunate Lord Hetton. When
his man-servant opened the study door one morning, for he had found the
bedroom empty, he saw Lancelot Haggard seated at the whist table, upon
which the four hands of an unfinished game were spread. Pole's "Treatise
on Whist" lay open at "The Echo of the Call," the candles had burnt out
in their sockets, there were tricks turned, and three cards were already
played of another one; and Lancelot Haggard sat bolt upright, the fourth
card between his fingers, stone dead, but with a peaceful smile upon his
lips.

Reginald Haggard, then, was practically in the position of Lord Pit
Town's son. Of course he was but plain Mr. Haggard still. He had got rid
of his father's place, thus "washing his hands," as he had threatened,
"of the whole bag of tricks;" for though Cunningham, the Scotch steward,
had succeeded in screwing three per cent. out of the place, yet he had
made himself so terribly unpopular in the process that he resigned in
despair in order to emigrate to New Zealand, and so become, as he
phrased it, his "ain mon again." When the steward resigned Haggard had
been very glad indeed of the excuse to send the place to the hammer. A
set of rooms in the huge mansion of the old lord in Grosvenor Square had
been placed at Haggard's disposal, and though he frequently ran up to
town, his _pied-a-terre_ was at the house which would one day be his
own, and the Haggards had no regular establishment in London. As for
Georgie Haggard herself, she invariably passed a portion of the summer
with her father at The Warren. She usually made her annual visit
accompanied only by the two boys, for Haggard invariably absented
himself in the summer either for Norway fishing, lengthy yacht voyages,
or as one of a little party of men of his own kidney, who sought their
sport further afield and went lion-hunting in South Africa, shooting
the hippopotamus on the White Nile, or chasing the fast-disappearing
buffalo upon the American prairies. But as a rule he would get home for
the shooting. Year by year the head of game in the Walls End preserves,
under Haggard's fostering care, had increased. In the old lord's name
Haggard had invited every year a select little party of crack shots; he
gave them a couple of days' _battue_ shooting, the other four in the
stubble and among the turnips, and at the end of the week they went away
to "wipe each others' eyes" over some other man's birds. For some years
the bags made at these little annual gatherings had been noted in the
daily papers. Haggard himself not infrequently headed the list, for he
was an enthusiastic sportsman and a brilliant shot.

Reginald Haggard at five-and-forty had quieted down. Years and years ago
he had taken his name off the books at the Pandemonium; he no longer
gambled, and he took a great interest in politics, as became a man who
was destined, in the ordinary course of events, and at no very distant
date, to become one of our hereditary legislators. Of course Haggard had
many friends, or rather acquaintances, all of whom were ready to kootoo
and truckle to the man who would be the next Earl of Pit Town; men whom
he would invite to dinner, and who would entertain him; generally men of
his own age, or club-room bucks with wrinkled cheeks; men whose clothes
were always in the fashion, and who as a rule ate and drank rather more
than was good for them; men who rode in the park on three hundred guinea
hacks, and who might be seen in the Drive in big mail-phaetons with
Brobdingnagian lamps, or driving noisy and rather miscellaneous parties
on their four-in-hands towards Richmond.

I don't know what Haggard would have done without that invaluable
esquire of his body, Mr. Maurice Capt. Capt accompanied him everywhere;
he had camped out with him in the Rockies, and his culinary skill there
had more than made up for the deficiencies of Bull-headed Bill, the
half-bred titular cook of the expedition. Capt was a silent man, and his
fellow servants were never able to extract any gossip from him
respecting his master's wanderings. But Haggard was lucky in retaining
one real friend; his old _fidus Achates_, Lord Spunyarn, was his friend
still; still a bachelor, no longer the unsuccessful amateur athlete of
former days, but developed into a full-blown philanthropist, the friend
of mankind in general, but of the destitute East-ender in particular.

Ever since Georgie Haggard, in her just indignation, had banished her
cousin from her presence, Miss Lucy Warrender, still a handsome woman,
had led a wandering life; the dove had found no rest for the sole of
her foot. Homeless and friendless, though her intimates and
acquaintances were innumerable, she was as restless and erratic in her
movements as the Wandering Jew. Miss Warrender was always in evidence
upon the Ascot Lawn; she was to be seen at Brighton during the season,
at German watering-places, at Deauville, Biarritz, and Eastbourne or
Scarborough in the summer, and occasionally even for a few days at The
Warren, where she invariably appeared at Christmas. For Lucy Warrender
had eight hundred a year of her own, which she had inherited from the
colonel, her father. I am afraid she had become a confirmed old maid;
she had flirted and philandered till she was thirty, and there were
plenty of the very smartest people who were quite ready to flirt with
her now, for Lucy Warrender still retained her good looks, her dreamy
blonde beauty, and her eyes still sparkled as of old. We have said Lucy
Warrender was homeless and friendless, and she had developed two master
vices: to drown her troubles she gambled as only a woman can gamble, and
she drugged herself with chloral and other abominations to procure a
temporary forgetfulness of a black shadow that incessantly pursued her.
The man Capt knew of the long-buried secret, and he persistently
blackmailed the unhappy Lucy Warrender; but Capt was far too wise a man
to kill the goose with the golden eggs. He considered that if he drove
her to extremity, and the trick which had been played upon Reginald
Haggard should ever become a public scandal, that he had nothing to gain
but everything to lose. He knew that the English laws against what the
French call _chantage_ were severe; he also knew enough of his master to
be quite certain that if Haggard's just indignation were once aroused,
he would be pursued with relentless ferocity. So he contented himself
with plundering Lucy Warrender, and kept her secret; not because he was
not perfectly ready to betray it, but because he saw no way of bringing
his knowledge to a better market.

As for the two young men, for they had already ceased to be adolescents,
they were certainty physically decidedly above the average. Lucius, the
elder, was, as we know, Lucy Warrender's child. His whole soul was
wrapped up in the fact that a few short years would see him the
possessor of the courtesy title and heir to his supposed father's ample
means and old Lord Pit Town's incalculable wealth. The young fellow had
even developed a taste for art, simply because he felt it was his
bounden duty to be able to appreciate the innumerable treasures which
must inevitably soon be his very own. Young Lucius Haggard had been
petted and spoiled from his earliest infancy, he had had his way in
everything; his nurses, his schoolmasters and his tutors had bowed down
to him; good-looking young fellow that he became in after years, a fact
of which he was perfectly aware; he was flattered and toadied to by the
golden youth of both sexes, and by most of his elders, who ought to have
known better, to an extent sufficient to have turned the head of any
ordinary young man of well-regulated mind. But Lucius Haggard's was not
a well-regulated mind. He was of his father's religion, but he carried
the religion further. Reginald Haggard was a self-worshipper, a man
determined to get the greatest amount of pleasure and amusement out of
this world, regardless of consequences to others, a man for whom trumps
were continually turning up, a man who felt he was a brazen pot among
the earthen ones floating down the stream, and to whom the annihilation
of the weaker vessels was a matter of utter indifference. Like Napoleon,
he believed in his star, and he had been right in doing so, for when at
two-and-twenty he had been turned out to take his chance, he had
rapidly become the possessor of wealth far beyond his needs; a little
later, after a short period of enjoyment of the free wild life in
America, he had returned to draw the prize in the matrimonial lottery,
which somehow inevitably falls to the lot of such as he. The good lives
which stood between him and the Pit Town peerage had all dropped, and
nothing now remained between him and what he considered his rights but
one frail old man. But the young Lucius had never for an instant been
submitted to the healthy influence of even temporary poverty, his
existence had never even been troubled by so much as a crumpled rose
leaf; the consequence was that his selfishness was utter and unaffected,
that he did not even wear it as a garment, but that it was absolutely a
part of himself. A tall handsome young fellow enough, fairly clever, who
did not conceal that he thought himself rather superior to the rest of
the world, and the rest of the world took pretty good care to coincide
in the young fellow's opinion.

As for George Haggard, he was the anti-type of Lucius. Equally
good-looking, he was the picture of old Squire Warrender in his youth;
his fair chestnut hair curled in profusion over his broad square
forehead. He was a muscular youth who shone at school and at the
university, in the cricket field and upon the river alike. But he was no
mere athlete, for he had a taste for reading, and he never forgot the
fact, which his father was continually pressing upon his mind, that he,
as a younger son, would have to get his own living. And George Haggard
was ambitious; he meant if possible to force his way into the arena of
political life, and had already determined to make a struggle for name
and fame at the Bar. But though George Haggard was ambitious, his was an
affectionate disposition; he idolized his mother, and he truckled to no
one, not even to his father or the old earl. George Haggard knew well
enough that he would be a comparatively poor man--a pauper, as his
brother pleasantly put it, but only a pauper from the point of view of
Lucius Haggard, the probable future possessor of immense wealth, for The
Warren acres would assuredly be his, and had George Haggard so willed
it, nothing would have been easier for him than to sit and twiddle his
thumbs and wait for old Squire Warrender's death; but as we have said,
George Haggard was ambitious.

The great new gallery at Walls End Castle, the Grecian temple which Dr.
Wolff had designed over twenty years before, was now less offensive to
the eye externally. It was a Grecian temple still, but its
spick-and-spanness had passed away. Two old gentlemen arm-in-arm slowly
walked down the principal saloon, the one a big grey-haired man whose
face was disfigured with many scars; as he walked he gesticulated, and
he spoke with a strong German accent in a loud voice. By his side ambled
his friend and companion of many years, a very old man this, who stooped
considerably and leant frequently upon a crutch-handle stick; the two
men were John, Earl of Pit Town, and Dr. Wolff.

"I never thought, Wolff, that I should be spared to fill the last space
on these walls. I certainly never expected to see the termination of my
labours. In art one cannot be too exacting. We made up our minds years
ago that there should be nothing doubtful here, and here is the only
remaining space filled at last, and filled, as it should be, by a
masterpiece. Yes," said the old nobleman, as he rubbed his hands, "thank
heaven there is nothing doubtful here. Nothing remains for me now,
Wolff, but to leave the treasures that it has been the labour of my life
to accumulate; my sight isn't what it was."

"No man is what he was, my good friend and master, but it is not well to
be sad. You set yourself a great task years ago, an almost superhuman
task. He is aggomblished."

"No, not accomplished yet, Wolff. I have only got through a part of it.
I have caught my white elephant, but what am I to do with him? I know
too well that my natural heir looks upon the contents of these galleries
but as so many hundred thousand pounds' worth of hard cash. He is an
honest man, and makes no secret of it."

"But his son, my lord, the young Mr. Lucius?"

"Ah! he is a mystery, Wolff, that I have failed to fathom. We have known
him, my friend, since he was a little child. I can't tell why, Wolff, I
have never trusted him. Perhaps the aged are over-suspicious. I confess
to you that if I thought he loved art for art's sake, he should have my
pictures, as he will ultimately have my title and what goes with it."

"You can tie them up, my lord."

"Yes, I know I can tie them up, but then the pictures I've loved would
suffer. Who will care for them, Wolff, when you and I are gone?"

"You have sometimes talked, my lord, of giving them _en bloc_ to the
nation."

"Yes, Wolff, I did once think of that; but since that time I have seen
that real Chamber of Horrors, the National Portrait Gallery. I should
not like to send her there," he said, as he pointed to the portrait of
wicked Bab Chudleigh, who simpered and smiled at him from the wall. "No,
Wolff, I shouldn't like my pictures to be hawked about as loans to one
East End or provincial exhibition after another, to be sneered at by
crowds of unappreciating yokels. It's a very heavy responsibility,
Wolff."

At this moment Reginald Haggard entered the gallery.

"I hear, my lord," he said, as he shook hands with the old nobleman,
"that you have hung the last long-sought treasure this morning. Is it
really so?"

The old lord nodded.

"I suppose you will begin the weeding process now?" continued Haggard.

The old man drew himself up a little stiffly. "If you can indicate to me
anything that is unworthy, you will confer an obligation; but I think
you'll find it difficult. In my opinion, Haggard," he continued, "and in
the opinion of others far better able to judge than I am, there is
nothing here requiring weeding out."

Haggard slightly flushed.

"I can only plead my ignorance," he said; "it is what most connoisseurs
do."

"Yes, there you're quite right; but most men begin collecting as the
amusement of their old age. I began it sixty years ago, and I'm afraid
my long life's labour is over, and that, useless old man that I am, I've
lived too long already."

"You look upon things in a melancholy light, my lord."

"No man is pleased when he finds his occupation gone; and perhaps it's a
little sad to me to find that you care for none of these things."

"I know you wouldn't wish me to affect an interest I do not feel," said
Haggard with an ingenuous smile.

"No, there you're right. For we should find him out, shouldn't we,
Wolff?"

The doctor of philosophy laughed. "It is our business to detect shams,"
he said. "Yes, I think we should have found you out."

"Then, Dr. Wolff, you'd better try your skill on Lucius; he poses as a
man of taste, I don't."

At that moment the two young men entered the gallery.

"Here he is to answer for himself," said Haggard; "and I'll leave him
to your tender mercies. If he be a sham Priest of Art, unfrock him by
all means, Dr. Wolff," said Haggard with a laugh, as he sauntered away.

The two young men greeted their aged relative with respect, and nodded
familiarly to Dr. Wolff.

"I verily believe, my lord, that this younger brother of mine has no
soul," said young Lucius Haggard; "he actually tells me that the
contemplation of pictures produces in him naught but headache."

"And a pain in the neck, Lucius; don't forget the pain in the neck,"
said his brother.

"Yes, his pain in his neck was his other symptom. He declares he sees
more beauty in a sunlit rustic hedge than in a landscape by Claude
Lorraine."

"And I added to my criminality, I fear, Dr. Wolff, by declaring that I
only liked a picture when it gave pleasure to my eyes, as does the
wicked wanton on the wall yonder," he added, kissing the tips of his
fingers to Mistress Barbara Chudleigh.

"Ach, my young friend, do not glory in being a _Philister_," sighed Dr.
Wolff.

"I fear, George, yours is but a low and sensuous ideal, if Sir Peter's
commonplace masterpiece is all that rouses your enthusiasm. Why, amidst
so much that is beautiful, so much that is spiritual, so much that
appeals to the higher nature, you should pick out the one commonplace
bit in the whole collection, I can't imagine," said Lucius with a sneer.

"You may call it commonplace if you like, Lucius. All I know is, that
whatever else she may have been, if Bab Chudleigh was like that picture,
she must have very closely resembled an angel."

"And have you seen them then, these angels, young sir, that you speak so
confidently?" said the German doctor, as a great smile ran over his
scarred face.

"Seen them? of course I have--hundreds of them. So did you, Dr. Wolff,
when you were my age, and I have no doubt so did his lordship there,"
said the boy with a glance at the old lord, who was peering into a
picture at some distance. "I'll be bound that Lucius here sees the
angels of his dream-fancies by the dozen. He goes in for poetry, you
know, and all that sort of thing, though I for my own part would rather
not see his angels, for I haven't been educated up to the pitch where
one admires the beauty of decay, as Lucius has, the creatures with the
pointed chins, the sandy towzled hair, the great hungry eyes, the
uncomfortable poses, the deficiency of adipose tissue and the prehensile
toes. I can't say that I appreciate green shadows under the eyes, nor do
I see anything poetic in a bilious air. But all these things are very
dear to Lucius, at least he says so. No, give me nature and Bab
Chudleigh, and I'll make Lucius a present of art and his bony angels,
and all Mr. Swinburne's clutching horrors into the bargain."

"Thank you, George; it's very noble and generous on your part to hand
over to me what you can't appreciate."

"My dear Lucius, we all have our failings. You go in for art and the
artificial, while nature is enough for me."

"When you are my age," said Lucius with the superior wisdom of an elder
brother, "you will cease to judge by externals, I trust. You will have
learned to peep behind the veil, and you will see the real soul seated
on its throne."

"Bosh!" said George shortly.

And so the idle talk went on, and Lucius continued to pose, while the
worshipper of nature took pains to fit on the Philistine's skin tighter
than ever.




  CHAPTER II.

  AT MONTE CARLO.


Mr. Maurice Capt, though an ambitious man and a clever one withal, had
risen no higher in the world since we saw him last; he was still
Reginald Haggard's valet, but his wages were good and he had a little
den of his own where his meals were served to him from the housekeeper's
table in solitary state. The valet was by this time a man of property;
his wants were few and his little economies, as he called them, were
large. Nobody but his banker was aware of the extent of his
accumulations; he couldn't have saved it all out of his pay, but he had
managed to amass a comparatively large sum which stood to his credit in
four figures. Was Mr. Capt a gambler, a backer of horses, or a dabbler
in stocks and shares? Not a bit of it. Mr. Maurice Capt was the
proprietor of a secret. For seventeen years Mr. Capt had drawn from this
queer property of his a varying but comfortable income. When Lucy
Warrender first came into her eight hundred a year, Mr. Capt's income
had very sensibly increased. It wasn't paid quarterly or half-yearly;
the manner in which it was drawn was sufficiently original. The bills
which Mr. Capt drew whenever he thought fit upon Miss Lucy Warrender
were always honoured. Mr. Capt was in the habit of writing to the lady
in the humble tone of a suppliant. The letters always stated with
praiseworthy clearness what was the sum required, and the demand was
always met with business-like promptitude. How Miss Warrender managed to
satisfy this insatiable bloodsucker I cannot tell, for though she had
eight hundred a year of her own, she certainly lived up to it, perhaps
beyond it. But Miss Warrender gambled in many ways; she speculated and
had quite a large account which she had opened with a very old friend
of former years, Mr. Dabbler, once of the firm of Sleek and Dabbler, but
now trading by himself, and though dropping his h's as freely as ever,
one of the biggest brokers on the Stock Exchange and an alderman of the
City of London. I suppose Alderman Dabbler must have been very much in
love with Miss Warrender, though he never actually had the impertinence
to propose to her. Her transactions with him were numerous, and did not
pass through his books. Most of her speculations were made upon his
advice, and many a handsome cheque testified either to the astuteness of
Miss Lucy Warrender, or to the generosity of Mr. Alderman Dabbler. Poor
Dabbler, he was but one of the many irons in Miss Warrender's fire. Miss
Warrender betted; it was even said that she ran horses as "Mr. Simpson."
She would stand upon the _plateau_ at Monaco at the shooting matches,
and in an entrancing costume and a pair of ten-button gloves, her face
carefully shaded from the blazing sun by an enormous parasol, she would
watch the birds fall right and left and die in agony, or drop wounded
into the sea, and still continue to back the bird or the gun, as seemed
to her good, with the cosmopolitan _habitues_ of the rather Bohemian but
money-spending set in which she moved. It was a very miscellaneous set:
peers, members of parliament, journalists, jockeys, people who lived by
their wits but who somehow always managed to wear new garments of
fashionable cut, actresses, singers, dancers, of European reputation,
and some of them with no reputations at all, fashionables of enviable
notoriety or the reverse; all these various sorts of people were
hail-fellow-well-met with Miss Warrender upon the _Plateau_ at Monte
Carlo, or within the walls of the great gambling house.

Lucy Warrender had kept her good looks; I expect if she hadn't she would
have gone under long before. She enjoyed herself in a sort of feverish
way; she was a notoriously lucky woman when she gambled, and she gambled
habitually and heavily. But just on the particular day we meet Miss
Warrender again, Fortune had been unkind. The lady was sitting gazing
out from her window on the second floor of the Hotel de Russie upon the
sunlit tranquil turquoise sea. I don't think that she saw much beauty in
the scene, for though she stared at the blue sea and the bluer sky, she
appeared to be rapt in thought.

There are some women who are always well dressed, whose flounces and
whose furbelows are ever fresh and crisp; Lucy Warrender was one of
these. It would be very easy to extract from _The Queen_ a poetic
description of the pretty pale blue tea-gown that Lucy Warrender wore,
but I must leave it to your imagination, reader. The pale blue and the
profusion of delicate filmy lace suited Lucy Warrender's dreamy blonde
beauty. Seventeen years had passed lightly over her head; perhaps the
golden locks were a trifle more golden than of old, and if their
luxuriance was due a little to art, the secret was only known to Lucy
and her maid. Her foot, thrust into a heel-less Tunisian slipper of blue
velvet embroidered with seed pearls, beat the floor impatiently. The
strong sunlight showed that there really were a few tiny wrinkles,
faintest lines on the ivory forehead and at the corners of the pretty
mouth, whose ruddy lips were arched like Cupid's bow. But though the
lips were arched, the mouth was determined, almost cruel; but the
cruelty of the mouth suddenly disappeared as the door opened, and the
whole face was instantly illuminated by the smile that men termed
infantine and angelic, but which rivals of her own sex styled affectedly
sentimental.

It was Lucy's maid who entered the room, a big burly woman, still the
fine animal of yore, Fanchette--the Fanchette who had succeeded the
unhappy Hepzibah, and who had nursed the boys Lucius and George.

"I have got them, mademoiselle," she said in French, as she smoothed out
a little heap of blue bank notes; "seven thousand francs as usual; and a
brave pair of earrings too, to produce that from the harpies of the
_Mont de Piete_ at Nice. The employe made me the usual compliment,
mademoiselle, and as he paid me the money he declared that the pair of
single stones were the most beautiful he had ever seen. The rascal took
care not to say it till we had made our bargain. _Ciel_, I trust
mademoiselle will be _en veine_ to-night, for I shan't feel easy till I
see the stones sparkling again in mademoiselle's ears."

Lucy counted the notes, she dismissed the _bonne_, and then she
soliloquized; not in so many words, as do heroines of melodrama, but
this is what she said to herself, at all events the substance of it:

"I am sick of life, I am sick of planning and plotting and being looked
upon as an adventuress. I am sick of being bowed to and spoken to by
people who in the old time would not have presumed to beg for an
introduction. I am getting _declassee_. Perhaps one doesn't feel it so
much here, for we are pretty well all adventurers more or less, here in
the gambler's paradise, though some of us have plenty of money." Miss
Warrender stood before the smouldering hearth and gazed with stern
scrutiny at her own features in the mirror. "Yes," she soliloquized,
"Georgie, though she is two years older than I am, has certainly worn
the better of the two; she is lovely Mrs. Haggard still. And what am I?
A hag, a dreadful grinning hag, a woman to be flirted with, danced with
and supped with, a woman who has ceased to be respected. Why, that
dreadful old Baron Teufelsdroch called me his _belle petite_ the other
day, and I have no champion now to take the old sinner by the throat and
shake the life out of him."

Lucy sank into the only comfortable chair in the room, and then she did
a dreadful thing. Dreadful to our minds, dear reader, for we are
respectable and insular and we have our prejudices, our glorious insular
prejudices. We can sympathize with "The Sorrows of Werther," we can even
shed tears perhaps over the bread-and-butter cutting Charlotte, but were
Charlotte to light a cigarette! Oh horror--fie--for shame--pschutt: the
lady would at once be outside the pale of respectability, totally
unworthy of our love and sympathy; worse still, to our minds she would
cease to be even good-looking or to deserve the lovely and romantic name
of Charlotte at all. One can't tell why it is so: the preternaturally
hideous heroes of our fashionable lady novelists seek consolation in the
strongest and most expensive cigars or in rough cut cavendish. Dirk
Hatteraick even places a quid of pigtail in his mouth, and that bold
buccaneer and the heroes of the lady novelists still remain dear
delightful darlings, and bright eyes grow dim over their hairbreadth
escapes, their struggles and their woes. Spare then a little of your
sympathy for poor Lucy Warrender, that bankrupt rake, as she coiled
herself up in the big easy chair and took from her pocket a tiny silver
case and extracted a _Laferme_ cigarette. Remember, reader, that
Fanchette, you, and I, are the only accomplices of her guilty weakness.
She took an ember from the fire with the tongs and lighted the little
cylinder, and as she did so her features once more, as of old, became
lighted up with the soft placid smile of girlish enjoyment, as the angel
face became surrounded by a halo of tobacco smoke. Why shouldn't poor
Lucy seek consolation as did the other villains and heroes of romance?
It evidently wasn't the first cigarette by many that Lucy had smoked,
for she inhaled the smoke scientifically and ejected it from her
nostrils like an _habituee_.

Nemesis sooner or later finds the sinner out, and when we called Lucy
Warrender a bankrupt rake it was done advisedly, for Miss Warrender had
come to the end of her tether. The earrings which she had pawned--a
sordid act, for they had been a love-token, the souvenir of a reckless,
wicked and unhappy attachment--were literally the lady's last stake. She
took the little roll of notes from her pocket and methodically counted
them once more.

"So this is the end of it all," said Lucy to herself; "a few dirty
pieces of paper and that is all. And if I lose them all to-night as
something tells me is but too likely, then I must be a beggar, and must
stretch out my hands for alms--or bid good-bye to all the bright
sunshine and the happy, pleasant memories," and she laughed a hard
bitter little laugh. "But why should I be sorry to go? Happiness is not
for such girls as I have been. My secret has been well kept, so far, but
will it be a secret long? For I can't afford to pay for silence now. If
I land a heavy stake, or break the bank, all will be well: if not, I
must go where I hope to find forgetfulness. But what if there should be
no forgetfulness beyond the grave?" As her thoughts dwelt on the words
she shuddered. "The cold, cruel, silent grave. Silent! Yes, that was
something--and after--if there be an after." And then the thought of the
happy girlish days at The Warren came back to her. The remembrance of
the stupid faithful people she had known, and liked, and laughed at, and
then the dreadful time at the Villa Lambert and what followed; and then
her own triumphantly-successful trick--successful, perhaps, from the
very simplicity of its audacity; and then her weary worthless
after-life, with its sickening treadmill round of so-called gaiety and
amusement. And then the child; why had he not died? It was for no love
of her child that, by her agency, young Lucius had been foisted into the
position of Haggard's heir. She had thought no further than to hide her
shame, and in doing it she had unwittingly disinherited her own
cousin's child. Why had Lucius not died?

Lucy's melancholy meditations were disturbed by the entrance of
Fanchette, who handed her mistress a letter and left the room as
silently as she had entered it. Lucy recognized the hand, and knew full
well what the letter would certainly contain. She had guessed aright.
Another demand for money from the man Capt. The words were respectful
enough, there was no threat, but Lucy Warrender understood what it
meant--the money or exposure.

A thousand pounds! As well might the daughters of Danaus try to fill
their sieves with water, as Lucy Warrender attempt to satisfy the
insatiable greed of the remorseless Capt. Miss Warrender placed the
letter in the fire, and saw it consumed to ashes.

"Unless I win heavily," she thought, "you will not be gratified, Maurice
Capt. Then, I suppose, you will try your master, but I fancy you will
have a bad quarter of an hour with him." The thought gave her evident
pleasure; it even made her smile.

And then she darkened the room, and flinging herself upon the sofa lay
down to sleep away the hot afternoon till it should be time for dinner
and the subsequent roulette.

Eight o'clock saw Miss Warrender in a charming toilette of electric
blue. The little bonnet with its short curling feathers did not hide the
great wavy masses of golden hair; the little cape with its fur trimming,
and the tiny muff, even the gloves and the boots, were of the same
colour. As Lucy Warrender entered the Rooms she smiled, and she talked
with several of her acquaintances. That hoary old sinner, General
Pepper, C.B., bowed profoundly to her, and paid her his old-fashioned
compliment.

"Dayvilish pretty little woman," he remarked to his friend Colonel
Spurbox, late of the Carabineers; "knew her years ago in Rome. Wears
well and don't look her age. Those little plump fair women never do.
Gad, she's not got her earrings on; sent them to her uncle's, I suppose.
She'll go for the bank, Spurbox, to-night. Plucky little devil. I hope
she'll win."

The eyes of the two warriors gazed after the retreating maid with
sympathetic admiration.

"Crisp little thing, eh?" continued the general.

"Monstrous," echoed his comrade, with ready acquiescence. "Let's go and
drink her health, and then we'll go into the thick of it and see how she
gets on."

The two old bucks ambled off to drink Lucy Warrender's health; they
wished her well. Much good may it do her.

As Miss Warrender walked towards the great room where the worshippers of
the Goddess Fortune most do congregate, the big _suisses_, in their
handsome liveries and chains of office, bowed obsequiously; they all
knew her as an _habituee_ and a constant customer of the tables. When
she reached the roulette table itself, that veteran diplomatist, one of
the oldest and most faithful of her admirers, the Duc de la
Houspignolle, offered to vacate his chair, with many a protestation and
a succession of courteous bows.

"I have been unlucky, dear Mademoiselle Warrender; Fortune has frowned
on me, but now I am far happier, for I exchange her frowns for the
smiles of Venus."

"I won't take your chair, duke," said Lucy. "I may lean upon it, and try
to be your Mascotte and to bring you luck."

But somehow or other, whether the pretty Englishwoman's presence upset
the old gambler's calculations or not I cannot tell, but he lost, and in
a quarter of an hour rose from his seat.

"Revenge me on the Philistine, dear lady, if you can," said the old man,
"for I am _decave_--but don't take my unlucky chair, I pray you. You
will?" he continued in astonishment. "Well, if you will you must; at
all events take my card, it may help you," and he handed her the little
card with the big black-headed pin, by means of which the experienced
players mark and register the exact result of each successive _coup_.

Lucy Warrender took the chair with a smile, and laughed gaily, as with
the card she received a little tender squeeze from the wicked old hand,
and then she sat down with a full determination, as the Americans put
it, "to plank down her bottom dollar." Lucy Warrender was sitting next
to the croupier. She handed him one of her thousand-franc notes and he
gave her in exchange a little _rouleau_, neatly sealed at both ends,
containing the equivalent in gold. For nearly three-quarters of an hour
Miss Warrender confined herself to stakes of one or two Napoleons at a
time, which she pushed out before the little glittering pile in front of
her, and which were placed upon the desired square with wonderful
rapidity by the obsequious croupier. It is a curious fact that your
croupier, that well-paid but honest official, for some mysterious reason
or other always mentally identifies himself with the bank; it gives him
absolute pleasure to rake in the winnings, and he feels some strange
vicarious twinge of agony when he commences the process of paying out.
But whenever Miss Warrender won, this particular croupier pushed her
gains towards her with a little smile, and strange to say didn't seem to
feel it in the least. And now Lucy looked at her card. For twenty-seven
_coups_ she had placed a single Napoleon upon the number twenty-seven.
Of course, at roulette, some number or zero itself is bound to come up
every time, but number twenty-seven was invariably unlucky. Lucy
Warrender's left hand was thrust into the pocket of her dress; it
clutched, as an Ashantee warrior clutches his fetish, the key of her
room at the Hotel de Russie, and from the key hung its little brass
label--it was number twenty-seven. For three-quarters of an hour then,
and for twenty-seven _coups_, Miss Warrender had pursued her
Will-o'-the-Wisp; the one or two Napoleons that she staked each time was
mere child's play to her, for as we know she was in the habit of
gambling heavily. At the twenty-eighth _coup_ Miss Warrender changed the
amount of her stake upon the unfortunate number; for the twenty-franc
piece she substituted a hundred-franc note and handed it to the
croupier; he thrust it into the great glass and metal cash-box at his
side and pushed five Napoleons on to the square marked twenty-seven.
"_Messieurs, le jeu est fait. Rien ne va plus_," said the bald-headed
high priest of the table, who sat exactly opposite the gentleman with
the rake, who had so deftly carried out Miss Warrender's directions. He
seized the big plated handle, gave it the necessary twirl as he said
the words, and tossed the little ball of fate, with the usual
professional spin, upon the rapidly-revolving disc. Round flew the wheel
of fortune, and round flew the ball, making little irregular jumps. As
the whirling disc revolves less rapidly, every eye is fixed upon the
ball. The wheel is about to stop. The ball jumps into 15, thence into
17. The wheel has almost stopped; the ball will surely rest in No. 23.
No, it has not quite stopped, it goes a little further yet. Heads are
craned forward. Lucy Warrender clutches the key of her bedroom tighter
than ever. And then the bald-headed high priest of Baal calls out in the
regulation monotone, "_Vingt-sept. Rouge Impair et Passe!_"
Rhadamanthus, Minos and Aeacus stretch out their rakes, and gold, notes,
and fat five-franc pieces, which have been staked by the unhappy backers
of black, even, the zero and the various numbers (all but twenty-seven,
lucky twenty-seven) are swept away in an instant. Then the croupiers
cover the stakes of the lucky backers of odd and red with their
equivalents; nothing remains on the table now but fortunate Lucy's five
Napoleons. The croupier at her side gives it the little professional
knock with his rake, sweeps the five Napoleons back towards Miss
Warrender, and counts out to her from his cash-box, with unerring
rapidity, the sum of three thousand five hundred francs in notes. There
is a little hum of applause. "_Faites vos jeux, messieurs."_ Down rained
the notes, the Napoleons, the British sovereigns and the five-franc
pieces, and the game continues with monotonous regularity.

For three mortal hours Lucy Warrender clutched her hotel key, and played
with varying success. At one time there was quite a little heap of notes
and gold in front of her, upon which she discreetly laid her fan. She
had steadily backed the number twenty-seven for varying but ever
increasing amounts. The number twenty-seven had come up no less than
eight times and had been the cause of Miss Warrender's winning heavily.
The keenest eye at that time could have detected no wrinkle on Lucy's
lovely girlish face. But fortune after a while ceased to favour her; the
crowd of admiring onlookers, "the gallery," that had stood behind her
chair attracted by her successes gradually dwindled, and the heap of
gold and notes in front of her slowly but surely took unto themselves
wings and flew away. But the gouty old Frenchman, the Duc de la
Houspignolle, faithful knight that he was, still stood behind her chair.
Old Pepper and the veteran Colonel Spurbox, of the Carabineers, still
leered at her, in mingled pity and admiration, from the other side of
the great roulette table. Lucy Warrender still clutched her key, and
still backed fatal number twenty-seven; her mouth was dry and parched as
she took out her last thousand-franc note, and, it not being permitted
to stake that sum at roulette, she took it to the _Trente et Quarante_
table, and lost it at a single _coup_.

The lady had played her last stake and lost it. She rose to leave.

"Let me be your banker, dear Miss Warrender," whispered the aged
Mephistopheles who stood behind her chair.

"No, duke, not that. I haven't quite sunk to that yet, you know."

"Always _farouche_, dear Miss Warrender, but I apologize," he continued
as he gave her his arm.

Perhaps the little hand that rested on it trembled slightly, but Lucy
was a Warrender, and plucky; she nodded and bowed in every direction;
she smiled and simpered as sweetly as of yore; she sat in the great
restaurant at one of the little marble tables and sucked an _orangeade
glacee_ through two straws, and then the Duc de la Houspignolle escorted
her back to the Hotel de Russie with all respect, where Fanchette
anxiously awaited her arrival.

Fanchette didn't ask her mistress how she had prospered, for her gesture
as she flaccidly dropped into her lounge-chair told the woman all she
wished to know.

"You can go, Fanchette," said Lucy; "if I want anything I'll touch the
hand-bell."

The woman yawned, courtesied and departed.

Lucy Warrender opened her writing-case and commenced an affectionate
letter to her uncle. In it she said incidentally:

"There are quite a number of people here that we know. The old Duc de la
Houspignolle, still quite the old beau; and that dreadful old General
Pepper, the man we met at Rome, and who was mixed up in Reginald's
affair with poor Barbiche, and Colonel Spurbox. They talk of making up a
party to run across to Nice. I think of joining them. If we go we shall
leave the day after to-morrow; everything of course depends upon the
weather. I----"

Here Lucy Warrender deliberately let her pen fall upon the paper. Then
she got up, looked at herself in the glass and frowned; and then she did
a thing she hadn't done for years. She knelt down at her bed-side and
said her prayer to heaven, the very prayer she had been accustomed to
say as a little child upon her nurse's lap. Then she took a printed
receipt of the _Mont de Piete_ for a pair of brilliant solitaire
earrings, and burnt it in the flame of the candle.

"No one will miss me," she muttered to herself, "no one, save Maurice
Capt, for I have been an income to him, and Georgie, perhaps. Poor
Georgie!" she added with a sigh. She never even thought of Lucius; she
knew full well that even had the youth known she was his mother, _he_
would assuredly not have missed her.

"I wonder whether the old duke will be there," she continued to
herself; "all the English are sure to come. We never miss a funeral;
it's one of our sad pleasures," she added with a hollow laugh. Then she
took from her dressing-case a dark blue fluted medicine bottle; it was
labelled, "The sedative mixture, a teaspoonful for a dose at bedtime.
POISON." The last word had a little special red label all to itself. The
bottle was nearly full. Miss Warrender deliberately poured out
seven-eighths of its contents into a tumbler, then she recorked the
bottle, replaced it in her dressing-case and swallowed the contents of
the tumbler at a draught, and then carefully and deliberately washed the
glass and dried it with the towel. Then she sat herself down in the
lounge-chair. In ten minutes she dozed; she soon slept peacefully and
calmly. In half-an-hour she had ceased to exist.

"On the 23rd inst., at the Hotel de Russie, Monte Carlo, Lucy, the only
daughter of the late Colonel George Warrender, of the H. E. I. C.
Service, aged 35, suddenly of heart-disease."

This was the first intimation to Lucy Warrender's friends in London of
her sudden death.

"Poor thing!" said Mrs. Charmington, now quite the old woman, "I wonder
how she managed that lovely-coloured hair."




  CHAPTER III.

  AN ANONYMOUS LETTER.


Mrs. Haggard and her husband, both in deep mourning, sat in the special
boudoir at Walls End Castle which had been furnished and set apart for
his grand-nephew's wife on her first arrival years ago by old Lord Pit
Town. Haggard looked pale and weary, and well he might, for he had gone
straight to Monte Carlo and had come straight back, stopping only
forty-eight hours there, just time enough to lay Lucy Warrender in her
grave. He had not gone alone; at his wife's insistance he had taken the
young Lucius with him. He had been astonished at the determined manner
in which Georgie pressed this arrangement upon him; he yielded, though
with a bad grace. When he reached the Hotel de Russie, both he and
Lucius had declined to look on the face of the dead woman. Haggard had a
long interview with Fanchette, and then he called upon the Commissary of
Police. The night before his mother was laid in her grave, Lucius
Haggard, unknown to his companion, who was shut up in his room writing,
visited the Rooms, won a couple of thousand francs, and thoroughly
enjoyed himself.

The next day the two men stood by the side of the shallow grave; graves
are shallow in Monaco, for the ground is very rocky. A wandering English
clergyman, of more than doubtful reputation, gabbled through the service
for the burial of the dead. The stones and bits of rock rattled upon the
coffin with a hollow sound, for the grave-digger didn't trouble himself
much about the feelings of the relatives of the foreign heretic.

"I think my aunt Lucy went off tremendously in the last year," said
young Lucius to his companion as they left the cemetery.

"Let her rest, boy, let her rest," was all the answer he got.

There was a sort of grey look of horror about Haggard's face, that the
boy put down to grief for the departed. He was a hard-hearted youth, and
was frankly surprised that Haggard showed any feeling at all.

The husband and wife, as we have said, sat in Georgie's boudoir. This
was what passed between them.

"Your cousin seems to have made a nice mess of it," said Haggard. "Why
she was penniless."

"Well, that wouldn't much matter, Reginald; she could have written to
Coutts' for more."

"Gad, they write me that she drew out the last farthing she had in the
world two months ago. And that woman Fanchette, who is a very bad lot
indeed, or I'm very much, mistaken, told me she pawned her earrings the
day before she--died."

Georgie nodded. "I remember them, a pair of large single-stone earrings.
I fancy she must have bought them when she first came into her property.
I saw them quite by chance last summer, for the first time; and when I
admired them, she said that she had had them for years, that they had
been her first folly and had cost her dear."

"Well, here they are at any rate," said Haggard; "she pawned them for
seven thousand francs, and I redeemed them after a lot of bother. And
that's all that remains. She had spent or gambled away every farthing of
the rest. I don't know whether I ought to tell you, Georgie," he
continued in a softer tone.

"Tell me, Reginald, tell me what? Did you know?" and the light of love
came back into Georgie Haggard's eyes, as she thought that perhaps her
careless heartless husband had, from a wish to shield her cousin's
honour, silently and deliberately allowed poor Lucy's bastard child to
be fathered upon him. But the light quickly faded, and the eyes were
suffused with tears, as her husband answered coarsely:

"Did I know what? I know this--she poisoned herself, there's not a doubt
of that."

And then, without the slightest attempt to soften the ghastly details,
he brutally told his wife the particulars of her cousin's end.

"They manage these things much better there than here," he said. "Twelve
Tom Fools are not called upon to sit in one's dining room and give their
opinion. The Commissary of Police had the whole matter cut and dried. I
saw the official doctor too--a hungry fellow that. Of course I had to
bribe the pair of them. Lucy Warrender poisoned herself, Georgie. She
did it artfully enough, with chloral. Why, they showed me the bottle;
she had swallowed enough to kill half-a-dozen women. What a fool she
was, when one comes to think of it! Why, she could have married well any
number of times, if she'd liked; she could have had Spunyarn years and
years ago, if she had chosen to lift her finger. What a fool she was!"

Yes, that was her epitaph: "What a fool she was!" You couldn't have put
it more tersely and more truly, Reginald Haggard. What a thoughtless
wicked fool she had been; she had wrecked her own life and her cousin's
by her wicked folly. "What a fool she was!"

I verily believe that if Haggard had shown one spark of feeling in the
matter of poor Lucy's death, his wife would have spoken, after a silence
of twenty years; but his last words had checked the impulse, and Georgie
merely nodded, while the tears rolled down her cheeks, as she silently
accepted the justice of her husband's verdict.

As she sat and pondered over her cousin's sorry ending, she felt that
the least she could do for the dead girl was still to jealously guard
her miserable secret.

While the elders were talking, the two young men were walking in the
great avenue that for nearly half a mile runs from the principal
entrance of the park to the big hall door of Walls End Castle. Lucius
had much to tell; he was full of the journey, and he went over all the
details of the funeral to the younger man.

"Battling good place, that Hotel de Russie; they gave us an uncommonly
good dinner, and ortolans. I didn't think much of them, but the governor
was very enthusiastic, and ordered them again for breakfast. By Jove!
George," continued the young fellow, "he's so fond of them that I
believe if mother, or even I, were to die to-morrow, the governor would
order ortolans for breakfast if he could get them. I say, George," he
added, "I'm in funds, and I don't mind doing the generous thing, if you
like. I know you're hard up--beastly hard up--you always are. I'll make
you a present of a pony, George."

Young George Haggard smiled, and took the five-and-twenty pounds, in
crisp bank notes, which his father's heir produced from his waistcoat
pocket. "I'll take it as a loan, Lucius," he said with a little laugh,
"to be repaid when I become Lord Chancellor."

"All right, my boy," said the other. "Now if you can keep a secret, I'll
tell you how I got it." And then he went off into a long description of
the great Temple of Fortune on the shores of the Mediterranean. How he
had retired early, on the plea of fatigue; how he had escaped
undiscovered to the Rooms; how he had backed his luck and won his money.
"Eighty pounds wasn't bad for a first attempt, you know," he said. "I
saw old Pepper," he continued, "in the thick of it; but I had to keep
dark, you know, for I shouldn't have cared for the old boy to see me
there."

George still held his brother's welcome present in his hand, and the boy
twisted the notes nervously in his fingers. He hesitated, but not for
long.

"Don't be offended, Lucius," he said; "I think I'd rather not take it,
if you don't mind."

"As you please, my boy," said the other, holding out his hand willingly
enough. "As they say in the schools, _Non olet_."

"It does to me, Lucius--it does to me."

The young men continued their walk up and down the great aisle of old
beech trees, and Lucius returned to his ecstatic description of the
scene in the Halls of Dazzling Delight; but I don't think the other
young fellow heard him, for he was thinking of the dead woman who was
sleeping in her lonely grave.

Lucky Lucy! dead a week, and you have two human beings who still mourn
your loss.

"I always thought you were a fool, George; but you really are a bigger
fool than even I ever took you to be. I actually hand you
five-and-twenty pounds, which you decline with thanks. I don't
understand you, George. You neglect your opportunities. Why don't you
make up to the old man, or cultivate a taste for art, as I do; I mean to
make art pay, my boy."

"Well, you see, Lucius, it might be awkward if his lordship found me
out. I'm afraid I find more pleasure in walking up and down this big
avenue and staring up at the rooks, than in spending my time in the Pit
Town galleries."

"Oh! I see; Child of Nature, and all that sort of thing. Why don't you
go in for being a poet, George? It's the only real business that I know
of suited for a thorough-paced fool, though as a rule it don't pay."

"Simply because I'm not a humbug, my boy."

"You might do a good deal with a rhyming dictionary, you know;
particularly if you let your hair grow."

"I don't think there's much poetry about me, Lucius. I like the air, and
the light, and the green leaves, and those black chaps who hop about
from branch to branch, and who look like a lot of disreputable parsons,
all preaching at once about nothing at all."

"Oh, I see, you admire the beauties of nature. Now I look upon this old
avenue from quite another standpoint. Sooner or later it'll be mine, and
all the rest of the pomps and vanities too, I suppose--the plate and the
pictures, and the title, George. Yes, there's something in a title. But
they're a precious long while coming."

"Don't be a brute, Lucius," was all his brother replied.

While the two young fellows carelessly talked and smoked in the great
avenue, old Lord Pit Town sat in his study and held a momentous
conversation with Georgie's husband. Reginald Haggard stood before the
fire looking exceedingly uncomfortable.

"I wish you'd be candid with me, Haggard. Was there any informality
about your marriage with Georgina?"

"Good gracious, no. What makes your lordship hint at such a thing?"

"That I will explain to you directly. In the meantime answer me
honestly; don't forget that as the head of the family I stand in the
position of a father to you. Anything you may say to me will of course
be between ourselves. Can you assure me, as between gentlemen, that you
made no previous marriage? Was there any such entanglement in America?"

"It seems to me that your lordship is asking me to say that I am an
unmitigated villain. Still, to satisfy you as the head of the family, I
give you my word that nothing of the sort ever occurred. Of course like
most young fellows I have made a fool of myself with dozens of women,
or rather perhaps they made a fool of me. I sighed and dangled, perhaps
I even hinted at marriage. Doubtless I was a young idiot, like most
young fellows of my age, but my peculiar form of idiotcy never developed
itself in a matrimonial direction."

"I'm uncommonly glad to hear it, Reginald, for I have been uncomfortable
for a day or two, and now that my mind is at rest, you shall see what
caused my apparently indiscreet questions."

The old lord opened a despatch-box which lay upon his writing-table, and
taking from it a letter, handed the document to his heir. Haggard seated
himself, opened the letter, and read it carefully through. It was a
strangely written manuscript on ordinary thick note-paper. If the writer
had intended to prevent any attempt at identification, he had thoroughly
succeeded. The precaution he had taken was simple, but sufficiently
ingenious. Your ordinary anonymous letter writer is content to slope his
writing the wrong way, or if very acute he uses his left hand; but the
expert, if placed upon his trail, generally succeeds in detecting some
peculiarity sufficient to identify him. The writer of the letter which
Lord Pit Town handed to Haggard was evidently a man of originality, for
the letter and its address were not written in a running hand, but in
carelessly printed Roman capitals.

As Haggard perused the letter his brow grew black as night, but when he
had ended it, he tossed it with a contemptuous laugh upon the table.

Here is the letter _verbatim_:

     "MY LORD,

     "I ADDRESS YOU TO LET YOU KNOW THAT I AM POSSESSED OF INFORMATION
     WHICH WILL ENABLE ME, SHOULD I FEEL SO DISPOSED, TO ENTIRELY ALTER
     THE SUCCESSION TO YOUR TITLE AND TO UPSET ANY DISTRIBUTION OF YOUR
     PROPERTY THAT YOU MAY MAKE. I AM PREPARED TO SELL TO YOU THE
     INFORMATION FOR THE SUM OF L5000. I MAKE YOUR LORDSHIP THE FIRST
     OFFER, SIMPLY BECAUSE I THINK THAT YOU WILL AT ONCE SEE THE WISDOM
     OF ACCEPTING IT. SHOULD YOU DECIDE NOT TO DO SO, I SHALL STILL GET
     MY PRICE, THOUGH I MAY HAVE TO WAIT TILL YOUR LORDSHIP'S DEATH.
     LITIGATION WILL, OF COURSE, ENSUE, AND A DISGRACEFUL SCANDAL WILL
     BECOME COMMON PROPERTY. SHOULD YOUR LORDSHIP FEEL DISPOSED TO
     LISTEN TO WHAT I HAVE TO TELL, A LINE ADDRESSED TO 193B, BROWN'S
     NEWS ROOMS, CHEAPSIDE, WILL BE SUFFICIENT. THE FACT OF MY NOT
     ASKING FOR PAYMENT FOR MY INFORMATION UNTIL I HAVE GIVEN IT SHOULD
     BE TO YOUR LORDSHIP A SUFFICIENT GUARANTEE OF ITS GENUINENESS."

"What can the fellow mean?" said the old lord. "Can Hetton have
contracted a secret marriage?"

Haggard shook his head. "It's probably a mere vulgar trick to obtain
money," said he. "Shall you see the fellow?"

"It would, perhaps, be better that you saw him, Reginald; you are as
much concerned as I am, nay more so. Make an appointment to see the man
in town. I will write to him, and if the secret he alludes to be genuine
it is cheap at the money, if it were only to prevent expensive
litigation and the worse horror that he hints at--the dragging of our
name through the mire."

So it was arranged. A letter was dispatched to 193 B, making an
appointment for the astute writer of the letter to see Mr. Reginald
Haggard upon a certain day at the old lord's house in Grosvenor Square.
Reginald Haggard sat for a whole hour waiting in vain. Nobody came to
him with a mysterious communication, and at the end of a week both he
and the old lord had dismissed the matter from their minds as an
impudent and stupid hoax.

To the mind of the shrewd reader the name of the writer of the anonymous
letter is no mystery. Mr. Maurice Capt had been seriously disappointed
when, for the first time in his life, one of his applications to Lucy
Warrender had been unsuccessful. But Lucy Warrender was now beyond his
reach. Capt felt aggrieved; he considered that his demands upon Miss
Warrender had been excessively moderate, and he felt a sort of pride in
the fact that he had kept her secret so long and so cheaply. But now
Lucy Warrender was dead, and the contract between Capt and the lady at
an end. Mr. Capt, when he wrote his rather ambiguous anonymous
communication to the old lord, had thought the matter well out; he had
made up his mind not to reveal the nature of what he had to tell until
he had the old lord's promise to let him have the sum he demanded. For
Mr. Capt well knew that it is possible to provide even against
extraordinary contingencies; he knew that there were such things as
family treaties, and he knew that his threat, if he could only get Lord
Pit Town to believe in its genuineness, would be only terrible to the
old man by its rendering him practically incapable of disposing of his
property, and leaving the very succession to his title in doubt. Mr.
Capt was sharp enough to know that if once he had the old lord's
promise, the five thousand pounds was as good as paid. But Mr. Capt had
a holy horror of two things. The one, which he dreaded with a natural
terror of the unknown, was the criminal law of England; the other was a
desperate fear of the wrath of big Reginald Haggard. For once his master
had lost his temper with the valet. It was nearly twenty years ago now
since Reginald Haggard, in a moment of indignation, had literally
thrashed Mr. Capt within an inch of his life, and though it was twenty
years ago Mr. Capt's bones still ached with the remembrance of that
tremendous beating. So that the suggested interview with Haggard
entirely upset all the valet's well-arranged plans. Could he but have
had a private conversation with the old lord, and the required promise,
he felt that he would have proved his case up to the hilt, and thus have
obtained what he looked upon as the honest reward of his long silence.
But though a clever man, Mr. Capt was a coward, and he feared to face
the fury of Lord Pit Town's heir.

The valet repeatedly turned the matter over in his mind, and found it a
very complicated question. Of course, the one person in the world to
whom the secret was most valuable was young George Haggard. The facts
had but to be published to the world and George would jump at once from
the precarious position of a younger son into that of the direct heir to
an earldom and the property of a man of enormous wealth, while as for
Lucius, he would become but the nameless byblow of old Warrender's
niece. But there were several disturbing influences to Mr. Capt's
calculations. To neither of the young men could he sell his secret for
money down. This was a very serious consideration indeed. As for George,
he might decline to do business at all, from loyalty to his mother;
while as for Lucius, Mr. Capt well knew that it was impossible to trust
him. The valet at length determined that he would sound young George
Haggard upon the matter, and having made up his mind, proceeded to do so
at the first opportunity.

Mr. Capt had not long to wait, for he encountered the young fellow in
one of his solitary rambles in the park, and seeing that they were
secure from interruption, plunged at once _in medias res_.

Young George Haggard was seated upon a stile meditatively gazing upon
the landscape, when he was roused by a slight cough behind him, which
proceeded from his father's discreet body servant.

"Halloa! Capt," said the youth good-naturedly; "enjoying the beauties of
nature?"

"Yes, Mr. George; one can't well help it in such a lovely place as
this."

"I suppose ordinary people like you and I, Capt, don't appreciate it as
we ought. That, as my brother tells me, requires culture. He would
doubtless see more in it than we do, being a man of culture, as he is,
you know."

"Perhaps the old place, sir, may look all the pleasanter to him, for in
the ordinary course of things, you see, sir, he must come into it some
day or other. That must be a very pleasant thought, sir," added the
valet after a pause.

"Well, I'm not so sure about that, you know; there are lots of
responsibilities, you see," and the young man proceeded to fill his pipe
philosophically.

"You may come into it yourself, sir, one of these days, who knows?" said
the valet in a carneying tone.

Young George Haggard started, and stared at Mr. Capt, who seemed to him
to have slightly forgotten himself.

"Stranger things than that have happened, sir," continued the Swiss.

"Well, you see, my man, as my father and Mr. Lucius--to say nothing of
his lordship--would both have to go to the wall first, it doesn't seem a
likely contingency. And do you know I don't think it's quite the thing
to talk about, Capt."

But the valet was not to be put down.

"Anyhow, it's a great position for so young a gentleman as Mr. Lucius,"
insisted the man. "Many a man has sold his soul for less than that," he
continued, as he gazed admiringly at the Castle, which occupied the
centre of the peacefully romantic landscape.

Young George Haggard stared at the valet in undisguised astonishment.
"Fellow's been drinking," he thought; "he seems strangely impertinent,
that accounts for it."

"Ah, they manage things differently, sir, in my country. It's share and
share alike there. My father, sir, had seven sons, and we each of us
took an equal share of his little bit of land as a matter of right."

"Well, perhaps, Capt, that's what they'll do here when England becomes a
republic. But I don't think that it'll happen in my time, and I don't
think I could persuade Lucius to go halves with me."

Seeing that the young man was disinclined to continue the conversation,
the valet touched his hat respectfully and took himself off.

It is a highly respectable thing to be a landowner; the freeholder has
many advantages, but getting rid of the property, particularly in the
present day, is as a rule both difficult and expensive. Mr. Capt was
like the proprietor of an Irish estate; far from being able to dispose
of it at a reasonable figure, he was unable to obtain even an offer for
his secret, and it was a valuable secret; but then, though a white
elephant is a valuable animal, it is not an investment that most people
would care to hold, and Mr. Capt's property now seemed indeed but a
white elephant. Had it not been for his holy fear of his master he might
have attempted to make terms with Mrs. Haggard, but his terror of Lord
Pit Town's heir was extreme and had become a second nature to him.

The love of home is specially developed among the honest and economical
inhabitants of Switzerland; like the Scotchmen they quit their dear
native land young, in the hope of making their fortunes; but unlike the
Scots they inevitably return to the Fatherland with the results of a
life of industry, and this was the dream of Mr. Capt's life. Like a wise
man, finding he could not get a cash purchaser, he determined, though
very much against his own inclination, to make a bargain with young
Lucius Haggard at the earliest opportunity; but he knew that if he
trusted to the honour of Lucy Warrender's son he would be leaning upon a
broken reed, and he walked back to the discharge of his duties at the
Castle in a state of considerable depression.




  CHAPTER IV.

  PALLIDA MORS.


It was the second of September. Reginald Haggard's usual invitations had
been accepted by a select party of his intimates. They had had a great
slaughter in the well-stocked Walls End preserves on the day before.
General Pepper, Lord Spunyarn, Colonel Spurbox, the host and the two
young men sat down to breakfast, and Georgie Haggard presided at the
meal, looking to Spunyarn's mind handsomer than ever in the deep
mourning which she still wore for her cousin Lucy. But Mrs. Haggard was
not the only lady who graced the breakfast-table at the Castle, for Mrs.
Dodd had arrived to pay a long-promised visit the day before, of course
accompanied by her husband. As some men never travel without a hat box,
so Mrs. Dodd never left King's Warren without the Rev. John.

"I am so glad to have met you once more, Lord Spunyarn," said the
vicar's wife; "isolated as I am at King's Warren, it is so seldom my
privilege to meet any man having a purpose in life, and the men with a
purpose, you know, are after all the only men worth knowing." Here she
gave a benignant and comprehensive glance round the table, and every one
felt that he at least was not worth Mrs. Dodd's notice, which was
exactly the sensation the vicar's wife intended to produce.

"Awfully good of you, dear Mrs. Dodd, I'm sure, but I'm afraid I can
hardly claim the credit of being a man with a purpose. I went to the
East End first, you know, merely from curiosity and because the people
were excessively amusing, but nowadays 'slumming' is the fashion and a
great many smart people I know do as I do, merely for a new sensation."

"Ah, you do good by stealth and blush to find it fame," said the lady.

"I don't know if you can call it doing good. I give very little of my
money away, though I certainly do spend a good deal of my time among the
abjectly poor. I became a sort of confidential adviser to a good many of
them, a kind of honorary amateur solicitor. I drifted into it somehow or
other. I acted as a sort of buffer between the East End Lazarus and his
landlord. I was instrumental in obtaining for Lazarus certain rights
which had been long in abeyance in the East End; either my client didn't
know his rights, or he found them difficult to enforce; the landlords
would screw the uttermost farthing out of the poor wretches in the shape
of rent, and if they didn't pay they were sold up. The _quid pro quo_
they got for their rent was simply a place to rot and die in--no water,
no drains, no ventilation, no anything. Then there was the sweating
system; women working fifteen or sixteen hours a day for a pittance of
ninepence: women doing men's work and getting next to nothing for it;
and the attempted redress of a thousand and one nameless grievances and
horrors."

"Oh, Lord Spunyarn," cried Mrs. Dodd, "would that I could walk hand in
hand with you through those dreadful places, sharing in such work."

"I have no doubt Dodd could exchange and become one of the wise men of
the East, if he tried," said Haggard maliciously.

"Ah, dear Mr. Haggard, my husband was never formed for missionary work.
Ever since my girlhood I have tried to rouse his enthusiasm, but in
vain. I don't believe he has any enthusiasm," and here the voice of the
Reverend John Dodd was heard in an unctuous whisper addressing Colonel
Spurbox in commendation of the dish in front of him, to which he helped
himself copiously for the second time.

"I'm quite certain, my dear sir, that there is no more successful way of
accommodating the freshly-killed partridge than in a _salmi_. I say
this advisedly, and after many years' experience. I speak feelingly,
colonel. Till the fourth you can't do better than stick to _salmi_; I
always do."

"There's no want of enthusiasm in that, anyhow, Dodd," said Spunyarn
with a smile, while the two young men laughed aloud.

"Ah," sighed the vicaress in a stage whisper, "forgive his little
weakness; he _will_ hanker after the flesh-pots--the flesh-pots of
Egypt."

"Be exact, my dear, be exact," cried the vicar; "it was quail, probably
roast quail, though that is a succulent dish, that is referred to;
certainly not _salmi_ of partridges."

"Don't trifle, John," cried Mrs. Dodd.

"I don't, my dear; I assure you that I am seriously, profitably and
pleasantly employed. Good gracious me, is there anything one need be
ashamed of in the admiration of art? And what art can be higher than
the culinary art, which must have been necessarily one of the earliest,
if not the very earliest of all? Some people are born without an ear for
music; I am one of those unfortunates myself, but to make up for it I
have been blessed by heaven with an appreciative palate. Would you have
me neglect my advantage, would you wish me to bury my one talent in a
napkin? Certainly not, Mrs. Dodd. Art I appreciate, especially high art,
and I'll trouble you for a little more of the _salmi_, Dr. Wolff."

"And how are things going on in the parish, Mr. Dodd?" said Georgie.
"Are the Dissenters as active as ever?"

"No, my dear madam; just now the Church is far more popular."

"Thanks to organization, thanks to organization," burst in the vicar's
wife impetuously. "Our curates' wives are admirable organizers. You
remember the Misses Sleek, Mr. Haggard?"

"That I do; uncommonly good-looking girls they were too."

"Well, Mr. Haggard, it was the last thing that I should have expected,
but they both went into the Church."

"You mean that they married my curates, my dear," interrupted the vicar.

"No, Mr. Dodd, I said it advisedly, they went into the Church. I suppose
that in the old days when high-born ladies became nuns that they went
into the Church, and in doing so vowed themselves to a life of
self-denial. And in this present time any lady who marries a clergyman,
Mr. Dodd, vows herself to a life of self-denial and penance, and
certainly enters the Church. I did," she added with a sigh, "and I glory
in it. The humble curate may rise to rank and title, but in the highly
unlikely event of your becoming a bishop, John, I should remain plain
Mrs. Dodd still."

"Not plain, my dear--not plain."

But Mrs. Dodd did not condescend to reprove him; she forgave the
flippancy of the remark for the sake of the compliment.

"The fact is," said the vicar, "that since that fellow Smiter left
King's Warren a great many of the better-disposed of his people have
come over to us. The services are more ornate than they were, and
consequently more attractive. So are the sermons, I suppose. At all
events, they are shorter. Then we've got a Sisterhood and a Young Men's
Christian Association, who play cricket in summer and football in
winter. Then again we use collecting bags, while at Gilgal they still
stick to the plates. Of course the collections have dropped off to a
mere nothing, but the congregations have increased wonderfully.
Certainly the plates produced a healthy rivalry, but the bags, I take
it, are less of a tax, and the congregation assuredly prefers them. It's
a mystery to me where they get all the threepenny-pieces, and I am sorry
to say that farthings, and even buttons, are not uncommon. Still, your
father and Justice Sleek--everybody calls him Justice Sleek now--let us
have all we want in the shape of money, so I suppose there's nothing to
complain of."

"Whatever my husband may say, dear Mrs. Haggard, there has been a great
awakening, and though he may not see it, for none are so proverbially
blind as those who won't see, I look upon it as principally due, at all
events in my own parish, to the exertions of my own sex. My curates are
both highly popular."

"My dear, curates always are highly popular when they are married to
wealthy good-looking young women, and their pockets consequently
bursting, literally bursting, with half-crowns; I may add that, in my
experience, these are the only circumstances under which married curates
_are_ popular."

"You have much to be grateful for, John."

"I know it, my dear--I know it," said the vicar as he finished his
coffee. And then the party broke up to commence the real business of the
day.

No one would have recognized in the well-appointed and terribly
respectable head keeper who touched his hat to the party of gentlemen as
they emerged upon the lawn, the former village reprobate--Blogg, the
whilom King's Warren poacher. But so it was. By some strange fatality or
other your poacher either becomes a confirmed reprobate or blossoms into
the very best kind of gamekeeper. Perhaps it's on the principle of set a
thief to catch a thief that those estates are best preserved where the
head keeper has been poacher in his youth. Just as the man who has risen
from the ranks makes the sternest martinet and the strictest
disciplinarian, so the reformed poacher is invariably the prince of
gamekeepers, when honest.

The vicar of King's Warren was a High Churchman. I believe he would have
ridden to hounds with pleasure but for the fact that he found it
impossible to find anything up to his weight. But he sternly drew the
line at carrying a gun. Though the vicar denied himself this pleasure,
he joined the shooting party, for his intense appreciation of the
culinary art made violent exercise a necessity of his existence.

As Mrs. Haggard and the vicar's wife sat and chatted over the little
details of life at the village of King's Warren, the happy home of the
former's girlhood, Mrs. Haggard remarked to her companion that it was
strange that they had not heard a shot for at least half an hour. As she
uttered the words Lord Spunyarn entered the room, pale and out of
breath, and evidently hardly able to control his emotion.

"What! back so soon, Lord Spunyarn? Is anything the matter?" said Mrs.
Dodd.

"Something dreadful has happened."

"Has there been an accident? Has anything happened to George?" cried the
mother, and the colour left her lips as she rose excitedly.

At that moment the old lord entered the room.

"George is safe, dear madam," said her husband's old friend, "but I have
hurried here as the bearer of bad news, and I must bid you prepare for
the worst."

"Gad, sir, don't keep us in suspense," cried old Lord Pit Town, with the
irritability of age. "Is Lucius the victim?"

"No, the boys are safe, dear Mrs. Haggard," he continued. "My old friend
is badly hurt. In passing through a hedge----"

But Mrs. Haggard had fainted in the arms of the vicar's wife.

And then Lord Spunyarn told his tale to the old man, while Mrs. Dodd and
the women-servants who, unsummoned, had appeared upon the scene, busied
themselves around the fainting woman.

It appeared that in getting through a hedge to pick up a bird that,
wounded, had managed to struggle through it, Reginald Haggard's gun had
suddenly exploded and lodged a charge of shot in his chest. It was not
from carelessness; but Haggard's foot had caught in a rabbit burrow, and
as he fell the accident happened. Before their eyes the thing had taken
place. There was nothing mysterious about it. It was terribly sudden,
that was all.

Hardly had Spunyarn told his tale when Mrs. Haggard came to herself.
Tearless and wan she rose to her feet, and taking the old earl's arm,
she said simply but in a broken voice, "Let us go to him--let us go to
him at once, Lord Pit Town; there may be hope--there may be hope yet."

The old man looked towards Spunyarn interrogatively, but a shake of the
head was the only response.

Mrs. Haggard hadn't to go far to meet her wounded husband, for as they
passed into the great entrance hall of the Castle a melancholy little
procession came in by the main doorway. Four keepers bore a hurdle, upon
which lay Lord Pit Town's wounded heir. His face was pale, the lips
bloodless, while cold drops stood upon his brow. The four men halted,
uncertain where to deposit their burden. Georgie Haggard, quitting the
old lord's arm, sprang at once to her husband's side, seized his hand,
and attempted to wipe the death drops from his brow.

"Don't touch me, Georgie," he muttered, and the voice sounded unequal
and cavernous. "I've suffered untold tortures in being brought here,"
and his pale fingers, whose nails had become livid, vainly fumbled at
his collar. The faithful wife tenderly loosened the band, which appeared
to almost strangle him. "Georgie," he continued to his wife, "where is
Spunyarn? I must speak with him at once."

He who had been his faithful friend from youth to middle age stepped
forward and bent his head over the mouth of the dying man, for he was
dying. For several seconds Haggard whispered a hurried communication to
his friend, while the bystanders, including the old lord and Haggard's
wife, stood aside, so as not to interrupt the privacy of the
communication. Ever and anon Haggard paused for breath.

"Shirtings," he said at last, "you will remember?"

"I will see to it, be assured of that," replied his friend, Lord
Spunyarn. And then Haggard motioned the old earl to his side, and
addressed him with considerable effort.

They had dragged forward a couple of oaken benches, and had placed them
one under either end of the hurdle upon which Haggard lay. There was a
dead silence in the great entrance hall, only broken by a loud
succession of regular ticks, caused by Haggard's life blood, which in
great drops fell upon the tesselated pavement below with a monotonously
dreadful sound.

"Good-bye, my lord," he said simply, as with an effort he stretched out
his hand, which was affectionately grasped by the trembling fingers of
the old nobleman. "I am going," he continued, "but you have the boys, my
boys."

"Perhaps it's not so bad as you think, Reginald. Assistance will be here
shortly. We will move you out of this at once."

"There won't be time, Lord Pit Town. Take care of Lucius."

The dying man's eyes fell upon his wife, and a smile passed over his
pale face. "Georgie," he gasped out with an effort, "say you forgive me
and I shall die easier."

"Reginald," she whispered, "I have nothing to forgive, but," she added
through her sobs, "there is something I must tell you."

"I know it, Georgie. I have known it all along. Kiss me, dear," he added
with an effort, and with the kiss his spirit passed away.

Reginald Haggard was dead, stricken down ere he could succeed to the
title and estates which would have been his in the ordinary course of
nature; but as the aged earl turned away from the body of the man who
had been his heir, his eye fell upon the two young men, and motioning to
Lucius he said in a broken voice, "Give me your arm, boy; you're all I
have left in the world now."

All sign of grief left Lucius Haggard's face at this public notification
of his change of position. He drew himself up proudly, and deferentially
led the old man away. But young George Haggard didn't hear the words; he
stood staring at his dead father, like a man in a dream.

"Is there no hope?" he said to those who crowded round the hurdle upon
which the body lay. The ominous tick of the falling blood had ceased
now, and as if in answer to the young fellow's question, the dead man's
jaw fell, disclosing the white teeth. Then George Haggard turned to his
mother, and at a sign from Spunyarn he led her from the spot.

As soon as Mrs. Haggard found herself alone, she gave way to her natural
grief. The hero of her girlish dreams had been snatched from her
suddenly, so suddenly that she could hardly realize that he was actually
gone from her for ever. She had continued to idolize the man and to
remain unaware of his many deficiencies and failings, from the very
moment he had first courted her in the rose garden at King's Warren
until his death. He had been a fairly good husband to her, as husbands
go, and she had never ceased to love him with a trusting affection. But
bewildered as she was by the suddenness of her affliction, she could not
help pondering over the strange communication he had made to her upon
his death-bed.

"_I have known it all along!_" What had he known all along? Had he known
that Lucius, instead of being his own son was but the bastard child of
Lucy Warrender? Surely not. What could he mean, if he had known it all
along, by his solemn adjuration to old Lord Pit Town to take care of
Lucius. There could be but one interpretation to that, surely that he
looked upon the boy as his eldest son, his heir, his first-born child.
Why had her husband asked her to forgive him on his death-bed? Forgive
him what? He had not bade good-bye to either of the young fellows, but
then death had probably come upon him unawares. Could it possibly be
that her dead husband, man of the world as he was, could have
deliberately, for the mere sake of her cousin's honour, sacrificed the
future of his only son designedly, and without that son's consent? That
supposition was beyond even Georgina Haggard's credulity.

There was a mystery in the matter, a mystery she could not fathom. The
more she thought over it, the more difficult she found it to attempt to
arrive at any possible solution. Was it merely that he feared that
George, being really his only child, that at the boy's death without
heirs the Pit Town title and the Pit Town wealth should descend to some
remote branch of the family, and so perhaps he may of a purpose have
placed the second good young life between the old lord and his distant
relatives? But that was hardly likely, for such a contingency could
never happen till George was in his grave; and Haggard himself, be it
remembered, was a wealthy man.

What then was Lucy Warrender's son to him?

Could it be that he had a stronger, a dearer interest in the child? But
she thrust it from her as an unworthy thought; and she strove to banish
the phantom she had unwittingly conjured up, by letting her mind return
once more to its natural grief, in the thought of her awful bereavement,
her sudden widowhood.

Reginald Haggard's death and Reginald Haggard's funeral were a nine
days' wonder in the neighbourhood of Walls End Castle. Hundreds of
people clad in black attended the ceremony. The old lord, the two young
men and Lord Spunyarn were the mourners. The shooting party had been
broken up on the day of the accident. A short obituary notice had
appeared in the _Times_, and the penny papers had made capital of what
they termed "The Shocking Accident in the Shooting Field," while the
leader writers had earned their daily three guineas by more or less
ingenious strings of the usual platitudes.

Lord Spunyarn was Haggard's sole executor. The will was opened, and
commenced with a confirmation of the terms of his marriage settlement;
it then proceeded to give a further legacy to his wife of half his
property for her lifetime, and he made his "dear son, George Haggard,"
his residuary legatee; "my son, Lucius Haggard," the document
continued, "being otherwise provided for as the heir to the entailed
estates of Lord Pit Town."

It was all plain sailing, and the will was a very natural one for a man
in Haggard's position to make.

Lord Spunyarn, who was still staying on at the Castle, waited for
twenty-four hours after the funeral, and then he demanded a private
interview with his friend's widow.

"I am sorry to trouble you, dear Mrs. Haggard, about business matters,"
he said as he entered the little boudoir which years ago had been
devoted by the old lord to young Mrs. Haggard's use, "but I am compelled
to worry you with a long and painful conversation on family matters. My
dear lady," he continued, "I should have been the very last person to
trouble you with the communication which I am about to make, had it not
been my friend's dying wish and command."

"Sit down, Lord Spunyarn, sit down," she said, "nothing you can have to
tell me can be more painful than the suspense, suspicion, and anxiety of
mind which I have endured for the last few days. Tell me the worst at
once. I have nothing to forgive my husband. When on his death-bed he
asked for my forgiveness, I feared that there was something dreadful to
come; but I fully and freely forgave him, Lord Spunyarn, and whatever
you may have to tell, it will not alter my affection for his memory."

"Dear Mrs. Haggard," said the philanthropist, with a little sigh, "the
matter concerns the future, as well as the past; the secret has been
well kept, and my poor friend has done his duty in providing for his son
George, and for you. I must tell you that at one time I had my
suspicions, but the thing seemed in itself so monstrous, so improbable,
that I put it from me as an unworthy thought. When your late husband
whispered those last words to me as he was dying, he informed me that I
was his executor, and told me to examine a little red box that I should
find at his banker's, and then to tell you everything. I obtained the
box; I have examined it, and it is here." As he said the words, he
placed a little red morocco box upon the table.




  CHAPTER V.

  A LITTLE RED BOX.


I don't think Lord Spunyarn could have really found it cold in Mrs.
Haggard's boudoir in the second week of September; perhaps it was for
the sake of collecting his ideas that he busied himself with the fire
and added another toy log to the flickering embers upon the dainty
hearth; then he sat down, and staring straight at the little red morocco
box upon the table, he began.

"I think it may perhaps spare your feelings a little, dear Mrs. Haggard,
if I tell you that from what my poor friend said, and from the contents
of this box, I have become aware of the secret of Lucius's birth." He
never took his eyes off the box for one instant, or he would have seen
as he said the words that the widow's face grew white as the lawn cuffs
upon her wrists.

She interrupted him suddenly.

"It is not I who have betrayed the secret. I have guarded it faithfully
for twenty years, God forgive me," she added with a sigh. "But what
could I do? I was bound to shield my cousin, even if I had not sworn to
her to do so; for she would not take my word for it, Lord Spunyarn. No
hint of it has ever passed my lips. Conceive my astonishment when my
dying husband told me that he was aware of the fact, for I suppose it
was that he meant, when he said to me, with almost his last breath, that
he had 'known it all along.'"

"Yes," said her husband's old friend, still staring at the little red
box, "and then?"

"And then he died, Lord Spunyarn," she said with a sigh; "but he had
asked me to forgive him, and to take care of Lucius."

"And did you forgive him, dear madam?"

"Of course I forgave him."

"And you forgive him still?"

"Certainly, though what it was he wished me to forgive I cannot tell."

But Lord Spunyarn never looked at her; he only stared at the box upon
the table. "I'm glad you forgave him," he said, "fully and freely."

"Fully and freely," she echoed.

"Mrs. Haggard, you had much to forgive. When you promised to take care
of Lucius, had you any idea whose son he was?"

"No, Lord Spunyarn, nor have I now; poor Lucy would never tell me that,
and I never pressed her, for it did not concern me."

"It concerned you very nearly, dear madam."

Their eyes met, and those of the widow were filled with mingled
astonishment and horror.

"No, Lord Spunyarn; do not tell me that Lucius's father was----" and her
eyes flashed with indignant rage.

"It is best to get it over--_he was your husband_!"

There was a dead silence of some seconds.

"Go on, Lord Spunyarn," said the widow in a hollow voice; "then I am
guiltless at least of deceiving him for years. It is horrible!" But she
shed no tear.

"Your husband, dear lady, when he was dying, gave it in charge to me to
let you see the contents of this box, which, he too truly said, would
explain all. I, too, at times, had my suspicions; for remember this, I
too loved your cousin long ago, and your husband was my dearest friend."
The man buried his face in his hands and was silent for a moment; he
pulled himself together with an effort. "When I saw what the box
contained, the whole ghastly secret was laid bare to me in an instant.
You remember when we were in Rome, by chance, by merest chance, I saw
your husband at a masked ball with a lady; at that ball arose the
quarrel between your husband and the unfortunate Frenchman who fell by
his hand. The box will tell you the rest. The masked lady wore a
magnificent pair of single-stone diamond earrings." Spunyarn unlocked
the box, placed it in front of his friend's widow and walked to the
window.

With trembling fingers Mrs. Haggard opened it. There was a little packet
of letters in Lucy Warrender's undeveloped girlish hand, the ink of
which had faded; then a pair of single-stone brilliant earrings, which
sparkled and shimmered in the firelight, as the widow took them in her
trembling fingers; to one of them was still attached the duplicate of
the _Mont de Piete_, dated the very day of her cousin's death. Last of
all was a little purple velvet case on which was her husband's monogram
with the single word "Rome," and a date just over twenty years ago. She
opened it with difficulty; in it was a lovely miniature, not a mere
photographer's likeness, of her cousin Lucy in all the pride of her
girlish beauty, as a shepherdess, in powdered hair and in a Watteau
costume. The face seemed to smile at her with an air of insolent
triumph, that old smile of Lucy's which her cousin remembered so well in
the days gone by, but which she had missed for many a long year. The
painter had not forgotten to place in the ears of the shepherdess a pair
of single-stone earrings; in the hand was the ordinary black silk vizard
worn at masquerades, and the shepherdess was depicted in the act of
unmasking. Nothing more pretty, nothing more piquant, nothing more
_chic_ could be imagined. The widow placed the miniature upon the table,
and as she did so a single object still remaining in the box caught her
eye. It was only a little black silk mask, and from the two holes in the
toy, in her disordered imagination, the eyes of her dead cousin still
seemed to sparkle with a mocking light. She dropped the miniature into
the box and closed the lid which shut out the horrid phantom.

As the box closed with an angry click, Lord Spunyarn turned towards the
victim of her husband's perfidy.

"There is no need of explanation; my husband was right. I understand it
all, but I forgave him, Lord Spunyarn, and I forgive him still. Poor
Lucius!"

This was all she said.

Spunyarn resumed his seat at the fireside. Then there was a long
silence, which neither seemed disposed to break.

At last with an effort he spoke. "What is to be done, dear madam? I wish
the secret had remained in the dead man's keeping; it is a dreadful
responsibility. Can it be still kept?"

"It is my duty towards my dead husband, Lord Spunyarn," she said
decisively.

"But you have another duty, dear lady; a duty to your son and a duty to
the old man here, who looks on Lucius as his heir."

"My son must suffer with me, Lord Spunyarn, for his father's fault."

Spunyarn shook his head. "Not so, dear lady; there is but one way, one
possible way, to preserve the reputation of those who are gone and to do
justice, for justice must be done. Pit Town must know; for others,
taking the lowest standpoint, may possess the secret, and the honour of
the family must not be compromised. Lucius must efface himself, that is
the only course."

"Efface himself, Lord Spunyarn? I know the boy, the orphan boy; he was
my husband's child; and with all his faults I love him; he will never
consent to that; he would die first," said Reginald Haggard's widow.

"And die he must, I mean socially. There is no other way."

"He will never consent, Lord Spunyarn," repeated the widow. "He is
wrapped up in the fact that he is Lord Pit Town's heir. With George it
is different; he is my own son, my very son," she added bitterly, "and,
if I wish it, he will give up everything for my sake and his father's;
his father's honour is as dear to him as it is to me. Besides, my
husband evidently foresaw the dilemma in which he has placed us, and
made the boy his heir."

"But justice, dear lady, justice----"

"Justice, Lord Spunyarn," cried the indignant woman as she rose to her
feet. "God's justice, do you mean, or man's? Is it not enough that my
husband should have betrayed and befooled me for twenty years, and
should have robbed my boy of his very heritage, and more than that, of
half the treasure of a mother's love? For I tell you, strange and
unnatural as it may seem, that I love Lucius; ay, I love him, though he
is poor Lucy's child and my husband's bastard. And who could help loving
the poor helpless, friendless, neglected child? Yes, I acted the love at
first, Lord Spunyarn, and it grew upon me till it became a part of
myself. Is it for nothing, that when my husband was bleeding to death
before my very eyes, that he bade me take care of Lucius? I have been a
faithful and obedient wife, Lord Spunyarn, and I will obey my husband's
last behest to the letter. I will protect his son's interests and his
son's rights."

"Alas, he has no rights, dear madam," said Spunyarn gently.

"The secret, Lord Spunyarn, is not yours or mine; it is my husband's and
hers," she added, pointing to the box. "When she made me swear to keep
her secret, she threatened to haunt me should I betray her. How could I
answer her? It was a girl's idle jest, I know; but I did swear it, God
knows how unwillingly, and Heaven help me I will keep my oath. Yes, I
will keep my oath," here she sank into a chair, and covering her face
with her hands, wept bitterly.

Lord Spunyarn paced the room in doubt. He was a man of principle, a
religious man, a man of honour--strange combination forsooth in this
nineteenth century, and he remembered that his mouth was closed. But was
he, a good man, to stand idly by and see a great wrong done? Was he to
see the honours and title of a noble family descend to a bastard through
the secret machinations of an artful woman? Heaven forbid!

"Think it over, dear madam, think it over," he said; "let me beg you, at
least, to sleep on it, and God give you counsel," he added in a broken
voice, and then leaving the little red box and its contents upon the
table where it lay, he hurriedly left the room.

While the interview which has been described was taking place, the two
young men were walking briskly up and down the great avenue, which was
already yellowing with commencing autumn.

It was Lucius who spoke.

"We have changed places, George, with a vengeance; it is I who am the
pauper now. If my father meant to surprise me, he certainly succeeded.
You are the man of property, George, while I am rich only in
expectations. Thank goodness, neither my father, the old man, nor any
one else can keep me out of the title and the entailed property; but
there may be a deuce of a long time to wait. By Jove! you know these
very old men don't die, they dry up. Why, look at grandfather Warrender.
It's a horrid nuisance this mourning, though I shall be heartily glad
when I have to go into black next time. His lordship is a decided
obstructionist;" so spoke the elder brother, as he blew a big cloud of
smoke into the air.

"Don't pretend to be a brute, Lucius; you don't mean it, you know, old
fellow," said George.

"But I do mean it, though. There's no more ridiculous custom than
mourning. It's a monstrous thing and ought to be done away with by act
of parliament, like suttee in India was--we could see the absurdity of
that. We have a kind of modified suttee here. Why, look at mother! Why
should she have to dress herself like a guy? It's a ridiculous custom, I
say. Why should I have to wear black gloves in order that I may exhibit
my woe by the stains on my fingers? And why should I be compelled to
look like a British working man out for a holiday, and pass the greater
part of my time in flicking the dust off my clothes? I've been badly
treated, George, and now I find myself pitchforked into a ridiculous
position. Here I am, heir to a title and any amount of coin, and without
a farthing I can call my own. I wonder whether the old man will think
fit to make me an allowance; he gave Hetton a big one, I have always
heard. Do you suppose I offended the governor, George?"

"No; the will was made several years ago, you know, when we were boys."

"Well, it's uncommonly rough. Anyhow, you'll allow that, I suppose; and
I confess I don't care for the _role_ of a waiter upon Providence. The
only thing I seem to have inherited at all is Capt, and I shall rid
myself of him at the earliest opportunity; he must have saved a pile of
money; he ought to go back to Switzerland and start an hotel. They all
do, I believe, when they don't cut their master's throats as Courvoisier
did. By Jove! I wonder whether Capt would lend me any money? If he
won't, I must try the Jews. Why, since the governor died, I've been
inundated with circulars from the house of Israel."

"You needn't trouble about money, Lucius; you can have anything you want
from me, you know."

"It's very good of you to say so, George; but as I shall have to go to
the Jews sooner or later, it's hardly worth while spunging upon you. I
may as well take the bull by the horns at once. Though, between
ourselves, I don't see why my mother shouldn't do something for me, and
so circumvent the governor's injustice. You and she got all the plunder
between you."

"Don't talk like that, Lucius. It's not right. It's hard on you, very
hard; but I wouldn't have anything to do with money-lenders if I were
you."

"Oh, of course not; that's the good advice all you wealthy fellows
always give us poor devils; it's the way of the world."

"You're not fair, Lucius; we are both under age, but this you can rely
on, till you come into your own, at all events, you're welcome to share
my purse."

"Do you really mean that, George?"

"Of course I mean it, or I shouldn't say it."

"I didn't believe you were half the good fellow that you are, my boy.
Let's shake hands on it," and the two young fellows shook hands, but
George's generosity was a bitter pill indeed to Lucius Haggard.

Mr. Maurice Capt did not find himself comfortable under the new
_regime_. He was still Mr. Haggard's man, but things were changed; he
disliked his new master, and his sharp eyes soon detected that the
dislike was more than reciprocated. When Lucy Warrender died, what he
looked upon as a legitimate source of income he suddenly found closed to
him for ever. The proprietor of a valuable secret is naturally anxious
to secure the best return possible from his property, but unfortunately
in Mr. Capt's case dividends may be said to have ceased. As he turned
the matter over in his mind he disliked his investment more and more.
It seemed to have assumed the aspect of a very unpromising property
indeed. What was he to do? The terms of Reginald Haggard's will were no
secret to him, for, in his first rage and mortification, the young
Lucius had confided his woes to his late father's confidential servant.
Should he, the valet, hang on at Walls End Castle for an indefinite
period, until Lucy Warrender's son should come into the old lord's
property, when he would be able to recommence the blackmailing process
which he had so successfully carried out upon the young man's mother? He
knew enough of the character of Lucius Haggard to feel certain that the
power he would possess in such a case would be boundless. But Mr. Capt
was no longer a young man; he, like his master, might die suddenly, and
then the secret would die with him. That miserable anticipation filled
him with horror and indignation. Should he go to the widow, inform her
that he shared her secret, and, for a good round sum in ready money,
sell his silence, and of course betray her as soon as he found it
convenient to do so? Should he go to the old earl, and make the best
bargain he could under the circumstances? He was torn by conflicting
doubts. Mr. Capt had an observant eye; he had noticed that there had
been an exciting interview between the widow and her late husband's
executor, and he became aware of the fact that a little red morocco box,
which in the old days had usually accompanied his master upon his
travels, had passed into Mrs. Haggard's personal custody. Intuitively,
he correctly jumped to the conclusion, that in some way or other, the
red morocco box was connected with the secret of Lucius Haggard's birth.
Mr. Capt felt then that it was his duty, as a prudent man, to ascertain
the nature of the contents of the box, or even to obtain possession of
it. Promptitude as well as firmness had characterised every action of
Mr. Capt's life; with him to determine was to execute, and he made up
his mind not to rest until he had mastered the secret of the box, and
that his subsequent action should be guided by the information so
obtained.

Reginald Haggard was a wise man, a man who burnt his letters, a man who
was as a rule untroubled by sentiment. The one episode in his early life
over which, to him, there had still hung a sort of unhealthy halo of
romance, was the affair with Lucy Warrender. Many a time and oft had
common sense urged him to commit the contents of the little red box to
the flames; but he knew too well that somehow or another his wife had
become the involuntary accomplice of her cousin's fault. He had not
burned the contents of the box; if he had done so the secret, as far as
he was concerned, would probably have died with him; but he had not
burned it. Hence his whispered death-bed confession to his friend
Spunyarn, and his appeal to his wife for forgiveness.

Mrs. Haggard had turned the matter over in her mind again and again. To
her it seemed unnecessary to rake up an old scandal, at least during
Lord Pit Town's life; the propriety of letting sleeping dogs lie
commended itself very strongly to her mind. She herself was quite
convinced that when it became necessary to communicate the secret to
young Lucius Haggard things would right themselves without a scandal. Of
course Lucius would do what was right, and so would George for the
matter of that. Spunyarn's suggestion that Lucius Haggard should "efface
himself," and so voluntarily suffer a social death, seemed to her but a
brutal and inhuman method of cutting the Gordian knot. She had never
again opened the little red box, since she had closed it on the occasion
of her interview with her husband's executor. To her mind the simplest
thing of all would have been to do away with the box and its contents,
but she gave way to the better judgment of Spunyarn in this matter. On
one thing, however, she was determined: by no act of hers should her
dead cousin's shameful secret be dragged into the light of day; and so
she made up her mind to communicate her decision to Spunyarn, and to
deliver the box to him for safety.

Lord Spunyarn's reflections upon the whole matter convinced him of one
thing--his own unenviable position. To his mind the matter was
thoroughly clear, and his own duty peremptorily defined. He had received
the secret as a death bed confidence; there could be no doubt as to the
mystery of Lucius Haggard's birth. It was certainly not for him to stand
calmly by and see the Pit Town title and the Pit Town estates pass to
Reginald Haggard's bastard son. It was his duty to take the old lord
into his confidence and to break the matter to the brothers. His own
evidence and that of George's mother, coupled with the contents of the
box, would set the facts at rest beyond a doubt. If young Lucius were
an honourable man he would not attempt to make matters worse by a
useless contest in the Law Courts, but would doubtless of his own accord
see the wisdom of disappearing into an honourable obscurity, while Lord
Pit Town and George Haggard would, of course, provide for him. He felt
assured that having had time for reflection Mrs. Haggard herself would
inevitably consent to this, the only possible course of action. As to
her scruples respecting her cousin's secret, they would be overcome. It
was then with a mind fully made up that Lord Spunyarn demanded a second
interview with his dead friend's widow, and he requested young Lucius
Haggard to await his summons to speak with them "on a matter which," as
he phrased it, "concerns you nearly."

He found Mrs. Haggard comparatively cheerful.

"I have thought it all over, Lord Spunyarn," she said. "You were my
husband's friend. I place myself in your hands unreservedly."

Spunyarn gave a sigh of relief, and then he proceeded to sketch the
course of action which we have given above.

"We will tell no one, dear Mrs. Haggard. George himself need never know.
The whole thing can be a simple matter of arrangement. Of course Lucius
must know all, and Pit Town. I purpose to break it to Lucius at once,
and to him at least your cousin's name need never be mentioned. He is
his father's son after all."

"His father's son," she said with a sigh. "Yes, his father's son," she
repeated with meaning. "Must it be done to-day?"

"Don't let us procrastinate, dear lady. Shall I send for him? He is
awaiting our summons."

The widow nodded, and Spunyarn went to seek the youth, who in a few
minutes was to be stripped of name and fame and wealth.

So far from suspecting a communication of an unpleasant nature, young
Lucius Haggard, his face wreathed in anticipatory smiles, was
impatiently drumming upon the window-pane in the library with his
finger-tips. It seemed to him that this formal interview with his mother
and his father's executor could have but one object, namely, to announce
to him that a suitable provision was to be made for the heir to the Pit
Town title during the short time that must necessarily elapse ere he
should come into his heritage. But his anticipations were considerably
damped by Lord Spunyarn's first words. The elder man placed his hand
affectionately upon the young fellow's shoulder.

"Lucius, my poor boy," he said, "prepare yourself for a surprise, and a
great disappointment," he added ominously.

The happy smile of anticipation left the young fellow's face as he heard
the words.

"Well, Lord Spunyarn," he said, "when my father cut me off without even
the proverbial shilling, I thought he had done the worst he could for
me."

Lord Spunyarn took no notice of the remark.

"My poor fellow," he said, "steel yourself to hear what I have to tell
you. I will tell you now," he added, "to spare your poor mother the pain
and horror of having the sad story repeated in her presence. Lucius," he
said solemnly, "you are no longer the heir to the Pit Town title, and
all that goes with it."

"Good heavens!" cried the young man as he sank into a chair, "it can't
be true. Did Hetton contract a secret marriage, and is there a son? Does
the old man know of it?"

"It isn't that, Lucius. Compose yourself," Spunyarn added after a short
pause, "and listen to what I have to tell you. This thing concerns you
and your brother only. Lucius, bear it like a man, but, my poor boy,
you are illegitimate."

"Did my mother dare----" he began, but Spunyarn stopped him with a
gesture.

"Lucius," he said severely, "the lady who has allowed you to call her
mother from the time you were a little child, did so out of kindness;
speak no ill word of her, my boy, for to her you owe everything, to her
love, and to her forbearance."

"Great God! Lord Spunyarn, it can't be true, there is some base plot in
the matter. Who is the heir, the man who calls himself the heir, I
mean?" he asked fiercely, and he clenched his hands; and his eyes, Lucy
Warrender's eyes, sparkled with mingled rage and hate. "We shall contest
the thing, of course?"

"The heir, Lucius, the rightful heir, is your brother George; he was
born in wedlock, while you, alas, though your father's son, are----"

"Not base born; don't say that, Lord Spunyarn."

But Spunyarn nodded sadly.

"I won't believe it, Lord Spunyarn," almost shouted the young man with
uncontrollable fury. "Have you, my father and my mother, been hatching
this infernal plot between you all these years? Can the dead man's hand
strike me, even from beyond the grave? I won't believe it, it isn't
true. I'll fight it in the Courts. What does Lord Pit Town say? Does he
give a tacit consent to my undoing?"

"Pit Town as yet knows nothing. Lucius, try to be calm. Listen to me,"
and as gently as he could he broke to the indignant boy the dismal fact
of his heritage of shame, that he was but Reginald Haggard's love-child
after all.

"And my mother?" said the boy in a broken voice.

"No need to speak of her, Lucius; she is dead."

"Have you the proofs, Lord Spunyarn, of all this?" said the boy more
calmly, after he had listened to Spunyarn's narrative in silence. "It'll
have to be proved, you know, proved to the hilt; that at least is my
right, and I'll not forego it."

"Lucius, you have no rights."

"I must see the proofs, at least."

"Yes, you must see them, I suppose, but spare your mother, Lucius; she
is broken down with grief and suffering."

"Lord Spunyarn," said the boy coldly, "you say she is not my mother; why
should I spare the feelings of my father's accomplice? Feelings
forsooth;" and he laughed bitterly.

"Lucius, you are mad. Let me beseech you, as a gentleman, in the painful
interview that must take place, to spare your father's widow as much as
possible. Deal gently with her, boy; it is she who has been the victim
in the whole matter."

"Don't bandy words with me, Lord Spunyarn," cried the young man, and
for the moment the impetuous Reginald Haggard of bygone years seemed to
stand before the astonished nobleman in the very flesh. "You tell me,"
he continued in a calmer tone, "that George Haggard is the heir, that I
am but my father's base-born child. Show me the proofs of this and I'll
believe it; till then, Lord Spunyarn, I simply say you lie," and the
young man bowed defiantly. "Let us go," he continued, "to the clever
woman who has hoodwinked me for a lifetime. I follow you, sir."

Lord Spunyarn made no reply, but led the way to the widow's boudoir.

As they entered, Mrs. Haggard rose and opened her arms to Lucius, but
she sunk again into her chair, staring with sad astonishment at the
extraordinary transformation that had been suddenly effected in the
young man. His dead father, in an access of furious passion, seemed to
stand before her. No answering look of affection was upon his face; the
young mouth was firmly set, and the eyes glittered with savage defiance.

"Lucius," she said with an effort, "dear Lucius."

"Madam," he replied, as, uninvited, he seated himself with an attempt at
dignity, "his lordship has inflicted upon me a strange and improbable
story. I have told him, and I do honestly believe it, that that wild
story is a lie, a wicked lie. He tells me that you hold the proofs. Let
me then see these proofs, that I may make him my humble apologies, and
go out from your presence into the world a nameless beggar. But you will
please remember that you will find it difficult to deceive me, and to
deceive Lord Pit Town, for you must cheat us both."

"Lucius," said Mrs. Haggard in a broken voice.

But Lord Spunyarn interrupted her. "I had hoped, dear lady," he said,
"to have spared you such a scene as this; let me deal with him, Mrs.
Haggard. The proofs, Lucius," he added, "are here. I myself can supply
the few missing links in the chain of evidence. It is but natural,
perhaps," he said, "and you have, as you say, a right to see these sad
proofs, unhappy boy, of the miserable folly and wickedness of your real
parents. Look at them, then; examine them for yourself, and then you
cannot fail to be convinced that I have not lied to you after all."

He turned the key in the lock and softly opened the box; then the
astonished man gave a sudden start and placed his hand to his forehead.

Young Lucius Haggard rose to his feet, and laughed a loud, indignant,
mocking laugh.

_The box was empty!_




  CHAPTER VI.

  LUCIUS HAGGARD IS BEWILDERED.


John, Earl of Pit Town, was above all things an art-worshipper. He was
never tired of perambulating the great galleries of Pit Town Castle and
admiring the collection, which it had been his life-long labour of love
to bring together. When his son, the late Lord Hetton, had come to his
sudden and dreadful end, the old man had felt the blow severely; when
his heir, Reginald Haggard, had been snatched away in the pride of his
manhood, it had affected him in a less degree; but he had felt the blow
from its very suddenness. Ever since Reginald Haggard's wife had come to
live at the Castle, he had ceased to feel that he was alone in the
world, and a deep affection had sprung up between the two. As for
Haggard's boys, now bursting into early manhood, he loved them somewhat
for themselves, but still more for the sake of the woman who had been a
daughter to him, and the stay and comfort of his waning years. Always
orderly and methodical, he had settled the ultimate disposition of his
property with justice and discretion. He was immensely wealthy. As we
have said, the entailed property was extremely large, but was exceeded
in actual money value by the great mineral wealth which was disposable
by will. The value of several ordinary estates, too, was locked up in
the vast collection contained in the new galleries.

The future possessor of the Pit Town title would be a lucky man indeed
if he got the treasures so laboriously accumulated, during his long
lifetime, by old Lord Pit Town. The old man lived by strict rule. He had
a curious theory that, barring accidents, the span of human life might
be ordinarily calculated at sixty-five years; that is, supposing that
one third of the time, or eight hours a day, was given to sleep. He
believed, too, that just as the span of life is undoubtedly shortened by
indiscretions and excesses, particularly in the matters of diet and
drink; so he considered that span to be indubitably lengthened, if the
ordinary rules of common prudence were carefully observed. But Lord Pit
Town went further than this. Continual association with Dr. Wolff had
converted the old nobleman to an extraordinary and original theory which
was held by the doctor of philosophy. This theory was a delightfully
simple one. Dr. Wolff was accustomed to sum it up as follows: "The human
body is a machine, and would go on working for ever did not certain
parts of it gradually wear out. It is our duty to make the machine last
as long as possible. When not in use it should be run at the lowest rate
of speed, in order to reduce the rapidity of the deterioration." "If I
don't want to wear out my boots," Dr. Wolff would triumphantly remark,
"I put on my slippers; therefore, as my body is more precious to me than
even my new boots, I never unnecessarily wear it out. A certain minimum
amount of exercise is undoubtedly necessary to health; let us take that
by all means, but no more. Let us avoid unnecessary exertion of all
kinds, physical or mental; let us not ride if we can drive, let us not
walk if we can ride, let us not stand when we can sit, and certainly we
should not sit if we can lie down; above all things we should not remain
awake if we can possibly sleep, and even in sleeping we should, if
possible, refrain from dreams. The valuable machine which we are
possessed of should be run at the lowest possible speed, that it may
last the longer. Strong emotions of all kinds should be just as
obnoxious to us as strong drinks. Holding it as an absolute fact that,
barring unavoidable accidents, a certain definite amount of wakefulness
is allotted to every man, every opportunity should be seized for running
the machine at the lowest possible rate by the simplest means; that is
to say, to put it shortly, never remain awake without an object, as you
are uselessly expending the allotted time of _Life_, that is to say, of
_Wakefulness_." But Dr. Wolff and his disciple went further than this:
they looked upon sleep as the secret recuperative power of nature. They
considered that in sleep they had discovered the real _vis medicatrix
naturae_. Their curiosity was aroused as to the success of their theory;
they were neither of them particularly anxious to become very old men,
except that their doing so would tend to prove the correctness of their
views.

Lord Pit Town himself had already reached an almost patriarchal age; he
slept and dozed frequently in the daytime, thus carrying out the
principles of what the doctor proudly termed the "Wolffian Theory."
Under no pretext whatever would any servant at Walls End Castle have
dared to awaken either the doctor or the old lord; they were never
called in the morning, and in the midst of the most interesting
conversations they were both of them in the habit, without the slightest
apology, of suddenly closing their eyes and taking a deep draught of
what they called nature's recuperative elixir. Everybody in Walls End
Castle knew perfectly well what the servants meant, when they said that
either the old lord or his faithful henchman was engaged; it simply
signified that the two human dormice were carrying out the Wolffian
Theory.

In sleep they were both accustomed to seek refuge from disturbing
influences of all kinds. On the second day of Mrs. Dodd's visit to the
Castle she had seized the opportunity of improving the occasion, when
she suddenly came upon the old lord and the philosopher, each of whom
was seated in an easy chair, silently drinking in the beauties of the
celebrated Pit Town Turner, which formed one of the gems of the new
galleries.

"I hope I'm not intruding," the energetic lady remarked, as she burst in
upon the scene of tranquil enjoyment; "I don't disturb you, Lord Pit
Town?" she said.

"Certainly not, dear madam; nothing disturbs me. I allow nothing to
disturb me now."

"No, nothing disturbs us; nothing short of an earthquake, _Frau
Prediger_; it is against our principle, you know, and that is why we
don't rise at your approach," chimed in the doctor of philosophy; and
the eyes of the two gentlemen by common accord left Mrs. Dodd and
returned to their meditative contemplation of the great landscape.

Mrs. Dodd was astonished but not abashed; she had never known what it
was to be abashed in the whole course of her life. "Their conduct is
very peculiar," she thought. "That German man, if he had the instincts
of a gentleman, should at least rise and explain the pictures to me; as
for the old lord, I suppose he's in his second childhood. I wonder what
'_Frau Prediger_' means?" "Ah, Lord Pit Town," she said, apostrophising
the old nobleman and utterly ignoring the obnoxious Wolff, "I must
confess to a feeling of sadness when I look at all these beautiful
things, and when I think how much might have been done with the vast
sums that they must have cost," and she put up her eye-glass and read
the descriptive label affixed to the frame of the great Turner. "So that
is the celebrated picture," she continued, "and did it really cost four
thousand pounds? Oh, Lord Pit Town," she went on, in the tone she might
have used to a little child detected red-handed in some act of juvenile
depravity, "when we think how much might have been done with four
thousand pounds, when we read in the statistics of the Society for the
Conversion of the Jews that it costs little more than four thousand
pounds to convert one of that proverbially stiff-necked race, one cannot
look at that picture without emotion."

She waited for a moment for the old lord to excuse himself; she looked
from the picture to the venerable nobleman; his eyes were tightly shut;
he was evidently taking a deep draught of the recuperative elixir. Then
she turned in search of sympathy to the man who had called her "_Frau
Prediger_;" he too was employed in exactly the same manner. For the
first time in her life Mrs. Dodd found herself absolutely and distinctly
ignored; she was to these two dreadful men as if she did not exist; it
was too much, she turned and fled. As the vicar's wife flung out of the
gallery, the two enthusiasts reopened their eyes and resumed their
contemplation of Turner's masterpiece. From this little incident it may
be seen that the old lord and his companion were not easily disturbed in
the even tenor of their tranquil lives.

Lord Spunyarn's feelings after the stormy interview with young Lucius
Haggard were not to be envied. He hated to meddle and to make. It's
quite true that he had been forced into his present position by
Haggard's dying communication, and it was by no fault of his own that he
suddenly found himself mixed up in the exceedingly intricate family
affairs of other people. It was an unpleasant position; he had seen with
his own eyes the links of evidence which completed the chain of proof
that plainly demonstrated the truth of what his old friend had told him
on his death-bed. How and by whom the contents of the little red box had
been mysteriously spirited away he was unable to imagine; certainly not
by his friend's widow, for Mrs. Haggard, he knew, was the soul of
honour; certainly Lucius could have had no hand in the abstraction. It
seemed to Spunyarn's mind imperative upon him to communicate the whole
matter to the old earl, and so shift the entire responsibility upon the
shoulders of the head of the family. Possibly the old lord, as the
possessor of unbounded wealth, might be able to make arrangements
satisfactory to himself and to the naturally conflicting interests of
the two young men. In any case an open scandal must be avoided, and the
Pit Town title and estates, whatever might become of the old lord's
money, must not be diverted from the legitimate heir. How he wished that
he had never accepted that autumn invitation to Pit Town Castle! He knew
full well that young Lucius Haggard would not relinquish one tittle of
what he considered his rights. It was difficult to escape from the horns
of the dilemma. It was quite certain that Mrs. Haggard would not move in
the matter, and to let Lucy Warrender's child rob George Haggard of his
birthright seemed to him a crime. The only other alternative being a
scandalous trial in open court and the dragging of the whole matter
before the public. As a man of the world, Lord Spunyarn was quite aware
that a secret ceases to be a secret when there are too many depositories
of it; for this reason he could not even consult the legal advisers of
the family. He felt that George Haggard must be told sooner or later:
that was a plain duty. He felt, too, that it were better that the boy
should learn the secret from him, but the communication of the matter to
the old lord was still more imperative, and that communication must be
made at once, for Spunyarn well knew that the life of the fragile old
nobleman hung by a thread, and that there was no exaggeration in Lucius
Haggard's statement that Lord Pit Town might go off at any moment. From
what Spunyarn knew of George Haggard and his mother, he felt, in the
event of the old earl's death, that it was more than probable that
Lucius Haggard would be allowed to succeed to everything, contrary to
all the dictates of human justice. At this thought all Spunyarn's class
instincts violently revolted.

Since the very startling communication which had been made to him,
Lucius Haggard had thought of nothing else. To be suddenly told that one
is a bastard is bad enough even for an ordinary mortal, but to a youth
who has considered himself _porphyro-genitus_ to be informed that he is
but of common clay after all, and, worse than that, base-born, is
terrible indeed. Since he had heard the story, young Lucius had been
unable to obtain even a sip of the doctor's recuperative elixir. He
believed the tale--he couldn't doubt it--for he knew that the woman who
had been a mother to him could not lie. So Lucius Haggard believed the
story, and his only consolation was that the proofs were missing.
Possession is nine points of the law he very well knew, and he thanked
his stars that the _onus probandi_, fortunately for him, lay with those
whom he already looked upon as "the other side." But he could not rest,
for the mysterious contents of the box, whatever they had been, might be
discovered at any moment, and, like Damocles, he trembled at the
suspended sword.

"You're not looking well, sir," said Mr. Capt, as he appeared with the
dressing materials in the morning. "Won't you lie a little while
longer?" said the valet. "I can bring up your breakfast, sir."

"I'm all right, Capt. I've only had a bad night," and then the valet
drew the curtains, and the young fellow looked once more upon the
well-timbered landscape which till yesterday he had regarded as all his
own. And then he gave a long sigh, which came from the very bottom of
his heart.

"The light seems to hurt your eyes, sir," said the valet, as he shut
out what had now become a hateful picture.

"I think you're right, Capt, I'll have an extra hour's sleep; you can
leave me, and when I want my breakfast I'll ring for it," and Lucius
Haggard turned his face to the wall as the valet left the room. But he
didn't attempt to sleep; he began once more to turn over the matter in
his mind and to meditate upon the best course of action to pursue.
Should he have an interview with the possessor of his father's heritage,
the heir to what he had once looked upon as his own birthright? He well
knew young George Haggard's generosity. Should he make a clean breast of
the whole matter to George, and propose that come what might, they two
should share and share alike by mutual consent? Of course such a
contract would not be legally binding, as he well knew, but he felt that
should George consent to such an arrangement, he, the more astute, could
break the contract whenever he saw fit. If he could only get hold of
those papers, or whatever they were, and destroy them, his position
would become almost impregnable; he would still remain practically Lord
Pit Town's heir. Should the old man be talked over, even he, could not
keep him out of the title and the entailed property. Could it be that in
her love and affection for him, or in a horror of a scandal being
attached to her name or to her dead husband's, that Mrs. Haggard had
destroyed what the little red box had once contained? No, he couldn't
hope that. To whose interest was it that the proofs, whatever they were,
should disappear? To his, and to his alone. But surely no one would
commit so stupendous an act of villainy merely to benefit him, or to
wrong the man whom he still called his brother? Would Spunyarn lay the
whole matter before the old lord? And if he did so would Lord Pit Town
take the tale for gospel without proof--proof, the very existence of
which was now problematical? Should he at once go to the earl and pose
as the outraged victim of a base conspiracy, with the hope of enlisting
the powerful support of the head of the family? The more he thought over
all these things, the more was he overwhelmed with a sense of his own
impotence. If he could only get hold of what the box had contained and
destroy it, he would be comparatively safe; for he felt that even were
he to peaceably come into the possession of what he had once considered
his own, what a life of doubt and terror would be unquestionably his, so
long as those proofs, those dreadful proofs, existed. If the whole
strange story were but a fabrication after all--even that was possible.
Reginald Haggard was his father; both Lord Spunyarn and Mrs. Haggard had
agreed in this. He had always stood much in awe of his father, and had
never given him cause of offence. It was strange that, knowing him to be
a bastard, his father should have treated him in all things as his
legitimate heir. Why had his father failed to provide for him in any
way by will? For the apparently simple reason that he looked upon him as
the old lord's natural successor. If it were true that he was but a
base-born child, then his father must have been aware of the fact, and
he and Mrs. Haggard must have been co-conspirators in an ignoble plot.
What possible object could Reginald Haggard have had, and by what
possible means could he have induced his wife to be his accomplice in so
abominable a crime? As he looked back upon the long years of affection
that the woman, who until to-day he had called his mother, had lavished
upon him, he became the more bewildered. Could it be possible that the
whole matter was but a hallucination of his mother's, caused by her
recent bereavement? That supposition wouldn't hold water for a moment,
for the philanthropic but notoriously hard-headed Spunyarn had actually
seen the proofs, and Spunyarn was an honourable man; and he well
remembered that Spunyarn himself had asserted his power of supplying the
missing links in the chain. Was it possible after all that the
mysterious contents of the little red box would never be discovered and
that he might be still the old man's heir for want of legal proof to the
contrary? Such a solution was the best that could be hoped for. He felt
more than ever powerless, as he reflected that his future lot remained
in the hands of Mrs. Haggard, the woman who in his rage and despair he
had insulted by base suspicion and met by an open defiance. That was a
mistake, he saw it now but too clearly. But the mistake was not
irreparable. Gradually the policy he should pursue became more and more
clearly marked out in his troubled mind. "I will not quarrel with them,"
he thought; "I will express my readiness to do what is right, and should
the contents of the box be ever forthcoming, then I must trust to their
generosity. That is the simplest and safest way, the only wise course
and the only prudent one; she may after all be bound to secrecy," he
thought.

And then he rang for his breakfast, and afterwards proceeded to
interview his father's friend. He found Lord Spunyarn in what had been
called Reginald Haggard's own room. When Lucius entered it, Lord
Spunyarn was engaged with a mass of papers.

"Spunyarn," he said abruptly, "I owe you an apology; I behaved badly
yesterday. Forgive me," he continued, as he held out his hand, "I
behaved badly enough to you," he went on, "but I behaved worse to my
mother, for I must call her my mother still," he added in a broken
voice.

Spunyarn rose and took the offered hand. "Say no more, Lucius, I'm glad
you thought better of it. After all it was a terrible position for you,
my poor boy, a terrible position for us all," he continued, "and for her
especially."

"There's one thing I have to say to you, Lord Spunyarn," said Lucius,
and the crafty young fellow spoke the words gracefully and trippingly;
"in this matter I can only place my interests and my honour unreservedly
in your hands. You were my father's friend, Lord Spunyarn, and you are
his widow's and mine. It is for you, then, to say what is to be done."

"One thing must be done, Lucius; the honour of the family and of the
dead," he added solemnly, "must be respected."

"That of course," said the young fellow, as he seated himself and fixed
his eyes upon the carpet.

"You will ask for nothing but what is just, Lucius; you would not wish
to see your brother wronged?"

"Surely not, Lord Spunyarn, surely not."

"It'll have to be done, I suppose, sooner or later, and perhaps it's
better done now. I don't think I could rake up all the miserable story
in your mother's presence, Lucius, but you have a right to hear it. A
good deal of the sad little drama was enacted before my very eyes. I
once loved your mother, Lucius, your real mother, and I wanted to make
her my wife. Lucius, don't ask me to name her--she is dead, poor girl.
Try to think of your mother, Lucius, as the life-long victim of a
girlish folly, as one who paid very dearly for her fault. Let us speak
of her no more. I will tell you all you need know. I must tell you, or
you would not be able to take in the situation. Just before you were
born, Lucius, your mother, who was a dear friend of the much-wronged
woman who sacrificed herself for you, feeling that her condition could
be no longer concealed, appealed to your father's wife to save her from
the consequences of her fault. Remember, Lucius, that Mrs. Haggard had
no inkling of the truth that her friend's lover was her own husband. She
never knew it, poor thing, till he was in his grave. If she chose to
make the great sacrifice demanded of her, it was in her power to save
her friend's reputation, and your mother, Lucius, was her dearest
friend. She made the sacrifice, but when she made it she little knew the
price she would have to pay, for in sacrificing herself, she sacrificed
the rights of her own then unborn son; and for twenty years that poor
woman supposed that she was deceiving, tricking and wronging your
father. But it was not so, Lucius, for your father was aware of the
whole conspiracy from the very first. Your mother's letters proved that,
and the box contained further evidence, which rendered doubt upon the
subject impossible. But when my poor friend was on his death-bed, Mrs.
Haggard could be silent no longer. She, the woman who had sacrificed her
whole life for the sake of a girlish friendship, on his death-bed, asked
the forgiveness of the man who had wronged her. Then, and then only,
with his dying breath, your father revealed to her that he had been a
consenting party to the fraud and aware of it from the first. And then
she forgave him, Lucius. What was she to do, poor thing? At your
father's dying request, I, as his executor, having come into possession
of the secret, handed the proofs to my friend's widow."

"And you saw those proofs, Lord Spunyarn?"

"Yes, I saw them, Lucius."

The young man rose. "Then, Lord Spunyarn," he said, "there is but one
course open to me. As a man of honour I place myself freely and fully in
your hands. Whatever you think is the right course to pursue, that
course I will follow; for I feel, as you told me yesterday, that I have
no rights. My very presence here as my father's bastard, is an insult to
her whom, I would to heaven, I could still call my mother, and to the
head of the family. I can say no more than this, Lord Spunyarn--I place
myself in your hands."

Spunyarn took the young fellow by the hand affectionately. "Lucius,"
said he, "you are behaving nobly. But the dilemma is none the less; the
proofs, unfortunately, have disappeared. I know full well that you will
never have cause to regret your generosity. Pray God that we may yet be
able to avoid a public scandal. I have sent for Brookes; he is, as you
know, the old lord's lawyer, and to him we must come sooner or later. If
we could only get the contents of the box once more into our possession,
all would be simple enough; but the proofs have disappeared, perhaps for
ever; and my poor friend's wife, Lucius, is smitten by a terrible
affliction; they found her speechless this morning, and the family
practitioner tells me she may never recover. God knows," he added with a
groan, "perhaps the hand of heaven has closed her mouth for ever."

"You don't say that she is ill, Lord Spunyarn, perhaps dying?" cried the
young man in an awe-stricken whisper, as he repressed his exultation
with an effort. "Let me see her at once. Poor mother!" he added with a
sigh.

I verily believe that should fortune desert young Lucius Haggard he need
never really starve, for his talents as a light comedian should
certainly be worth several guineas a week to him.

"Spunyarn," said Lucius after a pause, "who can have taken these papers?
Have you any suspicion?"

"It's a mystery I cannot penetrate," he replied. "Brookes may be able to
get at the bottom of it, however; I hope and trust so."

"Can it be possible," said Lucius, "that my mother destroyed the papers
herself, or has secreted them?"

"I hardly think so; she seemed as much astonished as I was, when we
found them gone. Besides, why should she destroy them? Lucius, she
trusted you; and she judged you rightly, my boy; you have chosen the
only honourable and manly course. No man has cause to regret running
straight in this world. You will never have reason to repent of it,
Lucius."

"Do you think no one outside the family, Lord Spunyarn, by any
possibility can be in possession of the key to the secret?"

"No one. Besides it interests no one, save my dear old friend, your
brother, and yourself."

"Yes, I suppose after all George is my brother, in a sort of way,
still."

"George will never forget that he is your brother, Lucius."

There was a pause.

"Let us go to her," said Lucius Haggard with a sigh.

The elder man consented, and they left the room.




  CHAPTER VII.

  ENTER MR. BROOKES.


When Lord Spunyarn and Lucius entered Mrs. Haggard's room they found her
stretched upon a sofa, and to the inexperienced eye she presented very
much her ordinary appearance; but as the young fellow, who had been
nursed and tended by the invalid when he was a helpless friendless
child, gazed upon the woman who had been a mother to him, he saw that
one corner of the mouth was slightly drawn. The old lord was seated by
her side; her left hand was clasped in his; the marks of recent tears
were on the face of the old nobleman, and he roused himself with an
effort to welcome his heir.

"Mother," said the young fellow, as he took her other hand, "poor
mother!" And even the long-headed youth felt a pang, as he gazed upon
the wreck before him.

An answering smile illumined the suffering face as she heard the
greeting.

Then there was a pause of some length; and then the old man made his
moan, for the selfishness of age is as natural as the selfishness of
childhood. This is what the possessor of countless wealth, and of all
the heart could desire to obtain, said in his cracked querulous old
voice:

"All gone from me, wife and son, and nephews, all taken; and now she is
stricken down, the joy of my dotage, the comfort of my old age. It's
very hard to bear," groaned the old man, and the hollow old eyes became
moist again. But there was an answering pressure from the slender hand
which he held between his wrinkled fingers, and the old man's face was
lighted up once more by a happy smile. "You won't leave me, Georgie," he
continued, "for I can't spare you, my dear, I can't spare you." Again
there came the same answering pressure. But she spoke no word; heaven
had set the seal of silence on her lips; they moved, those pale lips,
but no sound came from them; and then the sufferer made an impatient
gesture. As she did so young George Haggard entered the room; his eyes
were red with weeping and he trod daintily upon the carpet, as a man
would do who feared to disturb a sleeping child. The sick woman smiled
as he came to his brother's side and affectionately placed his hand upon
Lucius Haggard's shoulder; her eyes sought those of Lord Spunyarn, dwelt
upon his an instant, and then the lids closed upon the yet lovely orbs,
and still smiling, like a tired child, Mrs. Haggard sank into a peaceful
sleep.

No word was spoken by those around the couch; they sat silent, fearing
to disturb her slumber. As Lucius Haggard gazed upon the sweet sleeping
face, he was racked by torturing doubt. How would it all end? Would she
recover her bodily health again? The mind was evidently still uninjured.
_Would she ever speak again?_ That was the important question to Lucius
Haggard. The papers gone and the mouth of this one witness closed, he
felt himself comparatively safe; still in the eyes of the law and of the
world his father's lawful heir. But should she speak again, she might
communicate the secret of his shame. Without her evidence all that Lord
Spunyarn might say could but be mere surmise, a simple _ex parte_
statement.

One by one they left her sleeping, the old earl leaning heavily on the
arm of Haggard's eldest son. And then they separated; the old lord to
his slumbers and his dreams and the society of the faithful Wolff, the
two young fellows to the park, to wander up and down the great avenue
side by side, and talk with bated breath over their fresh misfortune,
the affliction that had befallen their mother; while Lord Spunyarn
returned to the examination of the mass of papers lying on the dead
Reginald Haggard's table, and to wait with impatience the arrival of the
family solicitor.

"If there is a thing in this world that I hate," said old Mr. Brookes to
his partner, as he sat in his cosy private room in Lincoln's Inn Fields
that morning, "it's this modern system of telegrams; they're almost as
bad as a doctor's night-bell. You have to go, whether you like it or
not. Here's probably some simple matter of common law. Why on earth
can't he write? Not a bit of it, he simply wires me, and I have to go,"
and he handed a telegram across the table:

            "Walls End Castle.

    "Please come down at once. Your presence urgently needed.

            "SPUNYARN."

"Why can't they write?"

That afternoon saw old Mr. Brookes at the Castle. He dined _tete-a-tete_
with Lord Spunyarn, and did full justice to the cook's efforts. Lawyers
are always epicures, and Mr. Brookes condescended to praise the _supreme
de volaille_ of the Walls End _chef_. After dinner they drew their
chairs to the fire, and then Lord Spunyarn opened his business.

"I'm glad you have come, Brookes; I'm very glad you've come."

"Something very serious, I suppose; something so urgent, Lord Spunyarn,
that you couldn't have written me a letter and got my advice by the next
post," and Mr. Brookes chuckled.

"Yes, Mr. Brookes, it was something so serious that I had to see you in
person. I fear there is a screw loose in the succession."

"Gad, sir, you don't mean that Hetton _was_ married after all?"

"No, it's not that. Since my poor friend Haggard's death, Mr. Brookes,
I have been placed in a very difficult position. On his death-bed
Haggard desired me to place a box containing letters and certain
reminiscences of a bygone intrigue in his wife's hands. There is nothing
very extraordinary in that you will say; the man was sorry for his
youthful error, and sought forgiveness. Quite so, but that was not the
end of the matter." Spunyarn described to the old lawyer the contents of
the box, the miniature, the mask, the earrings, and the packet of
letters. "Mr. Brookes," he continued, "as my friend's executor it was
perhaps my duty to have gone through those letters, but they were the
love-letters of a dead woman to my own dead friend, and I myself had at
one time, long long ago, been seriously attached to the lady. I hadn't
the heart to go through those letters. I see now, that I neglected or
avoided what was a very painful duty. I as my friend's executor should
have cared for those letters, verified them, and put them in a place of
safety. My only excuse is that my dying friend's words to me were, 'Hand
the red morocco box in my safe to my wife, the contents are important;
remember my affair at Rome and you will understand them; Georgie must do
as she pleases in the matter.' And then he died. I take it, Mr. Brookes,
that it was my duty to carry out my dying friend's injunctions. I did
carry out those injunctions to the letter, and then I became aware of an
astounding thing. Young Lucius Haggard is not the heir to the Pit Town
title, for he is illegitimate; nay, more than that, he is not Mrs.
Haggard's son at all."

The lawyer sprang from his chair. "Do you mean to assert, Lord Spunyarn,
that he was substituted by the supposed parents? On the face of it, Lord
Spunyarn, it's an improbable story, almost an impossible story."

"Let me explain, Mr. Brookes. Lucius Haggard is really the son of Mrs.
Haggard's dearest friend. When, in a moment of desperate fear and
agitation, in her love for her friend she consented to cover that
friend's terrible position--she was an inexperienced girl, Mr.
Brookes--by personating the child's mother, she had not the slightest
idea of the terrible complications that would ensue, and that the
child's father was her own husband; that latter fact she never knew
until my poor friend, suddenly stricken down, with his dying breath
hinted at the terrible secret, and asked for her forgiveness."

The lawyer moved uneasily in his chair, but did not attempt to interrupt
Lord Spunyarn's explanation.

"I acknowledge to you, Mr. Brookes," he continued, "that I committed an
error; I should have done at once what I am doing now, and taken you
into our confidence. But the good name of a woman was at stake, the
proofs were in our possession, there was no doubt as to the
illegitimacy of Lucius Haggard, and I trusted in his honour and to the
affection he bore to the woman who had been a mother to him, to enable
us to tide over the matter without disclosing it to a living soul, at
least during Lord Pit Town's lifetime."

"And you were disappointed, Lord Spunyarn; you forgot the magnitude of
the stake, when you deliberately placed the honour of a noble family,
the succession to a title and immense estates, in the hands of an
interloper."

"No, Mr. Brookes. At first Lucius Haggard refused to believe for an
instant what would naturally seem a most improbable story. A terrible
scene of violence ensued, but let me do young Lucius justice: he
speedily came to his senses; his conduct, Mr. Brookes, was all that one
could expect from a man of the very highest honour. He placed himself
unreservedly in my hands."

"Thank God for that," said the lawyer, as he wiped, his forehead with
his big silk handkerchief, "thank God for that, for it simplifies
matters very considerably. And now I suppose you want me to break the
matter to the old lord. We've had a very narrow escape, Lord Spunyarn."

"I fear we're not out of the wood yet," said Spunyarn meditatively.

"What! further complications?"

"Unfortunately, yes. Mrs. Haggard is suffering from a stroke of
paralysis and is speechless."

"Well, there is still your evidence and the contents of the box;
besides, you say that Lucius Haggard will not fail you."

"Mr. Brookes, the worst yet remains to tell; _the contents of the box
have disappeared_."

Again the lawyer rose to his feet deeply agitated. "Lord Spunyarn," said
he solemnly, "you have much to answer for. No doubt Lucius Haggard has
possessed himself of the evidence the box contained and has destroyed
it. Just think for an instant of the immense temptation to him to do so.
There may be, there will be, a gigantic law-suit that may never end,
while the whole of the vast property may be frittered away, for in a
matter such as this, remember, all costs come out of the estate. Lord
Spunyarn, what you tell me is not a misfortune, it is an appalling
calamity, and Lucius Haggard alone has the key of the situation. It's
not a time for half measures, Lord Spunyarn; we must attempt to obtain
from him the contents of the box, even if we have to employ violence."

"Calm yourself, Mr. Brookes," said Lord Spunyarn, "Lucius Haggard at
least is wholly guiltless in the matter. He was unaware even of the
existence of the box and its contents until he saw it in Mrs. Haggard's
presence. We revealed to him the story, and when we opened the box, that
he might see the proofs as he surely had a right to do, it was empty."

The lawyer stared at Lord Spunyarn. "And what is your lordship's
opinion," he said, "in the matter? Let me understand you exactly, Lord
Spunyarn. You handed the box and its contents to Mrs. Haggard. She can
testify to that?"

"Mr. Brookes, she is speechless."

"If we had only got the letters you speak of, with affidavits in proper
form from yourself and the wife of the deceased man, and, _Lucius
Haggard being a consenting party_, by the expenditure of a good deal of
money, we might perhaps tide the matter over; as it is, Lord Spunyarn,
there is no evidence, absolutely no evidence. All you have to tell, is
mere hearsay and conjecture; and it would doubtless be successfully set
up that, accepting your version of the communication made to you by
Reginald Haggard on his death-bed, unsupported as it is by a tittle of
evidence, it was but the incoherent raving of a dying man. A Committee
of Privilege of the House of Lords would not accept mere _ex parte_
statements in so serious a matter; there would have to be absolute
proof, legal proof, mind you, proof that would satisfy the law officers
of the Crown. Young Lucius Haggard, even if he were so Quixotic as to
wish to do so, could not sign away an earldom by a mere stroke of the
pen, neither could he strip himself of the entailed estates. The
extraordinary events, that you say took place many years ago, would have
to be proved; and who is to prove them? As to the parties themselves,
two of them are dead, while the third unfortunately is unable to give
evidence one way or the other. If I communicate this dreadful thing to
my aged client, it may actually kill him. What is your own opinion, Lord
Spunyarn? Do you suppose that in a temporary aberration of mind, to take
a most favourable view of it, Mrs. Haggard, with a woman's natural fear
of exposure, destroyed or secreted the contents of the box? Reginald
Haggard we know devised all his property to his son George, which was
the least he could do after stripping him of everything he had the right
to inherit (I am taking your strange story for gospel for a moment). Can
we think that Mrs. Haggard (still supposing the story to be true) felt
herself bound to be her husband's accomplice in robbing her own son of
his just rights, and so become the principal actor in an abominable
conspiracy? You have pieced the thing together in your own mind, and the
whole story fits charmingly, but it doesn't admit of proof in any way;
it's little better than an improbable and romantic tale as it stands
now, without a shadow of documentary or oral evidence to give it even
the semblance of truth."

Lord Spunyarn interrupted the lawyer impatiently.

"You don't mean to say that you doubt the various details that I have
given you, Mr. Brookes?"

"I doubt nothing, Lord Spunyarn," replied the lawyer, "I am merely
giving you the legal view. It will be my duty, I fear there is no escape
from it, to communicate the whole matter to Lord Pit Town, and to take
his instructions; of course by those instructions I shall be guided. He
may direct me to attempt to collect evidence in the matter, for I don't
suppose that he would wish an illegitimate child of his heir to inherit
his title and estates. There is another view, Lord Spunyarn, a view that
would commend itself to the minds of some men: 'Let sleeping dogs lie'
is a good proverb. If Lucius Haggard is, as you assert, base-born, then
it is for George Haggard to prove his title; and the real struggle
between the two young men need only commence when my old friend is laid
in his grave. Of one thing I am quite certain, Lord Spunyarn; public
scandal and litigation, must, if possible, be avoided, and I am sure
that my client will be at one with me in this."

Spunyarn nodded.

"It is, of course, possible," continued the lawyer, "that some third
person may have possessed himself of the contents of the box from
mercenary motives."

"And what is your own impression, Mr. Brookes?"

"Speaking to you, Lord Spunyarn, as Reginald Haggard's executor and the
guardian of his infant sons, one of whom is undoubtedly the heir to the
Pit Town title, speaking as a man unversed in the ways of women, and
supposing that Lucius Haggard was unaware of the alleged contents of the
box, I am inclined to suspect that Mrs. Haggard holds the key to the
mystery."

"You mean that she has secreted or destroyed what the box contained?"

The lawyer nodded.

"Mr. Brookes, my poor friend's wife would never commit a dishonourable
act."

"A woman's ideas of honour, Lord Spunyarn, are peculiar. With them, as
a rule, particularly with the best of them, sentiment often takes the
place of what men call honour. You yourself have told me that this
unhappy lady considered herself bound by an oath to Lucius's mother,
accepting for the moment the theory that she herself is not his mother.
If she would keep the secret for twenty years, Lord Spunyarn, if there
was a secret, she may carry it with her to her grave, repenting the
sudden confidence that you state she made to you. Even supposing that
the power of speech should return to her, she may decline to confirm
upon oath the statement made to you. The very fact of her suffering from
paralysis may be used by Lucius Haggard and his advisers to set up a
theory that she is of unsound mind; and a very natural theory, too, I
take it," said the lawyer with a sigh. "Lucius Haggard," he continued,
"a minor, under the influence which you and Mrs. Haggard would
naturally exert upon him, may be a very different person to deal with
from Lucius Haggard acting under professional advice, and only biassed
by his own interests. I fear, should the matter ever come before the
public, that very strong reflections indeed will be made upon you and
Mrs. Haggard. _Beati possidentes._ Supposing that Lord Pit Town should
elect to either ignore the matter altogether, or simply instruct me to
seek for further evidence; in a very short time indeed, for his lordship
is a very old man, Lucius Haggard will come into the title and estates
as a matter of course; it will then be for George to attempt to prove
his right. We must be careful, Lord Spunyarn, in attempting to set
ourselves up as an amateur court of law, that we do not ruin the
fortunes of a great house by leaving it absolutely without an heir; for
suppose young George Haggard to die, and supposing for an instant that
the story you have told me could ever be proved, that is what would
happen. Why, the very title would cease to exist, and the estates would
possibly revert to the Crown. Are you and I, Lord Spunyarn, justified in
setting the match to a train which might extinguish an ancient peerage?
If I speak to you as a man of the world, and give you my honest opinion,
I do not hesitate to say that the best thing that can happen is, that
these papers, whatever they contain, may never come to light."

"You would not go as far as to suggest, Mr. Brookes, that should we
discover the papers we are to destroy them?"

"No, Lord Spunyarn. God forbid! I don't go as far as that. You, as your
friend's executor, through a strange carelessness, for I can call it no
less, have let the contents of the box out of your possession; of course
it is for you to do your utmost to regain them. If you ever succeed in
doing so, it seems to me that young George Haggard will be called upon
to elect his own course. I don't think there is any use in prolonging
this interview," he continued; "I must see his lordship, of course, in
the morning; and should he consent, and I trust to his strong common
sense that he will do so, we shall be able to advise with you in the
matter. He may, however, object to that, in which case you will of
course obtain professional assistance and take your own course."

Spunyarn felt that the man who addressed him had ceased to be Mr.
Brookes, the old friend of the family, and that he had relapsed into his
real position of Lord Pit Town's legal adviser.

The two men shook hands; and it is not to be wondered at if neither
slept very well that night, both having abundant food for reflection.




  CHAPTER VIII.

  THE HOLLOW BEECH TREE.


Curiosity is not, as is popularly supposed, the private and peculiar
failing of the female sex. Most men tear up their letters ere they
consign them to the waste-paper basket; the wiser and more suspicious
portion of the human race burn them. If Bluebeard had confided the key
of the Blue closet to any one of his servants, we may rely upon it that
they would have been just as certain to have investigated the contents,
as the nameless, but indiscreet, lady, whose sister's name was Ann.

Mr. Capt was a very superior servant, but like most servants he was
innately curious. The little red morocco box, which he had never seen
opened, which had always accompanied his deceased master on his numerous
journeys, and which was habitually kept in his master's iron safe, had
always puzzled him. It's not very much to be wondered at, then, that
when Mr. Capt saw the box upon the table in Mrs. Haggard's boudoir, with
its key standing invitingly in the lock, he should seize the opportunity
to take a peep at its contents. When Capt saw what those contents were,
being an unscrupulous man, he hesitated not an instant in becoming their
possessor. With men such as Capt, _chantage_, as the French call it, is
a favourite mode of obtaining wealth. We know how Capt had blackmailed
Lucy Warrender for years, and how he was a past-master in the art. We
know, too, that Capt meditated a still grander _coup_. The secret he
possessed had been a little fortune to him during poor Lucy's lifetime,
and, like the shares of a successful mine, Mr. Capt's secret had
developed in value with astonishing rapidity. But Capt was a timid as
well as a cautious man; he had a holy horror of the terrors of the law.
The secret he had to sell was a valuable one, it is true, but the chain
of proof was incomplete. Capt could show that the ladies had gone to
Auray in a mysterious manner. Capt could swear that Miss Warrender,
under the threat of exposure, had made no secret to him that she was the
mother of the boy Lucius; but who Lucius's father was, had been to Mr.
Capt an impenetrable mystery. And as Mr. Capt rubbed his hands at the
thought of the disclosures he could make and their great pecuniary
value, his smile of delight would fade at the reflection, that though
all he swore might be perfectly true, yet, like the inspired Cassandra,
he might fail to find anybody to believe him. Great then was Capt's
delight at getting possession of the miniature which represented Lucy
Warrender in her Watteau costume, for it opened up to him the means of
placing his own evidence beyond a doubt, by adding to it the probably
unwilling testimony of Lord Spunyarn, a witness who would be above
suspicion. His master's monogram upon the portrait case, followed by
the single word "Rome" and the date, brought back all the facts
distinctly to his mind. He remembered actually looking on with his own
eyes, disguised as he was as a Roman warrior, upon the _fracas_ between
Haggard and the unfortunate Mons. Barbiche at Papayani's ball; he had
seen the blue domino upon Haggard's arm, and he had gazed with
curiosity, striving to penetrate the secrecy of the very mask which was
now in his possession. Probably, he thought, Lord Spunyarn was Haggard's
confidant in the whole matter, but when he read the packet of letters
all doubt was set at rest, and Mr. Capt felt that the honour of a noble
family was his to traffic with, and that all that remained was to look
out for the best bargain. Mr. Capt then secreted his prey at once.
Secure now in the possession of the power of proving what he had to
tell, he had but to take his merchandise to the best market and dispose
of it to the highest bidder. Unfortunately for the valet, there were
only a few possible purchasers for the valuable commodity he had to
sell. There was the old lord, but Capt doubted whether Lord Pit Town
might feel disposed to invest his money in proving the eldest son of his
own deceased heir to be a bastard. As for Mrs. Haggard, dealings with
her were out of the question, for she was prostrated by the stroke of
paralysis. Then Capt's mind reverted to old Warrender, but he thought
with horror of the collection of antiquated horsewhips which hung in the
entrance-hall of The Warren, and he remembered that Squire Warrender,
though a very old man now, had a vigorous arm, and that he was a justice
of the peace. The other possible purchasers that remained were the two
young men, but unfortunately both were under age, and, therefore,
comparatively penniless; so Mr. Capt, reluctantly enough, was compelled
to defer negotiations to Lord Pit Town's death, or, at all events,
until Lucius Haggard's majority, and he determined whichever of those
events might happen first, that he would then realize his property at
once.

Capt had reluctantly made up his mind to wait; he carefully packed up
the contents of the little box which he had purloined, including the
brilliant earrings, for he feared to dispose of them, though they were
very valuable, lest he might be accused of, and punished for, a robbery.
Besides the earrings were a part of the proofs. It was quite a neat
little parcel he made, and he carefully covered the whole with
waterproof canvas, lest the valuable contents of the packet might be
damaged by weather. Mr. Capt had determined to place his property in a
temporary hiding place, for he argued rightly that Lord Spunyarn, as
soon as he was aware of the robbery that had been committed, would leave
no stone unturned to regain possession of the deposit he had so
carelessly guarded.

Nature had provided Mr. Capt with a hiding-place suitable in every way
to his designs. In the most secluded portion of the park, whither he was
accustomed to resort to meditate and smoke his master's cigars in
secret, was a very picturesque beech. At about the height of a man in
the trunk of this vigorous young tree was a hole some eighteen inches
deep, just large enough to admit a man's hand. Into this natural
hiding-place Mr. Capt remembered to have once himself thrust his fingers
from curiosity. It was not without some hesitation that he placed his
property in the cavity, and to make assurance doubly sure he covered the
packet with a few dead leaves and closed the mouth of the hole with a
big stone, upon which he artistically placed a little layer of living
moss, carefully smoothing down the edges of the tuft with his fingers.
And then Mr. Capt became once more a waiter upon Providence.

The explosion which Mr. Capt had expected took place. The sudden
summoning of the family lawyer, and the striking down of Mrs. Haggard by
paralysis, had sufficiently informed him of the fact. He felt certain
that a vigorous perquisition would ensue, and it was with considerable
satisfaction, that he reflected that he had been beforehand in the
matter, and that he had placed, what he looked upon as his property, in
safety.

The interview between Lord Pit Town and his solicitor was a long one.
The old lord was naturally much agitated. As was to be expected, he
placed himself unreservedly in the hands of his legal adviser, and he
determined not to move in the matter.

"You seem to think, Brookes," he said, "that there is nothing to be done
in this thing."

"Certainly not, my lord," Mr. Brookes replied. "The late Mr. Reginald
Haggard's widow, should she recover possession of her faculties, which
her medical adviser has informed me is extremely doubtful, would be able
assuredly to give us the solution of the mystery; till then, or till her
death, it is my opinion that we can take no action whatever. It is
certainly not for us to throw any doubt upon the legitimacy of the young
man, whom you must perforce continue to look upon as your lawful heir.
Of Lucius Haggard's silence for his own sake, we may be certain. Lord
Spunyarn we may trust, while Mrs. Haggard herself will assuredly reveal
nothing until her health is in some measure restored, and then only
probably under considerable pressure from you, if you should, under the
circumstances, consider such a course advisable. If there really was a
secret, Lord Pit Town, we can rely upon the discretion of a woman who
has kept it for twenty years. But after all it seems to me that it is
only the distant branches of the family who suffer in losing a remote
contingent succession; even if the extremely unlikely history which
Lord Spunyarn gave me is a fact, and true in all its details, Lucius
Haggard is still Reginald Haggard's son. It seems to me that it is not
for us to stir up the question of his legitimacy. Possibly your lordship
might feel inclined to put pressure upon him, and make him covenant not
to marry in his younger brother George's lifetime, and so the title and
entailed estates would eventually pass to George Haggard or his heirs."

"That is, of course, supposing the story to be true," quavered the old
lord.

"It is impossible, my lord, in the absence of the documents, for us to
take any notice of the story. I may attempt, if you wish it, to obtain
information. I might sound the late Mr. Haggard's valet, though I think
it would be extremely bad policy to do so. As for George Haggard, my
lord, he is his father's heir, and you and I, my lord, know that the
present disposition of your lordship's property will amply compensate
him for the loss of the Pit Town title and the Walls End estates, even
if they were really his by right."

"Yes, Brookes, I suppose things must take their course."

His lordship's remark showed that he accepted Mr. Brookes' point of
view. The lawyer communicated the old man's decision to Lord Spunyarn,
but the matter itself was never mentioned between Lord Pit Town and the
executor of his late heir.

Young Lucius Haggard for the last few days had had plenty of food for
reflection. The agony of mind which he had suffered when Lord Spunyarn
had broken to him the strange story of his birth was more than
counterbalanced by the disappearance of the proofs and the opportune
illness of his father's widow. He found himself once more the heir
apparent, and so temporary had been his degradation that it seemed but a
fevered dream. Whether the story was true or false, probably no one
would ever know. The more he thought of the matter, the more young
Lucius Haggard congratulated himself on having controlled his feelings
after his first natural burst of passionate indignation. He had not
alienated Lord Spunyarn, he had not quarrelled with any one; his
conduct, under the most trying circumstances, had been such as to merit
the respect of all concerned. Though he had not yet won the rubber, he
had decidedly scored the first game.

As time rolled on, Reginald Haggard's widow made no perceptible progress
towards recovery. The speechlessness continued; she was still unable to
articulate. At first she frequently attempted to speak, but gradually
ceased her efforts, as she found that it was practically impossible to
express herself. When she tried to write, although the fingers could
grasp the pen, she was unable to produce written characters, but she
appeared to hear and to understand perfectly. Her memory, too, seemed
to have failed her, for she no longer attempted to express her grief at
her husband's death. She had lost to a certain extent also the power of
motion, and was confined to her couch. With this exception, her bodily
health remained good, and there was no visible change in her appearance.

No intimation of the supposed discovery of a family mystery had been
made to old Squire Warrender, not that there was any doubt as to his
discretion, but simply because there was nothing to be gained by
disturbing the old man's mind with so terrible a communication. Squire
Warrender had hurried to the Castle to visit his daughter when he first
heard of her seizure; but as the fears of an immediate fatal termination
gradually wore off, the old squire had returned to King's Warren. But
the two young men, as was natural, still remained at the Castle in close
attendance upon their mother; George, from natural affection, while
Lucius, though he longed to taste the sweets of his newly-acquired
liberty, felt that it was to his interest to remain upon the spot in the
unlikely contingency of Mrs. Haggard regaining her faculties.

While the minds of many of the inhabitants of Walls End Castle had been
disturbed in the manner narrated, the quiet little parish of King's
Warren had been shaken out of its ordinary state of somniferous
torpidity. To use Mrs. Dodd's words, "the government of the country had
at last become awakened to the important services rendered to the Church
by my dear father." The fact is, that a bishopric had fallen in, and
that the Prime Minister, a notorious talker and time-server, and a very
old servant of Her Majesty, was extremely anxious to perpetrate a great
and glorious job. But the Prime Minister was a wise man; he knew very
well that in trying to please everybody he would satisfy no one, and so
he meant to please himself, and to appoint to the vacant see an old
college chum of his own, a learned but harmless enthusiast, now a Don,
who had once in his life perpetrated a very abstruse work upon the Greek
particle. The first thing that the Prime Minister did was to lend an
apparently willing ear to the suggestions of the various busybodies who
under such circumstances always favour unfortunates in his position with
their disinterested ideas upon the subject. Deputations from the two
rival missionary societies waited upon him, lords temporal and lords
spiritual had private interviews with him, and the heads of his party
expressed their opinions to him freely but confidentially; he promised
to give their suggestions what he called his earnest consideration, and
then he bowed them out. But the Prime Minister was a man who invariably
killed two birds with one stone. "I will obtain some cheap popularity,"
he thought, "and several good rounds of universal applause, by a
master-stroke. I will _offer_ the bishopric to a simple parish
clergyman." In the clerical world, to use a profane phrase, there were
at least half-a-dozen favourites in the betting, and as many dark
horses. When the _Thunderer_ appeared with an inspired article upon the
fitness of a successful parish clergyman for the more onerous position
of a bishop, great was the humming and disturbance in the clerical hive.
Profound was the disappointment in the minds of the drones and
dignitaries. Men who were performing archidiaconal functions heaped dust
and ashes on their heads, crying aloud that the interests of the Church
were being sacrificed to obtain an ephemeral popularity. But the breasts
of the working bees throbbed with excitement; the vicars of parishes who
had been long in harness, and had never met with the expensive
misfortune of being haled by their bishop, or the terrible aggrieved
parishioner, under the Church Discipline Act, before that greatest of
all clerical bogies, Lord Penzance, and who would never have thought of
undergoing six months' imprisonment for conscience' sake; men who knew a
good glass of wine when they saw it; men who were apostles of the Blue
Ribbon Army, fathers of large families of sons and daughters blessed in
having their quivers full of them, and Celibates wedded to the Church
alone; all these men were racked by ambitious hopes. In the meanwhile
the Prime Minister was occupied in putting salt on his sparrow's tail:
that rare clerical bird so fast becoming extinct in the present day,
_rara avis in terris nigroque simillima cygno_, who should be willing to
reply to him _nolo episcopari_. The Prime Minister was looking round for
a man of straw, and after some search he found him in the person of the
Reverend John Dodd.

The _Thunderer_ had said that "the little leaven that was needed in the
hierarchy of the Church of England, that it might leaven the whole
lump, was a parochial clergyman who had unostentatiously laboured in the
clerical vineyard, a man who could rule his see as he had ruled his
parish," and after a long diatribe, the article concluded with these
pregnant words: "Such a man the noble lord at the head of affairs has
found in the well-known vicar of King's Warren, the Reverend John Dodd."
And then it compared the Reverend John Dodd to the "Man of Ross," in its
usual graceful and pointed manner.

Verbal communications, like dead men, tell no tales.

The Prime Minister didn't write a letter to the Reverend John Dodd, he
didn't even send him a halfpenny post-card, offering him the bishopric;
but he did dispatch a trusted emissary. We must remember that the
Minister had been credibly informed that the Reverend John Dodd was
absolutely the only respectable clergyman in the Church of England, in
the full possession of his mental faculties, who would be certain to
decline the honours of consecration. Certain Roman emperors have earned
our respect by refusing to accept divine honours, and the Prime Minister
heard with delight that the Reverend John Dodd was a man of the same
heroic kidney. We have met the emissary before, it was the same old
clerical friend of the Reverend John's, who had on a previous occasion,
as his archdeacon, warned him to set his house in order on the
appointment of a new bishop, a king who knew not Joseph. He it was, who
had recommended to his friend Dodd that eminently reliable clerical
charwoman, the Reverend Barnes Puffin. The Reverend Barnes Puffin had
done his work well, things had gone on smoothly ever since in the parish
of King's Warren; and many a time and oft had the stout vicar, like the
mask'd Arabian maid in the "Light of the Harem," exclaimed, "Oh, if
there be an Elysium on earth, it is this, it is this." I don't believe
that the vicar of King's Warren would have changed places with the
Mikado of Japan. The two clergymen had their interview; at which Mrs.
Dodd, to her great indignation, did not assist. Never before in his life
had the Reverend John kept a secret so long from the knowledge of the
wife of his bosom, the fair Cecilia; until the next morning at
breakfast, he may be said to have continuously wrestled with her in the
spirit. In vain did Mrs. Dodd alternately beg, command, and even entreat
him with briny tears, to communicate to her what had taken place in that
secret interview. All she could extract from him was, that she should
know all about it at breakfast time. She even tried guessing, but each
guess was more wildly improbable, and wider of the mark than the last;
her final suggestion was a rather barbed arrow though.

"John," she said in a hissing whisper, with a vicious nudge, to the poor
vicar, who was vainly seeking sleep for the twentieth time. "You may
keep it from me if you will, John, but I've guessed your dreadful
secret. Yes," she added with a succession of sobs, "I've guessed it at
last; the boo-boo-bishop is going to sequestrate your living on the
ground of your weakened intellect." But Dodd only chuckled, or rather
"chortled," in his amusement, as he buried his face in his pillow.

The next morning Mrs. Dodd, as was her custom, entered the
breakfast-room first. She took up the _Thunderer_, and she performed her
natural duty as a woman, and went carefully through the list of births,
deaths and marriages; and then she came upon the inspired article to
which we have alluded. At first the paper dropped from her fingers, and
then her face was illumined by a smile of triumph. The neat
parlour-maid was just placing the hissing urn upon the table.

"Jane," said Mrs. Dodd, "in future when addressing your master, be good
enough to say, 'my lord.' You can inform the others of what I wish
done."

The girl dropped Mrs. Dodd a low courtesy, stared at her, and then
stammered out, "Yes, my lady."

So grateful was this speech to Mrs. Dodd's feelings that she hadn't the
heart to correct the girl; she merely smiled blandly and smoothed her
cap ribbons.

The Reverend John Dodd entered the room at the moment; he sniffed and
rubbed his hands, for ambrosial odours from the kitchen reached his
nostrils. His wife sprang to her feet, and rushing into his arms after
the manner of long-lost daughters upon the stage, she buried her face in
his M.B. waistcoat. "John, dear John," she said through her tears of
joy, as she gazed up at his great round smiling visage, "let me be the
first to congratulate you on your well-deserved honours." She snatched
up the newspaper and waved it wildly in the air. "I've read it all,
John, and they've put it _so_ nicely. Little did I dream last night when
I spoke to you so irreverently, for I shall revere you now, John, that I
was speaking to a bishop. Oh, John," she continued, clapping her hands
in a girlish manner, "'tis such a becoming dress, and so, so
delightfully exclusive."

"Calm yourself, Cecilia," said Dodd, who feared the shock would be too
much for her. "Calm yourself, Cecilia, dear. I'm plain Jack Dodd still;
they did offer it me yesterday, but I refused it."

"And you can stand there, Mr. Dodd, and tell me this dreadful thing. Oh,
Mr. Dodd," she said with withering sarcasm, "I thought just now that I
was the wife of a bishop. Alas, I learn from your lips the terrible
truth, the truth which my poor father so often impressed upon me, that
I am only married to a fool," and she rushed from the room.

I suppose that the parson was after all a callous stony-hearted man, for
though he breakfasted alone, he devoured the entire dish of stewed
kidneys, which the parlour-maid had placed upon the table with a low
obeisance.




  CHAPTER IX.

  MR. CAPT LEAVES SERVICE.


Mr. Capt bided his time. The quiet respectful foreign servant showed by
no word or gesture that he held the key to the mystery of Lucius
Haggard's birth. His duties were almost a sinecure, and though now he
drew his pay from Lucius Haggard, and was, of course, young Mr.
Haggard's own man, yet he gave almost as much attention to the comforts
of the younger brother. Every afternoon Mr. Capt was in the habit of
taking a long walk in the great park. I don't think it was simply for
love of exercise, or to admire the scenery, that he was so regular in
his pilgrimages to a particular sylvan glade on the border of the river
Sweir, which formed the extreme boundary of Lord Pit Town's home park.
The real fact was, that Capt was in the habit of making a daily
inspection of the place where he had deposited his treasure. At first he
was accustomed to walk down to the river and examine the little tuft of
moss which he had so carefully planted over the hiding-place furnished
him by nature in the beech tree. But he had noticed that he had worn
quite a little path just beneath his tiny treasure-house; such
carelessness he remembered might betray him; so though he passed the
tree every day, he was careful to avoid his first mistake; and as day by
day the little tuft of moss grew greener, for it had now evidently taken
root, Capt gradually inspected the tree just as carefully but from a
greater distance. From many a point of vantage he could observe the
little green patch, and at length, by a refinement of ingenuity, he was
enabled to keep away from the tree altogether. His eternal cigar in his
mouth, he was accustomed to walk about well within sight of the beech
tree. The spot was secluded enough when he had first adopted the
hiding-place, but as the autumn wore on and the leaves fell, Mr. Capt
thanked his stars at his own ingenuity. Having assured himself that no
one was in sight, Mr. Capt would take a small opera glass from his
pocket, then he would commence by its aid to admire the view, he would
gaze round at all points of the compass; last of all, his glance would
inevitably fall upon the beech tree, the glass would be fixed steadily
upon the little tuft of moss, and then seeing that it was undisturbed it
would be replaced in its case, and pocketed with a sigh of satisfaction.
And then Mr. Capt would continue his perambulations in a comfortable
frame of mind.

It was one of those bright, brisk, clear days of early winter, when the
sun has attained sufficient power to make us unbutton our overcoats,
and feel glad if we had left our neck-wraps at home. Mr. Capt had just
breasted the rising ground which formed the boundary of the dell in the
direction of the Castle. He stopped, and placed his hand in his pocket,
to draw from it the glass, and to then commence his usual artistic
studies of the thousand and one autumn effects of the daily changing
landscape. But before he could get the glass to his eye, he perceived a
figure standing at the edge of the little swirling river. There was
plenty of water in the Sweir just now, as it swept through the rich soft
mould here, where it formed the boundary of the home park. Robinson
Crusoe's gesture of disgust and fear, when he saw the first savage upon
his island home, was very similar to that made by Mr. Capt when he
discerned the tall figure of Blogg, the head keeper, leaning upon his
gun. Robinson Crusoe was a pious Englishman, as we know, but Capt being
an irreligious foreigner, gave vent to his feelings in a continental
oath. The keeper's back was towards Capt, and his eyes were fixed upon
the fast-hurrying waters of the swollen stream; the valet, though he was
a good six hundred yards off, retraced his steps upon tip-toe in his
great anxiety not to attract the keeper's attention. When he was well
out of sight, having put the rising ground once more between himself and
Blogg, he lighted a cigar, and recommenced his walk, making a long
circuit, but as if drawn by some irresistible magnetism, his feet once
more, ere the cigar was finished, brought him to the banks of the Sweir
and the entrance to the dell. This time Mr. Capt was not so fortunate,
for the keeper's eyes met his the instant he made his appearance. The
fact is that Blogg had been standing chewing the cud of his reflections,
or possibly thinking about nothing at all, during the five and twenty
minutes' circuit that Capt had made. There is a considerable difference
in position between a head keeper and his master's valet. Blogg
recognized the fact, for though he didn't touch his hat to Capt, he
didn't presume to shake hands with him, and he addressed him with marked
deference.

"Mornin', sir," he said.

"Good morning, Mr. Blogg," replied the valet affably; "on duty, I
suppose."

"Lor' bless you, a keeper's always on duty; leastways a head keeper is."

The two men walked along amicably side by side.

"I daresay it seems to you," continued Blogg, "more like loafing than
duty, for me to go mouching round the best part of the day, aye, and at
times the best part of the night, too, with this here gun. Not that
we're troubled much with poachers here about, they're mostly amytoors
here, but they're as full o' tricks as a bag full o' monkeys. I'm mostly
a match for 'em you know, for I was a regular myself once, as you can
remember. Ah, many's the dark night as I went out a-wirin' in King's
Warren parish. I don't know as there weren't more enjyment in those
days. We were both younger then, Muster Capt," said the keeper with a
sigh.

"Ah, but think of your position now," said Capt, who wished to put the
man in a good humour, that he might all the sooner shake him off.

"Position ain't everything. A head keeper's life is as anxious a time as
a frog's in a frying-pan, a hot frying-pan, ye mind me; it's not all
tips and perquisites; it's information here and information there, it's
night lines in the river and the lake, its wirin' and steel trappin',
when it ain't ferrettin' and fish-pison, and what with the boys as cums
after the antlers and the nestes, and the children as cums after the
blackberries, and the radicals as keeps a dog, a man's hands is very
full indeed."

"You must have an anxious time," said the sympathizing Capt.

"Ah, you may well say that," replied the keeper; "why, in my young days
the boys they cum after the nestes, and the men they cum after the game,
as is perhaps natural after all, but now they cums after everything.
They even grubs up the ferns and the primroses with irons made
a-purpose. Why, one of they fern chaps would think nothing of clearing
half an acre in a mornin'. They comes after the butterflies with their
nets, and a botanizing with their tin candle boxes, and trespassin'
comes natural to them. Why, only the other day I caught a feller
bottling mud out of a pond, and a-catchin' newts and such like. 'What's
your business here?' I said. 'I'm collecting quattic animals,' said he.
'And I suppose you've got permission?' 'Don't you be insolent, my man,'
he said; and he shakes his finger at me, for all the world like the
Sunday-school teacher used to shake his finger at me when I was a
little bit of a chap. 'Don't you try to stop the march of science, my
man,' says he. 'I don't care nothin' about the march of science,' says
I; 'but if you don't hand over the pair of antlers as you've got up your
back, I'll wallop you, master. And after I've walloped you, you and
science can march where you please.' But what makes my life a burden to
me," continued the keeper, still airing his grievances, "is vermin."

Capt started.

"What with the weasels, the stoats, and such-like, a man need have his
eyes open."

"Yes," said Capt; "you need all your powers of observation, I suppose."

"You're right there," assented the keeper; "it ain't much as escapes
me."

By this time they had reached the middle of the glen, and were within a
dozen paces of Mr. Capt's secret store-house. Greatly to the valet's
disgust the keeper now produced a lump of tobacco from his pocket, and
commenced with his knife to carefully shred off the quantity necessary
for filling his pipe; he stopped to satisfactorily complete the delicate
operation, then, with great care, he lighted the little black clay
cutty. The keeper got his pipe into full swing, the two men were about
to proceed on their walk, but Blogg suddenly laid his hand on the
valet's arm and pointed at the beech tree.

"It's many a man," he said sententiously, "as would walk by that tree
and see nothing particular about it," and he stared at the tree in
curiosity. "Aren't you well, Muster Capt?" he said suddenly, as the
expression on the valet's face attracted his attention.

The valet's countenance had become of an ashen grey, and drops of
perspiration stood upon his brow as he seized the keeper's arm.

"I am feeling very queer," he said.

"You look as if you'd seen a ghost," said his friendly fellow-servant.
"Take a pull at that," said Blogg, producing a small flask from one of
the capacious pockets of his moleskin coat. "I'll get ye a drop of
water," he continued, removing the little metal cup from the bottom of
the flask.

Half-a-dozen strides brought the keeper to the banks of the Sweir, but
getting the cup full of water was not such a very easy matter. The
keeper flung himself upon the turf at the edge of the rapidly running
stream, but ere he did so he took the precaution to stamp, with one foot
in advance, upon the edge. The reason he did this was obvious, for the
soft bank was undercut by the rush of waters. He filled the little cup,
and returned with it to his companion, incidentally remarking, "The
banks are plaguy dangerous just here. Do ye feel better now?" he said
with solicitude.

"Yes, I'm better now," said the valet.

"You look uncommon bad," returned the sympathetic keeper.

"And I feel so, Blogg," the other replied; "give me your arm, I must
lean on something. I think I'll get home at once."

"Just an instant, Muster Capt," said the keeper; "there's some artful
game or other been a-doin' with that beech; some chap has gone and
plugged the hole of it with a lump of moss; as like as not he's got a
shopful of wires there now. I'll just put my hand in and find out what
they've been up to with it."

"Get me home first, Blogg, if you can," hurriedly interrupted the valet,
clutching his arm. "I feel," said he, with simulated anxiety, "I feel as
if I were going to die."

"I won't keep ye a minute, Capt, but duty's duty," answered Blogg.

"Don't be a fool, man," cried the valet in an authoritative tone; "there
are seven days in the week, and you can search the hole, if there is a
hole, to-morrow as well as to-day."

But Blogg was an obstinate man. "You're woundy masterful, Capt, for a
man who thinks he's a-dying," said the keeper with an honest laugh.
"I'll see what's in the hole; and then, if you ask me, why, I'll carry
you to the Castle pick-a-pack, if you like." And then Blogg marched up
to the beech tree and picked the moss away from the hole. He removed the
stone, and turning to the valet, with a triumphant guffaw he cried, "I
told 'ee so, Muster Capt. I said as how there was a game going on," and
then he plucked the little packet from its hiding-place.

Maurice Capt was a determined man. Should he allow the cherished plan of
twenty years to be ruined by the curiosity of a clod? The packet was in
the keeper's hands. Like Alnaschar's dream of wealth, all the valet's
plans and schemings, all his fondest hopes of affluence, would be kicked
down in an instant. He well knew the dogged honesty of the man; the
packet, now within the keeper's grasp, was as good as in Lord Pit Town's
hands. All this passed through his mind in the twinkling of an eye, and
as the keeper flung himself once more upon the ground, the Swiss valet
advanced over the soft turf towards his prostrate form with noiseless
cat-like step. Maurice Capt had made up his mind. He flung himself upon
the keeper's throat with the ferocity of a tiger, and proceeded to
attempt to throttle his adversary from behind. But the keeper was a
powerful man. Although Capt's long fingers were tightly fixed upon his
windpipe, and the astonished man was taken at a great disadvantage, yet
the keeper did his best to rid himself of the remorseless adversary who
was savagely attempting to strangle the life out of him. He couldn't
call for help, and he didn't attempt it; but he struggled bravely, he
drove his heavy boots into the soft turf, and succeeded once even in
rising to his knees, only to be forced back again upon his face by the
furious efforts of the Swiss. Blogg's eyes were nearly starting from his
head, and his mouth literally foamed, from the cruel tightening grip
upon his throat. But the force of his muscular fingers, which wrenched
in vain at the iron wrists of the valet, began to relax. Even a strong
man cannot fight long when deprived of air. As the light of triumph came
into the valet's eyes, for he felt that slowly but surely he was choking
the very life out of his victim, the vengeance of heaven suddenly
overtook the aggressor. The overhanging bank of soft earth all at once
gave way; assailant and assailed, and the very earth they struggled on,
fell with a dull splash into the rushing stream.

Yet another few seconds, and the long lithe fingers of the Swiss would
have completed their deadly work. As he felt himself falling, he
relaxed his grasp of the keeper's throat, in the natural instinct of
self-preservation. Before his mouth reached the water, the hapless Blogg
got one great draught of air into his capacious chest, but Capt had too
nearly effected his work, and the keeper was practically almost
insensible. The only effect of this last breath of life, that chance,
and not the mercy of his adversary, had given him, was to make his
muscular fingers clutch the struggling wrists of his murderer with a
more vice-like grasp. The assailant and assailed had now changed places
as they sank beneath the black waters. The valet's sole efforts now were
directed to escape from the tenacious grip of the still struggling man.
As well might a cur attempt to shake off an infuriated bull-dog who had
once fixed his remorseless fangs in his throat. They sank beneath the
waters, and, still violently struggling, reappeared again and again as
they were spun round and round by the rushing stream. But not for long.

The little packet escaped from Blogg's fingers and floated rapidly away
down the stream. The would-be murderer sunk to the muddy bottom dead,
and honest Blogg struck out and scrambled up the bank of the rushing
Sweir.

"Blame me," he cried, as he shook himself like a great water dog, "blame
me if I don't think Muster Capt went clean mad; why, he nigh on
strangled me," and then he stared at the hurrying, rushing waters. "Poor
chap, he have gone to his account. I wonder what was in that little
bundle though!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The dark waters of the Sweir have closed for ever over the crafty wretch
who had so lately held the destinies of a noble family within his grasp.
Poor Lucy's secret has disappeared for ever beneath the raging waters of
the little river. The oath that Lucy Warrender extracted from her
cousin at the Villa Lambert more than twenty years ago will have been
kept but too well, and the secret will probably remain for ever
undiscovered. And will young George Haggard be any the worse, seeing
that he is robbed of his birthright? We know that Lord Pit Town's will
has practically made him a very wealthy man. The mills of heaven's
justice grind slowly perhaps at times, but they go on turning and
grinding for ever. Lucius Haggard, who in his black and bitter heart
knows that he is but an undetected impostor, may never marry, may even
predecease the half-brother who was born in lawful wedlock. She, the
silent invalid, may yet perhaps speak, or the hollow beech tree may
perchance give up its secret.

       *       *       *       *       *

Many things can happen in a couple of years. To-day the old lord and the
German doctor still chat and doze in the great picture galleries; and
George's mother, beautiful still in life's sad evening, yet wonders
whether she shall ever meet again in another world the dead husband who
betrayed her, but whom she has forgiven long ago. As she lies on her
sofa in the pretty room heavy with the scent of flowers, which has been
hers for many a long year, her eye brightens, and the soft colour comes
back momentarily to the pale cheek, as she hears the manly step of her
dear son George; her own son, her very own son, her best beloved.

He is dressed in deepest mourning; and he wears it for Lucius Haggard,
the man who would have robbed him of his birthright.

"Mother! dear mother!" he says, as he gently takes her hand.

There is no more to tell. And now the prompter claps his hand upon his
little bell, and down comes the green curtain upon the drama of human
love, of human passion, selfishness and greed, upon the end of the
family mystery with which it has been the author's privilege to try and
interest the reader.


    THE END.


PRINTED BY
KELLY AND CO., GATE STREET, LINCOLN'S INN FIELDS, W.C.;
AND MIDDLE MILL, KINGSTON-ON-THAMES.




      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber's note:

Although most printer's errors have been retained, some changes have
been made silently in spelling, punctuation, capitalization, and
accents. Variations have been made consistent.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PIT TOWN CORONET, VOLUME III (OF
3)***


******* This file should be named 42169.txt or 42169.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/2/1/6/42169



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
