Project Gutenberg's The Comet and Other Verses, by Irving Sidney Dix

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Comet and Other Verses

Author: Irving Sidney Dix

Release Date: March 5, 2013 [EBook #42265]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMET AND OTHER VERSES ***




Produced by Nicole Henn-Kneif, Greg Bergquist and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









[Transcriber's Note:

  Variations in spelling, punctuation and hyphenation have been retained
  except in obvious cases of typographical error:

    Page 012, Line  292: "sprits"    --> "spirits"
              Line  295: "evermore"  --> "evermore."
    Page 028, Line  981: "decendeth" --> "descendeth"
              Line 1001: "Autnmn"    --> "Autumn"
    Page 033, Line 1224: "the"       --> "the"

  Tags of decorative illustrations have been removed.

  Italic printed text has been formatted as _text_.]




                              _The_ Comet
                                  and
                              Other Verses


                          By Irving Sidney Dix

                   COPYRIGHT 1910      PRICE 15 CENTS




                               THE COMET
                                  and
                              OTHER VERSES

                          By IRVING SIDNEY DIX


                               DEDICATION

                    To the Memory of my school mate
                  William Morgan who was drowned in
                  the Delaware.

    _Press of Munn's Review_                    _Carbondale, Penna._




                            With the Reader


It should be stated that some of these verses, in a slightly different
form, have previously appeared in various periodicals in Binghamton,
Scranton, Philadelphia and New York City, but most of them appear here
for the first time, and also, perhaps it should be mentioned that some
of these stanzas were written during my school days. However, the
majority of the following verses have been composed since the former
booklet was published.

And if in any way you have been helped to see, that even here in this
rugged country "the poetry of earth is never ceasing," however rude my
interpretation of it may seem to the critical, the labor and expense of
publishing this little volume will be fully justified.

                                                         IRVING DIX.




                             Contents


                                                            _Page_
    The Comet                                                   7
    Washington                                                  8
    The Storm                                                  10
    Jim, the Newsboy                                           11
    March Wind Blow                                            12
    The Rime of the Raftmen                                    13
    A Child's Elegy                                            16
    Dreaming of the Delaware                                   17
    Norma                                                      18
    Plant a Tree                                               21
    Maid of Shehawken                                          21
    To the Delaware                                            22
    Starlight Lake                                             24
    An Inquiry                                                 25
    Twin Lake                                                  26
    The Man Who Swears                                         27
    The Glen                                                   28
    Hope                                                       30
    Lines to Liars                                             31
    Fooling                                                    32




                             ADVERTISEMENT

                       The Comet--15 cents
                       The Silent Life--15 cents
                       Both Booklets--25 cents

These booklets are not published as a financial venture--they are likely
to be a failure in this direction, for the cost of printing alone equals
the selling price, on account of the small number issued, only 250
copies, and fifty copies are not for sale. Five hundred copies of the
Silent Life were printed in 1907, and I have left only 160 copies for
sale. I desire to dispose of these and the small edition of "The Comet"
during the present year, so that another booklet (containing, I hope
still better material) may be issued during the year of 1911.

To those who may wish to send copies of either of these booklets to
their friends, thereby assisting in the disposal of this edition, the
following offer will be of interest.

Ten copies, assorted to suit--$1.00.

Address:
                                                    IRVING DIX,
                                                        Shehawken,
                                                            Wayne Co.,
                                                                  Penna.




                                Foreword


A few years ago, while recovering from an illness, I conceived the
idea of writing some reminiscent lines on country life in the Wayne
Highlands. And during the interval of a few days I produced some five
hundred couplets,--a few good, some bad and many indifferent--and such
speed would of necessity invite the indifferent. A portion of these
lines were published in 1907. However, I had hoped to revise and
republish them, with additions of the same type, at a later date as a
souvenir volume of verses for those who spend the summer months among
these hills--as well as for the home-fast inhabitants. But in
substituting the following collection of verses I hope my judgment will
be confirmed by those who chance to read these simple stanzas of one,
who--

  "Loves not man the less, but Nature more
    From those our interviews, in which I steal
  From all I may be or have been before,
    To mingle with the Universe and feel
    What I can ne'er express, yet cannot all conceal."

                                                            I. S. D.




                             Copyright 1910

                                   BY

                               Irving Dix



                         Verses in this booklet may be
                 copied in the public prints by giving
                 credit as above.




    The Comet


    Swift circuit-rider of the endless skies,
      Thou wanderer of the outer, unknown air,
      Amid those dim, uncharted regions there,
    Imagination droops--in deep surprise
    Man doth behold thee, and the fearful speed
    At which thou spurrest on thy flaming steed.

    Born of the dark and ever-deepening Past,
      Who nurs'd thee there in yonder viewless space
      Afar from earth--thy all-beholding face
    Hath gazed unspeakable, with clear eye cast
    Worldward on each magnificent return
    As if of human progress thou wouldst learn.

    And thou hast seen each triumph and each plan
      By which the human race since human time
      Hath learned at last Earth's secrets all-sublime
    While rising from the elements to man--
    Hast seen it triumph over sea and air
    And universal knowledge hope to share.

    Thy circuit measures well the age of man,
      The epoch of a life--and few there be
      Who seeing thee, thy face again may see,
    For human life is but a little span,
    With varying cycles of a different day,
    And in diffusion wears itself away.

    Child of the Sun, when first the human eye
      Beheld thee coursing in the night afar
      Like an illumined spectre of a star--
    Beheld thy awful form against the sky
    Strong men fell earthward with a coward-cry
    On their pale lips, as if afraid to die--

    And that brute King--Nero, the cruel King,
      When looking on thy fiery face unknown,
      Sate trembling on his little human throne,
    And thought that thou didst evil tidings bring--
    That thou wert writing on the distant skies
    A doom from which no human king could rise.

    Thy age is all unknown--man can but guess
      The time when first the Sun thy circle set--
      He can but guess thy secret birth--and yet
    Observing thee his knowledge is not less;
    He knows each cycle, each return to be
    A moment in that vast eternity.

    Recording-comet of th' immortal space,
      What history thy eye hath look'd upon
      Since first thy airy, circling course was run!
    What fallen pride! What scatterings of race!
    Jerusalem and Nineveh and Rome
    Didst thou behold from thy almighty dome--

    Didst thou behold--their birth, their rise, their fall--
      Low humbled by the under hordes at last,
      With glory and fair triumphs in the past,
    And footprints of destruction over all.
    While thou, fleet comet, with a light divine
    Continueth upon the earth to shine.

    Speed on! swift comet--turn, wanderer, turn!
      And with thy flaming, god-like pen of light
      On heaven's scroll with burning letters write:
    Live but to love, O earth!--to love and learn,
    For while a comet's mighty cycles fail,
    Love,--love and truth forever shall prevail.




    Washington


    It is forever so--when there is need
    Of some clear, clarion voice to forward lead
    God raiseth up a man from his own seed;
    Not from the soft, luxurious lap of earth,
    But from a nobler soil, so that from birth
    The frame is moulded with a chosen food
    That has one only end--to make it good,
    Full generous, far-sighted, firm and keen,
    With strength to rise above the gross and mean--
    The sordid selfishness that like a curse
    Drives from the heart the virtues it would nurse--
    That love of country, freedom's holy cause,
    Justice, mercy, that eye for equal laws,
    Faith in the future and our fellow-men,
    Faith in the sword when shielded by the pen--
    And so it was with us--when there was need
    Of one commanding voice to forward lead,
    God rais'd up here a man from His own seed;
    And so came forth the gentle Washington,
    Fair child of Fate, the nation's noblest son,
    Whom Virtue fostered and whom Virtue won.

    Some few there be whose feet knew rougher ground,
    But few indeed a loftier summit found--
    Nurtured in tender soil, he held a path
    Where others faltered, heeding not the wrath
    Of any king or potentate or power--
    His was the hero-heart--he saw the hour,--
    He knew the mighty odds, yet would not cower.
    And when the tyrant's heel touch'd on our shore
    And thrust itself unbidden to our door,--
    But Washington alone with eagle-eye
    Withstood the foe and taught him how to die;
    Repulsed, disheartened, driven to despair,
    He lifted up his voice in humble prayer,
    For in that awful night at Valley Forge
    He drank the bitter cup--he knew Fate's scourge,
    He felt her lash,--this tender-hearted George.

    Father of Liberty--thou Child of Light,
    Columbia's first-born, who in thy might
    Restored to Freedom her enfeebled sight--
    If spirits of the nobler dead can hear,
    This day--thy natal day--press close thine ear
    And learn what we thy nation need to fear,
    And if the immortal dead can truly speak,
    Show us, O Child of Light, where we are weak,--
    Grant us thy counsel (for thou art with God)
    And bear us wisdom where thy footsteps trod,
    And if thou seest aught of envious strife
    From virtue sapping all her sweeter life,
    Teach us, O Child of Light, a purer love,
    For thou hast learn'd of God--thou art above
    Thy weak and erring mortals here below
    Who see the light, yet forward fear to go--
    Guide us, if spirits of the dead may guide,
    So that in peace we ever may abide,
    So that from land to sea, from shore to shore,
    We shall be brothers now and evermore.




    The Storm


    All day long the sky was cloudless,
      Life was waiting for a breath,
    And the heat was more oppressive
      Than the fear of sudden death;
    All day long the sun was shining
      In a hot and windless sky,
    And the trees were weak for water--
      Earth and air were dead and dry.

    But e'er Night her wings had folded
      Came a welcome western breeze,
    Moving idly through the forest,
      Prophesying to the trees,
    Till above that dim horizon
      Giant clouds like warring foes
    Marshalled far in battle numbers
      As the wild winds wilder rose.

    Hark! O hear the double rumble
      As the thunder shakes the air,
    Like a thousand hoofs advancing
      In yon cloudy corral there!--
    Look!--how red the lightning flashes!
      How the echoes roll and roll--
    Dirges from some demon goddess--
      How the bells of heaven toll!

    Like a lance, a flash of lightning
      Cuts the foremost cloud in twain
    And the thunder's mighty echo
      Rolls athwart the drenching rain
    Till the landscape fades like shadows
      In the driving sheets of spray,
    And the wind wails through the forest,
      And the great trees rock and sway.

    Soon the air is strangely solemn
      And the winds no longer blow
    To the thunder's distant drumming
      In the valley far below;
    And along the low horizon
      All the clouds are growing dim,
    While upon the western hilltops
      Rolls again the sun's red rim.

    And away across the valley
      In the heavens arching high,
    Like a bed for fairy flowers
      Swings the rainbow in the sky--
    Swings until the shadows gather
      And the sun sinks out of sight,
    Seemingly to whisper softly
      To the world a fond good night.




    Jim, the Newsboy


    Jim, the newsboy, died today,
    So the evening papers say--
    And the funeral will be
    In the afternoon at three--
    "Please" (the papers say) "a flow'r
    Bring for Jim before the hour--
    Any color that you deem
    A true token of esteem,
    If you would remember him--
          The newsboy, Jim.

    At his corner near Broad street,
    Jim, tho' lame, would smiling greet
    With a merry, winning call
    All his patrons, great and small,
    And his fellow newsboys say
    That they miss him much today,
    And they have a tablet bought,
    And upon it this is wrought:
    "In memory of Newsboy Jim,
          We all liked him."

    Little toilers on Life's road
    To yon visionless abode,
    There was much of good in Jim
    Or the boys had disliked him;
    There was something in his heart
    That drew patrons to his mart,
    Something noble, something true--
    Strive that it be said of you
    As in eulogy of Jim,
          "We all liked him."




    March Wind Blow


    Bitter March-wind, blow and blow;
    Drive away the drifting snow;
    Toss the tree-tops to and fro;
      Kiss the ice-bound lakes and streams
      And arouse them from their dreams.

    Happy March-wind, blithely blow,
    Winter's heart is full of woe,
    Winter's head is lying low;
      Bring, O bring the melting rain
      Back unto the earth again.

    Weeping March-wind, blow and blow
    Till thy tears of sorrow flow
    Down thy dying cheeks of snow--
      Weep away! for man must wait
      Till those tearful winds abate.

    Merry March-wind, softer blow,
    Let the little children know
    Where the sweetest flowers grow;
      Let thy tender accents ring
      From the joyous harp of Spring.

    All ye wild-winds, blow and blow,
    Drive away the drifting snow,
    Bend the bushes, bend them low;
      Breathe upon the trembling sod
      Springtime's messages from God.




    The Rime of the Raftmen


    I

      The Delaware above the Rift
        Each bank is fast o'erflowing,
      And sweeping onward dark and swift,
        Wild and still wilder growing
      It hurls a heavy raft along
        Upon its rocking way,
      While the Captain's call the hills prolong
        At dawning of the day:
      Pull, lads, pull!--to Jersey side,
              The Rift is near!
         Pull, lads, pull!--for the high floods hide
      The ragged rocks like an ocean tide,
              And the river's rush I hear.


    II

      Safely the Rift is left behind,
        A careful stearsman stearing;
      Swiftly we speed, only to find
        A dizzy eddy nearing,
      Where rolling in the river-lake,
        And whirling round and round
      A dozen rafts the circle make,
        And warning cries resound:
      Pull, lads, pull!--Sylvania's shore!
              The Eddy's near!
      Pull, lads, pull!--till the sweeping oar
      Bends like a bow and you hear the roar
              Of the river in the rear.


    III

      The luring eddy lies behind
        Where the dizzy rafts are whirling,
      And we speed along with the cutting wind,
        The foam like suds up-curling,
      When ahead a sharp curve comes in sight
        And we hear the Captain call
      As the raft swerves sudden to the right
        And the ridges tower tall:
      Pull, lads, pull!--to Jersey side!
              The Bend I fear!
      Pull, lads, pull!--and soon we'll ride
      On the rolling wave to Trenton's tide
              With river calm and clear.


    IV

      The Bend is past, but the Water-gap
        Of the Delaware up-rearing,
      Looms far ahead like a narrow trap
        As fast our raft is nearing,
      And calm and deep the waters grow,
        And scarcely comes a sound
      Till the Captain's calling, to and fro
        Re-echoes far around:
      Rest, lads, rest!--a little while!
              Be of good cheer!
      Rest, lads, rest! till yonder isle
      We safely pass--a few more mile
              And all our course is clear.


    V

      Along the wave we smoothly glide
        Until the island clearing,
      When down we speed as with the tide,
        Now here, now there a veering,
      Until a great bridge lifts its form
        Against the evening sky,
      When like the rolling of a storm
        The crew repeats the cry:
      Pull, lads, pull!--Sylvania's shore!
              The Bridge is near!
      Pull, lads, pull!--the for'ard oar,
      And soon our dangerous task is o'er,
              And little need we fear.


    VI

      So on we speed; now fast, now slow;
        By isle and rift and eddy
      Until at length along we flow
        With movement firm and steady;
      And low and lower lie the hills,
        And wider spreads the vale,
      And soft the Captain's calling trills
        Upon the evening gale:
    Rest, lads, rest!--our work is done--
              The danger's o'er!
      Rest, lads, rest!--another sun
      Will see a haven safely won
              By Trenton's friendly shore.




    A Child's Elegy


    We know her not whom once we knew,
    Who died it seems e'er death was due--
    We know her not; she is asleep;
    Our hearts are dumb--we can but weep
    That one so young must bid adieu,
    Must part so soon from earthly view.

    Those tender feet we knew so late
    We hear no more; we can but wait
    To hear them in the House of God
    When dust to dust we tread the sod,
    For in that home of homes they wait
    For us beside the city's gate.

    Those little hands out-held in love,
    That in such innocence did move
    To fondle each familiar face
    Are still--they cannot now embrace
    As once they did so like a dove
    That weary parents would approve.

    Those little lips that met our own
    So sweetly when we were alone
    No more shall meet the lips of earth,
    Sealed up unto another birth;
    But when these larger lives have flown
    Our lips will meet; she will be known.

    Springtime was here--the birds would soon
    Have re-appeared--the birds would soon
    Have warbled from a new-built nest,
    Would soon have felt beneath their breast
    The little ones--and such a boon
    Had taught them still a sweeter tune.

    But of the little ones not all
    Will answer to the parent-call,
    Not all will learn to rise and fly--
    Many are born, but some must die;
    Many will rise, but some must fall,
    And God knows best for each and all.

    This is the hope--we know not how--
    This is the hope that lures us now,
    That makes the parting less of pain--
    The hope that we shall meet again,
    And so while unto grief we bow
    The road beyond seems brighter now.




    Dreaming of the Delaware


    I

    I have been far away from the Delaware's shore,
      From the river where once I did play,
    But I'm dreaming tonight by the old cottage door
      Where the moonlight is gleaming bright as day.


    REFRAIN:

    Dreaming, dreaming, dreaming of that dear old stream,
      Dreaming of the days that are no more--
        The days so bright and fair,
    Dreaming in the moonlight gleaming on the shore
        Of the dear old Delaware.


    II

    And the river is still, and so peaceful tonight
      That its murmur I scarcely can hear,
    And across it the moonlight is beaming so bright
      That the scenes of my childhood appear.


    III

    And I think of my mother who bade me farewell
      And the sister who kist me good-bye--
    They are sleeping below in that beautiful dell
      But methinks that again they are nigh.


    IV

    Long deserted has been the old river home,
      My old home by the dear Delaware,
    But never, O never again will I roam
      From the scenes of my childhood so fair.


    V

    I will cherish the dreams I am dreaming tonight,
      Will upbuild the old homestead once more,
    And perhaps when I'm dead, for another's delight
      It will bloom by the Delaware's shore.


    REFRAIN.




    Norma

    A Legend of the Wayne Highlands


    Along the lake's wild northern shore
      An island dark with trees
    Lies shadow-like, and o'er and o'er
    At midnight thru a leafy door
      Comes music on the breeze,
      Sweet music on the breeze,
    Where sad-eyed Norma dreams,
      And o'er the wave, in thru the trees
    The mellow moonlight streams.

    And Norma's voice is sweet to hear
      As the breathing of a bell;
    But while so welcome to the ear
    Of any one afar or near,
      The notes, O few can tell!
      The notes, O few can tell!
    Falling so wildly sweet,
      Like the mournful ringing of a bell
    With the tones still incomplete.

    How came this maid upon the isle
      Within the Hills of Wayne?
    Why sings she sweetly all the while
    As if to ease her self-denial?
      Why sings she a refrain
      At the lonely midnight hour
    On an island dark with trees,
      Enchanting souls unto her bower
    By such sweet melodies?

    The legend runs:--That long ago
      A lover came to woo,
    But left her--why?--(no man doth know)
    For while her love like wine did flow
      Away from her he drew--
      He drew from her away,
    While she was left forlorn
      And ever (so the legends say)
    Did daily for him mourn.

    But Norma left her home one night
      When all were fast asleep
    And angel-like she trod the light
    Moonpath across the waters bright
      Until she ceased to weep,
      Until she ceased to weep,
    Singing a sweet, sweet song
      That on the lake that lay asleep
    The night-wind did prolong.

    And after Norma's death, one day
      A knock at her father's door
    Announced the lad who went away
    When both were lovers young and gay,
      Who now would love her more
      Than any other maid,
      Yes, any other maid,
    Saying, O where is Norma now,
    Where is my sweetheart now?

    O Youth, my daughter is not here--
      She waited, waited long
    To hear the voice she held more dear
    Than all the rest--nor could we cheer
      Her with another song;
      But many hear her sing
    By the island,--sing so sweet
      That never, never can they bring
    The song to me complete.

    The lover sadly turned away
      And vowed that he would know
    The song complete e'er dawn of day
    And followed where the moonpath lay
      Upon the lake below,
      Where Norma sang of love
    On the island dark with trees
      That cast deep shadows on the cove,
    And his heart was ill at ease.

    At midnight o'er the moonlit wave
      He bent his little boat,
    Till he heard the song the soft winds gave,
    But if his life that song might save,
      He could not tell a note!
      He could not learn a note!
    Tho' many, and many, and many a night
      In the lovely moonpath gleaming bright
    He listened from his boat.

    But the song he never, never knew
      Altho' he listened long,
    And so it is--is ever true
    When hearts withhold a love long due;
      For Love sings one sweet song,
      One sweet familiar song,
    At thy heart's door today,
      And knocking, waits, but waiting long
    Forever turns away.




    Plant a Tree


    The Past unto the Present cries--
    Arise, ye more than blind, arise!
    For I who fell the forest low
    Would now another forest grow,
    But what is done I cannot mend,
    So unto you a message send--
    Much did I do for you, for me
        Plant a tree,
        Plant a tree.

    The Present, waking from its sleep,
    Across the hills began to creep,
    And saw where Past had fallen far
    A noble forest, with a scar
    On many a wounded mountain side
    That from the elements would hide--
    And answered:--Past, I will for thee
        Plant a tree,
        A forest tree.

    The feeling Future, yet unborn,
    Heard Present echoing her horn,
    And stirring somewhat in Life's cell
    Did try her dearest wish to tell,
    Whispering in an undertone:
    I--I shall reap as ye have sown,
    O heed the Past! and--thanks to thee--
        Plant a tree,
        Plant a tree.




    Maid of Shehawken


    Maid of Shehawken, kind and true,
      I sing a fond farewell,
    But, maiden, though I sing adieu,
      My love I cannot tell--
    My love I cannot tell to thee
      For parting gives me pain,
    Oh may I in the days to be
      Meet with thee once again.

    Maid of Shehawken, sweet and fair,
      Accept my humble praise,
    And may thy path be free from care,
      Full happy be thy days,
    And ever mid the lure of life
      Where e'er thy lot may be,
    In pleasant paths or weary strife--
      Remember, I love thee.

    Maid of Shehawken, kind and true,
      Tho' far away we roam,
    Few places will we find, O few
      As sweet as our highland home,
    And tho' Life's pathway lead along
      The shining streets of gold,
    Our lips will never know a song
      As sweet as the songs of old.

    Maid of Shehawken, dearer far
      Than any that I know,
    Lighting my pathway like a star,
      Afar from thee I go,
    But tho' I leave the Hills of Wayne
      My heart is still with thee,
    O maiden, may we meet again
      In the days that are to be.




    To the Delaware


    Cease thy murmuring, Delaware,
    For thy many braves so fair
    Who are sleeping by thy stream--
    Rouse them not--there let them dream.
    For upon that silent shore
    Indian's cry shall sound no more.
    There, where still the owlets cry
    And the solemn night-winds sigh,
    Let the victor's head remain
    With the spirits of the slain,
    Leave the warriors fast asleep
    Where the willows o'er them weep,
    For thy murmuring, Delaware,
    Cannot wake those sleeping there,
    For thy voice deep in the foam
    Cannot ever call them home.

    There, where low and high degree
    Sleep beneath the self-same tree,
    And where warriors small and great,
    Share in death a common fate,
    Leave the pale-face and the braves
    Side by side within their graves.

    There, where ridges lifting high
    Try to bridge the endless sky,
    And where willows bend like lead
    O'er the footprints of the dead--
    To each brother slumbering there,
    Sing sweet songs, my Delaware.


    REQUIEM:

    Brave!--thy happy days have fled
    Into silence with the dead;
    Thy canoe, thy well-worn way,
    And thy bow are in decay.
    And no more thy camp-fires gleam
    By thy sweet, complaining stream;
    And I mourn thy ruthless fate;
    Weeping am I--but too late--
    For upon that silent shore
    Indian's cry shall sound no more.




    Starlight Lake


    Well named thou art, O little lake
      Set in among the hills;
    Well named art thou,--each star doth make
    Reflected forms that fancies wake
      And memory fondly fills.

    And nightly on the rugged shore
      Each cot with ruddy beam
    Lights up thy face from pane and door
    And throws a stream of silver o'er
      Thy bosom like a dream.

    Thy hemlock hills, now dimly grown,
      Fling shadows on thy face,
    And to their branch the birds have flown,
    Except the owl, whose monotone
      The listening ear can trace.

    There, where the starlight thickly trails
      A path across thy wave,
    A passing boat a boatman hails
    Whose maiden crew still softly sails
      As with a pilot brave.

    While from thy shore a lithe canoe
      Shoots o'er thy bosom fair,
    Leaving behind a milk-white view
    As when the beaver paddled thru
      Thy waters unaware.

    Up rides the moon with rosy rim
      All silently and still,
    Chasing away the shadows dim
    That on thy surface seem to swim
      Like wood nymphs from the hill.

    Now midnight comes, and on thy shore
      No boatman plies his way,
    The cottage lights shine forth no more
    From window-pane or open door
      Where yet thy shadows play.

    Silent and strangely still is all;
      The stars like candles are,
    No echoes on the forest fall,--
    Each lonely owl hath ceas'd to call
      His wood-mate from afar.

    Silent and calmly still is all;
      Dim Night is monarch now,
    His kingdom is the midnight air,
    The forests his attendants fair,
      Who, at his bidding, bow--

    And stand like sentinels asleep
      Beneath the moon's wan beam,
    Until Aurora fair doth creep
    Above the hill where she doth keep
      Bright morn with welcome gleam.




    An Inquiry


    Speak, O speak, my angel fair,
    Is there sadness everywhere--
      Folly where the flower feedeth
      Rapids where the river leadeth
                To delight?

    Is there, is there anything
    An eternal joy can bring--
      What is real and what but seemeth
      Like a dream a dreamer dreameth
                Thru the night?

    Can there be, Angel of Love
    Can there be bright homes above--
      What is Life--and when it endeth
      What is Death--why it descendeth
                I implore?

    Tell me, Angel, can it be
    That thy hand is leading me--
      Tell me, are these seraphs singing
      Up in heaven, gladness bringing
                Evermore?




    Twin Lake

    In the Wayne Highlands


    The shadows fall on Twin Lake fair
      As crimson sets the Autumn sun;
    A holy hush is on the air
      Of eventide and day is done.

    No zephyrs kiss the little lake;
      So still and calm is either shore,
    That on her face dim shadows wake
      And deepen ever more and more.

    And where the long-leaf laurels grow
      A cuckoo sounds the hour of rest,
    And fondly answering far below
      Its mate is calling from her nest.

    Now comes the twilight, calm and still,
      And, with a cloak of sable hue,
    Half hides the lake and upland hill
      That faint and fainter fades from view.

    And through the broken web of night
      Each stalwart star with even ray
    Reflects upon the lake a light
      To guide a boatman on his way.

    And soon the massive moon doth ride
      Athwart the pine trees' heavy shade,
    That doth her fiery chariot hide,
      As an apparent halt is made.

    And sweetly from a maiden fair
      In yon canoe that skirts the shore
    A laugh rings out upon the air
      And echoes softly o'er and o'er

    Till dying on the distant hill,
      An evening silence settles far,--
    A quietness, so calm, so still,
      With rising moon and silent star--

    That peace, sweet peace subdues the soul,
      While on the clear and pensive air
    The bells of Como softly toll
      The ever-sacred hour of prayer.




    The Man Who Swears


    It is often, yes, often that the man who swears
    Is a man who dares and a man who cares;
    For the gentle voice and the eye of blue
    Will sometimes tell of a heart less true
    Than the rough, cold voice and manner stern--
    And you some day this truth will learn:--
    That often, yes, often that the man who swears
    Is a man who dares and a man who cares.

    When you are sick with fever and pain,
    Who comes to ease your weary brain?
    Is it the friend with the eyes of blue
    And gentle voice that comes to you,
    Or, is it the one with manner cold
    And voice so stern and ways so bold,
    That presses a hand on your fevered brow
    And soothes your troubled spirits now.

    When you are down and your friends are few,
    Who is it comes to comfort you?
    Is it the one with eyes so mild
    And voice as sweet as a little child--
    Is it the one with gentle way
    That comes to you and dares to say:--
    So sorry, friend; say, here's my hand,
    I'll do your bidding; now just command?

    When in misfortune you need a friend
    Who will fight for you to the bitter end--
    Is it always the one who speaks quite low
    And fears to say what he knows, is so,
    Or is it the man who speaks his mind
    And shows some mettle--and hardly kind
    Whose heart is cold until your woe
    Melts an entrance as the sun melts snow?

    I would not say that swearing is right
    But I say some men are willing to fight--
    It is wrong indeed for a man to swear,
    And I envy no one's weakness there--
    Still I believe, with me you would say
    While one will swear and another pray
    You would follow the man who is willing to dare
    Tho one might pray and the other swear.




    The Glen


    Here Nature's nice adjusted tool
    Hath cut a chasm; and each pool
    Reflects a narrow, rocky room
    Where sun-born flowers seldom bloom,
    But where the ledging, level shelves
    Betray the dance hall of the elves.

    And overhead the tasseled trees
    Frown from the wall, and with each breeze
    Awake the solemn avenue,
    But hide from sight the upward view,
    When with a hundred harps they sing
    To Boreas their mighty king.

    Here Echo dwells in lonely mood,
    And answers to the dying wood;
    Unsuited to a varying rhyme
    She hath no voice for tuneful Time
    Content to speak as she hath heard
    The lyric wind, the singing bird.

    Here these same falls awoke the glen
    Long, long before the march of men;
    Long, long before yon broken soil
    Brought forth the fruit of human toil
    And here these falls will dance and play
    When feeling man has passed away.

    Sing little Falls; and echo Glen,
    Till silent are the songs of men
    And they that dwell upon the earth
    Have disappeared as at thy birth
    And senseless Rock--if think ye can,
    Think ye--how short the life of man!




    Hope


    Kind guardian of the Lonely Shore,
      And Sorrow's true and only friend,
    Comforting angel of the poor--
      What heavenly spirit did descend
    With passive voice, with ways unknown,
      Within thy very self complete?
    O Hope, when left at last alone
      We fall a suppliant at thy feet
    And worship there, with heart forlorn
      From childhood's land of make-believe,
    Through early youth, the brightening morn,
      Till tottering age, the fading eve.

    And who could walk without thee, friend?
      Who walk dim paths without thy hand?
    From out the world shouldst thou ascend
      Blind Poverty would stalk the land;
    Despair would seize some simple knave
      And Hatred every evil one,--
    O Hope, for more would seek the grave
      Without thy timely vision shown:--
    The sick upon the lowly bed;
      The blind a-begging as of yore;
    The weeping child who works unfed;
      The prisoner by the fatal door,
    All, led along, still cling below
      To feel thy subtle charms so free,
    As wearily, drearily on they go,
      Following, following after thee.

    And when upon Life's field they fall,
      When Disappointment reigns supreme,
    Thy voice, omnipotent, would call
      E'en from the dust their fondest dream;
    Would call and wake the slumbering thought,
      And point it to some great ideal
    While adding all, but taking naught
      From out the present, living real.
    Then, Hope, thou sentinel of light
      By Disappointment's lonely shore,
    Speak out amid the depth of night
      And guide us safely evermore.




    Lines to Liars


    Let lawyers harp about the law,
      And all its majesty and might;
    They find in every case a flaw
          And think they're right.

    Let politicians praise the truth
      And laud its virtue to the sky--
    They practice from their very youth
          To give the lie.

    Let prophets send the saints to heaven
      And damn poor sinners e'en to hell--
    How such authority is given
          They cannot tell.

    Let doctors prate of human pain
      Alleviated by their skill,
    When Death's dull sickness comes, in vain
          Is every pill.

    Let poets pipe of bloody war
      And claim its carnal method right;
    They're only piping cowards, for
          Not one will fight.

    And so it seems we mortals boast
      Of knowledge where we know the least
    And show our ignorance the most
          Like any beast.




    Fooling


    He was a lad--a tender boy,
    And she--she held him as her toy,
    And when she wearied of his way
    And would with other playthings play,
    I heard him say beneath his breath:--
    A fool am I; it is my death--
    She jilted me--the little lass,--
    I will not let such fooling pass
    But shift at once some bitter dart
    Back--back again into her heart,
    But then thought he--All those who play
    With fools are fools as well as they,
    And so he made a living rule:--
    It takes a fool to fool a fool.







End of Project Gutenberg's The Comet and Other Verses, by Irving Sidney Dix

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMET AND OTHER VERSES ***

***** This file should be named 42265.txt or 42265.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/2/6/42265/

Produced by Nicole Henn-Kneif, Greg Bergquist and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
