The Project Gutenberg EBook of Aunt Jimmy's Will, by Mabel Osgood Wright

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Aunt Jimmy's Will

Author: Mabel Osgood Wright

Illustrator: Florence Scovell Shinn

Release Date: March 30, 2013 [EBook #42437]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AUNT JIMMY'S WILL ***




Produced by eagkw, Greg Bergquist and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)







  AUNT JIMMY'S WILL




  [Illustration]




  [Illustration: "_'Hem!' The lawyer cleared his throat._"
                                                       (See p. 52.)]




  AUNT JIMMY'S WILL

  BY

  MABEL OSGOOD WRIGHT

  AUTHOR OF "BIRDCRAFT," "WABENO THE MAGICIAN,"
  ETC., ETC.

  _ILLUSTRATED BY
  FLORENCE SCOVELL SHINN_

  New York
  THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
  LONDON: MACMILLAN & CO., LTD.
  1903

  _All rights reserved_




  COPYRIGHT, 1903,
  BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.

  Set up, electrotyped, and published October, 1903.

  Norwood Press
  J. S. Cushing & Co.--Berwick & Smith Co.
  Norwood, Mass., U.S.A.




  [Decoration]

  To my God-child

  MARY ELIZABETH MILLER

  [Decoration]

  "_Aim at the highest, and never mind the money._"
                                    --L. M. ALCOTT.

  [Decoration]




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                          PAGE
      I. RED PINEYS                   1

     II. HER UNCLE JOHN              23

    III. AUNT JIMMY                  38

     IV. A CAGED BIRD                58

      V. MRS. LANE PLAYS DETECTIVE   77

     VI. BIRD'S COUSINS             103

    VII. SUMMER IN NEW YORK         131

   VIII. THE FLOWER MISSIONARY      146

     IX. 'RAM SLOCUM'S TAUNT        162

      X. LAMMY CONSULTS OLD LUCKY   181

     XI. THE PEWTER TEA-POT         202

    XII. THE TUG OF WAR             217

   XIII. TELLTALE TROUSERS          225

    XIV. THE FIRE-ESCAPE           242

     XV. THE BIRD IS FREED         258




ILLUSTRATIONS


  "'Hem!' The lawyer cleared his throat" (p. 52)        _Frontispiece_

                                                                  PAGE
  "Bird crouched in a black heap"                                    8

  Bird, Lammy, and Twinkle                                          13

  "'Buy something to-day? Nice goots ver' cheap'"                   99

  Bird and Billy on the fire-escape                                137

  "'They ain't fer me, fer sure?'"                                 158

  "'It means, Lammy Lane, that the Lord don't forget the orphan'"  230

  "Bird was found at last"                                         267




Aunt Jimmy's Will




I

RED PINEYS


Bird O'More crouched in a little black heap in the corner of the sofa
that stood between the closed windows in the farmhouse sitting room. Her
eyes, that looked straight before her, yet without seeing anything, were
quite dry; but her feverish cheeks, that she pressed against the cool
haircloth, and the twisting of her fingers in the folds of her gown,
told of grief, as well as her black frock and the closed blinds.

Outside the house, in the road, half a dozen country teams were hitched
to the rickety fence, while their owners roamed about the yard, talking
in low voices, and occasionally wondering aloud "when the women folks
would be ready to go home."

But the women folks had no idea of going yet, and small wonder, for they
had come from a funeral that had made poor Bird an orphan; they had much
to discuss, and without them, also, she would be all alone at the farm
that lay on a straggling cross-road a mile from neighbours, as if it,
like its recent owners, had tried to hide from those who had known it in
better days.

The little girl had been christened Bertha, after her grandmother, but
as, from the time she could speak a word, she was always singing, her
father had called her "Bird." Yet this day the little bird in her throat
was mute and only made a strange fluttering; so that the neighbours,
talking in whispers as they drank the tea that a stout, rosy woman, who
seemed to be in charge, was serving in the kitchen, said, "Poor child,
if she'd only let go and cry it out natural, it would do her good; but
that dry sobbing is enough to break a body's heart."

Then, as she gradually grew quiet, dulled by fatigue and the heat of the
room, her head sliding down on her arm in heavy sleep, they drew sighs
of relief and their voices arose in chat about the happenings of the
last few days and the natural question as to what was to become of Bird.

"Hasn't she got any folks either side?" asked a young woman who had but
recently moved into Laurelville, and did not yet know the comings and
goings and kith and kin of her neighbours.

"Only her father's half-brother," spoke up the rosy woman, Mrs. Lane by
name, "and he lives way down in New York City. Joshua wrote him ten days
back when Mr. More took sick; but he never answered, so two days ago
he wrote again. Joshua says he guesses maybe they've moved, for folks
are awful restless down in York, and shift around as often as every few
years--says he reckons you have to if you're anybody, cause there's
sudden fashions in buildings down there as well as in clothes, and they
get made over frequent to keep in style, likewise the streets.

"Yes, I wouldn't even have known his name if Mis' More hadn't told me
about him before she died, two years back. You see," turning to Mrs.
Tilby, the newcomer, "she was Sarah Turner, born and raised over at the
Milltown, and, being an only child, was give her own head a good deal. I
must allow she was pretty, and had those big black eyes that you can't
guess what they're seeing, same as Bird's got. Her folks felt dreadful
bad when she wouldn't take up with any of the solid fellers who would
have taken pride in the farm and mill business, but married young O'More
that nobody knew a speck about, except that he claimed to be an artist,
but folks didn't buy his pictures, and I don't wonder, for there's some
up attic now, and you have to stand way back to even see a shape to 'em,
being not near as clear as those that come extry with the Sunday papers.

"No, Mis' Slocum, I _don't_ take Sunday papers, on 'count of Joshua's
aunt's husband being deacon, and not desirin' to call trouble on the
family; but if he wasn't I would, for besides them pictures an' readin'
an' advertisements, that wonderful they'd raise curiosity in froze
dough, there's your money's worth o' paper for carpet linin' or kindlin'
over and above.

"Where was I? Mis' Slocum, you shouldn't 'a' set me off the track, so's
I'm not giving Mis' Tilby a clear idee of how it was.

"Ah, yes, I remember,--his wall pictures not sellin', he got a job
to paint posies and neat little views the size of your hand on the
inside covers of sewin'-machine boxes and trays and work-tables over in
Northboro. It paid first-rate, I guess, for a spell, so after the old
folks died, they sold out the farm and mill and moved into town.

"When Bird here was five years old or so, O'More had a knock-down, for
they got some kind of a machine in the factory that could do pictures
quicker than he, and at the same time the folks that had bought the
place on a mortgage caved in, and, between havin' no sense themselves
and lawyers, most everything was ate up and mixed so's Mis' O'More lost
the mill and all, and they moved out here.

"Mis' More--folks round here never could swaller the O', it being the
sign, as it were, of a furrin race and religion--just drew in like a
turtle in a shell, losin' hope altogether, and never went any place.
And as for Terence,--that was him, Bird always callin' him 'Terry' like
he was her brother,--I suppose he was always what bustlin' folks like
us would call slack; but after he came here, he seemed to grow happy in
spite of the fact that only one shop, the work-box and the picture-frame
one, gave him jobs. He painted out his flowers as careful, no two
pictures alike, and when I said, 'Why don't you do one and copy it--it
would be less trouble,' he looked up sort of reproachful and said, 'It
makes me happy to do good work, Mrs. Lane; a machine can do the other
kind.'

"Mis' More fretted herself to death, dumblike, same as snow disappears,
and it's two years now that Bird and her father have made out to get
along alone. Once in a time old Dinah Lucky would come up and wash or
scrub a day, and he and Bird always was together, and he learned her
to be what I call a real lady, and never hurt anybody's feelin's, to
say poetry and write a fine hand, and draw out flowers so you'd know
'em right off. The s'lectmen went after him onct 'cause he'd never sent
the girl to school, but when they found she knew more'n the grammar
grade, they kept their hands off from her; and as for speakin',--since
she talked plain, she's spoke nicer, and chose her words better'n
anybody but story-books and the parson, which come natural, her mother
bein' well learned and her father havin' a tone of voice not belonging
in these parts. Never a cross word did he speak or a complaint, so I
guess it was true he was born a gentleman on one side, as poor Sarah
always claimed, and it stuck to him all through, too, for the day he
died he worried for troublin' me to draw him a cool drink, saying, 'The
well-sweep was out of repair,' which it was, Mis' Slocum, _awful_, 'and
too heavy for a woman to handle,' as if I wasn't always stronger than
two of him. But then I never was, and never will be, his kind of a lady,
for there's folks whose feelin's I'm just achin' to hurt if I knew a
sure way. And now to think of it, Bird left at only thirteen with no own
folks and little better'n nothing."

"Less than nothin', _I_ should say," put in Mrs. Slocum, setting her cup
in its saucer with an unnecessary clash, "for what's here won't pay Mr.
Slocum his back rent on the place and the fence rails of the south lot
that they've seemingly used for firin'. _I_ should say that the clothes
on the girl's back didn't fairly belong to her, mournin' and all.

"If she is only a little turned thirteen from what you say she has
schoolin' enough to pass for fourteen and get work in the factory. I'll
keep her if she'll help me evenings and she gets enough to pay full
board,--growin' girls eats hearty," and Mrs. Slocum settled back in her
chair, folding her arms as if she expected Mrs. Lane to be speechless at
her generosity.

Speechless she was for a few moments, but for a different cause--a
struggle between prudence and a quick but just temper--then she said
very slowly and distinctly: "Mis' Slocum, the back rent is not for me
to deny you, but the fence rails is and the few clothes the poor lamb's
wearin' also. There hasn't been any fence to that south lot since the
summer before my Sammy was born and I was there berryin' and noticed
the rails was rotted and fell, and that's fifteen years! As to clothes,
they was give her outside of the family, which was me, ma'am, made out
of those that belonged to my Janey and for her sake, and besides which a
minor child isn't liable for her father's debts, 'it bein' the law,' as
Joshua says, and he knows.

"I wouldn't have mentioned this in public, except some folks needs to
have witnesses around before they can take in things, Mis' Jedge o'
Probate Ricker bein' here makin' it quite suitable for me to testify.

"As for who'll take her, there's those that'll ask no board, but Joshua
says 'no one's got a right until the uncle either turns up or else
doesn't,' which I'd much prefer. And there'll be no talk of factory and
passin' her for above her age, Mis' Slocum, I bein' the niece-in-law to
a deacon, as I've said before, should feel called upon to testify and
give the truth a full airing."

Whatever action Mrs. Slocum would have taken, it was sidetracked by the
minister's wife, who, with a sharp warning cough and a hurried "s'h'ush,
she's awake," turned the attention toward the darkened room again.

Bird rubbed her eyes drowsily, then started up murmuring, "Yes, Terry,
I'm coming, I didn't mean to fall asleep," as if she fancied herself
called, stumbled toward the door, saw the kitchen full of people, while
the bright light and lilac perfume of the May afternoon came through the
open door. Then she remembered.

"Here, let me wash your face and freshen you up a bit," said Mrs. Lane,
whisking out a clean handkerchief and dipping it in the water bucket,
while at the same time she put her arm around Bird to cut off her
retreat. "Now, that is better. Just a sip of tea, dearie, and a bite,
and then go out and get a mouthful of air, while I open up the windows,
for it's sizzling in here if it does lack two days yet of almanac
summer."

[Illustration: "_Bird crouched in a black heap._"]

The child did as she was told, gave her friend one grateful look, and
slipped out the door without speaking, much to the relief of the others,
the minister's wife nodding caution to Mrs. Tilby who said: "Sakes
alive! she scart me silly, gropin' in that way. I do wonder how much she
heard."

Meanwhile as Bird disappeared around the house a tall boy, carrying a
big bunch of red peonies, came up the track in the grass that served as
a path. It was Sammy, or Lammy Lane, as he was usually called, clad in
his best clothes and red with running, having only come to a full stop
as he reached the kitchen door, where he stood looking anxiously in, the
flowers clutched nervously in both hands.

"Lammy Lane, where've you bin, to go and miss the funeral and all, when
I started you out close after breakfast?" asked his mother, fiercely,
yet with an air of relief.

"Catchin' fish in the brook with his eyes, I reckon," said Mrs. Slocum,
with a glittering smile, which was very trying to Mrs. Lane, for Lammy,
the youngest of her three sons, was not esteemed over clever, in fact
a sort of village Johnny-Look-in-the-Air, always going to do something
that he never did, and lacking in courage to boot. In fact the twisting
of the name of Sammy into Lammy was really a slur upon his lack of sand
and the fighting spirit natural to the average boy.

It is perfectly true that Lammy at this time was not a beauty with his
tousled reddish hair, freckles, and lean colt's legs, but no one who was
a judge of faces could look in his straightforward gray eyes and at the
firm line of his chin without feeling that here was the makings of a
man, if people did not meddle with the plan God had for his work.

Lammy's eyes roved about, and, not seeing the object he wanted, answered
his mother slowly, as if it was hard to remember exactly where he had
been.

"I've been at Aunt Jimmy's most all day until now," he answered. "When
I took the butter down after breakfast, she wanted me to help her
fix up cause she didn't feel smart, 'n' then there was the chickens
to feed, and Jake he didn't go yesterday to spread the grass under
the strawberries, and she said if it rained, they'd spoil, so I did
that; 'n' then I ate dinner, 'n' dressed up again and started. Then
I remembered I told Bird I'd cut her some o' Aunt Jimmy's red pineys
for her to take along up there," nodding his head backward toward the
hillside graveyard.

"Aunt Jimmy's awful particular about those red pineys, and she wouldn't
let me cut 'em. She came out in the yard to do it herself, but it took
her a long while, and when she'd got them tied up, she said, 'Best go
to the house now for they'll be back, and tell your ma to come over
to-night, for somehow I feel all strange and worked up as if I was going
to have a spell,' and that's why I'm late, and where's Bird?" he ended
abruptly.

"Lammy Lane, do you mean that aunt is threatened with a spell, and
you've took all this time to tell me?" said Mrs. Lane, hardly believing
her ears.

"Neighbours, I'll have to close up here, Joshua bein' in charge,
as it were, as Mis' Jedge o' Probate Ricker understands, until a
'ministrator's fixed on, but we can meet to-morrow forenoon to wash up
and discuss the situation. Goodness me, I hope Aunt Jimmy's no more'n
overtired!"

"'Twouldn't be surprisin' if you was resigned to the worst, seein' your
expectations through being the favourite nephew's wife," said Mrs.
Slocum, slyly.

"Expectations, fiddlesticks!" snorted Mrs. Lane, "you know perfectly
well, Mis' Slocum, that the Lord and I are working together as hard as
we can to give Aunt Jimmy every breath of life that's coming to her,
and seein' that she enjoys it too, her ownin' the best southslope fruit
garden between Milltown and Northboro having nothing to do with it.

"Lammy, do you go round, and I guess you'll find Bird back of the shed,
and you can take her a walk to fetch the posies up yonder, and then
bring her down to our house for supper; and if I don't get back first,
the butt'ry key is in the kitchen clock, and you and pa can set out a
full table.

"Young company's best for the young in sorrow," she added to the group
as Lammy shot off.

"Yes, Mis' Slocum, those spoons is real silver, but biting 'em 'll
injure them new teeth o' yourn, and not profit you anything, for they're
_my_ spoons I fetched up for the funeral, minding how well the Turners
always set out things at such times in the old days."

With this parting shot Mrs. Lane shooed the women out and locked
the door, called Joshua from the group of men who were examining a
broken-down grindstone for lack of better occupation, climbed into the
old buggy, and disappeared in a cloud of dust, the others following
until they scattered at the four corners.

       *       *       *       *       *

As Mrs. Lane had said, Bird was behind the shed. She was sitting on an
old log, her face between her hands, as she looked across the fresh
green grass to where the ragged spiraeas and purple and white lilacs
waved against the sky. Leaning against her knees was a queer little
rough-haired, brown terrier with unkempt, lopping ears, his keen eyes
intent on her face as if he knew that she was in trouble, and only
waited for some signal that he might understand to go to her aid, while
he vainly licked her hands to attract her attention.

As Lammy came around the corner suddenly, at first the dog gave a growl,
and then bounding toward the boy fairly leaped into his arms in joy,
for Twinkle, named for his keen twitching eyes, had once been Lammy's
best-beloved pup, that he had given to Bird for a companion.

"Hello, Twinkle, where've you been these days?" said the boy, holding
the flowers at arm's-length with one hand, while he tucked the little
dog between his shoulder and neck with the other. "Seems to me you've
got pretty thin wherever you've tramped to."

[Illustration: _Bird, Lammy, and Twinkle._]

"He hasn't been away," answered Bird, looking up; "he was hiding all the
time in Terry's--I mean father's room, and to-day, after they took _him_
away, he knew it wasn't any use waiting any longer, and he came out,
and Lammy, you--know--he's--all--I've--got--now," and, burying her face
in the terrier's ragged coat, she broke into a perfect storm of crying.

Lammy felt like crying, too, and in fact a tear rolled so far down on
his cheek that he had to struggle hard to lick it up, for Bird was his
dear friend, the only girl in the village who had never laughed at him
or called him "Nose-in-the-Air," or "Look-up-Lammy," and seemed to
understand the way in which he saw things. At first he looked around
helplessly, and then remembering that his mother had gone, and that he
must get Bird down to his home before supper-time, he blurted out: "Say,
don't you reckon Twinkle's pretty hungry by this? I guess we'd better
get him some feed down to my house, and you can leave these red pineys
over yonder as we go along if you like."

Lammy could not have done better, for Bird sprang up instantly, all the
pity aroused for the dog, and, turning toward the house, said: "How
selfish of me; we'll go in and get him something right away. Do you
think the people have gone yet? 'They mean kindly,' Terry used to say. I
must never forget that, but they talked so much I couldn't seem to bear
it."

"Yes, they've gone; mother wouldn't leave them behind 'cause of Mis'
Slocum," and he began to tell her about his Aunt Jimmy's ill turn and of
his delay in getting back with the flowers.

Bird listened quietly, and as they stood before the door of the silent,
empty house, a strange look crossed the girl's face that frightened poor
gentle Lammy, as she gazed straight before her and said: "Now I know
that I was not asleep this afternoon, only dull and faint, and that
what I thought was a dream was partly true. Terry _did_ owe rent to
Mrs. Slocum, and that was what he tried to tell me and couldn't when he
said there was only a little bit of money in the Centre bank to pay for
things, so that I must be sure and keep his paint-box and the pictures
in the big portfolio. The Slocums might try to take them. That's why
your mother made the people go and locked the door. Oh, Lammy, I haven't
any home or anything of my very own but Twinkle, but I could work and
learn to paint. Terry said I could and if everything gave out, I can
open the keepsake bag. See, I've got it now," and Bird pulled out a
small, flat, leather case, strongly sewed together, that hung close
around her neck on a thin gold chain.

"Do you know what's in it?" asked Lammy, fingering it curiously.

"No, but I think it's a piece of gold money; for it's round, though one
side is thicker than the other. Mother wore it, and then father put it
about my neck for me to keep, and he said his mother gave it to him when
he came away from home long ago."

As Bird stood looking at the house, the afternoon shadows began to
fall and a change came over her. That morning the thought of leaving
the place frightened her, but now the thing she most wanted was to get
away. "Lammy," she cried presently, "we must get those pictures and the
paint-box _now_; to-morrow the people may come back."

"But mother's taken the key."

"That doesn't matter, the cellar-door flap doesn't fasten--it never has
since I can remember--we can go in that way," and then Lammy, quaking
mightily, though he didn't know why, followed Bird into the house.

Love lights up many a dark, shabby room, and Bird had never been lonely
with her father for a companion, and in spite of his own shiftlessness
and poverty he had taught her much that she never would forget; but now
love had gone, and as she crept down the rickety stairs hugging the box,
Lammy stumbling after with the portfolio, her only desire was to go
somewhere, anywhere to get away, lingering only a moment in the kitchen
to collect some scraps of food for the dog. When they reached the porch,
they stopped to fasten the things together with some twine from Lammy's
pocket. The portfolio was full of flower pictures and some designs such
as wall-papers are made from. Bird turned them over lovingly, explaining
as she did so that a man in New York had written to Terry that if he
could do these well, he could earn money, and that he was only waiting
for spring flowers to begin. The letter was still in the portfolio.

"See," she said, "here is one of red peonies all ready to put the last
color in, and father was only waiting for them to bloom, but it is too
late now, so we will take them to him," and she took the bouquet from
Lammy, gently kissing each of the glowing flowers; and then they went
out of the yard in silence, Twinkle first, then Lammy with the bundle,
while Bird hesitated a moment; lifting the sagging gate she dragged it
to, fastened it to the post with the old barrel hoop that had replaced
the latch, and with one parting look shook the tears from her long
lashes and walked straight down the road. At the gate of the little
graveyard Lammy put down the bundle, and they went in together.

"See, I've made it look nice until dad can turf it over," said Lammy,
"and put a little Christmas tree for a head-mark," and sure enough the
mound that a few hours before was a heap of rough gravel was green
with young bayberry twigs and spruce branches, for on the upper side
of the hill had once been a great nursery of evergreens, the seed had
scattered, and the fragrant little Christmas trees had run all down the
hill and clustered in groups around the fence posts.

Kneeling very carefully, Bird arranged the crimson peonies. The country
folk thought only white flowers proper for such a place, but Bird loved
colour and Lammy's gift cheered her more than any words.

"Janey's close by here and grandma," said Lammy, presently, "so it
won't be a bit lonesome for your father, and I was hoping to-day that
he'd remember to tell Janey that you're going to be my sister now and
come down and live at our house, for she'll be glad that mother and I
won't be so lonesome as we've been at our home since she went to heaven.
'Cause you will stop with us, won't you?" he added earnestly as he saw
Bird hesitate. "Mother's going to fix it just as soon as she gets word
from your uncle. She didn't want to write, only dad said she'd ought to
because of the law or something."

"I'll always love you, Lammy," said Bird, slowly, the tears gathering
again, "and I never can like any place so much as this, and I'll never
forget to-day and the red peonies and your covering up the ugly stones,
but I've got to earn my living and I can't be a drag on anybody. I
thought, you know, if there was enough left to get to a city,--New York,
perhaps,--I might learn to paint quicker, and perhaps the man that
wanted Terry to make pictures for wall-paper might tell me how," and
then the poor child, tired and overcome with the long strain and the
new loneliness, could keep up no longer, and, throwing her arms about
Lammy's neck, sobbed, "Oh, take me somewhere out of sight, for I feel as
if I was all falling--way down a--deep--well."

Poor little Bird! All that she knew of the great city was from the
pictures in the papers and an occasional magazine, and it seemed to her
so big and gay and busy that there must be some place in it for her,
and now that night was coming, the country felt so empty and lonely to
the little girl, faint from weariness, and with the door of all the
home she had known closed upon her. For no one but Lammy had had time
to really comfort her, and in her unhappiness God seemed to have taken
her parents away and then hidden Himself. If only Aunt Jimmy had not
had the spell just then and she could have laid her head on Mrs. Lane's
motherly bosom, how different it might all have been. A carriage passed
as they turned into the highway, and the clanking of the harness made
Bird lift her head from Lammy's shoulder where she had hidden it, and
looking up she met the eyes of a young girl who was sitting alone on
the back seat of the handsome victoria. She was perhaps sixteen, or a
little over,--the braids of pale golden hair were fastened up loosely
behind,--and she was beautifully dressed; but it was not the clothes but
her sweet face and wistful big gray eyes that made Bird look a second
time, and then the carriage had passed by.

"How happy she must be," thought Bird.

"I'd rather walk than ride, and wear stubby shoes, or go barefoot, if I
only had a brother so that I need not go alone," was what the other girl
thought.

"That's Miss Marion Clarke that lives in the big stone house on the hill
before you come to Northboro," quoth Lammy. "There's only one of her,
and she can have everything she wants." Then he straightway forgot her.
Bird did not, however, for there was something in the gray eyes that
would not let themselves be forgotten.

By the time they reached the Lane farmhouse Bird was quiet again,
though her eyes drooped with sleep, and Lammy was telling eagerly how
next autumn they could perhaps go over to Northboro to school, for
drawing was taught there, and, he confided to Bird what had never before
taken the form of words, that he too longed to learn to draw, not
flowers, but machinery and engines, such as pulled the trains over at
the Centre.

As they came in sight of the house Lammy noticed that there was a
strange team at the gate, a buggy from the livery-stable at the Centre,
for quiet Lammy kept his eyes open, and knew almost every horse in the
county. On the stoop a short, thick-set man, with a fat, clean-shaven
face, and clad in smart black clothes, stood talking to Lammy's father.

Both men glanced up the road from time to time, and then Lammy noticed
that the stranger held his watch in his hand, and he kept fidgeting and
looking at it as if in a great hurry.

As the children entered the gate they heard Mr. Lane say, "Here she is
now, but you can't catch that evenin' train from the Centre; you'll have
to put over here until morning."

Bird gave a gasp and instinctively clutched Lammy's hand. Could this
be some one from her uncle? Of course it was not he himself, for her
father had been youngish, tall and slight, with fair hair, small feet
and hands, while this man was all of fifty, and had a rough and common
look in spite of his clothes that did not match his heavy boots and
clumsy grimy hands.

For a moment Bird forgot the story of her father's boyhood that he had
so often told her, forgot that fifteen years and a different mother
separated him from his half-brothers, and when Mr. Lane called her, as
she tried to slip in at the side door after Lammy, saying, "Come here,
Bird, this is your Uncle John O'More come from New York," she could only
keep from falling by an effort, and stood still, nervously twisting her
hands in the skirt of her black frock without being able to speak a
word, while Twinkle seated himself at her feet looking anxiously, first
at the stranger, then at Mr. Lane, with his head cocked on one side.




II

HER UNCLE JOHN


"Got a start? Didn't expect to see me here, did you? else maybe you
never knew you had an Uncle John," said the stranger, by way of
greeting, taking Bird roughly, but not unkindly, by the shoulders and
looking her full in the face. Then, noticing how pale she was and that
her eyes were red with crying, he let her go with a pat of his heavy
hand that shook her through and through, saying, half to her and half
to Mr. Lane, "Go along in now and get your supper. You look done up,
and I wouldn't object to a bite myself since I've got to hang around
over night; been chasing round after you since morning, and those
sandwiches I got at that tumble-down ranch at what they call the Centre
were made up of last year's mule-heel. They ain't gone further'n here
yet," he added, striking his chest that was covered by a showy scarf,
emphatically.

Bird began to breathe more freely to know he was going away in the
morning. Her father had told her in one of the long sleepless nights
of his illness about his two half-brothers, one in Australia, as far
as he knew, and the other in New York. Their mother had been a strong,
black-eyed, south-country lass, but his mother, the wife of his father's
later years, was a gentle, fair-haired, English girl, the governess in
the family to which his father was steward. At her death when he was a
lad of about fifteen, family differences arose, and he had gone to his
mother's people until he finally came to America with this brother John.

John was sturdy and coarse-grained; Terence delicate and sensitive.
They soon parted, and in the years between the artist had written
occasionally to his brother, but kept him in ignorance of his poverty.
Yet, in spite of knowing it all, Bird was bitterly disappointed in her
uncle. She built hopes about him, for did he not live in New York, and
there were schools where painting was taught in that magical city, also
the man lived there who wanted the wall-papers. Ah, if her uncle had
only been different, he might have asked her to visit him or perhaps
even have known the wall-paper man himself.

But this uncle seemed an impossibility and fairly repelled her, so that
to get out of his sight was all she desired. Presently she went into the
house, and, after carefully dusting her plain, little, black straw hat
and laying it on the sofa in the best room, she covered her new dress
with Mrs. Lane's gingham apron that hung on its usual peg and fell to
work at helping Lammy with the supper.

Now Bird was a clever little housewife while Lammy was very clumsy at
the work, so that in a few minutes they were both absorbed and chatting
quite cheerfully, never dreaming of the conversation that was going on
in the north porch. Only the white-curtained windows of the best room
could hear it, and they were shut tight.

"Now, Mr. Lane, since the youngster's gone in, I guess we might as well
get right down to business. I've shown you my papers and proofs, and
there's no special use rubbing it into her that her father was a dead
failure clear from the start, and that the sticks of furniture he left
and the few dollars banked or coming from his work 'll only square up
his accounts and leave the kid on the world, so to speak. I own I'm
clean flabbergasted myself, for I thought he was a man of some property
through his wife, for when he wrote, his letters were chuck full of high
ideas for the girl here."

Joshua Lane fidgeted miserably on the edge of his chair, and if ever a
man longed for the presence and ready tongue of his wife, it was he.

"I suppose that's one way o' lookin' at it," he assented after a while,
"but mebbe in some way he didn't flat out so much as it looks. He never
gave an ill word to any one, and Bird here's as smart and talkable and
writes a fist as good as the seminary principal over to Northboro, all
through his teachin', so no wonder she set a store by him. As to leavin'
the child on the world, she'll never feel the hurtin' edge of it while
mother and Joshua Lane's got roof and bite. I told O'More so, and I
reckon it eased him considerable."

"Smart, is she?" echoed the other; "that's a mercy. Girls have to get
a move on them nowadays in the city, and if they can't start in at
type-writing or something when they're sixteen or so, they get shoved
out of the race as leftovers by a new lot before they've earned their
ten a week. I've got a good job now, but I've had to hustle for it and
keep a lively step, too. That's why it goes hard to lose two days'
time on this business. I was mighty afraid when I saw what a forsaken
hole this was that the girl might be green as the grass, and n. g.
altogether. No, I didn't mean any offence," he said, as he noticed
Joshua's face flush at his reference to the pretty hillside village,
"but I've never had a use for the country. Give me streets with a push
of people and a lively noise and trolleys going by at night to remind
you yer alive, if you don't sleep straight through.

"Of course, knowing nothing of the circumstances before I left, I
couldn't quite fix a plan,--might have had to wait around and see to
that mill property if it hadn't vamoosed, but as it is, I don't see why
Bird shouldn't go right back with me to-morrow morning. I've got three
lively boys besides a poor little crippled feller,--them and the city
sights 'll cheer her up. It's different from what I thought to find, and
I don't owe Terry any favours of purse or tongue, but I've no girls, and
blood's thicker 'n water even though the English streak is heatin' to
an all-through Irishman,--but let that go. I'll give her some schooling
until she's fit age to choose her trade, or if she's tasty looking, get
in some good shop, and she can ease her way along meantime in minding
little Billy or helping the woman out. For I'd have you know that though
I've a good job, and there's always meat in the pot, we're plain people
of no pretence. I've money in a land company, though, that'll soon give
us our own home and not so far out either but what a gun would shoot
into the Bowery."

John O'More's speech poured out so rapidly that it almost stunned Joshua
Lane. When he pulled himself together, he gasped: "Did you say that you
calkerlate to take Bird away from us and to-morrow at that? I'll have
to go down to Aunt Jimmy's, I reckon, and call mother to onct," but as
he started from his chair "mother" appeared, coming up the road in the
buggy clucking vigorously to the old gray horse, excitement written in
every line of her homely, lovable face.

As she pulled up the horse at the gate, an entirely unnecessary labour
as for the past ten years he had never willingly gone past it, Joshua,
wearing a white, scared look upon his usually placid face, greeted
her with: "Sakes alive, Lauretta Ann, I'm wonderful put out; it never
rains but it pours; an' 's if there wasn't enough trouble for one
day, Bird's uncle, John O'More, has turned up. He's a rough, drivin',
quick-tongued sort o' chap, like the travellin' man that sold us the
horse-rake that had fits of balking and tearin' up the medder, and when
I complained, he said, says he, 'Why, certainly, I forgot it had the
plough combination,--I had oughter asked you an extry five on it.'"

"Nonsense, Joshua Lane, nobody's going to carry Bird off under our very
noses, uncle or no uncle; I'll soon settle that! But talking of pourin'
rain,--it's certainly let drive on us this day, for your Aunt Jimmy's
had a stroke; and though she can't move she can speak her mind still,
and isn't for lettin' folks in or havin' things done for her as she
ought. I've left Dinah Lucky with her, and I've stopped at Doctor Jedd's
and told him to hurry down, but the time has come when you've just got
to assert yourself willy-nilly. It's you, not me, as is her eldest
nephew and kin, and while I'm more'n willing to do the work, you've got
to show some spunk. Now jist you git into a biled shirt and your good
coat and go down and stand off the neighbours that, now she can't stir,
'll all be wrigglin' and slippin' through that door like eels in the
mill sluice when the gate's up. I'll soon settle that O'More."

Joshua, much relieved, obediently went into the house, while Mrs. Lane,
after looking into the kitchen to be sure that supper was progressing,
smoothed her Sunday dress that she had donned that morning for the
funeral, opened the windows of the best room to impress her visitor with
its green carpet and cabinet organ, and asked John O'More to come in.

"Thanks, Mrs. Lane I take it, but I guess I'll stay out here,--had
enough of shut-up places in that train to-day, besides some ladies
object to smoke in the house."

Before she could speak a word or even notice the long cigar that was
sticking out of his mouth in the direction of his left eye, he had
plunged into the subject at the exact point where it had been dropped.
"Now as to Bird, Mrs. Lane; your husband and I have tongue-threshed
things out, and he can repeat the same to you. I know just how things
stand, so nuff said about what's past. I travel in the west and Canada
for a steady house, and I'm away a good deal; now Bird can be company
for my wife as my kids are all boys. I'll give her schoolin', a trade,
and a shove along on the road in a couple of years. I wouldn't do less
for any kin of my own, and I kind o' take to her."

"But we don't want you to take her, and I reckon she don't either,
for--" put in Mrs. Lane, almost bursting with suppressed speech.

"Excuse me, one moment more, madam," he continued, removing his cigar
and speaking rather more slowly, "I judge that you object to her going
to-morrow; now I can't stop around here, and it's an expensive trip.
Seein' the city 'll be a change, and she'll soon settle down all right."

"But we don't want her to go at all," Mrs. Lane almost shrieked; "we
want her to live with us!"

"As what, for instance?" queried O'More, growing more Irish in his
speech, "a kind of a charity help, or had you intentions of adopting
her by the law? If so, and she wishes, I'll stand in the way of nothing
but a change of her name, to which I'd object."

Mrs. Lane was struck dumb. She had no idea of making a servant of Bird,
but on the other hand she knew that legal adoption would mean to give
Bird a like share with her own boys, and as what little they had, or
might expect, came from her husband's people, this she could not promise
at once.

"I meant--to treat her just like my little girl that died--but"--poor
Mrs. Lane got more and more mixed up--"I haven't asked Joshua about the
adoptin' business--it's so lately happened, we'd not got that far, you
see."

"Yes, mum, I see," said the fat man, drawing his lips together shrewdly,
"yourself has a warm heart, but others, yer own boys likely, may give
it a chill some day, and then where's Bird? No, mum, the girl 'll have
an easier berth with her own, I fancy, and not have to bend her back
drawin' and fetchin' water, either,--we've it set quite handy."

This was said with withering sarcasm for, unfortunately, at that moment,
Bird could be seen lugging in a heavy water bucket from the well,
something she had been warned not to do, and yet did unthinkingly, for
to-day she walked as in a dream.

Mrs. Lane saw that in reality she was helpless, unless she appealed to
Bird herself, and to rouse the child's sensitive spirit she knew would
be not only foolish but wicked, so for once Lauretta Ann Lane sat silent
and with bowed head, only saying with a choking voice, "I will tell her
after--supper--and you'll let--us write--to her, I suppose, and have
her--back to visit if she gets piney for Lammy,--they've been like twin
brother and sister ever since Janey died."

"I will that, ma'am, and I'll say more; if within the year she don't
content herself and settle down and grieves for yer, and yer see it
clear in that time to adopt her fair and square, and guarantee to do by
her as I will,--you'll get the chance."

O'More stretched his legs, stiff with sitting, and jerked his
half-burned cigar into the bushes, while at the same moment Oliver and
Nellis, Lammy's big brothers who worked in Milltown, rode up on their
wheels and the bell rang for supper.

       *       *       *       *       *

No one but Bird ever knew what Mrs. Lane said to her that night,
during the sad hours that she held the child in her arms in the great
rocking-chair that had soothed to sleep three generations of Lane
babies. Perhaps it soothed poor Bird, too, only she did not know it
then; yet she fell asleep, after a storm of crying, with her arms around
Twinkle, the terrier, as soon as Mrs. Lane had put her to bed, promising
to come back from Aunt Jimmy's early in the morning to awaken her, for
her uncle was to take the nine o'clock train from the Centre.

As Mrs. Lane collected, in a valise, the few clothes that made up
Bird's wardrobe, she felt broken-hearted indeed, but she could not but
realize that if the little girl must go, the quicker the better, and who
knew what might turn up, for Mrs. Lane was always hopeful. But Lammy,
poor boy, could not see one bright spot in the darkness. It was with
difficulty that his father could keep the child, usually so gentle,
from flying at O'More; he stormed and begged and finally, completely
exhausted, fled to the stuffy attic where he fell asleep, pillowed by
some hard ears of seed corn.

Next morning when Bird awoke, she had forgotten and felt much better for
her long sleep, but when she sat up and looked at the strange room, it
all came back. One thought mingled with the dread of parting,--she was
going to New York; there was where the wall-paper man lived and people
learned things. Hope was strong in her also, and never did she doubt
for a moment but what she could win her way and come back some day to
her friends if she could only find the right path.

Downstairs all was confusion. Joshua Lane had come from Aunt Jimmy's to
take O'More over to the judge's house to sign some papers. A man had
followed him up to say Dr. Jedd felt the old lady was worse. Mrs. Lane
was giving Bird a thousand directions and warnings that she couldn't
possibly remember, and in the middle of it all Lammy, looking straight
before him and dumb as an owl, his eyes nearly closed from last night's
crying, drove around in the business wagon to take the travellers to the
station, four good miles away.

"Here's my card, so you'll know where I hang out," said John O'More, as
he stepped into the wagon, holding out a bit of printed pasteboard to
Joshua Lane, "and if you need anything in my line, I'll let you in on
the square." On one corner was the picture of a horse's head, on the
other a wagon, and the letters read, "John O'More with Brush & Burr,
Dealers in Horses, Vehicles of all Kinds, Harness & Stable Fixings."
Then they drove away, Bird keeping her eyes fixed on Twinkle who Lammy
had settled in the straw at their feet.

"To think she was going and I was so put about I never asked the
address," sighed Mrs. Lane, adjusting her glasses and looking at the
card. "For goodness sakes, Joshua, _do_ you suppose he's a horse-jockey?
I sort of hoped he might be in groceries, or coal or lumber,--something
solid and respectable. What would poor Terry say?"

"I really don't know, Lauretta Ann," sighed Joshua, whose slow nature
was showing the wear, tear, and hurry of the last few days; "but he's
Terry's brother, not ourn. It takes all kinds of fellers to make up a
world, and I _hev_ met honest horse-jockeys, and then again I haven't. I
wished I'd thought to ask him the bottom price for a new chaise; ourn is
so weak every time you cross the ford I'm afeared you'll spill through
the bottom into the water," and Joshua turned on his heel and went in to
a belated breakfast, while his wife jerked remarks at the chickens she
made haste to feed, about the heartlessness of all men, which she didn't
in the least mean.

       *       *       *       *       *

They had ten minutes or so to wait for the train when they reached
the Centre, and, after taking her valise to be checked and buying the
ticket, O'More returned to the wagon for Bird. For the first time
she remembered that she had not asked about Twinkle and perhaps he
might need a ticket. Making a brave effort to get out the name that
choked her, yet too considerate to use the plain Mr., she said: "Uncle
John,--you won't mind if I take Twinkle with me, will you? He's very
clean and clever; I love him dearly and he was so good to Terry when he
was sick."

O'More was the bustling city man now, and whatever sentiment had swayed
him the night before was slept away. He gave a glance at the dog and
shook his head in the negative.

"That's a no account little yaller cur. If your aunt will let you keep a
pup, there's always a litter around the stable you can pick from, though
they're more'n likely to fall off the fire-escape."

The tears came to Bird's eyes, but she blinked them back; but not before
Lammy saw them. "I'll keep Twinkle all safe for you--till--you come
a-visiting," he said in a shaky voice, reading her wish.

Then the train came around the curve and stopped at the big tank to
drink.

"Come along," called O'More.

"Oh, I've forgotten my paint-box and bundle!" said Bird, running back to
get the precious portfolio that had been wrapped in the horse blanket.

"Your what?" said O'More, "paint-box! Just you leave that nonsense to
your chum along with the dog. You've had enough of paints and painting
for your vittles; I'm going to see you stick to bread and meat," and,
waving his hand good-by to Lammy, he flung him a silver dollar, that
missing the wagon rolled in the dirt.

For a moment the sickening disappointment tempted Bird to turn and run
down the track, anywhere so long as she got away; then her pride came to
her aid, and, stretching out her hands to her playmate, she cried, "Keep
them safe for me, oh, Lammy, please do!"

"You bet I will, don't you fret!" he called back.

Then she followed her uncle quietly to the cars, and her last glimpse,
as the train entered the cut, was of Lammy, seated in the old wagon with
Twinkle at his side, the box and the portfolio clasped in his arms, and
a brave smile on his face.




III

AUNT JIMMY


For a few minutes Lammy sat looking after the vanishing train. Then he
carefully wrapped the paint-box and portfolio in the blanket again, and,
patting Twinkle, who was quivering with excitement and looking into his
face with a pitiful, pleading glance, he put the dog down in the straw
again, saying, "We can't help it, old fellow; we've just got to stand it
until we can fix up some way to get her back."

As he turned the wagon about, with much backing and rasping of cramped
wheels, the bright silver dollar that was lying in the dirt caught his
eye. It seemed like a slap in the face when O'More threw it, though in
his rough way he meant well enough, and Lammy's first impulse was to
drive home and leave it where it had fallen.

Still, after all, it was money, and to earn money vaguely seemed to
him the only way by which he could get Bird back again, for though
Lammy had a comfortable home, enough clothing, and plenty to eat, whole
dollars were as rare in his pockets as white robins in the orchard.

So he picked up the shining bit of silver, wiped it carefully on his
sleeve, and, wrapping it in a scrap of paper, opened the precious
paint-box, and tucked the coin into one of the small compartments. It
never occurred to him to spend the money for any of the little things
a boy of fourteen always wants, and he quite forgot that his knife had
only half of one blade left. The money was for Bird, and from that
moment the paint-box, which was to spend some months in his lower bureau
drawer in company with his best jacket and two prizes won at school,
became a savings bank.

Lammy stopped at the "Centre" druggist's for some medicine for Aunt
Jimmy, and while he was waiting for the mixture, he had to undergo a
running fire of questions concerning his aunt's "spell" from the people
who came in from all sections for their mail, as this store was also
the post-office and there was as yet no rural free-delivery system to
deprive the community of its daily trade in news.

Now Aunt Jimmy, otherwise Jemima Lane, occupied an unusual position in
the neighbourhood and was a personage of more than common importance.
In the first place she was a miser, which is always interesting, as a
miser is thought to be a sort of magician whose money is supposed to
lie hidden in the chimney and yet increase as by double cube root; then
she owned ten acres of the best land for small fruits--strawberries,
raspberries, currants, and peaches--in the state. The ground was on the
southern slope of Laurel Ridge, and though it was shielded in such a way
that the March sun did not tempt the peach blossoms out before their
time, yet Aunt Jimmy's strawberries were always in the Northboro market
a full week ahead of the other native fruit.

Of course there was nothing particularly strange in this interest, as
many people coveted the land. The odd part that concerned the gossips
was that Aunt Jimmy had three able-bodied nephews, of which Joshua Lane
was eldest, all farmers struggling along on poorish land, while she,
though seventy-five years old, insisted upon running her fruit farm
and house entirely alone, hiring Poles or Hungarians, who could speak
no English, to till and gather the crops, instead of going shares with
her own kin. In fact, until a few years back, no one, man, woman, or
child, except little Janey Lane, had ever got beyond the kitchen door.
Then when she died, Aunt Jimmy had opened her house and heart to Joshua
Lane's wife, and ever since, that dear, motherly soul had done all that
she could for the queer, lonely old woman, in spite of the fact that the
gossips said she did it from selfish motives.

Joshua Lane was very sensitive about this talk and would have held aloof
like his two brothers, who lived beyond the Centre, one of whom had a
sick wife and was too lazy to more than scratch half rations from his
land, while the other had once given the old lady some unwise advice
about pruning peach trees, and had been forbidden inside the gate under
pain of being cut off with a "china button," Aunt Jimmy's pet simile for
nothing.

Mrs. Joshua, however, was gossip proof, and, tossing her head, had
publicly declared, "I'm a-going to keep the old lady from freezin',
burnin', or starvin' herself to death jest so far 's I'm able, accordin'
to scripture and the feelings that's in me, and if that's 'undue
influence,' so be it! I shan't discuss the subject with anybody but the
Lord," and she never did.

Many a meal of hot cooked food she took to the old woman to replace the
crackers and cheese of her own providing. It was not that Aunt Jimmy
meant to be mean, but she had lived so long alone that she had gotten
out of the habits of human beings. She certainly looked like a lunatic
when she went about the place superintending her men, clad in a short
skirt, a straw sunbonnet, and rubber boots, merely adding in the winter
a man's army overcoat and cape that she had picked up cheap; but the
lawyer who had come down from Northboro a year before to make her will
said he had never met a clearer mind outside of the profession, for she
had Dr. Jedd testify that she was of sound mind, and a second physician
from Northboro swear that Dr. Jedd's wits were also in good order.

Shortly after this she had given it out quietly that, though Joshua Lane
was the only one of her kin that was worth a box of matches, yet they
would share and share alike, as she didn't believe in stirring up strife
among brothers by showing favour.

Then everybody expected Mrs. Lane would lessen her attentions, but as
often happens everybody was mistaken.

Of course the good woman could not help thinking once in a while what
a fine thing it would be if some day her elder boys could work the
fruit farm (Lammy she never thought of as working at anything) instead
of delving in a shop at Milltown, but she put the idea quickly from
her. However, it would keep coming back all that night after Terence
O'More's funeral when she watched with the old lady, while poor Bird
slept her grief-spent sleep before her journey.

If the fruit farm could ever be hers, she would adopt Bird without
hesitation, for the little lady-child had crept into the empty spot
that Janey had left in her big mother heart and filled it in a way that
greatly astonished her.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lammy finally secured the medicine and jogged homeward, thinking, all
the time thinking about Bird. He knew that people said he was stupid,
and yet he also felt that he could learn as well as any one if they
would only let him pick his own way a little. His father wanted him to
be a carpenter, his mother thought that too rough, and that he was still
a baby and some day perhaps he might be a clerk.

But Lammy himself, as he looked into the future, saw only the whirling
wheels of the machinery at Milltown, or the wonders of the locomotive
works that he had once visited at Northboro. That was why he was always
day-dreaming and looking in the air. Of course it was very stupid and
dumb of him not to tell his parents, but Bird's was the only ear that
had ever heard his thoughts.

All that day he stayed about the place at home, keeping the fire in and
doing the chores, for his mother's time was divided between her aunt's
and straightening things at Bird's old home, and his father was up in
the back lots planting corn. Toward night, as he was sitting on the
steps having brought back Twinkle who had run to his old home in search
of his little mistress, Mrs. Lane bustled in, mystery and importance
written on her face. Spying Lammy, she beckoned him to follow her
into the kitchen, then, carefully closing the doors, putting Twinkle
in the closet and the cat out of the window, as if they could carry
tales, she unfastened her bonnet and collar and settled herself in the
rocking-chair.

"Samuel Lane," she began solemnly, shaking her forefinger and making the
boy quake at the unused title, while his eyes opened wide in wonder,
"No, 'tain't _that_; Aunt Jimmy's _much_ more comfortable, and I suspect
she's going to pick up again after scaring us well, or I wouldn't be
home, but she said private words to me this afternoon that if I do keep
quite to myself, I'll burst, I know, and maybe get a headache spell
that'll lay me by a day and upset everything. Now, Samuel, I've found as
far as givin' messages you're told to carry, you're as good as nobody,
so I reckon you'll be tight sealed on something that you're bid to keep
close and forget maybe for some years."

"Is it about Bird?" asked Lammy, suddenly jumping up and fixing his big,
gray eyes on his mother's face with a gaze that made her nervous, for
she well knew that there was something in this pet son of hers that was
a little beyond her comprehension.

"No, not about Bird,--that is, not straight, though another way it may
have a lot to do with her; it all depends. Listen, Samuel!

"This afternoon Aunt Jimmy waked up, and, seeing me sitting by the
window croshayin',--true I was making a bungle of the tidy, not feelin'
like workin' (but she hates, same 's I do, for watchers to set idle
looking ready to jump at a body like a cat does at a mouse hole),--she
says, says she, her voice comin' back steady, 'Set nearer, Lauretta Ann
Lane, I'm goin' to tell you somethin' no one else need ever know.'

"I drew up all of a flutter, of course. 'You're a good woman, Lauretta
Ann,' says she, 'and you've never poked and pried, or shown desires for
what's another's, an' you've worked hard to keep me livin', which I've
done to my satisfaction beyond my expectations.'

"I burst out cryin', I couldn't help it; for I never thought she set any
store by me, and I felt guilty about wishes I'd had last night and had
fed with thoughts inwardly.

"'Hush up, now, and don't spoil all by pretendin',' she ran on; 'I
know you'd like to have my farm, though not a day before I'm done with
it. _I'll_ credit you that. It's natural and proper and I'm glad to
have interest took in it, likewise I've said I'd share and share alike
between my nephews, which I intend; but listen, Lauretta Ann, for
there's ways of circumventin' that suits me, _I've left you the farm for
your own_; moreover, I've fixed it so there'll be no talk and no one'll
know it but you. You think I'm crazy, I guess, and that you couldn't get
the farm unbeknown, nohow. Just wait and see!'

"Then she asked me to draw her a cup of tea, and when I went to fetch
that battered old pewter tea-pot she's used I reckon these fifty years,
'twasn't in its place, but on her mantel-shelf, and when I reached up
to take it down she said, 'Leave that be and take the chiney one; its
work's over for me and we're both takin' a rest;' then she dozed off
after the very first sup."

"Mother," said Lammy, who was now leaning on her knees with his hands
behind her head and drawing it close, while his eyes glowed like coals,
"if--if you ever get the farm--will--you--"

"Bring Bird back?" she finished for him, hugging him close. "Yes, I
will, and you shall both go to school to Northboro, too; but mind you,
Samuel, no crowdin' Aunt Jimmy, and it may be years yet.

"Now bustle round and help me cook up something, for I must go back to
Aunt Jimmy's before seven, as Mis' Jedge o' Probate Ricker is the only
one I'll trust to spell me, for Dinah Lucky's mush in a bowl when the
village folks smooth her down with their palarver."

So Lammy flew about, sifting flour, skimming milk, or rattling cups
and saucers, and it was not quite dark, supper over, and every dish
washed, when he went back to the porch steps and whispered the precious
hope to Twinkle, who raised one ear and his lip together as much as if
he understood and cautioned silence. Then the boy began day-dreaming
anew, but this time his mind, instead of following flying wheels, was
busy weeding strawberry plants and carefully picking raspberries, so as
not to crush them, while Bird stood by and watched. "And," he startled
himself by saying aloud, "the first thing I'll do 'll be to divide off a
root of those red pineys and plant it up on the hill, so Bird 'll find
it next spring all in blow."

       *       *       *       *       *

A few days later when Dr. Jedd and all the neighbours were convinced
that Aunt Jimmy would be out in the garden again by raspberry time,
with good chance of another ten years, and Mrs. Lane had made indoors
more comfortable than it had been for years by a thorough cleaning and
renovating, the strange old lady again upset all their calculations and
died. Then in due time the lawyer from Northboro sent letters to the
three nephews and their families, to Dr. Jedd, to the minister of the
First Congregational Church, and to the superintendent of the new School
of Industrial Art of Northboro, to meet on a certain Friday afternoon at
Aunt Jimmy's house to hear the will read.

Once more was the entire community involved in a guessing match. The
summoning of the kin was a matter of course, and usually took place
immediately, so that the lawyer was evidently carrying out special
directions in delaying the matter for more than a week, but as to what
the doctor, the minister, and the teacher from Northboro could possibly
have to do in the matter was a mystery that not even the fertile brain
of Mrs. Slocum could settle, either for good nor evil.

It couldn't be that Aunt Jimmy had left these three outside men
anything, for it was known that she only employed Dr. Jedd because she
couldn't help it, that she hadn't been to church for five years because
the minister had preached a sermon against avarice and the vanity of
hoarding money, and as to the Northboro teacher it was positively
certain that she had never even seen him, for he was a stranger in these
parts, having recently been sent from New York, to take charge of the
school, by a wealthy man who had been influential in founding it and
whose country place was on the farther edge of the town.

Mrs. Lane was as much in the dark as any one and did not hesitate
to say so, while excitement ran so high that on this particular
Friday afternoon the women sat in their fore-room windows overlooking
the village street with the expectant air of waiting for a passing
procession.

Mrs. Dr. Jedd, Mrs. Judge of Probate Ricker, and the minister's wife
were privileged to attend the reading by courtesy for reason of being
their husband's wives, and cakes had been baked and several plans
made to waylay them separately on their divers routes home to drink a
cup of tea, that every detail might be gleaned for comparing of notes
afterward.

"We shall soon see whether Lauretta Ann Lane's cake is dough or fruit
loaf," sniffed Mrs. Slocum, angrily, drawing in her head suddenly from
the third fruitless inspection of the road that she had made in fifteen
minutes and giving it a smart bump against the sash as she did so.
"Either the folks is late, or they're gone around the back road, and if
so, why? I'd just like you to tell me," she snapped at Hope Snippin, the
meek little village dressmaker who, drawn over as if she had a perpetual
stitch in her side, was remaking a skirt for the lady of the house and
felt very much discouraged, as it had been turned once before, at the
possibility of making it look startlingly new.

"Maybe they've stopped down to the Lane's and have walked around the
meadow path," ventured Hope Snippin. "The other day when I was fixin'
up Mis' Lane's black gown, changing the buttons and such like to turn
it from just Sunday best to mourning, I heard her tell Mis' Jedd that,
as there was no convenience for gettin' up a proper meal down to Aunt
Jimmy's, seein' as nothing must be touched until the will was read,
she'd asked all the folks concerned to dinner--a roast-beef dinner
with custards--at her house so's they could be comfortable and stable
their teams, and then walk right around short cut to the other house
after. You see the two farms meets the road separate, like the two
heels of a horseshoe, and then join by going back of the doctor's hill
woods. My father was sayin' last night if those two farms _and_ the
wood lot went together, they'd be something worth while," and Miss
Snippin smiled pleasantly as if she thought she had propitiated Mrs.
Slocum by her news.

"Then you knew all the while they wouldn't come by here and never told
me, though seein' me slavin' over that cake," snapped Mrs. Slocum. "I
wish you'd mind your work closer; you're makin' that front breadth up
stain out."

"But it runs clean through," pleaded the dressmaker, miserably.

"Depend upon it," Mrs. Slocum muttered to herself, not heeding the
protest, "she's made sure of that farm, or she wouldn't risk the cost of
a roast dinner for a dozen folks if she wasn't."

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile this dinner had been eaten and the party, headed by the lawyer
and the teacher, had gone through the sweet June fields to Aunt Jimmy's
house and seated themselves upon the stiff-backed, fore-room chairs that
were ranged in a long row, as if the company expected to play "Go to
Jerusalem."

Outside, the bees were humming in the syringa bushes while the cat-birds
and robins, unmolested, were holding a festival in the great strawberry
bed, for to-day there was no one to see that the birds "kept moving"
after the usual custom, as the hired man on returning from taking eggs
to market had gone to sleep in the hay barn, knowing that the stern
voice of the old lady in rubber boots and sunbonnet would not disturb
his dreams.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Hem," the lawyer cleared his throat and read the usual preliminaries
about "last will and testament, sound mind," etc., "paying of just
debts," etc., in a clear but rapid voice that grew gradually solemn
and important, until, as the pith of the matter was reached, every
word was separated from its neighbour, and the buzzing of a fly on the
window-pane seemed an unbearable noise.

"I give and bequeath to Amelia, the wife of William Jedd, doctor of
medicine in this town, the sum of two thousand dollars, because I think
she may need it owing to her husband's slack way of collecting bills."

Mrs. Jedd, who had for a moment looked radiant, quickly cast down her
eyes after a frightened glance at her husband who was, with apparent
difficulty, refraining from laughter as he looked crosswise at the
minister.

"I give and bequeath to Sarah Ann, wife of Joel Stevens, minister of the
First Congregational Church, a like sum of two thousand dollars because
she is sure to need it, this being twice the amount that he once desired
me to give to foreign missions. If he still holds to his views of
avarice and hoarding, he will doubtless be able to persuade her to share
his ideas as to its use."

It was the minister's turn now to look red and confused, while his
wife's face expressed her views on the subject beyond a doubt.

"I give and bequeath to the Trust Fund of the School of Industrial Art
in Northboro the sum of $10,000, the income therefrom to be applied to
the board and teaching of two girls each year who cannot afford to pay,
for the reason that I think a girl is usually worth two boys if she has
a chance, and I don't like to see our best girls running to the big
cities for schooling.

"I direct that my fruit farm of ten acres, more or less, with the
adjoining one hundred acres of meadow and woodlands, and all buildings
and fixtures, other than household furniture, appertaining thereto,
shall be sold at public auction within six months of my death, and that
the cash proceeds be divided between my three nephews, share and share
alike, I holding the hope that one of them will be the purchaser. I also
direct that the pieces of household furniture mentioned in the enclosed
memorandum shall be divided between the wives of my three nephews by the
drawing of lots, and I charge that all other furnishings not mentioned
in this paper, being of no value except to myself, shall be destroyed
either by burning or burying in the swamp bog-hole according to their
character, as I don't wish them scattered about for the curiosity of the
idle, of which this town has its full share.

"Making one exception to the above, I give to my dear niece by marriage,
Lauretta Ann, wife of Joshua Lane, in token of my respect for her, my
old pewter tea-pot that, as she knows, I have treasured as having laid
buried in the garden through the War of Independence and had in daily
use for years, hoping she will cherish it and by like daily use hold me
in constant remembrance by the sight of it."

At this juncture no one dared look up, for all felt the cruelty of the
gift after Mrs. Lane's years of service, and the poor woman herself
merely tightened her grasp upon the chair arms, but she could not
prevent the sickening sense of disappointment that crept over her.

"I hereby appoint my nephew, Joshua Lane, as my sole executor, directing
that he be paid the sum of $1000 from my estate for his services,
desiring him to carry on the fruit business for the current year, the
profits to be added to my estate. (Here followed special instructions.)
If there be any residue after paying to the before-named legacies, I
direct that he divide it equally between himself and his two brothers,
and I hope that all concerned may feel the same pleasure in hearing this
testament that I have had in making it."

As the lawyer stopped reading there was a pause, and then a rush of
voices, congratulations and condolences mingled. That he had made an
error in summoning Dr. Jedd and the minister instead of their wives was
plain.

The two brothers, who cared nothing for the fruit farm except its cash
price and had been too indolent to bother about the matter or go to see
their aunt except in fruit time, assumed importance and talked about
wounded pride and the injustice of having but one executor. The school
superintendent, an Englishman of fifty or so who had received his art
training at South Kensington and brought it to market in America,
confused by his surroundings, but of course pleased at the gift by
which his school benefited, made haste to leave, feeling that he was
intruding in a gathering where a family storm was brewing.

"Mebbe there's something _in_ the tea-pot," suggested the minister's
wife, hopefully, "else I can't think she knew her own mind."

"There's surely something in it," echoed Mrs. Dr. Jedd.

The lawyer, who himself had thought this possible, went upstairs, and
took down the battered bit of pewter from the best bedroom shelf, where
it had remained since the day Mrs. Lane had placed it there at Aunt
Jimmy's request, opened it, shook it, and held it toward the eager
group,--it was absolutely empty!

Mrs. Lane stretched out her hand for the legacy, but her husband grasped
her arm and asserting himself for the first time in his married life,
said: "Lauretta Ann, don't you tech it; it'll go down in the swamp hole
with the other trash for all of you. I'll not have you a-harbourin' a
viper. I'll do my lawful duty, but, by crickey, I'll not have you put
upon no more."

This very ambiguous speech so impressed the hearers that it was reported
that "Joshua Lane wasn't tied to Lauretta's apron-strings and could
hold his own equal to anybody," which had been seriously doubted, while
the news was a surprise and disappointment to every one but Mrs. Slocum,
who said, "Dough! I told you so,"--and actually cut a big slice of cake
for Hope Snippin to take home for tea.

As for Lammy he seemed dazed for a while, and then set to work daily
with his father on the fruit farm, so that he might earn the tickets
to send to Bird when hot weather and the time for her visit came. His
mother noticed that he did not gaze about as much as usual, and, while
he was picking berries for market, he said to himself, "I'll snake a
root of those red pineys for Bird anyhow before the auction, 'long in
November, and maybe before then something 'll turn up."




IV

A CAGED BIRD


When the high banks of the cut shut off Lammy from Bird's sight, she
followed her uncle into the car, vainly trying to blink back her tears.
He, however, did not notice them; but, putting her valise on a seat,
told her she had better sit next to the window so that she could amuse
herself by looking out, as it would be two hours before they changed
cars at New Haven, and then, taking another seat for himself, pulled his
hat over his eyes and promptly fell asleep.

At first the poor child was content to sit quite still and rest, trying
to realize who and where she was. The changes of the past two weeks had
been so sudden that she did not yet fully realize them. Beginning with
the day when her father, all full of hope, had been soaked by the rain
in walking back from Northboro, where he had gone to buy materials for
beginning his work for the wall-paper man, and caught the deadly cold,
until now when she was leaving the only friends she had ever known,
seemed either a whole lifetime or a dream from which she must awake.

But as the train flew on and the familiar places one by one were lost in
the distance, little by little the bare cold truth came to her. Not only
was she going to a strange place to live among strangers, but the hope
that had comforted her the previous night had been swept away when her
uncle had refused to let her bring her paint-box, and she knew by the
contemptuous way he spoke that he was even more set against her father's
work than their farming neighbours had been.

"Never mind," thought the brave, lonely little heart, "I simply _must_
learn somehow, and perhaps my aunt and cousins may be different and
help me to persuade Uncle John to let me go on with drawing at the
school he sends me to, for I heard him tell Mrs. Lane that I should go
to school." Then Bird began to imagine what the aunt and cousins would
be like, and what sort of a house they would live in. She thought the
house would be brick or stone like some in Northboro, and she did not
expect that there would be a very big garden, perhaps only at the back
with a little strip at the sides and in front, but then that would hold
enough flowers for her to draw so that she need not forget the way in
which Terry had taught her to do it from life, and even if she had no
paints and only bits of paper and a pencil, she could work a little out
of the way up in her room so as not to annoy her uncle and yet not quite
give up. That she was determined she would never do, for Bird had, in
addition to a talent that was in every way greater than her father's,
something that came from her mother's family and that he had wholly
lacked,--perseverance, a thing that people are apt to call obstinacy
when they do not sympathize with its object.

So busy was she with castle-building that she was quite surprised when
the brakeman called: "New Haven! Last stop. Change cars for New York and
Boston. Passengers all out!" and her uncle jumped up, flushed and stupid
with sleep and bundled her out of the train into the station restaurant
"to snatch a bite of dinner" before they went on.

Now Bird, being a perfectly healthy child, even though overwrought
and tired, was hungry and gladly climbed up on one of the high stools
that flanked the lunch counter, while her uncle gathered a sandwich,
two enormous doughnuts, and a quarter of a mince pie on one plate and
pushed it toward her saying: "Tea or coffee? You'd better fill up snug,
for we won't be home until well after dinnertime," then John O'More
proceeded to cool his own coffee by pouring it from cup to saucer and
back again with much noise and slopping.

"Please, I'd rather have milk," answered Bird, rescuing the sandwich
from under the pie and making a great effort not to stare at her uncle,
who had begun by stuffing half a doughnut into his mouth and pouring the
larger part of a cup of coffee after it before he swallowed, so that
his cheeks bulged, his eyes seemed about to pop from their sockets,
and beads of sweat stood on his forehead, while the next moment he was
shovelling up great mouthsful of baked beans and ramming them down with
cucumber pickles, very much as she had seen Lammy charging his father's
old muzzle-loading shot-gun when going to hunt woodchucks.

Though sometimes the food at home had not been any too plentiful, Bird's
parents had always been particular about her manners at table. She had
had their example before her and was naturally dainty in her own ways,
so that her uncle's gorging gave her another shock, and unconsciously
she began to pick at her food like a veritable feathered bird.

"The country ain't what it's cracked up to be," remarked O'More, when he
was able to speak. "I thought country girls was always fat and rosy and
ate hearty. Just wait until you get to New York and see my kids stoke in
the vittles; it'll learn you what it means to eat right."

"Express train for New York, stopping at Bridgeport and Stamford only,"
called a man through the open door.

"Come along," shouted O'More, wedging in another doughnut, throwing
the pay to the waiter and seizing a handful of toothpicks from a glass
on the counter, and before Bird had but half finished the sandwich and
milk, she found herself on the train again.

The second part of the journey passed more cheerfully, for all along
at the east side of the road were beautiful glimpses of the Sound and
silvery creeks and inlets came up to the track itself.

Bird had never before seen the sea, or any river greater than the mill
stream, and she exclaimed in delight.

"Like the looks of salt water, do you? Then you're going to an A 1 place
to see it. New York's an island, and you only have to go to the edge
anywhere to see water all round, not forsaken lookin' empty water like
this either, but full of ships and boats and push. Down at the far end
of the town is Battery Park, smash on to the water, and there's sea air
and seats in it and music summer nights, along with a building full of
live swimmin' fishes that little Billy's crazed over goin' to see. Oh,
you'll find sport in the city for sure."

"Who is little Billy?" asked Bird, feeling that she was called upon to
say something, and now realizing that she knew nothing about the cousins
she was to meet.

"Little Billy? Oh, he's the youngest of the four boys. Tom, he's the
eldest, and a wild hawk; he's got a rovin' job, and he seldom turns
up lest he's in trouble, but for all that his mother's crazed after
him. Jack, he's next, seventeen, and fine and sleek and smart with the
tongue, and keeps the clean coat of a gentleman; he's in a clerking job,
but he goes to night school, and he'll be somebody. Larry's fifteen,
and he's just quit school and got a place helping a trainer on the
race-track; he's minded to make money quick, and thinks that's the road,
which I don't. Then little Billy,--he's turning six, and he's worth
more'n the whole lot together to me, if he is only a four-year size and
hops with a crutch. Ah, but he's got the head for thinkin', and he's
every way off from the rest of us, pale and yellow-haired, while the
others are coloured like sloes and crows' wings in the eyes and hair."

As O'More spoke his whole face softened and lightened up, and it was
plain to see that little Billy filled the soft spot that is in every
heart if people only have the eyes to see it.

"Until little Billy was turned three he was as pretty as an angel,"
he continued, "and sturdy as any other child. Then come a terrible
hot summer,--oh, I tell you it was fierce; you couldn't draw a breath
in the rooms, and so the missis she fixed a bed for Billy out on the
fire-escape and used to take him there to sleep."

Bird was just about to ask what sort of a place a fire-escape was, for
this was the second time her uncle had mentioned it that day having said
that if she had a dog, it would likely fall from it, but he talked so
quickly that she forgot again.

"As luck had it, one night the wind come up cool, and, the woman bein'
dead tired, never woke up to notice it, and in the morning little Billy
set up a terrible cry, for when he tried to get up he couldn't, for the
wind had checked the sweat and stiffened his left leg, as it were.
Of course we had a big time and had in full a dozen doctors, and some
said one thing and some another, but they all give it the one name 'the
infant paralysis.'

"The doctors they wanted him to go to the 'ospital and have the leg shut
into a frame and all that, but I said 'twas a shame to torment him, and
I'd have him let be till he could say for himself.

"The woman takes him awful hard, though, as if he was a reproach to her
for not wakin' up, which is no sense, for what be's to be, be's--that's
all," which shiftless argument Bird afterward found was her uncle's
answer to many things that could have been bettered.

"I hope Billy will like me," said Bird, half to herself after a few
minutes' silence; "somehow I think I like him already."

"If you do that and act well by him, I buy you a hat with the longest
feather on Broadway for your Christmas," said O'More, grasping her
slender fingers and almost crushing them in his burst of enthusiasm.
"But whist a minute, girl, for we're most home now. If the woman,--I
mean my missis, your Aunt Rosy,--is offish just at the start, don't get
down-hearted, for you see as she don't expect I'm bringing you, she may
be--well--a trifle startled like. She'll soon settle down and take what
be's to be straight enough," and with this rather discouraging remark
the train crossed the Harlem River and entered the long tunnel that is
apt to cast a gloom over every one's first entrance to New York, even
when they are bent on pleasure and not sad and lonely.

"We're in now," said O'More in a few minutes, as the echo of the close
walls ceased and the train slid across a maze of tracks into an immense
building with a glass roof like a greenhouse.

"Grand Central Station--all out," called a brakeman, and Bird found
herself part of a crowd of men, women, children, and red-capped porters
moving toward a paved street, full of carriages, wagons, trucks,
electric cars, besides many sort of vehicles that she had never seen
before, coming, going, dashing here and there in confusion, while on
every side there was a wall of houses, and below the earth was upturned
and trenched, not a bit of grass or tree to be seen anywhere, and the
sky, oh, so far away and small. Bird almost fell as she stumbled blindly
along toward a trolley car after the uncle, for what could seem more
unreal to this little wild thrush from the country lane, with song
in her throat, and love of beauty and colour born in her heart, than
Forty-second Street in the middle of the first warm summer afternoon?

       *       *       *       *       *

The car they boarded went through another short tunnel, and on every
side could be heard the noise of hammers or drilling in the rock.

"Is this a stone quarry?" asked Bird, innocently, not understanding, and
wondering why the near-by passengers smiled as her uncle replied: "Lord
bless yer! no; it's the subway, a road below ground they're building
to let out folks from where they work to where there's room to live;
there's such push here below town there's little room for sitting, let
alone sleeping. Oh, but it's a fine city is New York, all the same."

Next a broad avenue with a jumble of old, low shops and fine new
buildings side by side; still Bird looked anxiously out for some place
where it seemed possible that people might live and found none.

"Here's 2--th Street where we land," said O'More, presently looking
up, and when the car had stopped, Bird found herself walking along a
sidewalk between another wall of buildings without gardens, while the
heat of the first warm day rising from the pavement made her dizzy, and
she asked, "Is it far from here to where you live, Uncle John?"

"No, right close by, only a few steps farther. We're facing east now and
down yonder half a dozen blocks is the river, the same as we crossed
coming in saving a turn in it.

"Getting tired, ain't yer? Well, it's been a long day for us, and I'm
mighty glad to be gettin' to a homelike place myself."

"Do you live right by the water, and is there any garden?" Bird
continued, a feeling of nameless dread creeping over her as she saw
nothing but buildings still closing in on all sides; even a blacksmith's
shop, from which a spirited pair of horses were coming with newly shod
polished hoofs, seemed strange and out of place. Then there were more
poor looking buildings, and a great stable with many men standing about
and horses being constantly driven in and out to show the people who
waited on the curbstone.

"By the river, and do I have a garden," he echoed, laughing heartily.
"Do you think I'm one o' the millionnaires you read about in the papers,
my girl? Do I keep an automobile and eat at the Waldorf-Astoria?" and
then, seeing that Bird could not understand the comparison, he patted
her good-naturedly on the shoulder.

As they passed the stable quite a number of the men spoke to her uncle,
but instead of resenting it as she expected, he joked and laughed and
seemed very glad to see them.

"It's called the 'Horse's Head,' and it's out of there my job is," he
said to Bird, pointing over his shoulder at the stable, "for half the
time I'm over the country from Kentucky to Canada picking up horses, and
the other half of the time I'm helping to sell them out again, so I live
as near by as may be for convenience."

At this Bird's heart sunk still farther, for in the prim New England
town where she was born and bred a Puritan, a horse-dealer meant either
some oversharp farmer who could outwit his neighbours or a roving
fellow, half gypsy, half tramp, of very ill repute, who went about from
town to town buying and selling animals who mostly had something the
matter with them that had to be concealed by lying.

John O'More, striding on ahead, did not notice her expression, nor would
he have understood if he had read her thoughts, for he was perfectly
satisfied with himself and everything else in his surroundings, except
the fact of little Billy's lameness, and for a man of his class he was
roughly honest and good-hearted.

"Here's where!" he said at last, turning into the doorway of a tall
building with one door and many windows. The square vestibule was
dusty and had a ragged mat in the centre, while on one side were ten
letter-boxes in a double row, with a bell knob and speaking-tube, as
O'More explained, over each.

"Is this your house? It seems pretty big," said Bird, wearily.

"One floor of it is," he answered, laughing again; "it's what's called
'a flat house,' because each tenant lives flat on one floor, with
conveniences at hand and no water to carry, which beats the country all
out," he added slyly. "See, I'll but touch the bell and the door 'll
open itself."

And he suited the action to the word, the door opening to reveal a
narrow, dark hall with a flight of steep stairs covered with a shabby
red carpet.

As Bird groped her way up, one, two, three flights, fairly gasping for
breath in the close, hot place, she stumbled against groups of children
who were sitting or playing school on the stairs.

"It's lighter near the top; that's why I choose it," called her uncle,
himself puffing and blowing as he climbed. "Here we are," and he pushed
open a door into an inner hall, and then another into a sort of sitting
room where a tall, red-haired woman, clad in a collarless calico sack
was sewing on a machine, while a pile of showy summer silks and muslins
was lying on a chair beside her.

"Hello, Rosie, old woman; here's Bird O'More, Terry's orphan, that I
brought back to stop a bit until we see where we're at," and he gave his
wife a knowing wink as much as to say, "I know it's sudden on you, but
let her down as easy as you can."

The "old woman," who was perhaps forty, or at most forty-five, glanced
up, and then, either not understanding or pretending not to, her face
flushed as she jerked out, her eyes flashing, "Well, if you ain't the
aggravatment of men, John O'More, to bring company just when I've got
Mame Callahan's trou-sew to finish, and she gettin' married next week,
and Billy bein' that cantankerous with cryin' to go over to the park or
down to see them fishes that my head's ready to split," she whimpered.

With all his will the man cowered before her tongue, and in spite of her
own pain Bird's womanly little heart pitied him. She saw the piled-up
garments and knew at once that her aunt was a dressmaker, and her
gentle breeding led her to say the one thing that could have averted an
explosion.

"Aunt Rose, I could take Billy to see the fish or something if you'll
tell me the way."

"That's what I figured on when I brought her," said O'More, greatly
relieved, and quickly following the lead; "I knew you'd often spoke of
gettin' a girl from the Sisters, and that's why I brought Bird instead
of leavin' her to slave fer strangers," he stammered.

"Humph," answered Mrs. O'More, at least somewhat pacified, "Billy's
fastened in his chair on the fire-escape; she'd better go there and sit
with him a while until it's supper-time. It's too late for them to go
traipsing around the streets to-night. Can you do anything useful?" she
said, fixing her sharp, greenish eyes on Bird, who tried to gather her
wits together as she answered, "I can make coffee, and toast, and little
biscuits, and two kinds of cake, and--" then she hesitated and stopped,
for she was going to say "do fractions, write, read French a little, and
draw and paint," but she felt as if these last items would count against
her.

"Humph," said her aunt again, this time more emphatically, "I guess
you done well to bring her, Johnny. Turned thirteen, you say. Of
course she'll have to make a show of goin' to school for another year
on account of the law, but they can't ask it before the fall term. I
suppose she'll have to sleep on this parlour lounge, though; there's no
other place."

John O'More was now beaming as he led Bird through a couple of dark
bedrooms toward the kitchen, where the mysterious "fire-escape" seemed
to be located.

Going to an open back window he looked out, motioning Bird to follow.
What she saw was a small platform, about three feet wide and ten feet
long, surrounded by an iron railing; one end was heaped with a litter
of boxes and broken flowerpots that partly hid a trap door from which
a ladder led to the balcony belonging to the floor below. At the other
end, fastened in a baby's chair by the tray in front, sat a dear little
fellow with great blue eyes and a curved, sensitive mouth, while tears
were making rivers of mud on his pale cheeks as he sobbed softly to
himself, "I want to go; oh, I want to get out and see the fishes."

"So you shall," said O'More, undoing the barrier and lifting the child
on his strong arm while he tried awkwardly to wipe his face.

"Let me," said Bird, wetting her handkerchief at the kitchen sink and
gently bathing eyes, nose, and mouth carefully, as Mrs. Lane had bathed
hers--only a day ago, was it? It seemed a lifetime.

"Who are you?" said Billy, gazing at Bird over his father's shoulder,
as he wound his little arms around the thick neck.

"She's your cousin Bird, come from the country to play with Billy and
take him to see the fishes. Go out there on the platform with him a
spell till the heat dies down; the doctor says he's to get plenty of air
you see."

"Where do you get the air here?" asked Bird, wonderingly, looking at the
paved yards filled with rubbish, the tall clothes poles, and the backs
of the other buildings where more fire-escapes clung like dusty cobwebs.

"Air? Oh, out here and down in the street mostly if there's no time fer
going across to any o' the parks. Get a bit acquainted now, youngsters,
for I've got to report at the stable before supper," said O'More,
putting Billy back into his chair and preparing to leave, wiping the
sweat from his face as if he had thus put the whole matter of Bird from
him.

For a few minutes the pair were silent. "Is your name Bird?" asked
Billy, eying her solemnly, and, upon her nodding "Yes," he rambled on,
"There's a yellow bird in a cage downstairs at Mrs. Callahan's--it's
name is Canary and it can sing. Can you sing?"

"Yes; that is, I used to last week," she said uncertainly, the tears
running between her fingers that she held before her face, for in the
past ten minutes her last hope had fled. No room where she could work
alone, not even a back-yard garden or a leaf to pick, and the bars of
the fire-escape seemed to be closing in like a cage.

"Now you're crying, too," said Billy, prying open her hands with his
thin fingers, while his lip quivered; "do you want to get out and see
the fishes too?"

"Yes, Billy, I do; but we can't go just now, so we must play we are
birds in a cage like the one downstairs," smiling through her tears.
"I'll sing for you," and she began in a low voice a song that Terry had
taught her:--

   "When little birdie bye-bye goes,
    Silent as mice in churches,
    He puts his head where no one knows
    And on one leg he perches."

When she finished, the little arms stole around her neck also, and
Billy, his face all smiles, said, "That bird's me, cause I've only got
one good leg, and I'm going to have you for my canary, only," looking
at her gown and hair, "you're more black than yellow," and giving her a
feeble squeeze, "and some day you'll get me out to see the fishes, won't
you?"

At his baby caress Love lit a new lamp in her dark path and Hope stole
back and led the way as she hugged Billy close and said, "Yes, some day
we'll surely get out of the cage together and fly far away."




V

MRS. LANE PLAYS DETECTIVE


For several weeks after the reading of Aunt Jimmy's will, it was the
talk of the neighbourhood, the alternate topic of conversation being
the death of Terence O'More and the sudden disappearance of Bird. For
Bird's Uncle John had come and gone so suddenly that few knew of his
flying visit, and those who did turned it into an interesting mystery.
Some said that he was a very rich relation from the west, others that
he was not an uncle at all, but the agent of the State Orphan Asylum to
which the Lanes, afraid of being expected to care for Bird, had hurried
her off. It is needless to say that it was Mrs. Slocum, piqued at not
securing Bird as a maid of all work and no pay, who concocted this tale.

In due time Probate Judge Ricker appointed Joshua Lane administrator, to
take charge of the furniture and few effects that O'More had left and
settle up his debts as far as possible. There was a little money left of
what his wife had inherited, in the Northboro Bank, but only enough to
pay his debts, it was feared, without so much as leaving a single dollar
for Bird.

Since the homestead and Mill Farm property that belonged to Mrs. O'More
had been forfeited through some defect in the drawing up of a mortgage
coupled with O'More's slackness in attending to the matter, Joshua Lane
had felt there was something wrong and that a little good legal advice,
combined with common sense, might have at least saved something if not
the entire property.

When, a year later, the mill had slipped into Abiram Slocum's hands,
Joshua's suspicions were again aroused, for Slocum's transactions in
real estate were usually adroit and to the cruel disadvantage of some
one, if not absolutely dishonest according to the letter of the law; but
when Joshua had spoken to O'More about the matter, he, feeling hopeful
about his painting, had put him off with a promise to "some day" show
him the "letters and papers" that bore upon the unfortunate business.

The day had never come, and now that Joshua had the right he determined
to sift the affair thoroughly, but the papers were nowhere to be found.
The envelope containing O'More's bank-book held nothing else but the
certificate of his marriage with Sarah Turner, and some letters from
his mother in the old country.

Joshua, though slow, was not without shrewdness, and he had not only
kept the old house where the O'Mores had lived securely locked by day,
until when, upon the selling of the furniture, it should again return to
the Slocums from whom it was rented, but at Mrs. Lane's suggestion he
had Nellis, his oldest son, sleep there at night, as she said, "To keep
folks whom I'll not name from prowlin'."

Joshua looked to the sale of the furniture to at least pay the last
quarter's rent due. By a strange happening the afternoon before the
vendue was to take place, as he was about to drive up to the old house
at the cross-roads to make a final thorough search in closets, drawers,
and the old-time chimney nooks for the missing papers, a passer-by,
hurrying in the same direction, called out to him: "There's a fire
up cemetery hill way; smoke's comin' over the hickory woods. Maybe
Dr. Jedd's big hay barn or Slocum's old farm, both bein' in a plum
line from here." When, sharply whipping up the old mare, much to her
astonishment, he hurried to the place, he not only found that it was
the old farm-house hopelessly ablaze from roof to cellar, but Abiram
Slocum appearing a few moments later by the road that ran north of the
place, flew into either a real or well-acted rage, shaking his fist and
calling: "It's that there hulking boy, Nellis, o' yourn, that has done
me this mischief. Must 'a' smoked his pipe in bed or left his candle
lighted until it burned down, for it's plain to be seen by the way the
roof's ketched, the fire started upstairs and smouldered around all day
until it bust out everywheres to onct."

"I reckon yer insured," said Joshua, dryly, taking little account of
what he said, as he began to realize that the fire had put an end
forever to the discovery of the papers that might have brought good luck
to Bird, as well as destroyed a part of the slender property.

"A trifle--a mere trifle--not the cost of the wood in the house, let
alone the labour at present rates. I could hev rented the place tew
teachers for a summer cottage for twenty a month, and I intended buyin'
in the furniture so to do. If"--and he drew his mean features together,
and then spread them out again in a spasm of indignation--"law was just,
you'd ought to make it up to me, Joshua Lane,--that you had."

But when he found that the few neighbours who had gathered were not
sympathetic, and only seemed to regret the fire on account of the O'More
furniture, he disappeared, and, strangely enough, later on no one could
tell in which direction he went or if he had gone afoot, on horseback,
or in the yellow buckboard in which he was wont to drive about to harry
his tenants and surprise his farm hands if they but paused to straighten
their backs.

When Joshua told of the fire at the supper-table, Mrs. Lane fairly
snorted with indignation, saying, "Firstly, Nellis didn't smoke last
night, bein' out o' tobacco and leavin' his pipe on the chimneypiece,
where it is now, and secondly he asked me for a candle; and then, the
Lockwood boys comin' along, and offerin' to walk up with him, he went
off while I was lookin' for the store-closet key which had fallen off
its nail, and clean through the bottom of the clock"--(the inside of the
long body of the tall clock being the place where the Lane family's keys
lived, each on its own nail).

"This morning when he came down home to breakfast he mentioned it, and
said it didn't matter because the moon was so bright he undressed by
light of it, Bill Lockwood stopping up there with him for company's
sake.

"A trifle of insurance indeed! and all hope of Bird bein' righted gone!
Joshua Lane, do you know what I think and believe?" And Lauretta Ann
jumped up so suddenly that her ample proportions struck the tea-tray
edge and an avalanche of cups and saucers covered the floor.

"Your thoughts and beliefs 'll soon fill a book, big as the dictionary
and doubtless be worth as much," said Joshua, pausing a second with a
potato speared on his fork, while he gave his wife a stern, silencing
look that was so rare that whenever she saw it, she gave heed at once,
"but in this here matter I'd advise you to keep 'em good and close to
yourself. We've got plenty ahead to shoulder this summer, besides which
if papers had been found, 'tain't likely any lawyer hereabouts would
risk taking the matter without money to back him, and 'Biram Slocum to
face."

So saying, Joshua, having put himself outside of the potato, a final
piece of pie, and the tea that had been cooling in his saucer, pushed
back his chair and drew on his coat, saying as he went out: "The first
strawberries over ter Aunt Jimmy's 'll be ready for marketing on Monday,
and this is Thursday. I must look around and engage pickers. That acre
bed of the new-fangled kind is a week ahead of Lockwood's earliest.
Aunt Jimmy was no fool when it came to foresighted fruit raisin'."

"I never said she was, nor in other things either if her meanin' could
be read. What time did you say the fire started?" she added in an
unconcerned sort of way, as she stooped to pick up the scattered cups,
which were so substantial that they had not been broken by their fall.

"Let me see--it must hev been close to two o'clock when I drove out of
the yard; the mail carrier had just passed, and he's due at the corner
at two, and at the rate I went I wasn't fifteen minutes from the fire.
From the way it had holt, it must have been goin' all of half an hour.
Queer 'Biram didn't scent it sooner workin' in the corn patch back of
the wood lot as he appeared to be, leastways he came down the lane from
there.

"Fire couldn't hev ketched before one o'clock, for the hands up at
Lockwood's go up that way before and after noon as well as of mornings,
and if Nellis had left anything smouldering, they'd have surely smelt
it, first or last."

Joshua paused a moment, but, as Mrs. Lane asked no more questions, went
out, closing the door. No sooner did she hear the latch catch than she
jumped up, saying to herself: "Appeared to come from the corn patch,
did he? I wonder what he was doin' there? He planted late, so the corn
can't be set for hoeing; he _might_ be watchin' for crows or riggin' a
scarecrow." As she pronounced the last word she had reached the dresser
where hung a large square calendar that advertised one of the husky
sorts of breakfast foods that taste as if they might have been the
stuffing of Noah's pillow.

Lifting this down she carried it to the table, and, after hunting in
the dresser drawer for the pencil with which she kept her various egg
and butter accounts, she proceeded to put a series of dots about the
particular day of the month (it was June 10th), and then reversing the
sheet, she covered the back with a collection of curiously spelled and,
to the casual observer, meaningless words.

She had barely time to replace the calendar when the boys came in for
their supper, and she fell vigorously to rearranging the table and
brewing fresh tea.

The elder boys spoke of the fire as a bit of "old Slocum's usual luck,"
for it was known that the house would need a great deal of repairing
before any one but the artist, whose thoughts were always in the
clouds, would be willing to hire it. Lammy alone rejoiced in the fire
because, as he said, "When Bird comes back, the house won't be there for
her to see and make her sorry."

"Better not say that outdoors," warned Nellis, "or Slocum 'll say you
fired it on purpose--he'd like nothing better. By the way, mother," he
continued, as Mrs. Lane glanced keenly at Lammy, "what do you think I
heard at the shop to-day?"

"Concernin' what?"

"The Mill Farm."

"I can't think. Those Larkin folks hev worked the land these two years
past, but the mill hasn't run this long while,--not since the winter
Mis' O'More died and the ice bulged the dam; the fodder trade has all
gone away, and I don't know what 'Biram Slocum can turn it to 'nless he
can insure the water an' then let it loose somehow."

"There is a party of engineer fellows, or something of the sort, just
come to camp out up by Rooster Lake,--sort of a summer school, I guess,
for there are some older men along that they call professors. They
scatter all over the country surveyin' and crackin' up the rocks with
little hammers to see what they are made of.

"This afternoon half a dozen of them came down to the shop to see some
new kind of a boring tool that our foreman has designed, and Mr. Clarke
was with them,--you know he is the man who started the Art and Trade
School in Northboro, and has his finger in a dozen pies. Pretty soon
the superintendent called me and said, 'Here, Lane, you live out at
Laurelville; these gentlemen wish to see the old Turner Mill Farm place.
I'll let you off the rest of the day if you'll show them the way over.'

"I got in the runabout with Mr. Clarke and the others followed in a
livery six-seater. The old gentleman asked me all sorts of questions
about the water-power, and how low the stream fell in summer, and if the
pond ever froze clear through, and one thing and another.

"When we got to the Mill Farm, there was no one at home but the dogs and
hens; I suppose the folks had all gone to Northboro to the circus."

"Sure enough, it is circus day! How did I forget it?" ejaculated Mrs.
Lane. "That accounts for why there were so few folks on the roads this
noon!"

"Yes, everybody seems to have gone but ourselves, even Lockwood's
field-hands took a day off."

"They did? Then they didn't go up and down the cemetery hill road this
noon?"

"Of course not, why should they?" replied Nellis.

"You didn't remember that it was circus day, did you, and I guess it is
the first time you ever forgot it," said Mrs. Lane to Lammy.

"I knew--all right, but I'm savin' up for--you know," replied Lammy,
wriggling out of his chair and going to the door where he began crumbing
bread and throwing it to some little chickens that had strayed up out of
bounds.

"I do wish you had mentioned it, anyhow; it would hev done us all good
to have a change, though to be sure I _do_ suppose some folks would
have turned our going into disrespect to Aunt Jimmy,--Mis' Slocum in
particular."

"She went, and Ram, and Mr. Slocum, though he came home early. I saw him
down in the turnpike store back of the schoolhouse this noon; he was
sayin' he'd had to come back early on account of havin' a lot of things
to attend to over at the Mill Farm this afternoon," said Lammy.

"The turnpike store? He doesn't trade there--it's a mile out of his
way," said Mrs. Lane, thoughtfully.

"He didn't get to the Mill Farm, anyway," said Nellis, "because I was
there from after dinner until I came home just now. Where was I? You
got me all off the track."

"You were sayin' that Mr. Clarke asked you all sorts of questions about
the mill stream," said Mrs. Lane, who now seemed to have lost interest
in Nellis's story.

"Oh, yes,--well, Mr. Clarke and that Mr. Brotherton,--that is
superintendent of the engine shop in Northboro,--poked about a lot
together, measuring things and figuring in a little book he had in his
pocket. It looked as if they were going to make an afternoon of it, and
as I saw a fishin' pole inside one of the open sheds, I thought I'd go
down the sluice way and try for a mess of perch. I was lyin' quiet out
along a willow stump, thinkin' the folks were in the mill, when I heard
voices on the dam above. Mr. Clarke said: 'I tell you what, Brotherton,
I want you to negotiate this affair for me. That Slocum is a tricky
fellow. I saw him a month ago and told him I'd not touch the property
until that snarl about the mortgage foreclosure was untangled, the price
he asked was outrageous for two hundred acres, of course the buildings
are only fit for kindling. Now I want you to either buy me the farm and
water right, or else lease it for say twenty years; then I will run a
spur of the Northboro Valley railroad down here, move the locomotive
works and the paper-mill, and enlarge both plants. This is the right
place; plenty of room to build houses for the hands, and close enough to
my place to be under my eye without being annoying.

"'It will suit my daughter Marion, too. She has all sorts of ideas about
building a model village. Of course this is between ourselves, for if
that old Slocum rat dreamed that I was behind you, he would ask a dollar
a blade for every spear of run-out wire-grass on the farm.'"

"To think of it!" sighed Mrs. Lane, sitting down so suddenly in the big
rocking-chair that it nearly turned a somersault in surprise, "and it
was only a scrap of a mortgage, not more'n $2500, that was the cause of
workin' the O'Mores out of property that had been in her family near two
hundred years. Everybody knows there was crooked business if it could
only be proved. But your father can't find any papers, and now just as
he was going this afternoon to search through poor O'More's furniture
and things at the house, it had to go and burn down, and the hopes we
had that something might be worked out for Bird hev all gone up in
smoke," she said, addressing the stove solemnly.

The boys went out together to take a stroll up to the scene of the
fire. Hardly had they disappeared when Mrs. Lane jumped from the chair
with such a bound that it completed the somersault and stood on its head
facing the wall.

"I wonder!" she ejaculated, addressing the pump by the sink, and shaking
her finger at it as if the gayly painted bit of iron was her husband.
"Yes, it must be it. All along I allowed 'Biram Slocum fired that house
for the insurance. Now, by a new light I read he did it so in case there
was any papers or letters to and fro about that mortgage that they'd get
burned.

"I've noticed he and she hev made plenty of excuses to get into the
house alone, but I never reckoned it was for anything else but for
general meddlin', and pa's keepin' everything so close, even nailing up
the cellar doors and winders, balked 'em.

"He knew the auction was ter-morrow, and that he'd rather burn the
papers and furniture than risk Joshua or others finding 'em is my firm
belief, and I'd like to prove it. Not that it'll do Bird any good now,
but it would be a satisfaction, even though, as Joshua says, 'We've got
enough business of our own to shoulder before fall and settlin' time
comes.' I wonder if 'Biram 'll hev the cheek to ask for the rent now.

"Yes, I'm going to do a little nosing on my own account,--yes I be!"
she continued, adding more mysterious words to the back of the calendar
and nodding determinedly at the pump as if it had contradicted. "Knowing
never does come amiss, even if it is salted down for a spell. Shoo!" she
cried presently, waving the dish towel at the chickens who had boldly
ventured in, and then the tumult, caused by Twinkle's chasing them back
to their yard with much barking and sundry nips, brought her back to the
present and the work of dish-washing and tidying the kitchen for the
evening.

Even then her head and hands did not work together. She hung the biscuit
in a pail down the well and set away the butter in the bread-box, put
sugar instead of salt into the bread sponge she was setting; and,
finally, before she sat down to rest remembering that the pantry door
locked hard and creaked when it opened, she poured toothache drops
instead of oil upon both hinges and key, and presently began to sniff
about and wonder if Dinah Lucky, who had been in that day to do the
weekly laundry, was doctoring for "break-bone pains" again, and hoped
she had used the laudanum outside instead of in, otherwise nobody could
tell when she would turn up to do the ironing.

       *       *       *       *       *

Next morning if Joshua Lane and Lammy had not been in such a hurry to
get down to the fruit farm to prepare the crates and small boxes for the
coming strawberry picking, they would have noticed that Lauretta Ann
seemed to be quite excited and anxious to get them out of the way.

But Joshua was unusually absorbed and quiet--he was disappointed at
not finding the papers--but he had a hard summer's work ahead of him
with plenty of thinking in it; while as for Lammy,--he was trying to
calculate how many strawberries he must pick at a cent and a half a
quart to buy a round-trip ticket from Laurelville to New York, so that
he might invite Bird to come up for a Fourth of July visit; also as
to whether it would be possible to do this and have anything left to
buy fire-crackers. Yet, after all, crackers were of small account, for
Bird did not care much for noisy pleasure, and if she didn't come, he
wouldn't care for even cannon crackers himself.

"I suppose 'Biram Slocum will go over to Northboro smart and early to
collect his insurance," Mrs. Lane remarked, apparently looking out of
the window, but stealing a side glance at her husband's face.

"Mebbe he will; but when I turned the cows out an hour ago, I saw
him driving Milltown way in his ordinary clothes with a plough and a
dinner-pail along, so I reckoned he was goin' to work on that patch of
early corn he's got down at the Mill Farm."

At this Mrs. Lane's eyes glistened, and she plunged some dishes into the
tub of suds with a splash that was an unmistakable signal that breakfast
was over and all but lazy people should be out.

This morning she bustled so that a half hour did all the work of
"redding" up that usually took two at the very least, and when Dinah
Lucky came to do the ironing with no sniff of laudanum about her, though
the kitchen was still heavy with it, Mrs. Lane looked puzzled, then much
to that fat aunty's astonishment popped the batch of six plump loaves
into the oven and, leaving Dinah to tend the baking,--a thing that save
for illness she had never trusted to other hands in her twenty years of
housekeeping,--she took a small basket, a knife, and her crisp gingham
sunbonnet, and muttering something about trying to get one more mess of
dandelion greens, even if it was counted late, disappeared through the
woodshed door.

Dandelions grew in plenty in the moist meadow below the cow barn, but
Mrs. Lane crossed the road and took a winding path through the woods.
After following this for some distance and crossing several fields
where she filled her basket with greens, cutting only the very youngest
tufts with the greatest deliberation, she turned into the highway
through the cemetery gate and walked rapidly past the "four corners,"
never stopping until she stood in the enclosure that had once been Bird
O'More's garden. Then she set down the basket, and, seating herself on
the scorched chopping-block, looked about her.

The house had burned down to the foundation; some of the heavy chestnut
beams had not been wholly consumed but lay in a heap on the hard dirt
floor of the cellar. Otherwise the only bits of woodwork remaining were
the frames of two cellar windows that had been protected by the deep
stone niches in which they rested. The great centre chimney, around
which so many old houses are built, held its own, and its various
openings, most of them long unused, marked the location of the different
rooms; several of these, such as the smoke closet and brick oven, being
closed by rusty iron doors.

Presently Mrs. Lane set out on a tour of inspection. The half dozen
outbuildings were quickly explored, for, with the exception of the barn,
they were quite open to the weather and as rickety as card houses. Tall
weeds struggled with the straggling sweet-william and fiery, hardy
poppies in the strip before the lilac bushes that Bird had called her
garden, and the rusty wire of the henyard fence enclosed a crowd of
nettles that stretched toward the light like ill-favoured prisoners in
a pen. The grass and low bushes had been trampled by the people who had
gathered to watch the fire, as well as by the cows that had strayed in
through the latchless gate.

Clearly there was nothing to be discovered here. Next Mrs. Lane walked
about the ruined foundation looking for a likely spot to get down into
the cellar. The old chimney with its nooks and crannies was the only
thing left to examine, and she had made up her mind to do it even if it
meant a rough climb, bruised knees, and scratched fingers.

In some places little heaps of ashes were still smouldering, but by
picking her way carefully down the stone steps that had been under the
flap-door, she reached the base of the chimney and tried the first iron
door. It was warped with the heat, but after some difficulty she opened
it, only to find the ample closet absolutely empty. Talking to herself
and saying that it was not likely that anybody, even an artist, would
hide papers in a cellar, Mrs. Lane looked up to see how it would be
possible to reach what had been the kitchen level, where the chances
looked brighter; for there was the brick oven and a wide fireplace,
closed by sheet iron through which a stove-pipe had pierced. There was
no way up but to use the chinks between the big stones for stairs and
climb. True, she had seen an old ladder in the barn, but Lauretta Ann
was too practical a woman to trust a dozed rickety ladder--she preferred
to cling with her fingers and climb, and cling and climb she presently
did.

To young people it seems a very small feat to climb the outside of a
broad, rough, stone chimney that slopes gradually from a wide base
toward the top. For Mrs. Lane--stout, thick of foot and nearer fifty
than forty--it was a terrible exertion, and she paused between every
step she took to catch her breath, muttering, "Lauretta Ann Lane, you
are a fool if ever there was one. Suppose folks should pass by and see
you creepin' up here like a squawkin' pigeon woodpecker hanging to a
tree?"

She, however, did not in the least resemble even that heavy-bodied bird.
Did you ever see a woodchuck mount a low tree when cornered by dogs?
That was what Mrs. Lane looked like as she climbed. And did you ever see
the same woodchuck scramble, slip, and flop down, flatten himself, and
then amble to his hole, when he thought his pursuers had ceased their
hunt? Well, that was the way in which Mrs. Lane came down to the cellar
bottom, when she found that the brick oven had been used merely to hold
broken crockery and such litter.

For a minute or two she sat flat on the floor, resting, nursing her
bruised hands, and gazing idly at the outline of the sky through one
of the window holes in the stone wall. Then, as she recovered herself,
a bit of something fluttering from a broken staple in the scorched
window-frame attracted her attention. She picked herself up and examined
it. The glass had broken and fallen in, while the bit of metal had
caught a narrow rag of woollen material some six inches in length. This
was singed at the edges, but enough remained to show that it was a
herring-bone pattern of brown and gray such as is often seen in men's
suitings.

Mrs. Lane looked at the rag thoughtfully for a moment, then, detaching
it, pinned it carefully inside the lining of her waist, picked up her
basket of greens which were by this time rather withered, freshened
them with water from the well, and trudged home openly by the
highway, saying, as she walked, "'Tain't much, and most likely it's
nothin'--still maybe it's a stitch in the knittin', and if it is,
another 'll turn up sooner or later to loop on to it."

At dinner Mr. Lane gave his wife an odd look saying: "Why, mother,
where've you been? You look as if you'd gone a berryin' on all fours!
You're scratched on the nose and chin, let alone your hands."

"Be I?" answered "mother," so fiercely that Joshua quailed, and
remembered guiltily that he had forgotten her request to clear a tangle
of cat brier from over a tumble-down stone wall in the turkey pasture,
where his wife passed many times a day to herd this most contrary and
uncertain of the poultry tribe, so he said nothing more, but held his
quarter of dried apple pie before his face like a fan, while he slowly
reduced its size by taking furtive bites at the corners.

About four o'clock Mrs. Lane seated herself on the front porch to sew.
She was dressed in a clean print gown, with her collar fastened by a
large photograph "miniature" pin of Janey when a baby, a sign that she
considered herself dressed for callers. True it was Saturday and Dinah
Lucky was still pounding the ironing board, but that was because she had
"disappointed" on the two first week-days sacred to such work, and not
through any slackness on Mrs. Lane's part.

The weekly mending was always a knotty bit of business, and to-day
doubly so, for now that Lammy was working at the fruit farm, it
seemed as if he fairly moulted buttons and shed the knees and seats of
his trousers as crabs do their shells. Spreading a well-worn pair of
knickerbockers on the piazza floor, she trimmed the edges of the holes
and dived into a big piece bag for material for the patches.

"Seems to me I can't find two bits alike and I do hate to speckle him up
all colours and kinds as if he was a grab-bag. I know what I'll do--I'll
put in what I've got and clip down to the store for some blue jean, and
run him up a couple o' pairs of long overalls to cover him, same as his
brother's and Joshua's. Wonder I didn't think of 'em before, only I
can't realize that Lammy is big enough to be at work."

A man's shadow crossed the piazza. Mrs. Lane looked up quickly; she had
not heard the gate click, and Twinkle, who kept both eyes open as well
as ears cocked most of the time, was down at the fruit farm with Lammy.

"Buy something to-day? Nice goots, ver' cheap," said a voice in broken
English, and a pedler stood on the broad step and swung two heavy packs
down to the floor, while he wiped his face and asked if he might get
some water from the well.

[Illustration: "'_Buy something to-day? Nice goots ver' cheap._'"]

"Certainly, 'nless you'd prefer milk," said Mrs. Lane, cheerfully, for
she was naturally cheerful and generous, unless she was imposed upon.
The pedler, a foreigner, had a full-moon face, that looked both young
and tired, two things that always appealed to her, besides which his
packs were temptingly fat, and she had a weakness for pedlers. So after
getting the milk, she leaned back in her rocker, folded her arms, and
prepared to enjoy the exhibition, saying in the same breath: "I don't
know as I care to buy. What have you got?"

The packs contained a little of everything in addition to the usual
tinsel jewellery and cheap finery which she motioned aside, while she
selected half a dozen gingham shirts, the overalls, which the man
assured her truthfully were only what the goods would cost in the
village, and some stout red handkerchiefs.

"You don'd need trouble vit him," he said, pointing to the tattered
trousers. "I sells you somedings vot you can make down schmall," said
the pedler, growing confidential and pulling a stout pair of long pants
from a separate compartment in his pack. "Only a dollar, and I give the
schentlemens ninety cents for him,--yes, I did. I keep dem for mineself
if I home vas going, but I joust stard out. Only von dollar, and only
von leetle place broke."

"I don't like to trust to buy second-hand clothes; nobody knows what
kind of folks have wore 'em," objected Mrs. Lane, yet at the same time
fingering the substantial goods lovingly. "Where are they tore?"

"Here it vas, joust by der side leg ver you can schmaller make him, and
so help me gracious it vas no dirdy peoples wore dem. It vas a rich mans
to sell so fine a pants for ninety cents for such a break. Maybe you
knows him alretty, for he live"--pointing eastward--"in a big what you
call red house by the road there farther."

"Slocum's!" ejaculated Mrs. Lane, her hands trembling with excitement.

"Yes, dat vas his name. You take de pants, hein?"

For a moment Mrs. Lane was silent, examining the rent, for the trousers
though bright and new were of the same brown and gray herring-bone
pattern as the dingy rag she had brought from the cellar window of the
burned house.

"Yes, I'll take 'em. They _could_ be cut to advantage, and you may leave
me a box of that machine cotton, too; I'm clean out. Now, pack up and
move on, my man; I've got to see to supper."

"She vas very glad of dose pants," thought the pedler to himself, as he
trudged away, smiling at the sales he had made.

Up in the attic Mrs. Lane presently stood by a gigantic cedar chest, the
lid of which she lifted with difficulty, next the top tray. In the one
below she spread the pair of pants to the torn leg of which was pinned
_the_ rag.

"It does seem a shame to lay away a pair of 'Biram Slocum's pants
so near my weddin' shawl, but so must it be. Well, now, there's two
stitches in the garter I've set up to knit for the hobbling of 'Bi
Slocum's pace; the third stitch will be to show why he crawled in that
cellar window before the fire for he surely didn't do it after, and why
he was afeared to let his wife mend his torn pants."




VI

BIRD'S COUSINS


On the night of Bird's arrival in New York Jack and Larry O'More were
late for supper. In fact they did not come in until she had gone to bed
on the "extension" lounge in the parlour, where she was lying with her
teeth clenched in an effort to keep her eyes shut and to choke down the
nervousness to which crying would have brought the quickest relief. If
Bird could only have been alone in the dark and quiet for a few hours,
it would have been much easier for her to have overcome her great
disappointment. But in the corner of the family sitting room, amid a
litter of sewing and the smell of pipe smoke, with the glare and noise
of a busy street coming in the two small windows, sleep was impossible.
Finally her aunt closed the lid of the sewing-machine with a bang,
tossed her work into a heap in the corner, and, turning out the gas,
went into the kitchen.

There were six rooms in the flat, all quite small. The sitting room in
front and the kitchen in the rear had windows that opened out, above
the three bedrooms clustered round an air-shaft that was like a great
chimney having small windows let into it, through which even at noon
only a gray, sunless light entered, and the air had no freshness but was
full of odours and noises from the flats above and below.

Mr. and Mrs. O'More occupied the room next to the sitting room, Billy
sleeping beside them on a small mattress that was propped up nightly
upon two chairs; for when the bed was thus made, there was no room to
move about. Jack and Larry slept in the middle room which had a door
into the hallway, while the third room, opening out of the kitchen, had
been used by the oldest boy, Tom, before he had taken wholly to wild
ways and drifted off. Now it was more than a year since he had slept
there and it was tightly packed with broken furniture, old boxes, and
various kinds of trash that it had been easier to throw in there than to
dispose of in any other way. A small bath-room at the end of the hall
was littered up in much the same way, and it was evident that no one
cared for bathing, as the tub was used as a cubby hole for pails, a mop,
broom, and the wash boiler and board, for which there was no room on the
overloaded fire-escape. Still Mrs. O'More felt the dignity of having a
bath-room, for it stamped her home as a "flat," tenements so called
having no such luxuries.

Presently Bird gave up all idea of going to sleep or even of closing her
eyes, and do her best she could not keep from hearing the conversation
that passed between her aunt and uncle in the kitchen, for they made no
effort to lower their voices, and she dared not close the door as the
only breath of air that reached little Billy, who was tossing about and
muttering in his sleep, came through the front windows.

After hearing herself thoroughly discussed until her cheeks burned, her
uncle closed with the remark, "Well, of course Terry was all kinds of a
helpless fool, but he shouldn't be blamed for it, his mother was a lady
out of our class, and his wife too, judging from the looks and ways of
the kid, and don't you forget it, and it must come rough to her to be
shoved about, anyhow."

Then a new resolve came to Bird from the rough but well-meaning words.
Her grandmother and her mother had been ladies,--she would not forget
that any more than she would forget her father's wish that she should
learn to paint and win the success that had been denied to him.

Presently the subject changed and she heard her aunt speak of Tom and
say that it was three months since she had heard from him, and she
feared he was dead.

"I hope it will be three months more, then," O'More had cried with an
oath that made Bird quiver and pull the pillow over her head, but she
was obliged to take it off again because of the heat. "He never minds us
unless he's in a scrape, or there's something to pay. But he's not dead,
if that's any comfort, for he wrote to me two weeks gone, saying he must
have fifty dollars or leave his job, and I wrote him that he'd leave it
for all of me."

"And you never told me! I could have sent him a trifle; God knows what
he's done by this," and Mrs. O'More covered her red head with her apron
and began to whimper.

"Look here, Rose O'More," answered her husband, while Bird judged by the
jar that he had brought his fist down on the table with a bang, "that
scoundrel has bled you long enough; now we are saving up to have little
Billy doctored, and I'll not see you rob yourself and him for that other
that we gave the best of everything, and he's turned it to the worst,
even if he is the eldest born. If I were you, I'd bank the bit o' money
that comes in from the sewin' and not keep it about ye."

"The top drawer of the bureau is bank enough for me. The sum is near
complete to buy the frame for his leg, and it will be wanted next week
when I take Billy to the doctor, for it's to his own house he shall go,
and not to the thing they call the "clink" at the hospital, to be stood
up and twisted before a crowd o' dunce heads."

So Billy was to go to a doctor. That was good news, and Bird began to
take an interest in life again, for Billy, in a single hour had crept
quickly into her sensitive, motherly little heart, and with her to love
and to serve were one and the same impulse.

Presently two new voices joined the conversation, knives and forks
rattled, and amid pauses she heard scraps of conversation muffled by
food-filled mouths, and knew that they were talking of her. Jack and
Larry had come home and were having supper. Jack, who worked in an
office by day, was attending an evening school of type-writing and
bookkeeping, while Larry, who was of slight build and whose ambition was
to be a jockey and ride races, was kept late on the track where he was
serving an apprenticeship as handy man to a well-known trainer.

"Where is she? Let's have a peek at her. I hope she's pretty if I've got
to look at her steady," said Larry, who prided himself on his eye for
beauty, and wore plaid clothes and wonderful pink and green neckties,
the colours of the stable to which he was attached, and thought it the
finest thing in the world, for jockeys are often as loyal to their
racing colours as college men are to theirs.

"She isn't so handsome but what it'll keep until morning, and she's dead
asleep by this. Quit yer noise, all of ye; ye'll wake little Billy, and
he's been that fretful to-day that the rasp of his voice would wear
through an iron bar," Mrs. O'More added, as the three burst into loud
laughter over some tale of track happenings that Larry told.

Then the voices dropped to a hum, and then turned to the song of the
bees in Mrs. Lane's hives, and Bird drifted away into that sleep that
God sends to make our tired bodies and minds able to live together
without quarrelling.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bird slept heavily for many hours, yet to her it seemed only a few
minutes when she awoke again, a streak of light shining directly across
her face and the same noises coming from every side. This time, however,
the light was from the sun, not from the gas, and the noises were
fourfold, for there is nothing so varied, penetrating, and stunning as
the sound of the awakening of a great city to unaccustomed ears.

For a few moments she lay quite still, gazing about, and trying to
realize where she was, and whether awake or asleep, for so many things
had happened during the past week, that it all seemed like a bad dream.

Not many days before, morning light brought the hope to Bird that this
day her father might be better; only the day before she had waked in
Mrs. Lane's big white bed, to see that kind soul watching beside her and
Twinkle had come racing upstairs.

Presently it all came back to her, and, getting up, she raised the shade
quietly, for no one else was awake, and looked down into the street
in which wagons of all kinds were passing, while the sidewalks were
already, at six o'clock, swarming with children, driven into the air as
early as possible by the heat of the night. Then she looked about for
her clothes and a place where she might go to bathe and dress, for the
small rooms were all open through, and the lack of privacy and the sight
of the flushed disordered sleepers was a fresh jar to her.

Finally she tiptoed into the kitchen where a friendly clothes-horse
offered shelter, and managed to make herself neat, and arranged her hair
at a mirror hung over the kitchen sink, which she afterward found was
the family toilet place; then she stepped out on to the fire-escape
where there was the possibility of a breeze.

At that moment she heard Billy's querulous little voice wail, "Oh, I'm
so tired--tireder than last night, and I hurt all over," and she slipped
back through the hallway into the front room again to meet her aunt who
stood in the middle of the parlour, gazing at the empty sofa and open
window in some alarm.

"Oh, so yer up and dressed betimes and not fallen out of the winder
through sleep-walkin'," she said, not unkindly. "Jack has turns of it at
the coming of every hot weather, and he's been down the escape to the
ground, up to the roof and every place he could get, so it gave me a
turn when I missed yer. Here, I'll just throw a few clothes on Billy and
you can take him down to the street for a mouthful of air, while I get
the breakfast. I'll fetch him to the doctor to-day if it does put back
my sewin', and see if I can't get some ease for him."

"Shall I wash him first?" Bird asked quickly, as his mother began to
pull and jerk at his clothes, and then stopped short as she saw a flash
in her aunt's eyes that told her that she must be careful what she said.

"Wash him this time of the morning when he's scarce awake, and have
him all tired before he has a bite of breakfast? I guess not. You can
clean him up this noon, before I take him to the doctor's," and Billy,
now hopping, now stumbling along on his little crutch, led the way down
the three flights of dark stairs, moving carefully from step to step so
that he should not trip in the holes in the carpet with which they were
covered.

Once in the street Bird was at the same time interested and confused by
what was going on about her. A Jewish fish pedler, with much wagging
of head and hands, was trying to sell some stale-smelling flat-fish to
a woman who had preceded them downstairs. Another pedler, with a push
cart, piled high with cabbages, radishes, and greens, went into one of
the houses with a basketful of his wares at the very moment that a big,
roan truck-horse halted with his soft, inquisitive nose dangerously near
the green stuff. First he sampled a bunch of radishes, but these were
too hot for his taste, so he tried a carrot or two, and mangled fully
a peck of spinach before he sniffed the cabbages. At these he gave a
whinny of delight and nosed among them so vigorously that half a dozen
rolled into the gutter, and when the man returned, the horse had started
back a yard or so in fright and looked guiltless of the mischief, and
the pedler ran down the street after some suspicious-looking boys.
Meanwhile the horse stepped forward and nibbled the biggest cabbage with
great relish, while Billy clapped his hands, half a dozen other children
cheered, and Bird herself laughed and felt glad to see the horse, who
did not look overfat, have such a good breakfast.

For if Bird loved flowers and all outdoors, she loved animals still more
even if she did not know it, but the other children did not think of the
horse at all; they were only glad because it had outwitted the pedler,
for between the people of poorer New York and the push-cart people there
is everlasting war. This lesson Bird learned that morning before the
various factories in the neighbourhood had blown their seven-o'clock
whistles.

Another thing that struck her sensitive ear was the different languages
that were spoken by the passers-by,--the various mixtures of slang
and foreign idioms that the speakers used for English being almost as
difficult for her to understand as the German and Italian.

At Laurelville, to be sure, people spoke in two ways. The real country
folk had a vigorous, if homely, dialect, such as the Lanes spoke, while
Dr. Jedd, the minister, and her father and mother used a purer speech,
though her father alone had the soft, distinct way of pronouncing the
words that was one of Bird's great attractions.

Little Billy, however, was quite at home with this street language, as
far as understanding it went, but no word of it came from his baby lips,
strangely enough, and though he was really over six years old, he had
the slight frame and innocent, open-eyed gaze of a child of four, and he
was entirely "different like" from the rest of his family, as his mother
said, and it provoked her as if the fact of the child's being apart from
her own rudeness was a personal reproach.

"Hullo, Billy," called a freckled, lanky-looking girl of perhaps
fifteen,--reading by her face, though she was no taller than Bird,--who
was coming across the street from a grocer's carefully carrying a bottle
of milk as if it was a rare possession.

"Hello, Mattie," he answered cheerfully, hopping to the curb to meet
her. "Where've you been? I thinked you moved away."

"I've been working all of two weeks, and we moved right in back of your
house yesterday. We've got two fine rooms now, and I buy Tessie a bottle
of milk every morning now my own self," she said proudly.

"Tessie's legs are very bad again, and I can't get her out except
Sundays when mother's at home to help, but she's got a rocking-chair and
she can pull it all round the room an' see up out the winder to your
'scape. We seen you sittin' up there last night. Who's the girl?" she
added, dropping her voice as Bird drew near to Billy, not knowing how he
went about alone and fearful lest he should fall.

"It's Bird, my cousin; she came last night from the far-away country,"
he answered, clinging to Bird's hand, while the two girls looked at each
other, one shyly and the other--city bred and quick-witted--curiously,
noticing at once the plain black gown.

"Come to visit or stop?" she asked presently.

"I've come to stay," said Bird, slowly, only half realizing the truth of
the words.

"Father dead?"

"Yes."

"Mother living?"

"No."

"Any brothers and sisters?"

"No."

"Well, that's tough luck," said Mattie, her tone full of sympathy. As
she set the precious bottle on a damp spot on the sidewalk, so that her
hands need not heat the milk, she noticed the tears in Bird's eyes and
changed the subject quickly.

"Ain't you going to work soon? I've got a good job--cash-girl--$3.50 a
week, Saturday afternoons off all summer; 'n, if I'm smart in a year,
I can get to be an assistant stock-girl. How old are you, anyhow? I'm
fifteen and over."

"I'm thirteen and Uncle John is going to send me to school by and by; he
says that it closes too soon to make it worth while this term."

"Yes, you'll have to go until you're fourteen or they'll chase you up,
even if you do live in a flat with stair carpet. It's too bad, though;
you'd have lots more fun working."

"But I want to go to school as long as I can," said Bird, smiling at
Mattie's mistake.

"Oh, then you want to begin in an office type-writing or keeping sales
books. I don't like that; it's too slow and you can't see the crowd.
You'll have a daisy time this summer, though, with nothin' to do but
takin' Billy riding in trolleys and seein' the town. I'll tell you all
the parks where they have music. Billy's pa is free with dimes for
trolley rides. Last year, before my pa's falling accident, we lived down
this street, and when Tessie's legs were well enough, Mr. O'More 'd
often give me a quarter to take Billy along fer a ride. You can ride
near all day fer that, if you know how to work the transfers and stick
up fer yer rights."

"Was your father badly hurt?" asked Bird, drawn to this stranger by a
common chord.

"Yes, hurt dead," she answered, in a matter-of-fact tone without the
trace of a tremble, "and then pretty soon we had to move, and we've
been doin' it most ever since, so I kinder lost track o' Billy. You see
mother worried sick and we all got down on our luck, but now she's got a
steady job to do scrubbin' at the Police Court, and I've got a job, and
we've got two rooms and everything is all hunky; that is 'cept Tessie's
legs, but some's worse than her and can't even sit up."

"You say you live behind us; which house is it? Perhaps I could see your
sister through the window," said Bird, somehow feeling reproached at
Mattie's cheerfulness.

"It's the little low house down in the yard, back of yours, that's got
winders that stick out of the roof. Ours is the top middle and it's got
blinds to it,--all the winders haven't,--and they're fine to draw-to
if it rains, 'cause you don't have to shut the window. It's a rear
building, and some don't like 'em, and of course Tessie would rather
see out to the street, but rents come so high and rear buildings are
stiller at night; that is, when there's not too many cats. Were rents
high a month where you came from?"

"I don't exactly know," said Bird, trying to remember. "I think we paid
ten dollars, but we had a whole house, though it was old, and a garden,
and a woodshed, and a barn, and chickens. Everybody lived in whole
houses in Laurelville, even though some had only two or three rooms."

"Ten dollars for all that, and we pay eight for two rooms!" ejaculated
Mattie, looking hard at Bird to see if she was in earnest, and, seeing
that she was, quickly grew confidential, and, coming close, whispered:
"Would you, may be, sometime come in and tell Tessie about it and the
garden and chickens? She's read about the country in a book she's
got,--oh, yes, she can read; she's twelve and went to school up to last
year, for all she isn't much bigger 'n Billy--but she can't seem to
understand what it's just like and she's cracked after flowers; the man
in the corner market gave her one in a pot last year, but it didn't live
long because we hadn't a real window that opened out then. Maybe your
aunt won't let you come 'cause we live in a rear; my mother says she's
awful proud; but then, most anybody would be, living in a whole flat
with bells and a stair carpet.

"Say, Bird," she continued, after a moment's silence,--during which the
pedler had given up chasing the boys, rearranged his scattered wares,
and plodded patiently on,--this time dropping her voice to a whisper and
putting her lips to the other's ear, "if yer aunt won't let yer come
over, maybe you'd wave to Tessie when you and Billy's takin' the air on
the 'scape. I'll tie a rag to our blind so's you'll know the winder.
It would be an awful lot of company fer her daytimes when we're out to
have somebody to wave to. Yer will? I believe ye; somehow I could tell
in a minute ye'd be different from the rest," and giving Bird a thump on
the back expressive of gratitude, Mattie picked up her milk bottle and
hurried round the corner.

A shout from above next attracted Bird, and looking up she saw her uncle
leaning out of the window and calling to them to come up for breakfast.
Billy could hop downstairs quite easily, but in going up he was obliged
to crawl, baby fashion, on his hands and knees, so Bird followed, slowly
carrying his crutch.

Her uncle and cousins were already seated at the table when the pair
came up, both rather out of breath. Of the two boys, Larry made no
attempt to rise and shake hands, but stared hard at Bird's pale,
clear-cut face and neatly brushed almost blue-black hair and lashes
that made her violet-black eyes darker yet, then gave a quick nod in
which recognition and approval were combined, and continued his meal;
while Jack got up, came forward pleasantly, if with the very flourishy
sort of manner that somehow always reminds one of the pigeon wings
and squirrels in old fashioned writing-books, and waved her to a seat
between himself and his father and began to collect the dishes about her
plate.

"Go on with yer eatin'," said Mrs. O'More, rather sharply, as if
resenting the attention. "Bird can wait on herself,--she's got all day
to do it in and it's time you were off. Come round this side by Billy's
chair so's you can spread his bread; he's always cuttin' himself," she
added.

The food was plentiful enough, if rather coarse in quality,--a dish of
oatmeal, slices of head-cheese and corn-beef on the same dish, potatoes
sliced cold with pickled cabbage, a bowl of hard-boiled eggs, a huge
plate of bread with a big pot of coffee, still further heating the close
room from its perch on the gas range. But the table-cloth was soiled and
tumbled, and Bird saw with horror that her uncle wiped his mouth on the
edge of it, using it as a napkin, while the dishes seemed to have been
thrown on without any sort of arrangement.

Not feeling hungry herself, she began to cut up some meat for Billy,
who fed himself awkwardly using his knife instead of a fork; but Bird
did not dare say anything, and in a few minutes his appetite failed
and he sat picking holes in a piece of bread, while Bird looked at the
heaped-up plate her uncle pushed toward her with dismay, yet forced
herself to eat from inbred politeness.

Larry and Jack, having finished, pushed back their chairs, and hastily
filling their lunch-boxes with bread, meat, and eggs, took their coats
from the rack in the narrow hall and went out, Larry calling, "So long,"
as he went downstairs, but Jack turned back and said pleasantly to Bird,
"Good-by till night, and don't get homesick, Ladybird!"

"Ladybird, indeed," snapped Mrs. O'More, "you needn't bother; she can't
well sicken long over what she ain't got," at which unnecessarily cruel
remark, that made Bird stoop lower over her plate and swallow some
coffee so quickly that coughing hid her tears, O'More looked up and
said: "What's wrong with yer to-day, Rosy? You've no call to hit out
when nobody's touchin' yer."

"What's wrong? What's right, I'd like you to tell me?" she flashed; "me
with a lot uv sewin' to do, and to get Billy up-town to the doctor's by
ten."

"You don't do that tomfool dressmakin' with my leave and consent. I can
keep my family and well, too, if you weren't so set on robbin' yerself
fer Tom, who'll land himself in prison yet for all of you, if, please
God, he doesn't drag the rest of us along with him."

"I can wash the dishes and dress Billy if I may," said Bird, timidly,
feeling the tension of a bitter quarrel in the air.

"Well, you may try it for onct, but look to it you neither smash them
nor make him cry; there's days he near takes fits at the sight of water.
Here's his clean suit, and I'll just go and finish up that silk skirt,"
and Mrs. O'More pulled some clothes from a corner bureau and left Bird
and Billy alone.

"Don't you worry with what she says," said O'More, in a gruff whisper,
pressing Bird's shoulder with his kindly grasp. "Just you be good to the
little feller and yer Uncle John 'll stand by yer, and maybe ye'll see
some way to chirk things up a bit. I've been thinkin' some of puttin'
a bit uv an awning out on the 'scape to keep the sun off him while
he's takin' the air, only travellin' so much I've not got to it. I'd
do it to-day, only I must go to the yards to unload a car o' horses.
To-morrer, maybe, I'll stay around home."

"Don't you want any breakfast, Billy?" Bird asked, as her uncle clumped
downstairs.

"No,--yes,--I'm hungry, but I'm tired more," he answered, laying his
head on the table.

"Suppose I wash and dress you first, and then you can go out on the
piazza and eat something and see if you can spy Tessie."

"Will you hurt Billy's bones when you wash him? Ma always does," he
added, his lower lip beginning to quiver. He always called himself by
name and often spoke in short sentences as very young children do.

"I'll try not to; and if I do, you must tell me and I'll stop right
away."

Bird looked about the room to see what she could find without calling
her aunt, whose very presence seemed to irritate Billy. There were two
stationary wash-tubs beside the range; one of these being empty, she
proceeded to fill it half full of water, making it comfortably warm by
aid of the tea-kettle. Next she hunted up a piece of soap and found a
towel with much difficulty, for the roller towel on the kitchen door was
for general use.

"Come and play duck and go in swimming," she said to Billy, who had been
watching her with interest as she overturned a pail and put it in the
corner of the tub for a seat.

The idea struck the child's fancy so completely that he could hardly
wait to slip out of his few clothes and be helped up on a chair and then
into the tub, where he sat comfortably pouring the water over himself
with a tea-cup, and chuckling in a way that would have warmed his
father's heart.

Meanwhile, Bird gathered the dishes together in the sink, wiping off
the plates with bits of bread,--as she had done ever since she could
remember and had seen her mother do in the short "better days" when they
had a pretty home and her mother had always herself washed the best
china in the inside pantry,--and straightened the furniture and hung up
various articles that littered the floor so that there was room to move
about. By this time Billy was ready for drying, which Bird did so gently
that he did not even wince, for she had ministered to her father, seen
her father care for her mother, and God had given her the best gift that
a girl, be she child or woman, can have,--the gift of loving touch, of
doing the right thing almost unconsciously for the weak or helpless.

Billy, clean, refreshed, with his bright hair brushed into a wreath
around his forehead, sitting in his little chair on the fire-escape,
and being fed with bread and milk by Bird, who talked to him as he ate,
was a different being from the crumpled little figure that had only a
few moments before looked so pathetic sitting in his high-chair, head on
table.

As Bird gave him the last morsel and wiped his mouth, he leaned backward
to where she knelt behind him and, clasping his arms around her neck,
pulled her head down to him, and, nestling there, whispered, "Billy
loves Bird very much, and she must stay close by him forever 'n' ever,
won't she?"

"See, that must be Tessie's window down there," she said, not trusting
herself to answer and catching sight of a white rag hanging from the
blind of a low building that stood in the rear of a shop that fronted on
the next street. It was an old-fashioned, two-story, wooden house, with
dormer windows in a roof that had been once shingled. There were a dozen
such in Laurelville, and as Bird looked at it she wondered how it came
to be there, built in on all sides, and if it didn't miss the garden
that must have once surrounded it.

Then as she looked she saw the outline of a face inside the window.
It was so far down and across that she could not distinguish the
features, but she waved the towel she held, and Billy shook his hand.
Presently something white waved back, and thus a telegraph of love
and sympathy crossed the dreary waste of brick and clothes-lines, and
put the three in touch, and the Bird, who had been taken from the
country wilds and put in a city cage, and the two little cripples were
no longer alone, for even at these back windows there was some one to
wave to and respond.

Mrs. O'More was in a better mood when, an hour later, having finished
the gown, she came back to the kitchen to find the dishes washed and set
away, and Billy sitting contentedly in his chair throwing crumbs to try
to coax some pigeons that lived in the stable next door from the roof to
the fire-escape.

"I'll take him up to the doctor's now," she said to Bird, without
vouchsafing any remarks upon the improved appearance of the kitchen,
though she saw it all. "You can come along with me if you like, or you
can stop here and look about and rest yourself a bit. There's plenty of
passing to be seen from the front room."

Bird said she thought she would rather stay at home.

"Mind, now, and lock the inside hall door as soon as we've gone and
don't let anybody in, for, in spite of the catch on the door below,
there's always pedlers and one thing and another pushing up."

After Mrs. O'More had left, Bird went through into the sitting room.
Seating herself by the window with her arms on the sill, she looked
down into the street. It was an intensely hot day in spite of a breeze
that blew from the East River; down by the pavement the mercury was
climbing up into the nineties--summer had come with a jump. Could it be
only a week ago that she had been picking long-stemmed, purple violets
by the brook beyond the wood lot at Laurelville? Was it only day before
yesterday that Lammy had brought her the red peonies, and they had
walked up the hill road together?

She had stayed by the window for some time, perhaps half an hour,
watching the horses that were led out from the stable to be cooled by
spray from the hose attached to the hydrant in front, when a slight
noise in the kitchen caused her to turn. The light from the window
opening on the fire-escape was darkened, and a man's figure showed for
a second in outline against the sky and then swung noiselessly into the
kitchen.

Bird's first impulse was to scream, but, checking it, she shrank
trembling behind a tall rocking-chair and watched. The man glanced about
the kitchen and came directly through to the room where her uncle and
aunt slept. It did not seem to occur to him that there was anybody at
home, though Bird did not think of this until afterward.

Pausing before the bureau, he opened the upper drawer, and, after
passing his hand rapidly through the clothing it contained, drew out a
long wallet, which Bird recognized as the one from which her aunt had
taken some money before going to the doctor's. Without thinking of the
result or counting the cost, she rushed forward and caught the wallet
tight in both hands, crying, "You mustn't take it, you shan't; for it's
the money to pay for mending poor Billy's leg."

The man, taken utterly by surprise, fell back, but only for a moment,
and, muttering a string of such words as Bird had never before heard,
seized her by the shoulder with one hand while he tried to wrench the
pocket-book from her with the other; but, strong as he was, this took
several minutes, for Bird hung on desperately, clinging to his arm after
he had secured the wallet, until finally he picked her up bodily and
threw her on to the bed, and before she could recover herself, locked
the door into the sitting room, and, taking out the key, did the same to
the door into the boys' room, through which he retreated, leaving her a
prisoner, for the window into the air-shaft was high out of reach.

As Bird sat on the edge of the bed sobbing with fright and the thought
of what the loss of the money might mean to Billy, noise of a scuffle
reached her ears from the kitchen and the locked door burst open
suddenly as it had closed, pushed by a strong shoulder, but it was the
face of a perspiring policeman that peered through the crack.

"Catch him, oh, do catch him!" she implored; "he's got the money from
Aunt Rose's drawer that's to pay for mending Billy's leg!"

"He's caught safe enough, my girl,--me mate has him in the kitchen and
the money, too, though he did try to throw it over the yards when we
grappled him. You see there's been a slew of these daylight thieves
around these parts lately, sneaking over roofs and down escapes when
folks are at work. We spotted this one goin' through the saloon on the
corner and in among the skylights, and we followed but lost track, for
he has another wallet lifted besides this one, and if he'd slid out a
minute sooner, we'd have lost him."

"Then holding on did some good, after all," Bird gasped, still standing
with tightly clasped hands as if she were holding the precious money in
them.

"An' did yer grab him, now? Look at that fer pluck,--it's a wonder he
didn't smash yer entirely. Come out and take a look at him; maybe ye
can tell did ye see him before."

Bird looked, but the young man was a stranger to her. He did not appear
to be more than twenty, and, as they led him away, handcuffed to an
officer, he pulled his hat so low over his face that the crowd that
gathered and followed as soon as the street was reached could not see
his features, or if he was old or young.

Bird gave the officer her uncle's name, and he said: "When he comes in,
tell him to come round to the station-house and he'll get his money
all right. I've got to take it in as evidence." The street was hardly
clear again of the curious crowd when the twelve-o'clock whistle sounded
and workmen appeared from all quarters, either with pails to eat their
dinners in the shade of the house fronts, or on the way to their various
homes.

Mrs. O'More and her husband--for he had been watching for their
car--came up the street together, little Billy between them, and it was
strange that they did not meet the policemen with their prisoner. Bird
was watching eagerly for them, and, after hearing their news,--that the
doctor said it was possible to help the lame leg, only that Billy must
grow stronger before it could be done,--told them hers.

Both listened eagerly. Her uncle said, "Yer pluck does credit to the
O'Mores, but did ye mind the villain's face what it was like?"

"Oh, yes," Bird answered excitedly, "it was smooth and fair, and he had
very blue eyes with a long scar over one, and his hair was quite red."
Glancing at her aunt, she saw that she had turned deadly pale, and a
certain resemblance struck her for the first time.

"God help us,--it's Tom come back to rob his own mother," gasped poor
John O'More.

"But you'll not appear against him, John," cried his wife, throwing her
arms around him as he seized his hat and turned to go out.

"I can't, woman, I can't; but maybe it'll do no good. I must go round to
the station and get the wallet and see to this, anyway."

And Bird, after laying Billy on the lounge for a nap, sat by her
aunt,--who, while waiting to hear the outcome, had collapsed and was
crying noisily,--and tried to take off her tight waist and bathe her
face, and she realized that there were even worse griefs than leaving
one's home and father, for surely dear Terry was safe beyond all harm
now.




VII

SUMMER IN NEW YORK


The arrest of Tom O'More threw the matter of little Billy's leg into
the background for a time. When the father had gone to the court where
his son was arraigned, he found that not only was there another charge
against him, but that all unknown to his family he had committed petty
thefts in other places, and had already what the police call "a record,"
so that he had to go to the penitentiary for a year, and John O'More,
feeling his disgrace keenly, for though he was a rough man and coarse in
many ways he was as honest as the day, turned doubly to little Billy,
and could not bear to have him out of his sight when he was at home.

The doctor's orders concerning Billy had been short and clear, but it
was fully a week after the visit before his mother could pull herself
together or even think of carrying them out, and then when O'More took a
day at home and had leisure to ask for details, she began by saying that
what the doctor had ordered to get the child in condition for treatment
was nonsense, and only to be had by rich folks.

"Well, well, woman, let's hear and get to the core o' the matter," said
John O'More, tired of the continual word warfare.

"He's to have a real bed and no shake-down, so's he can stretch out and
roll about, and it's to be in a room opening to the light where he can
lie quieter by himself an hour or so every day. Then he's to get a full
bath every morning and a light meal, and fresh meat at noon, and a bite
and sup between that at supper, and the between times filled in with air
and a bottle o' tonic, and the saints knows what else.

"'Do yer think I keep a 'ospital to do all them things,' sez I to the
doctor.

"'No,' he answers quick like, 'and for that reason I think it will pay
you best to send him to the 'ospital to get him built up.'

"'His father will not hear to it,' I said.

"'Very well, then,' said he, 'you know what _I_ think; go home and talk
it over.'"

So John O'More sat and thought and blinked at the ground, and thought
some more, but it was Bird who first spoke, though very hesitatingly,
for her aunt resented almost everything she said, and in her ignorance
and prejudice seemed to owe poor Bird a grudge as being partially
responsible for Tom's arrest, rather than showing any gratitude toward
her for trying to prevent the theft of the money.

"Couldn't Billy have a bed in the little room that was--that is shut
up?" she asked finally. "The door is close to the kitchen window, and a
good deal of air would come in."

"It's packed solid full, and besides the room is off from me, so's I
couldn't hear the child to tend him in the night if needs," objected
Mrs. O'More, somewhat hotly.

"Couldn't the things be put in the attic or somewhere?" persisted Bird,
seeing a flash of approval cross her uncle's face, "and then there would
be room for two beds, and I could stay with Billy and give him his bath
every morning."

"Attic! do you hear her?" mocked the aunt, "and a fine slop there'd be
in me kitchen, and a nice place for folks to eat breakfast, with the
bath."

"If the things were taken out of the bath-tub we could use that,"
continued Bird, waxing bold at the prospects, "and I'm sure, Aunt Rose,
it would be much nicer for you to have the parlour to yourself, and not
have to make me a bed there every night."

"That last is true; I've been greatly put out these days when company
called," the company being the slipshod factory girls for whom she did
sewing, but, as often happened, Bird had unconsciously said the one
thing that could have appeased her aunt, for only when something was
suggested that would benefit herself was she willing to have others
considered.

"The tub is full of holes, and the agent he won't mend it, saying that I
made them with the ice-pick, when for convenience I used that same tub
for an ice-box, me own givin' out."

"If that's all, a bit o' solder is cheap," said O'More, springing to his
feet, and preparing to take action.

"I've the day on me hands, and a few extry dollars in me pocket, and if
something can't be worked out o' this, 'twon't be my fault; and while
I recommember it, I think you'd be the better of a new hat, Rosie, and
while yer out buyin' it, jest step in the store, round on Third Avenue
and get two o' them light-lookin', white iron beds; they're cheap, for I
saw yesterday when passin' that they be havin' a bargain sale of them,"
and John, with the quick-witted diplomacy of his race, handed his wife
some money which she took, and, half mollified, at once prepared to go
out, instructing Bird to "do up the rooms" while she was gone.

The door had not fairly closed when O'More gave a shout that almost
frightened Bird, and said: "Now we'll do some hustlin'; there's no
attic, me girl, but there's the coal-closet in the cellar which is
empty, now that we use gas in the range. Half the stuff is but fit for
the ashman, and the rest I'll bundle down there quick as I get a man
from the stable to help. Now watch sharp whilst I put the truck out and
see if there's aught yer can use."

When the room was finally cleared, a mirror, a chair, and a small chest
of drawers were the only useful assets, and these Bird pulled into the
kitchen, while she dusted and wiped away at them until they looked
clean, even if somewhat shabby.

Returning from the cellar O'More (in his youth a handy man in a stable)
attacked the dust in the little room with broom, mop, and finally a
scrubbing-brush to such good purpose that in an hour it was quite
another place, for the walls fortunately had been painted a light cream
and were in fairly good condition.

If John O'More had been asked to go down on his knees and scrub a room,
he would have resented the work as an insult to his manhood, but love
had set the task. Little Billy, sitting there in his chair, his face all
eagerness, needed the room, and so he did the work as nonchalantly as he
would have stepped into the stable and curried a horse in a hurry time.
It was only when Bird clapped her hands in admiration and said, "Why,
uncle, how nice and quick you did that; Dinah Lucky would have taken a
whole day," that he became embarrassed, and, giving her an apologetic
wink, said with lowered voice, "It's a job well done, but whist! 'tis
not for the good of my health to be repeated," and Bird understood and
wondered, as she did a hundred times during that long summer, why she
always understood her uncle and he her, while life with her aunt seemed
one long misunderstanding.

A plumber, living in the flat below, came up in the noon hour and
soldered the holes in the tub, which O'More declared to be too black
even for a pig's trough, so he sped out around one of those many
"corners," of which at first Bird thought the city must be made, for a
quart of boat paint and a brush.

"Yer aunt must be havin' a hard time with her tradin'," he remarked on
his return, seeing that his wife had not come back to prepare dinner.
But just as Bird had spread the table with various articles of cold
food, whose abiding-places she very well knew, and was making Billy some
little sandwiches to coax him to eat meat for which he had a distaste,
Mrs. O'More came in, talkative and almost pleasant as the result of her
morning's bargaining.

Before night two narrow beds were carefully fitted into opposite sides
of the little room, with the chest of drawers set between, in front of
the now-closed door that led to the boys' room, with the looking-glass
hung above it. It was only a bit of a place and still very close and
stuffy, but Billy and Bird had at least beds of their very own, if only
in a niche apart, and Bird's heart took fresh courage.

The next step was to coax her uncle to fill some long boxes with earth
and set them inside the outer railing of the fire-escape. There is a law
against filling up these little balconies with boxes or furniture of any
kind, but Bird knew nothing about it, and her uncle regarded it as a
sort of tyranny that he, a free-born citizen, should disregard. All Bird
thought of was that she might plant morning-glory seeds in the earth
so they would climb up the strings she fastened to the next story, and
later on there was, in truth, a little bower blooming above that arid
waste of bricks and ashes.

[Illustration: _Bird and Billy on the Fire-escape._]

After the new room was arranged, and permission given to Bird to see
that Billy had what the doctor ordered that he should eat, and to
take him out whenever he wanted to go, everything began to move more
regularly and in some respects more comfortably, then Bird, to her
dismay, saw the city summer, like a long roadway without a tree or bit
of shade, stretching out before her.

There was not a book in the house and no one to tell her of the free
library where she might get them, and school, where she hoped to find
a sympathetic teacher for a friend, belonged to September three months
away. No one who has always lived in the city can possibly understand
what this change, with its confinement and lack of refined surroundings,
meant to this young soul. To be poor, in the sense of having little to
spend and plain food, she was accustomed,--in fact, she had much more
to eat now, and through her uncle's careless kindness she was seldom
without dimes for the trolley rides to Battery Park "where the fishes
lived," or Central Park with the swan-boats that were to "make a man" of
Billy. But to be shut away from the woods, the sky, the beauty of the
sunsets, to have no flowers to gather and love, and to be brought face
to face daily with all the ugliness of the life that is merely of the
body, was almost too much for her courage.

How could she keep her head above the street level, how remember what
her father had taught her?--already the memory of the past was becoming
confused. Sometimes she was on the verge of ceasing to try and settling
down into a silent drudge, content to take what came, and falling
into the habits and commonplace pleasures of the girls of her cousins'
acquaintance with whom she was thrown in the parks and on the stoop and
streets. It would have been much easier in some respects,--her aunt
would have been better pleased to see her go off with the others, to
some noisy if harmless excursion, arrayed in a cheap, flower-wreathed
hat and gay waist, shrieking with laughter, and chewing gum, than to
see her always neat amid disorderly surroundings and ever willing
to do the endless little tasks that her own mismanagement piled up,
and Ladybird--Jack's name for her--strangely enough seemed a term of
reproach, not compliment.

At first Bird had hoped that Sunday might bring better things; but no,
Sunday in the quiet, peaceful, Protestant sense that Bird understood
it,--there was none. The family straggled to early mass one by one, for
Mrs. O'More and her sons were Romanists, though O'More was not, being
from the north of Ireland, and the rest of the day was spent by the men
either lying in bed and smoking, or standing in groups about the street.

In these hard days little Billy was Bird's only ray of light. The two,
being of equally sensitive natures, clung together, and the child was
so happy in his new-found friend and ceased his incessant fretting
whenever he was with her, that Mrs. O'More at last gave him completely
to Bird's charge with a sigh of relief, for her youngest child was as
much a puzzle to her as her niece, and she felt that he also was of a
different breed, as it were, and it annoyed her.

All the fierce scorching summer days Bird and Billy wandered about
together, sometimes going over to Madison Square, sometimes riding in
the trolley to Central Park, but more often down to the Battery where
the air tasted salt and good, where the wonderful fishes lived in the
round house and the big ships went past out to that unknown sea of which
Bird was so fond of telling Billy stories.

Bird, too, soon learned to find her way about, for six-year-old Billy
had all the New York gamin's knowledge of his whereabouts coupled with a
cripple's acute senses. He hopped along with his crutch quite well, and
many a lesson in human nature and life did Bird learn these days in the
treeless streets of poorer New York.

After a time she found that her uncle had seemed to forget his hatred
of anything like drawing or painting, so one day she ventured to buy a
good-sized pad and pencil, and then watching Bird "make pictures" became
Billy's great joy, while she to her surprise found that she could draw
other things besides flowers.

Oftentimes the children would go down to sit on the steps and watch
the horses from the great sales stable being exercised up and down the
street. Bird tried to draw these too, and one day succeeded so well that
her uncle, passing in at the door, stopped and looked down, and then
said, "Bully! any one would know it for a horse, sure!" After that she
worked at every odd minute.

She loved horses dearly, but she and Billy were forbidden to go into
the stables, which were almost underneath the flat, and Bird really
had no wish to, for the men there were so rough and there was so much
noise and confusion; but a few doors away was a fire-engine house where
lived three great, gentle, gray horses that ran abreast, and had soft
noses that quivered responsively when they saw their driver even in the
distance. Bird made friends with these, taking them bits of bread or
green stuff, until the firemen came to expect the daily visit and "Bird"
and "Billy" became familiar names in the engine-house; and there was a
little dog there that ran with the engine and reminded her of Twinkle.

Dan was the heaviest of the three horses and Bird's favourite, and
one day, after many attempts, seated on the stoop of the next house,
she succeeded in drawing a small head of him that was really a good
likeness, at least so the firemen thought, for they put it in a frame
and hung it in the engine-house, and the next day big Dave Murray, Dan's
driver, gave her a small box of paints "with the boys' compliments."

Ah, if the big, bluff fellow only knew what the gift meant to poor
little Ladybird struggling not to forget and to still keep the heavenly
vision in sight.

Bird had written a short note to Mrs. Lane telling of her safe arrival
in the city, and giving her address, but more than that she could not
say. If she said that she was happy and gilded the account of her
surroundings, it would have been false. If she told the truth, her
Laurelville friends would be distressed, and it would seem like begging
them to take her back when it evidently was not convenient, for she did
not know that her Uncle John had refused to let her stay with Mrs. Lane
unless she was legally adopted.

Neither was Bird worldly wise enough to act a part and simply write of
her visits to the park and the little excursions with Billy which in
themselves were pleasant enough. She was crystal clear, and knew of but
two ways, either to speak the whole truth or keep silent. She was too
loyal to those whose bread she was eating to do the first, and so she
did not write.

In due time a long letter came from Lammy written with great pains and
all the copy-book flourishes he could master, telling of Aunt Jimmy's
strange will, of how he was going to work all summer at the fruit farm,
and ended up by telling her of the preparations he had made for the
Fourth, never dreaming it possible that, the matter of tickets disposed
of, Bird should refuse his invitation.

At first the thought of getting away from the city, and being among
friends again quite overcame her. She began to wonder if Twinkle would
be glad to see her, and if the ferns met over the brook as they did last
year, and if Mrs. Lane would have the white quilt on the best-room bed,
or the blue-and-white patch with the rosebuds. Then she realized that
if she met the Laurelville people face to face, she would surely break
down, while the saying "good-by" again would be harder than not going.
Then, too, there was little Billy. How could she leave him at the very
time when, in spite of continued hot weather, he seemed to be gaining?

No--she sat down resolutely and wrote a short note that wrung her heart
and kissed it passionately before she mailed it, for was it not going to
the place that now seemed like heaven to her?

But the letter that arrived as the Lanes sat on porch after supper said
no word of all this, and seemed but a stiff, offish little note to
warm-hearted Mrs. Lane and Lammy who, having now quite earned the ticket
money, was cut to the quick when he found that it was all in vain.

"She's gone to the city and forgotten us," he gulped in a quavering
voice, as he read the letter, coming as near to letting a tear run down
his nose as a sturdy New England boy of fourteen could without losing
his self-respect.

"It doos _appear_ that way," said Mrs. Lane, who was gazing straight
before her out of the window with an abstracted air; "but, after all,
what's in appearances, Lammy Lane? Don't your copy-book say that they
are deceitful? Well, that's what I think of 'em. Likely 'nough it
appears to Bird that I didn't want to keep her, 'cause owing to this
other mix-up, I couldn't divide the share of you boys without thinking
it over, and 'dopt her then and there. But my intentions and them
appearances is teetotally different.

"No, Lammy, I'm goin' straight on lovin' Bird and trustin' her and
keepin' a place in my heart for her, besides havin' the best-room bed
always aired and ready, and jest you keep on lovin' and trustin' her,
too, and like as not the Lord will let her know it somehow, for I do
believe kind feelings is as well able to travel without wires to slide
on as this here telegram lightnin' that hollers to the ships that's
passin' by in the dark. 'Think well and most things 'll come well,' say
I."

"How about Aunt Jimmy's will? Yer always thought well enough o' her,"
said Joshua, who had laid down his paper and folded his spectacles to
listen to the reading of the letter.

"An' I do still," Mrs. Lane averred stoutly; "it doos _appear_
disappointing, but I allers allowed that if we was only able to read
her meanin', 'twould be a fair and kindly one."




VIII

THE FLOWER MISSIONARY


It was the last day of June when one morning, before the sun had a
chance to turn the pavements into ovens, Bird, having finished some
marketing for her aunt, was leading Billy slowly in and out along the
shady sides of the streets toward Madison Square, where they were
watching the lotus plants in the fountain for the first sign of an open
flower, for already buds were pushing their stately way through the
great masses of leaves.

Chancing to glance at the window of a newly finished store that was not
yet rented, Bird read the words, "Flower Mission." As she paused to look
at the sign, wondering what it might mean, an express wagon stopped at
the curb and several slat boxes and baskets filled with flowers, for
sprays peeped from the openings, were carried into the building, a wave
of moist coolness and perfume following them.

Bird's heart gave a bound of longing, for the fragrance of the flowers
painted a picture of her little straggling garden and held it before her
eyes for a brief moment.

"Oh, look, Bird, come quick and look; it's all full of pretty flowers in
there! Do you think they would let Billy go in and smell close?" Billy
was standing by the open door, and, as Bird glanced over his shoulder,
she saw that one side of the store was filled by a long counter,
improvised by placing boards upon packing cases, which was already
heaped with flowers of every description in addition to those that the
expressman had just brought.

An elderly lady, with a big, white apron tied over a cool, gray, summer
gown, was sorting the flowers from the mass, while a tall, slender young
girl, of not more than sixteen, dressed all in white, was making them
into small bouquets and laying them in neat rows in an empty hamper.

It was the young girl who overheard Billy's question to Bird and
answered it, saying, "Of course Billy may come in and smell the flowers
as much as he pleases, and have as many as he can carry home."

"Oh, can we?" said Bird, clasping her hands involuntarily with her old
gesture that expressed more joy than she could speak.

At the sound of the second voice, the young girl pushed back the brim
of her drooping, rose-trimmed hat and looked up with clear, gray eyes.
As she did so Bird recognized her as Marion Clarke, the daughter of the
man who spent his summers in the stone house on the hillside beyond
Northboro, and it was she who had passed Bird and Lammy on the roadside
the day when she had left her old home and, carrying Twinkle, was going
to Mrs. Lane's.

But if Bird recognized Marion, the memory was on one side, as it is apt
to be where one sees but few faces and the other many. This however
did not prevent Marion from holding out her free hand to the younger
girl, as she made room for her to pass between the boxes, saying, in a
charming voice, low-keyed and softly modulated, yet without a touch of
affectation: "If you are fond of flowers and can spare the time, perhaps
you would help us this morning; so many of our friends have left the
city that we are short-handed. Here is a little box your brother can sit
on if he is tired." Oh, that welcome touch of companionship, and that
voice,--it made Bird almost choke, as she said:--

"Billy is my cousin, and I should love to tie the flowers, for Aunt Rose
does not expect us back until noon."

It was one of Marion Clarke's strong points, young as she was, that she
had insight as well as tact. She saw at a glance that these children
were not of the ordinary class that play about the streets, interested
in every passing novelty, merely because it is new, so she had given
Bird a friendly greeting and asked her to help, instead of merely
offering the children a bouquet and letting them pass on as objects of
charity, no matter how light the gift.

When Bird replied in direct and courteous speech, Marion knew that she
had read aright. An ordinary street child of that region would have
said, "I dunno 's I will," or "What 'll ye give me 'f I do?" or perhaps
declined wholly to answer and bolted off after grabbing a handful of
flowers.

"Aunt Laura, will you let us have some string? There, see, it is cut in
lengths, so that you can twist it around twice and tie it so. I do wish
people would tie up their flowers before they send them, they would keep
so much better; but as they do not, we have to manage as best we may.

"Oh, how nicely you do it," she continued, as Bird held up her first
effort for approval,--a dainty bouquet of mignonette, a white rose, and
some pink sweet-william, with a curved spray of honeysuckle to break the
stiffness.

"So many people put the wrong colours together, and tie the flowers
so tight that it seems as if it must choke the dear things,--see, like
this," and Marion held up a bunch in which scarlet poppies and crimson
roses were packed closely together without a leaf of green.

"Yes, I understand; those colours--hurt," Bird answered, groping for a
word and finding exactly the right one.

"You must have lived in the country and been a great deal with flowers
to touch them so deftly and know so well about the colours."

"I always lived in the country until this summer, and Terry taught me
all about the colours and how to mix them."

"Who was Terry?" asked Marion, much interested, and not knowing that she
was treading upon dangerous ground.

"He was father," and Bird, remembering where she was, stopped abruptly,
and Marion, who had noticed the rusty black gown, understood that there
was a story in its shabby folds and forbore to intrude.

Miss Laura Clarke, who was the lady in gray, gave Billy a pasteboard box
lid of short-stemmed blossoms to play with, and he sat quite content,
while the others kept on tying the flowers until only one basketful was
left.

"The flowers come in every Wednesday morning, and I ask people to send
them in as early as possible, so that they may be sorted and tied
up by ten o'clock when the ladies come to distribute them," Marion
explained as they worked. "They are Miss Vorse, the deaconess from the
mission, beside two workers from the College Settlement, and half a
dozen district visitors. Those two hampers go direct to hospitals, but
the ladies take the flowers about to the sick in the tenements and to
special cases.

"I have come here from the country place where I live every week all
through May and June, but this is my last day this season, because I'm
going to Europe next week with my aunt, and Miss Vorse will take my
place."

Another disappointment for Bird. At last she had met some one to whom
she had felt drawn, and whom she thought she might see occasionally, and
almost in the same breath learned that she was going away.

"Do you know of any children who would like some flowers, or any one who
is ill?" she added, as she noticed that Bird was silent and loath to go,
even though all the bouquets were ready and Miss Laura was packing them
in the baskets and boxes for distribution.

"There's Tessie; oh, I know that Tessie would love to have some!" cried
Bird, eagerly; "she has not waved to us for nearly a week, and I was
going to see her this afternoon when Billy takes his nap, if Aunt Rose
will let me," and Bird told what she knew of the little cripple who
"kept house" by herself while her mother and sister worked.

Then a happy idea came to Marion Clarke. Handing out a flat wicker
basket, that held perhaps twenty-five bouquets, to Bird, she said:
"Would you like to be one of the Flower Missionaries this summer and
carry bouquets? Yes?" as she saw the glad look in her eyes; "then you
may fill this basket, and here is a big bouquet for you and something
extra sweet to add to the basket,--see, a bunch of real wallflowers,
such as grow over seas, some foreign-born body will go wild with joy
over it, and here is a fruit bouquet a youngster has evidently put
together,--big strawberries on their stalks set in their own leaves.

"Miss Vorse is coming now. I will introduce you and tell her to give
you the flowers. What is your name? Bird O'More. I'm glad of that; it
seems to fit you. I should have been disappointed if it had been Jane
Jones," she continued, as a sweet-faced, tall young woman, dressed in a
dark blue gown and bonnet, entered, saying: "I'm afraid that I am late,
but there is so much illness among the little children in the district
now that I could not get away. A new Flower Missionary! That is good;
children can reach those whom we cannot."

Presently Bird found herself walking along the street, Billy's hand in
one of hers, and the basket of flowers in the other. Billy was prattling
happily, but for once she scarcely heard what he said, the flower voices
were whispering so gently and saying such beautiful things.

"Take us to Tessie," whispered one. "God lets us bring sunlight to
dark places," said another--"You can do the same." "Be happy, you have
something to give away," breathed another, and this flower was a spray
of cheerful honeysuckle that blooms freely for every one alike.

Yes, Bird was happy, for Marion Clarke had held her by the hand and
called her a Flower Missionary; she had flowers to give away and flowers
to take home. Oh, joy! she could try to paint them, and she pushed the
bouquet that held the old garden flowers, the mignonette, sweet brier
and honeysuckle under the others to keep for her own.

If she waited to go home first, the flowers might fade, so an impulse
seized her to give Tessie her flowers first, and then turned into the
street below their own, trying to remember Mattie's directions--"Count
six houses from the butcher's, and then go through the arch, and up two
pairs of stairs to the top."

Before she had gone a block, two little girls had begged her for
flowers, one rosy and sturdy chose red and yellow zenias; the other,
who, like Billy, had a "bad leg" and hopped, chose delicate-hued sweet
peas. Bird had never seen a lame child in Laurelville, but now she met
them daily, for such little cripples are one of the frequent sights of
poorer New York.

At the first corner a blind woman, selling the mats she herself
crocheted, begged for "a posy that she could tell by the smell was
passing." To her Bird gave the bunch of mignonette. A burly truckman,
who thought she was selling the flowers, threw her a dime and asked for
a "good-smellin' bokay for the missis who was done up with the heat,"
so she tossed him back the coin and a bouquet of spicy garden pinks and
roses together, while Billy called in his piping voice, "We're a Flower
Mission--we gives 'em away," so that the man drove off laughing, his fat
face buried in the flowers.

When Bird had counted the "six houses from the butcher's" and found the
archway, which was really the entrance to a dismal alley, her basket was
almost empty. She hesitated about taking Billy into such a place, and in
fact but for her great desire to give Tessie the flowers, she would have
turned back herself. As she looked up and down the street, a policeman
passing noticed her hesitation and stopped.

"Sure it's the plucky girl from Johnny O'More's beyond that tried to
catch the thief,--and what do you be wantin' here?"

Bird recognized the policeman and explained, and he said, "Ye do right
not to be pokin' in back buildings heedless; it's not fit fer girls like
you, but this same is a dacent place, though poor, and as I'm not on me
beat, only passin' by chance, I'll go through to the buildin' with ye,
and the kid can stay below with me while ye go up, for stairs isn't the
easiest fer the loikes av him."

So through they went, the big policeman leading the way, and entering
the back building Bird began to grope upward. When the house had stood
by itself in the middle of an old garden, the sun had shone through and
through it, but now the windows on two sides were closed, and the halls
were dark, and the bannister rails half gone.

At the first floor landing she paused a moment. What was that tap,
tapping? It came from a small room made by boarding off one end of the
broad, old-fashioned hallway. The door was open and a single ray of sun
shot across from an oval window that had originally lighted the stairs
and was high in the wall.

In the streak of sun was a cobbler's bench and on it sat a man busily at
work fastening a sole to a shoe, so old that it scarcely seemed worth
the mending.

Then she went on again and, after knocking at two wrong doors, finally
found the right one.

"Come in," piped a shrill, cheery voice; "I can't come to open it," and
in Bird went.

"I hoped that you would come to-day," said the small figure, sitting
bolstered up in a wooden rocking-chair with her feet on a box covered
with an end of rag carpet, by way of greeting. No introduction was
necessary, for the two girls knew each other perfectly well, although
their previous acquaintance had merely been by waving rags across the
yards.

"My legs haven't felt as if they had bones in 'em in a week," Tessie
continued, "so's I couldn't reach up high enough to wave, and it seemed
real lonesome, but I've got a new pattern for lace, and there's a man in
the store where Mattie works who says he'll give me half-a-dollar for
every yard I make of it,--what do you think of that?" and she spread
out proudly a handsome bit of Irish crocheted lace upon which she was
working. It was four inches wide, a combination of clover leaves, and
very elaborate, of the kind that is so much sought now and costs many
dollars a yard in the shops.

"It is beautiful," explained Bird; "how do you know how to do it?"

"My mother learned long ago in the Convent in the old country, but her
hands are too stiff to make it now, and besides she says it wouldn't pay
her. So she showed me the stitch and some of the old patterns, and one
night last week, when I couldn't sleep very good, I was thinkin' of the
lace work, and I guess I must have dreamed the new pattern, for the next
morning I worked it right out. Those leaves is like some that came in a
pocketful of grass Mattie fetched me home; one day they were cutting it
over in the square, and the man let her take it. I just love the smell
o' grass, don't you? And now's I can't get out, Mattie brings me some in
her pocket every time she can. I guess she will to-night if they've cut
it to-day."

All this time Bird held her basket behind her, but now she wheeled
about and rested it on the arm of Tessie's chair. The joy of the child
was wonderful, almost startling. Her dark eyes dilated and she looked
first at Bird and then at the flowers, as she almost whispered in the
excitement of her surprise, "Ye ain't got 'em to keep, have ye?" Then as
Bird tipped them into her lap, "They ain't fer me, fer sure?"

[Illustration: "'_They ain't fer me, fer sure?_'"]

"Yes, they are, and I'm going to bring you some every Wednesday," said
Bird, joyfully, and then she told about Marion Clarke and the Flower
Mission.

"Ain't it jest heavenly to think of,--me with a whole winder to myself
that opens out and the crochet to do and real flowers, new ones that
ain't been used at all," and Tessie leaned back and closed her eyes in
perfect content.

Then suddenly Bird's sorrow seemed to grow lighter and life a little
brighter, and the sunlight as it were crept in to sweeten them both--she
had something to give away, and lo, it was good.

Tessie was down handling the blossoms again and discovered the berry
bouquet beneath. "Oh, but here's growing strawberries on a bush like!
Well, I never, never! But they're handsome! Maybe I could make a pattern
from them, too. Oh, surely there's angels about somewhere doin' things.
You know Father John, he says I've got a Guardian Angel looking out
after me, and St. Theresa my name saint chose her, and that everybody
has, though for a long spell I didn't know it. You see it's been easier
for her to look after me since we've got a room with an opened-out
winder. I reckon if I was an angel, I wouldn't care to poke around
air-shafts much. Oh, what's these browny-yeller flowers that smell so
elegant?" and Tessie held up the wallflowers.

When Bird told their name, Tessie gave a little cry and said, "They're
what mother talks about that grew up in the wall below the big house
at home where her father was a keeper, and the smell of them came in
the cottage windows in the night air right to her, and she's often said
she'd cross the sea again to smell them if she had the price, and now
she won't have to take that trouble. That angel has found our winder for
sure. Would you get me the little pitcher and some water in it yonder?"

The larger of the two rooms, the one with the window, had two clean
beds in it, over which a newspaper picture of the Madonna and Child was
pinned to the wall, two chairs, and an old bureau, while the smaller
room, little more than a closet, held a table, a few dishes, and an oil
cooking-stove, all as neat as wax. A pail of water stood on the table,
from which Bird filled the pitcher, and set it on a chair by Tessie
that she might herself arrange the flowers. Then, remembering that the
policeman and Billy were waiting, she picked up her basket and her own
flowers, and, promising to come the next week, groped her way downstairs
again.

Bird did not see the tired mother, when she returned from her day's
scrubbing, enter the dark room and drawing a quick breath say, in an
awe-struck voice, "I smell them--I smell the wallflowers! Sure, am I
dreaming or dying?" or see the way in which she buried her face in the
mass, laughing and crying together, when the lamp was lit and Tessie had
told her the how and why of it.

There were dreary days often after this, when her uncle was away on long
trips and her aunt was cross, but though Bird did not yet give up all
hope of going back some day among her friends, or studying, as she had
promised her father, she was learning the lesson of patience, which,
after all, is the first and last one to know by heart.

Now the morning-glories had reached the window tops, and in the little
bower above the clothes-lines she and Billy often sat as she told him
stories of the real country, of Lammy and Twinkle, the old white horse,
and the red peonies, and flew there in imagination. Then the child's big
eyes would flash as he gazed at her, and he always ended by asking,
"When we stop being birds in this cage, we'll fly right up there to
your country and be real birds and see Lammy and Twinkle, won't we?"
And Bird always answered, "Yes," to please him, but it was a word that
meant nothing to her. So the summer wore on, and Bird did not go back to
Laurelville.




IX

'RAM SLOCUM'S TAUNT


While Bird was putting away from her all thought of going back to
Laurelville for a summer visit, Lammy Lane was trying in every way to
bring about her return.

His mother was the only person in the family or village who really read
Lammy aright and valued him at his worth. She never laughed at his
various contrivances and mechanical inventions, and when he appeared to
be star-gazing, she firmly believed that it was not idleness, but that
he was interested in things other than the mere jog-trot work on the
farm.

His brothers had all taken up other occupations in factory and shop,
and Joshua Lane had expected that easy-going Lammy, the youngest by
several years, would naturally drift along into farm work; but the boy
had said, when his father had spoken upon the subject, "Farming is all
right, only this one isn't big enough for mo'n two, and I like to live
in the country for pleasure; but for a trade I'm going into making
somethin' that bugs can't eat, and that won't get dried up, nor drowned
out neither." To Joshua this remark savoured of feeble-mindedness; but
when he repeated it to Dr. Jedd, that keen-eyed person laughed, saying
they need not worry about Lammy, for that some day he might surprise
them all.

All through June he worked diligently at strawberry picking; then
currants and raspberries followed in quick succession, so that it was
nearly August, when, with twenty dollars to his credit in the Northboro
Savings Bank, he took a vacation and went to his old haunts with the
other boys.

Lammy had been bitterly disappointed when he found that Bird could not
return to spend the Fourth of July, but he was not in the least daunted;
for, after all, what was a whole summer even, when some day Bird would
come back for good? The boy firmly believed that something would turn up
to enable his father to buy the fruit farm, or if that was impossible,
he would try to coax his father and mother to get her back without.
There was always plenty to eat, and his home seemed so pleasant to him
that he did not realize how hard his parents had to struggle to make
both ends meet in the bad seasons when the bugs ate and the drought
dried. He did not, of course, know of John O'More's requirement that
if Bird ever returned she must be legally adopted, and share and share
alike with his brothers and himself; but if he had, it would have made
no difference.

Lammy was very fond of prowling in the deep woods and along the
river. He had intimate acquaintances among the gray squirrels, always
knew where fox cubs could be found, and had once reared a litter of
skunk pups under an abandoned barn. Their mother had evidently been
trapped,--for he never saw her,--and he fed the young with milk and
scraps, in the childish belief that they were some sort of half-wild
kittens, and was very much disgusted, when they were old enough to
follow him home, that his father declined to have them about, and that
they disappeared the very same night.

But the river interested him the most, and he not only knew every
swimming and pike hole, perch run and spawning shallow, along its
ten-mile course from Northboro down to the Mill Farm at Milltown, and
the windings of every trout brook that fed it, but he understood all
that went on in the half dozen mills or shops along the route. He could
explain exactly how the water was turned on and off and the gearing
adjusted in the gristmill, the stamping and perforating done at the
button factory, or the sand moulds prepared at the forge where scrap
iron was turned into cheap ploughshares and other cast implements.

One very hot day the last part of July when Lammy, together with
'Ram Slocum and Bob Jedd, was going to the pet swimming-hole of the
Laurelville boys, a clear pebble-lined pool with a shelving rock on
one side that approached the water by easy steps, they heard voices
in the woods and came suddenly upon a party of young fellows from the
Engineers' Summer School, which had its camp farther down the ridge of
hills.

"Hullo!" shouted the foremost, addressing Lammy, who also chanced to
be in the lead; "can you tell us if there is any decent place to swim
hereabouts? The pond at the Mill Farm is posted 'No Trespassing,' most
of the river bed is either too rocky or too shallow, and the only good
place we've struck below here has a mud bottom, and looked too much like
an eel hole to suit me."

"Yes, 'tis an eel hole, this side of the course," Lammy answered
readily, "and t'other side there's pickerel could bite yer toes if they
was minded to. I'll show yer a bully place. We're going there now, and
it isn't much further up."

"Charge him a quarter for the steer," said 'Ram Slocum, in a loud
whisper, kicking Lammy's bare shins to stop him, for he had stepped
forward eagerly to lead the way.

"Shan't either," Lammy replied spicily, to 'Ram's astonishment; "water's
free up here, even if your pop won't let us swim in the mill-pond, and
does charge folks three cents a barrel for taking water when their wells
are dry."

'Ram, a strong boy of sixteen, with bright red hair, who usually
domineered over all the boys of his age and under,--particularly
under,--had never before been so answered by any of his companions, much
less Lammy, to whom he often referred as "softy," and his temper rose
accordingly. His nickname "'Ram," short for Abiram, referred to his
fighting proclivities and the way in which he frequently used his bullet
head to knock out an antagonist instead of his fists; and though he did
not see fit to follow the matter then and there, in his mind he put down
Lammy for punishment when he should next catch him alone.

Meanwhile Lammy, silently threading through the dense underbrush,
followed by Bob Jedd, reached the swimming-hole, while 'Ram slowly
brought up the rear, crashing along sullenly, kicking the dead branches
right and left so that the little ground beasts fled before him, now and
then pausing either to pound a luckless land turtle with a stone, or
shake from its perch some bird who, silent and dejected, had sought deep
cover for its moulting time.

When he reached the others, he found not only that Lammy had made
friends with the students, who, by the way, were a new lot who had
recently come to camp, but that they were asking him all sorts of
questions to draw out his knowledge of the neighbourhood, and were
actually making Lammy a good offer if he would come to the camp daily
during their stay, be "chainboy" on their surveying expeditions, and
show them many things about the country that it would be a waste of time
for them to search out for themselves.

Now Mr. and Mrs. Slocum had been very much stirred up by these same
surveyors, and being suspicious, as shifty people usually are, wondered
very much if the men were only practising as they claimed, or if they
were in the pay of some land company, and prospecting, that they might
see where land could be bought in large blocks. They had tried all
summer to have 'Ram employed about the camp, that he might keep his eyes
and ears open, but so far to no avail. Consequently, when the boy heard
the coveted position offered to Lammy, his rage and disappointment got
the better of his usually shrewd discretion, and pushing into the group,
he almost shouted, his voice pitched high with eagerness:--

"Lammy ain't the one you want; he ain't strong, and he's got no go. I'm
two years older and worth twice as much, but I'll take the job at the
same price and get pop to let you swim in the mill-pond if you'll hire
me."

"I rather think not," said the spokesman, a bronzed, broad-shouldered
young fellow of about nineteen. "I'm afraid you might charge us for the
air we breathed while we were in swimming; besides, I never employ a
sneak if I know it."

Then 'Ram knew that he had been overheard, and he slunk away toward
home, owing Lammy a double grudge, and the sounds of shouts of merriment
and the splashing of water did not tend to cool his wrath.

As for Lammy, he sat on the edge of the rock, trailing his brown toes
in the water in the seventh heaven of content; for he was to help carry
those mysterious instruments about for a whole month, and go in and out
of the Summer School camp, knowing what was said and done there, instead
of gazing at it across the fields. Then, too, perhaps he might some day
meet Mr. Clarke, and possibly, though it was a daring thought, get leave
to go into the mysterious building in his locomotive works at Northboro
that bore the sign "Strictly Private--No Admittance."

Bird and he had often talked of such a possibility. How glad she would
be to know! He would write to her all about it.

He did, but had no reply; for the letter reached Bird at one of the
times when her uncle was away. Billy had been suffering more than usual,
and his mother was consequently very cross and difficult to bear with.
Bird put the letter by to answer "to-morrow"; but every day bore its own
burden, and the days piled up into weeks.

       *       *       *       *       *

Joshua worked steadily on the fruit farm all the season, preparing for
future crops as conscientiously as if he himself was to be the owner.
Of this, however, he had no hope; it was impossible for him to bid on
the place, as he had little or no ready money, and the only way to raise
this would be to mortgage his own little farm.

This several of his neighbours had suggested, offering to loan him the
money; but Joshua had struggled along some fifteen years under the
weight of a mortgage, and now that he was freed he did not wish to
pick up the burden again. Then, too, his farm with its old ramshackle
outbuildings was not worth more than three thousand dollars, while the
fruit farm with its rich land, good barn, poultry house, and newly
shingled dwelling was valued by good judges at any figure from five to
six thousand dollars. For though Aunt Jimmy had scrimped herself in many
ways, she was too good a business woman to let her property get out of
repair.

Neither of the Lane brothers were as well off as Joshua, so by the last
of October the community had decided that the fruit farm must go out of
the family, and attention was divided between who would buy it and what
Joshua would do with his third of the proceeds,--better his house, or
buy more land.

The Slocums were considered to be the most likely purchasers; for Abiram
Slocum was known to have much money stored away in various paying farms
as well as in the Northboro bank, though the way in which he came by
it was not approved, even by the most close-fisted of his neighbours,
for 'Biram was what was called a "land shark." He sold worthless
parcels of land that would grow nothing but docks and mullein to the
hard-working Poles and Hungarians who were fast colonizing the outskirts
of Northboro, taking part cash payment, the rest on mortgage, and
encouraging them to build. Then when the interest became overdue, owing
to inevitable poor crops, he foreclosed, put out the family, and sold
the place anew.

So sure did Mrs. Slocum appear to be that she would own the fruit
farm, that she took it upon herself to watch the place to see, as she
explained when caught by Joshua Lane peeking in at the kitchen window,
"that nothing properly belonging to it was took off." He told her in
very plain language that whoever bought the farm would buy what there
was on it at the time, and no more, as his aunt had trusted him with the
management until the final settlement, and that what he did was no man's
business save that of the heirs.

In the interval, before it was time to tie up vines and bed the various
berries with their winter covering of manure, he turned his attention to
Aunt Jimmy's flower garden, a strip of ground enclosed by a neat picket
fence, where a box-edged path starting under a rose trellis ran down
the middle and disappeared in a grape arbour at the farther end, and
everything that was fragrant and hardy and worth growing flanked the
walk, while behind, the sweet peas and nasturtiums climbed up to the
very fence top in their effort to see and be seen.

This garden had been the apple of Aunt Jimmy's eye, and in spite of all
"spells" and oddities, she had tended it wholly herself, her one gentle
feminine impulse, as far as the outside world knew, having been giving
nosegays to the children that passed the house on their way home from
school. If they handled the flowers carelessly, they never received a
second bunch, but if they cherished them, slips, seeds, and bulbs were
sure to follow, so that Aunt Jimmy's flowers lived long after her in
childish garden plots.

Prompted by Lauretta Ann,--for Joshua was too hard-headed and practical
to have learned anything about flowers, except that they must be fed and
watered like other stock, whether animal or vegetable,--he regulated the
various borders, dividing and resetting the roots of hardy plants under
his wife's direction, as Aunt Jimmy had done each autumn, while Lammy
stood by, eagerly waiting for the "weedings," which he carried home with
great care and set out in a corner south of the barn, "to make," as he
said, "a little garden for Bird, in case we don't get the fruit farm."
His mother encouraged him in this and praised his efforts, giving him
some strips of chicken wire to make a trellis, so that his vines might
in time cover the end of the old, gray-shingled barn. Even she, however,
did not know of another little garden strip on a far-away hillside that
he had tended all summer for the sake of his little friend.

       *       *       *       *       *

In spite of Joshua Lane's rebuke to Mrs. Slocum, she continued spying
and insinuating, and not many days later, chancing to drive by the fruit
farm half an hour after school was out, and seeing Lammy going up the
road, carrying a basket, spade, and water can, followed by faithful
Twinkle, she hurried home and bade 'Ram "step lively and follow that
Lane boy up, an' see where he's goin', and what he's got, and what he's
agoin' to do with it."

Mrs. Slocum was more than usually determined upon annoying the Lanes,
since Joshua, as administrator for Terence O'More, had refused payment
of the rent owed for the little cottage, until the insurance company
had satisfied themselves as to the cause of the fire and paid Abiram's
claim. The furniture destroyed, at the lowest estimate, would have been
more than enough to cancel the debt.

'Ram, only too glad to do his mother's errand, after the manner of all
bullies, waited until Lammy was out of reach of protection and well
up on the sheltered "hill road" before he overtook him, asking in a
"you've-got-to-tell" tone what he had in the basket and where he was
going. Upon Lammy's declining to tell, he announced his intention of
following until he found out for himself.

Now it must be remembered that Lammy had the name of being girlish, if
not exactly cowardly, that he was only fourteen, and though tall, was of
a slender build; while 'Ram was not only broad-shouldered and sixteen,
but the village braggart to boot, so that it really took some pluck for
Lammy to continue up that houseless road with 'Ram muttering threats
and marching close behind. Still Lammy walked straight on past all the
farms, to where the runaway Christmas trees stood sentinels around
the hillside graveyard. There is no denying that his hand shook as he
unlatched the gate, but he did not falter or look back, but went to the
corner where were the mounds that marked the graves of Bird O'More's
father and mother.

Why the turf was so much greener and smoother than anywhere else in the
enclosure no one but Lammy knew, and for a moment 'Ram paused outside
the fence in sheer surprise; but as Lammy, kneeling down, took a couple
of roots of the red peony from his basket, and prepared to plant one at
the top of each flowery mound, his surprise vanished in derision.

"Ain't you a fool for sure!" he shouted, not coming in the enclosure,
for, stupid and superstitious like all real cowards, he thought it
bad luck to cross a graveyard,--"a fool for sure, planting posies yer
stole; top of paupers, too, when even that stuck-up girl that was yer
sweetheart's gone off to live with rich folks and has clean forgotten
them and you!"

Lammy's trembling fingers fumbled with the earth and his head swam. The
first part of 'Ram's jeer made his blood boil, but after all it was a
lie, and lies do not sting for long; for poor though O'More was, his
debts would be paid to a penny, and Lammy had _bought_ the peony roots
from his father as executor by doing extra weeding on the fruit farm.

The last sentence, however, hurt cruelly; for though Lammy did not
believe it, he had no way of disproving it even to himself, and so could
not say a word to 'Ram in reply; for during the five months since Bird
went away only two brief notes had come from her, and these told about
city streets and sights, and little or nothing of herself. While, to
make it the more strange, when, in the hot August weather, Mrs. Lane had
sent her an invitation to come up for the promised visit, enclosing the
tickets, which represented some weeks of egg money, and offered herself
to go down to New Haven to meet the child, a stiff little note returning
the tickets had come by way of reply, and though it was grateful in
wording and said something vague about going with Billy for sea air,
etc., he could not guess the disappointment that it covered, and that
the sea air was merely a chance ferry ride, or the breeze that blew over
Battery Park, where they herded daily with hundreds of other children
of poorer New York. Lammy had been cut to the heart, and 'Ram's taunt
rankled indeed.

Mrs. Lane, however, had read between the lines, her keen insight,
confidence in Bird, and motherly love serving as spectacles. She still
felt, as she always had done, that Bird was unhappy, and yet too proud
to confess it, and that she did not dare write often or come among them,
for fear that they should discover what they could not as yet better.
For Mrs. Lane remembered O'More's conditional promise only too well,
and the possibility of fulfilling her part of adopting the little girl
within the year seemed to grow more and more remote.

Silently Lammy finished his work, picking up every dead leaf that lay on
the mounds, and then taking his spade and basket, turned to go home, but
there stood his tormentor by the gate.

If anything angers a bully, it is silence. If Lammy had engaged in a war
of words, the chances are that 'Ram would have gone away, having had,
as he considered it, his fun out. As it was, he really felt that he had
been neglected and affronted, so, making believe open the gate as Lammy
closed it, he said, "I can dig up them posies twict as quick as you
planted 'em."

"Maybe you can, but you won't," cried Lammy, suddenly growing pale and
rigid, while he stood outside the gate, but square in front of it.

"Oh, ho, and who 'll stop me?" sneered 'Ram, in amused surprise,
standing with his arms akimbo.

Without saying another word, Lammy, the meek, the boy-girl in name, flew
at 'Ram with such suddenness, beating and buffetting him, that the big
boy was knocked down before he knew it. Recovering his feet quickly, he
tried to grapple with the lanky little lad, but Lammy twisted and turned
with the litheness of a cat, landing rapid if rather wild blows at each
plunge, while Twinkle nipped at 'Ram's heels, until finally 'Ram, seeing
that he was outmatched in agility, and determined to conquer without
more ado, lowered his head for the celebrated "butt" that generally
winded his antagonist.

Lammy's fighting Yankee ancestors must have left the lower end of the
graveyard and marched up to encourage him on this occasion; for he was
nearly spent and was pausing to get breath when the lunge came, so that
his final effort was to give a side twist, and the blow of the red
bullet head was received square and full by the locust gate post instead
of by Lammy's stomach.

'Ram dropped to the ground, where he lay for several minutes seeing
stars, planets, and comets, while a bump as big as an apple appeared in
the middle of his forehead and the cords of his neck ached like teeth.
Meanwhile Lammy, his nervous strength gone, ran all the way home, and
throwing himself on his bed, whither he was followed by his mother,
who saw his livid face as he dashed through the kitchen, sobbed as if
his heart would break, not from fear, but because in the reaction he
remembered what Bird had said of people who fought either with their
tongues or fists.

It was not until long afterward that he thought it strange, and wondered
why his mother had not scolded him, only hugged him to her comfortable,
pillowy breast, when he told his story, and put nearly all of her
precious bottle of Northboro cologne on his head to soothe it, and gave
him buttered toast, when, after having his cry out, he came down to
supper, which dainty was generally regarded as only for the minister
or else a "sick-a-bed" luxury. His father meanwhile actually broke
into a laugh and said, "Hear yer've been doin' a leetle Declaration o'
Independencing on yer own account. Wal, it's sometimes a necessary act
fer folks same as countries; Lauretta Ann, I reckon Lammy and me could
relish a pot of coffee to-night"--coffee being a Sunday-morning treat.

When it came to the part of his story concerning 'Ram's taunt and his
fear that Bird had forgotten them, his mother reassured him for the
hundredth time with her own ample faith, but he quite startled her by
saying emphatically:--

"That is all right, mother, as far as it goes, but we've just _got_ to
buy that fruit farm somehow." And he fell asleep that night, happy in
making impossible plans for the purchase.

It was perhaps as well for Lammy's self-conceit that he did not hear
his mother talk with Mrs. Slocum, who came in about nine o'clock,
tearful, yet at the same time in a threatening rage, demanding that
he be "whipped thoro' for half murdering her harmless boy when he was
taking an innercent walk, and that if he didn't get the whippin', she'd
get a warrant immedjet."

Mrs. Lane waited until she had finished her tirade, and then calling
Joshua, who had retreated to the wood-shed, said: "Mis' Slocum here
needs a warrant writ hasty; jest you escort her down to the Squire's,
as her husband don't seem intrested to go with her. I hate to see a
neighbour obleeged to play the man and risk goin' out in the dark
alone."

Then as her adversary, seeing herself outflanked, rose to go, she added
with apparent sympathy: "Of course I know it's hard for you to feel
'Ram's beat by one half his size, even if the gate post did help Lammy,
and folks 'll be surprised to hear it, but you mustn't blame him too
much; it was maybe me, his mother, in him worked Lammy's fists so good."
And Lauretta Ann looked her visitor straight in the eyes. Some weeks
later Mrs. Slocum had reason to remember that look.




X

LAMMY CONSULTS OLD LUCKY


When November came, Joshua Lane had completed his work of preparing
the fruit farm for the auction, according to Aunt Jimmy's wish that it
should be in full running order when sold.

The old fowls were mostly sold off, and the henhouse was full of the
vigorous laying pullets that mean so much in early winter. The fall cow
had calved, and the two or three yearlings were as sleek as does.

When the time came for the division of the furniture between the wives
of the three Lane brothers by drawing lots, public interest again
awakened, and Mrs. Slocum expressed great anxiety lest it should not be
done fairly, saying to her husband: "It's a fussy, mixed-up business
anyway. Why didn't they auction off the stuff and let folks in to see
it done fair? They do say, for all Miss Jemima lived so plain, she had
stores of good stuff shut up in those top rooms that even Dinah Lucky
never's had a peek at when she went to houseclean. Those old mahogany
pieces are worth money at Northboro, and Lauretta Ann's cute enough to
know it, but I don't believe those other slab-sided Lane women do; so do
you watch your chance and make them an offer so soon as it's divided.
There's a wardrobe there, solid mahogany, twice as big as one they ask
fifty dollars for in the 'curious' shop. Most likely they'd value cheap,
new stuff better."

If it had not been rather pathetic to Mrs. Lane, this breaking up of a
house where she had been so much at home, the day of the division would
have been one of unalloyed merriment.

In the first place, owing to the way in which Aunt Jimmy had directed
the drawing should be managed, the articles were not valued in the
usual way and divided so that each of the three women shared alike, but
merely numbered, the duplicate slips being shaken up in a basket and
drawn by Probate Judge Ricker for Lauretta Ann, the others drawing for
themselves, as Joshua preferred that there should be no possible chance
of his wife being criticised. While she, cheerful and thoughtful as
ever of the comfort of others, prepared a nice lunch on the afternoon
appointed, which she and Lammy carried to the fruit farm, and had a
cheerful fire in the kitchen stove, with a big pot of fragrant coffee
purring away on top of it, when Jason and Henry Lane, the younger
brothers, following each other closely, drove into the yard with their
wives.

Mrs. Henry Lane was a delicate, sad-looking little woman, quite above
the average. She had been one of the teachers in the Milltown public
school at the time of her marriage, but the struggle to wrest a living
from a small hillside farm, coupled with ill health, had broken her
spirit, and she sank into a rocking-chair and began to jiggle the baby
that she carried to and fro.

Mrs. Jason, on the contrary, was tall and gaunt, with high cheek-bones.
Life had not been very kind to her either, but still she looked as if
she could hold her own; and her husband, who only reached her shoulder,
fairly quaked and fell away before her like ill-made jelly.

"Do draw up to the table, sisters-in-law both," cried Lauretta Ann,
after greeting each heartily. "You must have hurried dinner to get down
here by now, and I always do feel hungrier the first cool days than when
winter has set square in."

"I _should_ feel better for a cup of coffee," said Mrs. Henry, in a
plaintive voice; "we haven't had any for more than two weeks. Henry
forgot it when he went to the store, and he doesn't get there as often
as he used, now that the mail is delivered around the country by wagon.
I've been using tea right along, and I think it's made me nervous;
besides, the last I bought from the travelling spice-and-sugar man
tasted more like buckwheat shucks and musty hay than anything else."

At this Henry Lane's head sank still farther into the collar of his
coat, which was three sizes too big anyway, and he began whittling
recklessly at a hard-wood clothespin with a broken knife, which quickly
caused a deeply cut finger and much consternation, as the sight of
blood always made his wife faint away, and the present occasion was no
exception to the rule.

After Lauretta Ann had bathed and bound up the finger, and sent Lammy
home for a little of the cherry cordial for which she was famous,
she made another effort to serve the lunch, and finally succeeded in
cheering the mournful company by sheer force of good temper.

"I do hope you'll draw Grandma Lane's canopy-top cradle and the big
rocker that matches, they'd be such comforts to you as you are fixed,"
Mrs. Joshua said to Mrs. Henry, as putting a friendly arm about her,
they went into the sitting room, where Judge Ricker was busy kneading
up the numbered papers in the basket as carefully as if he was working
lard into flour for tea biscuits, and seated themselves in a semicircle.

"Do you begin, sister-in-law Jason, and you follow next, sister-in-law
Henry," said Mrs. Joshua, laying her hand, which would tremble in spite
of herself, on Lammy's shoulder. Lammy, by the way, had grown broader
and stronger and lost much of his timidity of manner during the two
months past. Whether it was the sense of responsibility that working
with the college men had given him, or his determination to have Bird
come back, his mother could not decide, while his father chuckled
whenever the matter was referred to, saying, "'Tain't neither; it was
squarin' up at 'Ram Slocum that made a man of him;" and though Lauretta
always said, "Sho, pa! ain't you ashamed of aidin' and abettin' a
fight?" her smiling expression belied her words.

Mrs. Jason stepped forward and drew--the canopy cradle! A roar of
laughter greeted her venture, in which she joined grimly, for her
youngest offspring was a six-foot youth of seventeen, while Mrs. Henry
sighed and felt secretly injured, though she said nothing.

Next came her turn, and she drew a worked motto in a gilt frame,
which read, "The Lord Will Provide," whereat she smiled feebly and
whimpered, "I've tried to think so, but I do wish Henry Lane would help
Him out better." Mrs. Joshua drew the best china, Mrs. Henry the tall
clock, which she straightway declared to be a foot higher than any of
her rooms,--she finally traded it with Mrs. Jason for the cradle and
rocking-chair,--until at the end of two hours the last number left the
basket and three tired and confused women wandered about trying to
collect their property.

The great wardrobe had fallen to Mrs. Jason's share, but upon close
inspection it proved to be merely stained cherry and not mahogany at
all, and its owner remarked that she wished some one would take it off
her hands, as it was too big to go in her door, and more than it was
worth to truck it home, much less get it in to Northboro, where it would
be possible to sell it. Her husband, however, ventured to say it would
make a good harness closet for the barn and keep the rats from gnawing
the leather; and so with much stretching of muscles and groans of "now
heave together" it was loaded with the other articles upon the wagon.

There was quite a lively interchange of articles between the women
before the rooms were finally cleared, but in the end, owing to Mrs.
Joshua's good sense, they all declared themselves well satisfied. Mrs.
Jason had secured a good sewing-machine, and Mrs. Henry a parlour organ
for which her melancholy spirit pined; while Mrs. Joshua, who had a
machine and inwardly detested parlour organs, saying that when needful
she could do her own groaning, was made happy by the best parlour set,
her own chairs and lounge having been fatally collapsed by her family of
men folks of assorted ages.

One thing they all regretted, which was that Aunt Jimmy had ordered all
articles of every kind not mentioned in her list should be either burned
or buried, according to their kind, and there were many things dear to
their feminine hearts in the mass of rubbish that had been accumulating
in garret and cellar, barn and loft, these many years as well as much
that was salable as junk. It was of no use to object; for Joshua was
determined to carry out the will in both spirit and letter, and though
it had amused the eccentric old lady to collect and hoard the stuff, she
was equally determined that it should never be exposed to the gaze of
the curious. Joshua knew that though she thought him slow and without
ambition, she trusted him, and he was not going to disappoint her.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the loaded wagons filed out of the yard, a lean figure might have
been seen peering through the branches of a small maple tree in the
wood lot just above. It was Abiram Slocum, who, goaded by his wife, was
trying to see which cart contained the wardrobe; for she had come back
from Northboro the day before all eagerness to get possession of it, for
the owner of the "curious shop" had said if the wardrobe was of the size
and quality she described, he would pay her fifty dollars for it. Now
if the owner would let it go for fifteen or even twenty-five dollars,
the profit would give her new paper and a carpet for her best room; for
rich as Slocum was reputed to be, he was close-fisted with his wife, and
she was obliged to pick up her own pin money like her poorer neighbours,
with the exception that she had not succeeded in the egg business, owing
to her tendency, whenever possible, to give eleven to the dozen, and
sell limed eggs at a high price to ignorant people who desired them for
setting.

Abiram presently spied the wardrobe on Jason Lane's load. He was sorry
for this, for Mrs. Jason was one of the few people who had ever got
the better of him in trade, and a horse trade at that, so he feared she
would never sell the furniture, or if she did, would extort full value.

Nevertheless, he slipped hastily from the tree, cut across lots toward
the road they must take on their way home, and fifteen minutes later
met them when they stopped to rest the horse, as if he was merely
sauntering toward the pasture for his cows, and was soon engaged in
general conversation upon farm topics that gradually led up toward the
furniture.

"Heavy load you've got there," he remarked; "ain't that there closet big
for your haouse?"

Jason was about to say that it was, and that they were going to put it
in the barn, when he felt his wife looking daggers, and refrained.

"'Tis big, but we can use it," she answered dryly, starting up the
horse.

"How about selling it and buying somethin' handier?"

"I ain't anxious. Get along, Whiteface," she said, touching the horse
with the whip.

"I'll give yer fifteen dollars for it, here and now, if you'll leave it
to my house," Abiram shouted as the wagon began to move away.

"'Twouldn't pay me to turn back."

"Twenty dollars then."

"Nope, I'm in a hurry, and there's a pile of good seasoned wood in the
thing."

"She knows its value, sure enough," he said to himself, as the wagon
began to climb the hill.

"Give yer twenty-five, and yer can leave it here by the road."

"I reckon you might unpack, pa," the gaunt woman said, a smile hovering
about her mouth, adding to Abiram, "Hand up the money, and down she
goes."

In five seconds two ten-dollar bills and a five, after a searching
scrutiny, found their way into Mrs. Jason's pocket, and the clumsy piece
of furniture leaned tipsily against the pasture fence exposed to the
full glare of the sun.

Just as Jason Lane had remounted the seat and the wagon had begun to
move again, a shout made them look round. There stood Abiram in the
middle of the road, stamping and choking with rage so that he could
barely speak.

"Stop! hey, stop!" he yelled; "it ain't mahogany; it's only stained
wood. Hey, give me my money back or I'll hev ye arrested."

"Who said it was mahogany?" called Mrs. Jason, stopping the horse and
fairly beaming with the pleasure of the contention.

Abiram hesitated a moment, felt himself caught, stammered, and said,
"Mis' Slocum did."

"Well, go ahead and arrest Mrs. Slocum, then," chimed in Jason, his
speech for once meeting his wife's approval.

"Oh, Lordy, Lordy, what 'll she say, 'n' what 'll I do with it?" he
moaned to himself, completely caught in the trap set by his own greed.

"I dunno," shouted Mrs. Jason as she moved away, "'nless you put wheels
on it to make a wagon and hitch that sorrel mare I sold you to it."

       *       *       *       *       *

The day of the sale drew near. All that remained to be done was the
destroying of the rubbish, and this was no small task.

One entire day a bonfire had raged in the back lot, and what would not
burn was the next day taken in the ox-cart thrice filled by Joshua
himself and dumped carefully in the great bog-hole.

This quaking bog was one of the wonders of the neighbourhood and its
common dumping ground, even though it could only be reached by fording
the river above the mill-pond. To the eye it was merely an oozy-looking
swamp tract, such as are plentiful near the back-water of rivers, but
this particular bit was an ogre that swallowed up everything that was
cast in it, only a few hours being necessary to engulf, without leaving
a sign, an unlucky cow that had once strayed into it. So that now it was
securely fenced about except at one spot, used for dumping, which was
protected with logs secured to driven piles.

Mrs. Lane watched the loading of the wagon very ruefully, for she now
fully realized that all her hopes concerning the fruit farm had come to
as complete an end as the load of broken china and rusty tinware. When
she saw the old pewter tea-pot, the dents supplemented by a crack, go by
on top of a basket of broken flower pots, she begged her husband to let
her keep it, saying:--

"Even if it's worth nothin' now, even for drawin' tea, Aunt Jimmy must
hev meant somethin' kind when she left it to me, and I'd like it to mind
me of the idea, only she got fogged up some way and didn't plan right;
fer if she set store by anything, it was by that pot on account of its
bein' buried half of the Revolution with great-grandmother Cuddy's best
teaspoons and twenty gold guineas all safe inside."

"Lauretta Ann," said Joshua, pausing to rest the heavy basket on the
tail-board of the cart, "'tain't often I put my foot down, but now
they've set, heel and toe, sock and leather, both of 'em. I'm goin' to
do my work legal, but you've been treated shabby, and I ain't a-goin'
to hev that tea-pot set up on a shelf for a moniment to that same. If
you're too Christian to resent, I'm goin' to do it for yer, which she,
bein' my aunt, the quarrel is for me to take upon me, so there!"

Joshua had never before made such a long speech in all their married
life, and his wife, fairly awed by his earnestness, said no more, but
turning away, took the private pathway homeward that led through the
meadow and garden, closing the gap in the wall with brush as she went,
for soon now she would have no longer any right to come and go.

That afternoon as Lammy came home from school he saw in the distance his
father and the ox-team taking the last load along the highway, and as
he realized how soon the auction would take place, his heart sank and
his feet dragged heavily along. Turning to take a short cut through the
lane, he came face to face with an old coloured man with snow-white,
woolly hair, who was scratching up the leaves with his cane, in search
of chestnuts.

His name was Nebuchadnezzar Lucky, or Old Lucky, as he was called for
short, and he was the husband of Dinah, who was general factotum of the
village, and supported her man, who was double her age, by cooking,
nursing, or housecleaning, as the season or circumstances demanded,
absolutely taking pride in the fact, as if it was his right and his due.
For was not Old Lucky a superior being who made charms, brewed herb
medicines, and told fortunes, in addition to having turns of "seeing
things," which caused him to be regarded with awe by children and the
credulous of all ages, even in this prim New England town where witches
were once burned?

"Howdy, Massa Lammy? 'Pears like the squir'ls and chippin monkeys has
got all the chestnuts this season, and dey ain't left one for old Uncle
Lucky to bile soft so's him can eat 'em. You ain't got a handful laid
up you could spare 'thout missin', I reckon now?" And the old man gave
a persuasive, yet terrifying leer with eyes that were so badly crossed
that they fairly seemed tangled.

An idea struck Lammy, as the tales of Lucky's power came back to
him, for even the practical folk who scoffed, allowed that there was
something queer in it. He would consult the old man as to what he could
do to get the fruit farm and Bird back at the same time. But stop! Where
was the money to come from? For it was well known among his customers
that Lucky could not "see things" until he had rubbed his eyelids with a
piece of silver. Lammy's money was all in the bank. Ah! he had it! John
O'More's silver dollar that was hidden away in Bird's paint-box!

Away he flew like a scurrying rabbit, leaving Old Lucky muttering in
amazement, and in a half-hour returned, carrying a salt-bag full of
chestnuts in one hand and the coin wrapped in paper in the other.

The old man, by this time having grown tired of his useless hunt for
nuts, had gone home, and Lammy followed him to his cabin that was
perched on the edge of the bank overhanging the mill stream. Lucky was
sitting in an arm-chair by the window when Lammy entered and stammered
out his wish and request for advice, at the same time offering his bag
of nuts and the coin which he first polished on his trousers.

If Lucky was surprised at the size of the offering, his usual fee being
a quarter, while he never refused a dime, he did not show it, but felt
the money carefully, passed it across his dim eyes, munched a nut or
two, and falling back in his chair, covered his head with a red and
yellow handkerchief and began to mutter, beckoning Lammy to come near
and listen, which he did, scarcely daring to breathe. The mutterings
went on for several minutes, and then took the form of words.

"Take--a--shotgun," said the voice in a tone meant to be hollow, but
which stopped at being cracked, "load him wif bullets you make umsself,
go up on de churchyard hill and shoot der shadder of a Christmas tree on
a--black,--dark night,--an' den,--an' den--"

"Then what?" besought Lammy, in an agony of suspense.

"Den you'll hear sumpfin'!" shouted Lucky, suddenly pulling the
handkerchief from his face and fixing Lammy with a cross-eyed stare that
was paralyzing.

"But recommember," Lucky added, shaking his forefinger ominously, "make
dem bullets out o' sumpfin' yo' find, not bought nor lead uns, but
sumpfin' white like silver, or dis year charm hit won't work."

"But _where_ shall I find it?" gasped Lammy, so much in earnest that he
did not realize the absurdity of what the old man said.

This question seemed to take the magician out of his depth, and annoyed
him not a little. After casting his eyes helplessly about, they chanced
to rest on the stream below the window, when he quickly closed them
and whispered, "Yo' must look in water--not in a pond, but in running
water!" after which he refused to say another word.

When Lammy reached home, his mother was setting the supper on the table,
while his father and brothers were going over the same old arguments
as to the possibility or impossibility of buying the fruit farm. Lammy
smiled to himself as he lifted Twinkle to his shoulder and then put
the dog on a chair beside him, his usual place at meal-times, where he
waited, one ear up and one down, until it was time to be fed.

No one noticed how red the boy's cheeks were and how his eyes shone, as
he hurried from supper to learn his lessons, that he might have time in
the morning to begin his search for metal for the magic bullets before
going to school. He thought if he had the material, all else would be
easy, for there was an old bullet-mould in the workroom in the barn,
where mending was done, also an iron pot that had been used for melting
solder.

He did not tell his mother of his plan, not that he meant in any way to
deceive her; but if she knew nothing, the surprise at the result would
be all the greater.

For the next two or three days Lammy went up and down the river banks
from the Mill Farm to the upper fork, apparently as aimlessly as in the
time that he was dubbed "Look-out Johnny," and the neighbours nodded,
and said, "The brace he got fightin' didn't last,--he's trampin' again,"
while his mother took it to heart and thought it was because he was
grieving for Bird, as they had heard nothing definite or satisfactory
from her for more than a month, and then only a few words on a card
inquiring for Twinkle.

When Saturday came, Lammy started off in the morning early, asking
his mother for a lunch to carry with him, which was nothing unusual.
This day, instead of heading downstream, he started above the mill and
followed the river up toward the woods. All the forenoon he looked here
and there, and after eating his luncheon came out of the woods near
where the highway branched and crossed the ford on the way to the bog
dumping ground.

He stood there a few minutes, idly watching the dead leaves swirl
along, and an occasional fish dart by, when his eyes became fixed upon
an object lying close under a big stone in mid-stream; it glistened
as the sun shone upon it, and then turned dull again. Whatever it was,
it fascinated him strangely, and jumping from stone to stone, he soon
reached it. "Only an old tin pan," he muttered in disgust; "that won't
make bullets."

As luck would have it, the stone upon which he stood turned, making
him jump splash into the water, kicking the pan as he went. When he
recovered himself, he looked about for footing, and there where the pan
had been, to his amazement, lying almost at his feet, was the pewter
tea-pot!

"However did that get here?" he exclaimed; but the answer was so simple
that he guessed it at once. The tea-pot, in company with the pan, had
been jolted from the ox-cart in crossing the ford on its way to the
dump, and so escaped being swallowed.

"Hurrah!" cried Lammy, picking up the treasure and making his way to
land, where he danced about in glee. "This 'll melt into bullets first
rate, and it's kind of white like silver if it's cleaned. When it's
melted, pop can't call it 'an eyesore' or a 'moniment,' so it's no harm
for me to take it home."

He could not tell why, but he took off his coat and wrapped it
carefully around the tea-pot, and then slipped from the highway into
the woods again.

When he reached home, it was still early afternoon. His father was
cutting wood in the upper lot, and his mother had gone to Northboro with
eggs for her Saturday customers, so Lammy had the place to himself.

First he buried the tea-pot deep in the feed bin, and taking the key
of the house from its hiding-place under the door-mat, stole up to his
room for dry shoes and socks, as it was a cold day and his sopping feet
were already making him shiver and feel tight in the throat. Somehow
the possession of the tea-pot gave him an uneasy feeling. Did it really
belong to him? He hung about the house for a time, then walked straight
out the gate and down to the Squire's office in the town house. This
same "Squire" was a man of education as well as a lawyer, and Lammy's
knock was answered by a cheery "Come in!" which he did, saying, all
in one breath and quite reckless of grammar, "Please, sir, if I find
anything that's been took to the dump, but fell off and not been
swallowed, would it be mine to make bullets of?"

The Squire looked up from under his bushy eyebrows and smiled at
the lad encouragingly. "Certainly it would be yours, my boy; what is
intentionally thrown away is fair plunder for any one." And with a hasty
"Thank you, sir," Lammy was off again with an easy conscience, to find
an old axe, break up the tea-pot, and melt it if possible before his
parents' return. Ah, but Lucky's charm was surely working.

"Strange child that," said the Squire, looking after him; "he'll either
turn out a fool or a genius. There is no middle path for such as he. I
must keep my eye on him."




XI

THE PEWTER TEA-POT


When Lammy reached home he hurried into the barn, carefully closing both
door and windows. In looking about for an old axe whose edge would not
be hurt by chopping metal, he stumbled over a rusty anvil that was half
buried in litter. This he managed to drag into the light; then digging
the tea-pot from the feed bin, he began his work.

First he wrenched off the cover and battered it into small pieces, which
he put into the solder pot. Chop, chop! the handle gave way next, then
the queer sprawling legs. He made several blows at the thick, clumsy,
curved spout without hitting it, for his hands trembled with excitement
combined with the chill of his wet feet.

Finally he landed a square blow a little above where the spout joined
the body, but instead of cutting the metal quite through, the blade
wedged, so he dropped the axe and seizing the tea-pot, proceeded to
wrench off the spout.

"It's got tea leaves stuck in it," he said to himself, as he pulled and
twisted at it. "Nope, brown paper," as a small roll of paper, the size,
thickness, and length of a cigarette fell to the floor. To this he paid
no attention, but continued to chop at the tea-pot until it was all in
bits, tightly packed in the solder pot, and covered with an old plate.

As he went to push back the anvil he stepped on the little bit of
rolled-up paper and idly picking it up, turned it between his fingers,
but with his mind wholly filled with the making of the magic bullets. It
was too late to melt the pewter now; he would have to wait until Monday
afternoon. How could he ever eat two more breakfasts, dinners, and
suppers with the precious stuff in his possession?

As his hands worked, the stout oiled paper between his fingers unrolled
by their warmth, as a leaf unfolds in the heat, and showed something
green inside.

Lammy looked, and his heart almost stopped beating, while the sun, moon,
and stars seemed to be floating past, trailing cloud petticoats and
dancing, for the green stuff was money,--clean, crisp banknotes rolled
as hard as a pencil!

Lammy sank down all in a heap on a pile of straw, his eyes closed
and his fist clutching the little bundle like a vice. It was several
minutes before he could steady himself sufficiently to part the tightly
twisted roll and count his treasure, which was so compact that he had
to use great care. Fortunately the oil paper had kept the money dry in
spite of the bath in the river, in addition to a bit of cork that had
been rammed tightly into the spout, but which Lammy had not noticed as
it dropped out at the first chop.

At last a bill peeled from the roll. Lammy smoothed it out, and rubbed
his eyes. Could it be? He had never seen a bank bill for a larger sum
than twenty dollars before, but five hundred was printed on this. Then
he fell to work in earnest, and after many stops to moisten his fingers,
twelve of the green, damp-smelling bits of paper lay spread upon the
barn floor, while Lammy was saying over to himself, "Twelve times five
are sixty--sixty hundred dollars--ten into sixty six times--six thousand
dollars! Oh, mother--Bird--the fruit farm!" he fairly shouted. This then
was what Aunt Jimmy's will had meant, after all.

Gathering the bills into his grimy handkerchief, blackened by polishing
the tea-pot, he buttoned them inside his shirt and rushed into the house
at the moment his mother was getting out of the chaise and bringing in
the week's supply of groceries, for which she had traded her eggs.

His father having come home from the wood lot, took the horse to the
barn, fed and bedded him immediately,--for old Graylocks never went fast
enough to become heated,--and then came to the kitchen sink to make his
toilet for supper.

Lammy sat waiting his time by the stove with his feet in the oven door,
trying to suppress the shivers that ran through him. Would his mother
ever put the things away and stop bustling? They could not have supper
until late that night, for the shop where his brothers worked was
running over time, and they would not be home before seven.

Mrs. Lane put the potatoes on to fry, arranged the steak in the broiler
(she was the only woman in Laurelville who did not fry her meat), and
then sat down to rest, keeping one eye upon the clock. Presently she
caught sight of Lammy's face, and promptly jumped up again to grab one
of his hands and ask anxiously: "Be you feelin' sick, Lammy Lane? Your
hands is frogs and your cheeks hot coals. I do hope and pray it ain't
goin' to be a fever spell o' any kind."

"Spell be blowed!" said Joshua, who was now seated by the lamp, enjoying
his weekly paper. "He's been a-traipsin' round all day among them soggy
marshes that fairly belches chills in fall o' the year, on a snack o'
cold food. What he needs is a lining o' hot vittles; likewise do I."

But Lammy had left the stove and stood by the table, his hands clasped
tightly, and such a strange expression on his face that both his parents
were startled.

"I ain't sick--that is, not much," he began, "though I'm awfully hungry,
but I've got something to tell out first."

Then he began slowly, and told about his visit to Old Lucky and his
search for bullet material.

Here his father interrupted him with, "Shucks, Lammy Lane, ain't you got
better sense than to throw away dollars?" but his mother gave Joshua a
look, and said: "Don't you shet him off the track until he's through. I
knew he wasn't working in his mind like he's done lately for nothing."

When he told of chopping up the tea-pot, his father chuckled, but his
mother shivered and broke in with, "How could you ever set an axe in it?
It seems to me 'bout as bad as cuttin' up poor Aunt Jimmy for sausages!"

When he came to the end, and pulling out his handkerchief, spread the
contents before his parents, Mr. and Mrs. Lane stood grasping the table
edge and staring white and wide eyed, until Joshua broke the silence
with "Jehosophat! Nancy Hanks! but I'm kneesprung dumbfounded!"

"And you'd better be!" snapped Lauretta Ann, as nearly as she _could_
snap at her husband; "after all you've said against the memory of
sainted Aunt Jimmy, and sneered and snipped at her will and meanings!
Don't you see now how she fixed things so's I'd get the farm by biddin'
it in fair without bein' hashed over in public for gettin' more'n my
equal share? _She_ trusted me to fetch that pot home and, by usin' it
daily, find it wouldn't pour out, as I would have did and diskiver the
money. Oh, Joshua, Joshua, let this be a lesson to you an' all husbands
not to browbeat their trustin' wives, as women's allers the furthest
seein' sect."

"Fur seein', shucks!" snorted Joshua, who had enjoyed his recent
authority too well to part with it; "between you and Aunt Jimmy yer'd
made a fine mess o' it, and it took a male, though not a full-grown one,
to pull yer out of it, for yer allowed yer'd only stick up the pot for
a moniment an' not use it on account o' its taste tainting the tea. It
sartinly took us men folks to dig yer out o' it; didn't it, Lammy?

"Now as we know Aunt Jimmy's intentions was that this be kept close,
close it'll be kept, and we'd better pack up them bills until we can
bank 'em Monday, in case Mis'is Slocum should be drawd to look in the
winder to see if we are havin' a hot or cold supper, and real or crust
coffee."

"But mother," said Lammy, as soon as he could be heard, "when shall we
get Bird back? Need we wait until the auction?"

"Sakes alive, child, I'll write as soon as I get my head, but there's
two letters unanswered now, and I'm afeared they've moved again.
Somehow, with all we've got to face just now, I think 'twould be better
waitin' until everything's settled up certain and we've got the place
safe and sound. Then pa and me and you could kind er celebrate, and
take a trip to N'York and get her. I ain't never been there but onct
in my life, an' that was to a funeral when it wasn't seemin' fer me to
look about to see things, and it rained and I spoiled my best bunnit.
I reckon, now we can afford it, 'twould set us all up to go on a good
lively errand o' mercy, and maybe see a circus too if there's any there,
and eat a dinner bought ready made. Seems to me I should relish some
vittles I hadn't cooked, and to step off without washing the dishes."

"Say, Lauretta Ann," drawled Joshua, presently, when Lammy, hugging
Twinkle and telling him the news, had gone upstairs to look at Bird's
paint-box, and sit in the dark and think of the bliss of going to New
York and surprising her his very self, "who do you calkerlate owns them
_six thousand dollars_?" rolling the words about in his mouth like a
dainty morsel.

"Why, me,--that is we, of course!" she gasped. "You don't think there's
anything wrong in takin' it? Ah, Joshua, you _don't_ think there's any
wrong in takin' it?"

"Yes and no, not that egzactly; but as the Squire gave Lammy the law
about things that's been throwed out, it 'pears to me the find is hisn."

"Well, if it is, I'm glad, and it's the Lord's doin' anyway. We can put
the deed in Lammy's name, and earn him good schoolin' out o' it along o'
little Bird, for nobody knows how I've missed that youngster a runnin'
in and out these last months and feeling her head on my shoulder times
when she was lonesome, and I mothered her in the rocker before the fire.
What with the high school, and the painting school, and the female
college over at Northboro, there's all the eddication she'll need for
years close handy, and it's no wrong to the others, for there's this
place for them to divide, and they're strong and likely."

"Remember the auction ain't took place yet, Lauretta Ann, and don't set
too sure."

"Joshua, the Lord has planned this out; it can't go astray now."

"Amen," said Joshua; "but how about Old Lucky's spell? and supposin' Mr.
Clarke takes a fancy to bid on the fruit farm. I hear he's been for land
hereabout."

"Father, I'm _shocked_ at you, and you nephew-in-law to a deacon!"

Mrs. Lane went upstairs to look for Lammy and found him lying across
his bed in an uneasy sleep, with Twinkle keeping guard by him, while
his fatigue and the soaked boots in the corner told the cause for the
illness that was creeping over him.

"Pa," called Mrs. Lane down the backstairs, in a husky whisper, "do you
go for Dr. Jedd without waiting for the boys to come in. Lammy's chilled
and fevered and sweatin' all to onct, and I can't read nothing out of
such crossway sinktoms. Dear me suz, it does never rain but it pours!
Say, Joshua, you'd best fetch that money up here to be put in the iron
maple-sugar pot afore you go."

By the time Dr. Jedd arrived Lammy was in a heavy sleep, from which he
roused at the physician's firm touch on his pulse, and began to talk
wildly.

At first he seemed to think that Dr. Jedd was Old Lucky, for he cried,
"I gave you the silver dollar and I made the bullets, but when I went
to shoot them, they turned into polliwogs and went downstream." Then
raising himself, he shook his pillow violently, saying, "You were a bad
man to tell me lies. How could I shoot the shadow of a Christmas tree on
a dark night? Cause when it's dark there are'nt any shadows."

Next he seemed to imagine that he was tramping over the hills with the
surveyors, and he had an argument with himself, as to whether feet made
rods or rods feet, and then mumbled something about _a_ + _b_ that they
could not understand for they did not know that one of his new friends
had started him in Algebra.

"He is tired out," said Dr. Jedd, presently, "and in his mind more
than his body. The professor over at the camp told me that he had a
great head for mathematics, and was always asking questions and working
out sums and things on every scrap of paper he came across, and that
when paper gave out he'd smooth a place in the dirt and scratch away
on that with a nail. Said that it was a pity that he couldn't go to
the Institute at Northboro and be fitted for the School of Mines in
New York. Told me if he ever did, he could put him in the way of free
tuition at least."

"The pewter tea-pot! Take Bird out of the pewter tea-pot; she's stuck in
the spout, and when you chop it off, it will kill her!" shrieked Lammy,
jumping out of bed.

Dr. Jedd gave him some quieting medicine, and he soon sank back among
the pillows, with a burning red spot of fever on each cheek.

"Is it typhoid?" asked Mrs. Lane, her face white and drawn; "Janey died
of that."

"It is a fever, but I cannot be quite sure of exactly which one," said
the doctor, opening a little case he carried and taking out a fine
needlelike instrument and a bottle of alcohol. "If I wait to know until
it develops, we shall be losing time; if I prick his finger and send
a drop of blood to Dr. Devlin in Northboro, who makes a study of such
things, he will look at it through his microscope and tell me in the
morning exactly where we stand." So after washing a spot clean with
alcohol he took the little red drop that tells so much to the really
wise physician and prevents all the mistakes of guess-work, and then
began to prepare some medicines and write his directions for the night.

"Is there any one you would like me to send up to stay with you, Mrs.
Lane?" the doctor asked as he prepared to leave. "This may be a tedious
illness, and it won't do for you to wear yourself out in the beginning."

"Byme-by, perhaps," Mrs. Lane replied "but not jest now while he talks
so wild. You know, doctor, how the best of folks will repeat and spy.
Joshua ain't overbusy, and he'll help me out."

"What is that thing hanging round Lammy's neck by a string under his
shirt that he has such a tight hold of?"

"It's the key of the lower one of his chest of drawers; he keeps odds
and ends in it that he sets store by, and I guess he's lost it so many
times that he's took to hanging it on safe by a string."

The next afternoon when Dr. Jedd came, the smile on his face reassured
Mrs. Lane even before he said: "No, it isn't typhoid--merely plain
malaria, and his worrying so much about Bird has made him light-headed.
What has become of the child? Tired as she was in the spring, I would
not answer for her little wild-wood ladyship after a hot summer in the
city."

Then Mrs. Lane told sadly of the frequent invitations and the unanswered
letters.

"I'm going to town for a little vacation after the holidays, and I will
look her up myself," said the doctor, cheerily.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was many weeks after the night that Lammy chopped up the pewter
tea-pot and made his wonderful discovery before the fever left him,
and then he felt so limp and weak that after sitting up a few minutes
he was glad to crawl into bed again. His mind had only wandered during
the first two or three days, but frequently he would wake up with a
start from troubled sleep and ask his mother anxiously if it was really
true about the tea-pot or only a dream. He was bitterly disappointed
when the night before the auction came and the doctor told him that he
must not go, even though his big brother Nellis had offered to put the
great arm-chair in the cart and take him down in that way, all wrapped
in comfortables. For the doctor said the excitement of thinking of the
matter was enough without being there.

On his way out, Dr. Jedd spent a few moments before he went home,
chatting to Joshua in the kitchen.

"To-morrow the tug of war is coming, Joshua," said the doctor; "all of
your neighbours wish you well and set great store by your wife, and we
hate to think of seeing strangers in the fruit farm. If you can think up
any way that we could accommodate or help you out to buy it, why, just
speak out. If the two thousand dollars Miss Jemima left my wife would
make any difference to you, she bid me say that, as she knows your dread
of mortgages, she would loan it on your note of hand," at the same time
holding out his own toward Joshua as if it already held the proffered
money.

Joshua's honest face flushed with pleasure at the implied trust, yet
he could hardly keep the smile from his lips and a mysterious twinkle
from his eyes as he shook the doctor's hand heartily and answered:
"We're much obleeged, and we'll never forget that you and Mis'is Jedd
held us well enough in esteem to make the offer, but I reckon the only
way we could come to own the fruit farm would be by buying it out fair
and square. I don't say but I'd be downhearted to see it go by me,
especially to 'Biram Slocum, for they've been days, doc, when I've even
kind o' pictured out the two farms, ourn and it, joined fast by your
sellin' me that wood bluff that runs in between from the highway. But
you know the sayin', doc, 'Man proposes, woman disposes,' and all that."

This time the doctor caught the wink that Joshua's near eye gave
in spite of itself, but thought that it referred to Aunt Jimmy's
peculiarities.

"Well," said the doctor, deliberately, a genial smile spreading over his
features, "one thing I'll do to help out your picturing, as you call
it. If luck should turn so that you buy the fruit farm, I'll sell you
the wood knoll for what I gave for it, and that's the first time I ever
considered parting with it, though I've had no end of good offers."

"Here's the boys jest come home in time to witness that there remark o'
yourn. Ain't yer gettin' kind er rash 'n' hasty, doc?"

"No, Joshua, the more witnesses, the better," and the two men went out
the door, toward the fence where the doctor's chaise was tied, laughing
heartily.

As to the boys, they were completely bewildered, for not a word did they
know, or would until after the auction, and they had not the remotest
idea that their father even dreamed of bidding on the fruit farm.




XII

THE TUG OF WAR


The strain that Lammy had been under ever since the reading of Aunt
Jimmy's will had told on him in a way that only his mother understood,
and after the stubborn malarial fever itself was routed, he felt, as he
said, "like the bones in my legs is willer whistles," so Dinah Lucky was
engaged to stay with him on the morning of the long talked of auction
sale. He would have preferred some one else, for Dinah was a great
talker, and his head still felt tired, but she was the only trustworthy
person in the entire neighbourhood who for either friendship or money
would consent to miss the auction.

According to the terms of the notice that had appeared in the local
papers and been posted in a ten-mile circuit from Milltown to Northboro,
the sale conducted by Joel Hill, auctioneer, was to be held on the fruit
farm itself at ten o'clock on the morning of Thursday, December the
ninth, "by order of Joshua Lane, Executor."

When the day came, it was bitterly cold, though clear; a two-days old
snow-storm followed by sleet had crusted well, and the walking and
sleighing were both good, yet Joshua Lane was surprised when he went
down to the fruit farm at nine o'clock in the morning to sweep off the
porch and light a fire in the kitchen stove, which still remained on the
premises for cooking chickens' food, to see many teams already hitched
to the fence, the horses well muffled in blankets. People afoot were
also going toward the barn, where a Hungarian, who was retained to tend
the stock and act as watchman, had a room and fire which, together with
what information they could extract from him, was what they sought.

As the man said, "Yah! ha!" equally loud to every question, Joshua
thought no harm could come from that quarter, and proceeded to open the
blinds of the kitchen windows and make such preparations as he could for
protecting the audience from the cold.

By half-past nine the kitchen, sitting room, north parlours, all bare of
furniture, and the stairs were packed with standing people, and when,
at a few minutes before ten, the auctioneer and the Northboro lawyer,
Mr. Cole, who had made Aunt Jimmy's will, appeared together, they had to
push their way into the house.

Mrs. Slocum had been on hand early, of course,--she always was,--and
kept dropping mysterious remarks and pursing up her lips. She began by
cheapening the entire place, saying the house was not in as good repair
as she had been led to think, that the wall papers were frights, and
that everything needed paint, that four thousand dollars would be a high
price for the property, and she didn't know who'd buy it anyway. Then
the next minute she was requesting those about her not to crowd up the
stairs, as they might bend the hand rail, which would be just so much
out of the pocket of whoever bought the house, adding that red Brussels
carpet was her choice for the north room.

To the surprise of all, the two out-of-town Lane brothers, Jason and
Henry, were not there. The "all in due time" policy that had always, and
would always, keep Henry poor, caused them to start for the auction so
late that the delay on the road caused by a broken trace detained them
until nearly eleven, when they turned about and went home again so as
not to be late for dinner.

After reading the description of the property and the cash terms of
the sale, Joel Hill stood up on a soap-box that he might overlook the
assembly and called out, "What am I bid, to start?"

There was complete silence for a few moments. Then the door opened, and
Mr. Brotherton, one of Mr. Clarke's agents from Northboro, entered,
causing a flutter of speculation as to what his presence might mean
and making Mrs. Lane's heart thump painfully. Dr. Jedd and his wife,
the minister and his lady, together with Mrs. Lane, who were occupying
a bench that had been brought from the barn, and were the only people
seated, looked at the stove in front of them, so that those who expected
a bid from that quarter were disappointed.

Joshua Lane, hands behind him, leaned against the chimney front and
gazed steadily at a wire that held the stove-pipe in place.

"What am I bid, to start?" repeated the auctioneer. Abiram Slocum,
scanning the various groups with his ferret eyes, moved uneasily,
moistened his lips, and, as his wife gave him a prod with her umbrella
that exactly hit the "funny bone" of his elbow, jerked out, "Five
hundred dollars."

"One thousand," said a clear, distinct, but unfamiliar, voice at the
back of the room. There was a unanimous turning of heads and twisting
of bodies toward the bidder, who proved to be Mr. Cole the lawyer from
Northboro, who made a very impressive appearance, clad as he was in a
handsome fur-lined overcoat and a shiny silk hat. As he was also often
employed by Mr. Clarke, the mystery deepened.

Abiram Slocum gasped as if some one had poured a pail of water over
him at this unexpected competitor, and then called, "One thousand two
hundred and fifty."

"Two thousand," from the lawyer.

"Two thousand and fifty," shrieked Abiram.

"Why waste time with small change a cold morning like this?" called the
auctioneer.

"Three thousand," said the lawyer.

"Three thousand three hundred," snapped Abiram, vainly endeavouring to
get out of range of the faces and gestures his wife was making at him.

"Four thousand five hundred," jumped the lawyer, beginning to button his
coat and draw on his gloves, as if the end were well in sight.

Abiram Slocum seemed bewildered, and glancing at his wife, failed to
read her signal aright, and resorted to a hoarse whispering in the
middle of which she shook him off and shouted with an air of triumph,
"Five thousand dollars!"

Mrs. Lane was seen to moisten her lips nervously, and the colour in her
cheeks deepened, but then by this time the wood-stove was sending forth
red-hot air as only a sheet-iron stove working full blast knows how.

"Five thousand two hundred and fifty," bid the lawyer. Then followed
an altercation between Mr. and Mrs. Slocum. Vainly the auctioneer
rapped; they paid no attention, and upon the lawyer saying that any
further delay would cause a withdrawal of his bid, the final "Going,
going, gone, at five thousand two hundred and fifty dollars" was
called, and it was not until fully twenty seconds after the final bang
of the hammer that the Slocums came to, and Abiram fairly yelled,
"Six--thousand--dollars!"

Of course it was too late, and the fault was nobody's but his own.
He tried to protest and was actually hissed down, Laurelville folk
preferring to see the property go anywhere so long as Mrs. Slocum was
not mistress of the fruit farm.

"Name of buyer?" asked the auctioneer; "self or client?"

"Client," said the lawyer, slowly adjusting his eyeglasses and glancing
at a slip of paper, while dead silence again prevailed, and the Slocums
glared forked lightning at each other and the world in general.

"The purchase is made by Lauretta Ann Lane, as guardian for her son,
Samuel Lane, and she is prepared to deposit the price in cash, pending
searching of the title and transfer of deed."

There was a shuffle as the people, released from the strain, shifted
from one numb foot to the other, and then cheers broke out, for above
curiosity and all other feeling was one of joy that their kind,
hard-working neighbour had in some mysterious way received what they
firmly believed to be her due.

When the applause had subsided and the general handshaking ceased,
Lauretta Ann Lane pulled a large new wallet from some mysterious place
in her dress, and counting out eleven clean five-hundred-dollar bills
held them toward the auctioneer, saying, "I'll trouble you for the
change, please," adding in a low yet perfectly distinct voice to an
irate figure who was elbowing her way out, and meeting many obstacles in
so doing, "That change 'll come in right handy for new papers, paint,
and furnishings that you said was needful, and I think a red Brussels
carpet _would_ liven up that north room wonderful. That same was your
choice, waren't it, Mis'is Slocum?"

How it all came about the village never discovered; for whatever the
lawyer knew or _thought_, he kept it to himself and said the opposite,
which is, of course, what lawyers are for.

Dr. Jedd was the only one who suspected in the right direction; for
soon after the Lanes had moved into their new home, and curiosity had
subsided, he was looking on the parlour mantel-shelf for the matches,
and discovered the chopped remains of the pewter tea-pot reposing in
a handsome china jar that was bought in New York. But Dr. Jedd only
chuckled as the whole thing flashed across him, and he said to himself,
"Surely enough, man proposes and woman disposes, and there's a various
lot of human nature in woman, especially Aunt Jimmy, who was a blessed,
good, spunky, old fool."

One final sensation was given the neighbourhood when it was found that,
after the payment of the legacies and other charges against the estate,
there was enough surplus to give the three Lane brothers over three
thousand dollars each, legal allotment.




XIII

TELLTALE TROUSERS


As Mrs. Lane was hurrying home from the auction, that Lammy need not be
kept in suspense a moment longer than was necessary, she bumped into
Abiram Slocum, who was trudging moodily along the road. His wife had
left the house first, and in her anger appropriated the cutter and gone
home, leaving him to walk.

Mrs. Lane intended to go by without speaking, and merely gave a civil
nod, but he would not allow it; his ugly mood must find vent in words,
and as she passed he squared about, saying:--

"You've no cause to feel so hoity toity if yer _hev_ got the fruit
farm; _there's underhand business been goin' on here in Laurelville,
if the light o' truth was let in_. Moreover, it's time that husband o'
yourn as Minstrator of that Irish O'More's debts should pay me the rent
due; the fact of the furniture being burned don't release him a copper
cent's worth, as he well knows. Tell him from me he'd best come down
and settle up; ter-morrow I reckon to be at the tax office all forenoon,
or"--with an evil sneer--"mebbe, as you seem to hold the purse, you'd
like to pay the debt out of charity to the girl you bragged o' being
fond of, to save her the name of pauper."

Mrs. Lane grew hot and cold by turns, and a torrent of words rose to
her lips, but the thought of Lammy waiting so patiently checked her in
time, and she merely said, "Yes, Abiram Slocum, you'll hear from us
to-morrer."

As she reached the home gate, she saw Dinah Lucky, who was stationed at
the window to give the first word of her return, and at the same time a
wild-looking tawny head and a pair of big questioning gray eyes appeared
above her fat shoulder, as Lammy steadied himself by the window-frame.
Quick as a flash she pulled off her red knitted shawl and waved it
joyfully, so that Lammy knew at least two minutes before she could have
reached his room to tell him.

Once upstairs, she was obliged to begin at the beginning and tell him
the story of the morning in every detail, holding his hand the while as
if to convince him that she was real and what she told the plain truth.

Presently Dinah slipped downstairs, saying she would get the dinner and
bring them both some upstairs, for she was sure "Missy Lane" must be
clear tuckered out.

And so she was, though she had not realized it until that moment and
sinking back in the homemade arm-chair, she closed her eyes in a state
of perfect peace, and must have dozed, for she awoke with a start to
hear Lammy say, "This sort of makes up for the Thanksgiving dinner I
missed," and there upon the various chairs and the bedstand Dinah had
spread a dinner tempting as only a coloured "born cook" knows how to
make it, while the clashing of knives and forks below told her that
Joshua and the boys were provided for (they had all staid at home from
the shop to attend the auction) and that this afternoon at least was her
own.

After dinner Lammy lay for a long time, looking at the wood fire
flickering through the open front of the stove, planning how they would
fix Aunt Jimmy's--or rather _his_--house, as his mother called it, and
when they would move. Of course, Lammy wished to go at once--even a
week seemed a long delay. Mrs. Lane hesitated, for she had thoughts
of waiting until spring; yet, on the other hand, she could not well
leave the house empty or travel up and down to tend the chickens.
Aunt Jimmy's house was by far the easier to heat, and now as they must
keep a hired man permanently, he could be put into their present house
and everything settle down for a comfortable winter of work, rest, and
planning, so she said, much to Lammy's joy, that she thought they could
be in by Christmas and then make the improvements at their leisure.

"Yes, we can wait to paper the rooms--that is, all except Bird's," he
added. "I'd like to have hers fixed up for her when she comes, white and
a paper with wild roses--that's what she likes, and she made a pattern
for one once and was going to send it to the wall-paper man when her
father finished the red piney pattern, only he never did." And Lammy
told his mother of Bird's hopes about her work, ending by taking the
string that held the key from about his neck and saying:--

"Please unlock my lower drawer and give me Bird's bundle that her uncle
would not let her take with her; if I can't see her, I can look at her
things. I know she wouldn't mind, because I went back in through the
cellar with her that last day and tied them up; only I didn't do it very
well because there was no good paper and string. I'd like to fix them
better and put up the paint-box by itself," he said, fumbling with the
knots, as his mother, much interested, took a fresh sheet of paper from
the press closet behind the bed.

As she reseated herself, the string broke, and the contents of the
hastily made bundle were scattered about the bed. Lammy picked up the
water-colour drawings carefully, one by one, and smoothed them out
with the greatest care. There were a couple of dozen of them, besides
those of the wild roses and the peony design, which Mrs. Lane at once
recognized from its spirit, even though it was unfinished.

Suddenly Lammy cried out in delight, for there before him was a
pen-and-ink sketch of Bird herself, much younger and happier than when
he had last seen her, but still his little friend to the life.

"Oh, mother," he said, as soon as he had feasted his eyes on it, "do you
think there could be any harm in putting this up on the mantel-shelf
where I could look at it--just for a few days until we go to get
Bird back?" And of course his mother assured him that there could be
no possible harm. Then, completely satisfied, he laid the sheets of
drawing-paper together again and prepared to make them into a neat, flat
package.

"You've dropped this out," said his mother, reaching across the bed
to pick up something that had slid down between the coverlid and the
wall, and laid what seemed to be a letter in a long, heavy, brown manila
envelope tied with pink tape in front of Lammy.

"I don't know what that is," he said, looking it over; "it must have
been between the pictures when we pulled them out of her father's box,
because those were all I saw when I made the bundle up. See, there's
writing on this side," and holding it up to the light, for the winter
twilight was setting in, he read slowly:--

"'Papers concerning the Turner Mill Farm Property,--to be recorded.' I
wonder what that means."

Mrs. Lane's eyes fairly bulged, and great drops of sweat stood on her
forehead as she answered: "Means? It means, Lammy Lane, that the Lord
don't forget the orphan, and if Bird O'More _is_ in New York, he's
lookin' after her business right here in Laurelville.

[Illustration: "'_It means, Lammy Lane, that the Lord don't forget the
orphan._'"]

"The meaning of that letter is what Abiram Slocum burnt up his
cross-road house to conceal, which he wouldn't hev done if it was of no
account." And Mrs. Lane poured out her suspicions and ideas concerning
the matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the supper-table that night Mrs. Lane repeated Abiram Slocum's
message to her husband, and he, rubbing his chin with a troubled air,
replied, "Truth be told, Lauretta Ann, owin' to the burnin' of that
furniture there isn't a cent left to pay that claim, and I do hate to
have poor O'More held up as an insolvent around here for sixty dollars,
'count o' Bird. He was a good-natured, harmless sort o' feller, enjoyin'
of himself as he went, very much like I'd be if you hadn't taken up with
me, Mis'is Lane."

At this compliment Mrs. Lane blushed like a girl and murmured something
about all men bein' the better for women's handling, provided it was the
right woman, which Mis'is Slocum wasn't.

"Now as far as that sixty dollars goes, if it wasn't owed to 'Biram
Slocum, I'd undertake ter pay it myself, so as to get the receipt and
settle everything square up and clean billed, but, by jinks, it sticks
me to pay that low-down swindler."

"Joshua Lane!" cried his wife, in a tragic tone, standing up and
pointing her pudgy finger at him with such a jerk that it made him start
as if it had been a bayonet, while she used the most grandiloquent
language she could muster: "The estate of the late lamented Terence
O'More does not owe Abiram Slocum a bent penny, and as to the receipt
for the same, I'll hand it to you this time to-morrow night, leastwise
if it doesn't blow a blizzard 'twixt now and then, or Mis'is Slocum turn
'Biram into pickled peppers by the sight of the face she wore home from
the auction."

"Come now, Lauretta Ann," wheedled Joshua, "you ain't minded of paying
it, be ye? I'd think twice--that I would."

"Pay!" snorted Lauretta. "Don't I tell you there's nothin' owed?"

"You're talkin' an' actin' enigmas and charades. Not thet it's anything
new, but if I was you, I'd be mighty keerful how I baited 'Biram Slocum;
he is too cute for most men, and he would take to the law for a heedless
word jest now, he's that riled about the wardrobe story leakin' out and
losing the fruit farm."

"That's all right, and don't you fret, Joshua; if there is any law
called in, it'll be by me." And pump and quiz as he might, not another
word could he extract from his wife upon the subject.

       *       *       *       *       *

Early the next morning Mrs. Lane harnessed the "colt," which, though
ten years old, still bore his youthful name, to the cutter, and after
putting her egg-basket deep under the robe and depositing her satchel
on top of it, turned up the hill road toward Northboro, waving her whip
good-by to Lammy, who, seated in the big chair in his window, smiled at
her, with his finger pressed to his lips, as if cautioning silence.

As the sleigh bells jingled and the "colt" loped easily along, Mrs. Lane
leaned back as if the motion and jolly sound expressed her own feelings
admirably, and the miles flew swiftly by.

When Northboro was reached, she drove to the stable where she always
left her horse in unseasonable weather, but instead of carrying the
familiar egg-basket into town, she stowed it away under the sleigh seat,
and hanging her satchel securely on her arm, drew on her best gloves
that she had brought in her pocket, and started up the main street at
a vigorous trot. Coming to a gray stone building next the court-house,
where many lawyers had offices, she read the various signs anxiously,
and then spying that of Mr. Cole, opened the swinging outside door and
climbed the two flights of stairs that led to it.

Mr. Cole greeted her pleasantly, for he had a very kindly feeling
toward this generous-hearted woman; but when he heard her story and saw
the legal-looking envelope, he became doubly interested. Untying the
tape, he read the various papers through, one after the other, while
Mrs. Lane watched his eagerness with evident satisfaction. When he had
finished, he replaced the papers and tied them up deliberately before he
said: "These papers appear to me to be of great importance to O'More's
daughter, though exactly what they amount to I cannot tell until I see
the dates of certain mortgages and transfers on record in Milltown.
Fortunately the attorney, Mr. King, who drew up the papers before he
went to California four years ago, has returned on a visit, and I am to
meet him in court this afternoon."

"I suppose you know Bird hasn't anything to pay what Joshua says they
call the retainment fee, but if a little money 'll help her get her
rights, you may hold me good for it."

"That will not be necessary," said the lawyer, smiling, "for my client,
Mr. Clarke, is as anxious to have the title to the Mill Farm cleared
as you are, so in serving him I may be able to aid Bird. Slocum, the
present owner, seems a slippery man at best. You know that the insurance
company, for which I also happen to be the agent, withholds his claim
because he gave the date of June 9 for his fire when it took place the
10th."

At this Mrs. Lane's eyes grew steelly bright, and she moistened her
lips nervously. Then Mr. Cole put the papers in his safe and closed the
door with its mysterious lock, and Mrs. Lane breathed a sigh of relief
and, asking him to write as soon as he had news, either good or bad,
went carefully down the shallow marble stairs of the office building,
for elevators she would have none of.

Once more in the street, she spied a bakery and, going in, ordered a cup
of coffee and half a custard pie, which she ate with relish and then
returned to the stable for the "colt" without doing any of her usual
market-day trading.

It was only half-past eleven when Mrs. Lane, coming down the hill road,
saw Laurelville lying before her in the valley, and five minutes later
when she hitched the colt in front of the town-house, throwing the coon
lap-robe over him in addition to his blanket.

The selectmen had been in consultation, and were now standing outside,
making holes in the snow with their boot toes and finding it difficult
to break away, after the usual manner of rural communities. Mrs. Lane
nodded pleasantly and asked if every one else had gone home to dinner.

"Mostly," replied First Selectman Penfield, "but Judge Ricker's in his
office, I reckon, and Slocum, he's in the end room as 'cessor, waitin'
for folks to swear their taxes, for which they appear to be in no
hurry."

This was exactly the information Mrs. Lane wanted, and she walked
directly down the corridor, this time firmly grasping the egg-basket and
leaving the satchel outside.

Opening the door without knocking, she had entered, closed it, and
seated herself opposite Abiram Slocum before he was aware of her
presence, and do what he could, he was not able to control the slight
start that her appearance gave him.

"Morning, marm," he said formally, putting his thumbs in the armholes of
his vest and puffing out his cheeks with importance; "want to swear your
taxes?"

"Not to-day; Joshua always attends to that. I've jest dropped in ter get
that receipt for the O'More rent, as Joshua intends settling the matter
up with Judge Ricker this afternoon."

"Very glad to hear it, Mrs. Joshua Lane; it saves me lots of trouble,
and I hate to go to law unless required." And he drew a blank form from
a desk, which he filled in, signed, and was about to hand across the
table, when he suddenly withdrew it, saying, "Well, where are the sixty
dollars?"

"They was paid you June the 10th."

"What!" shouted Abiram, really believing the woman to be crazy, and
retreating behind the table.

"Just so; by that I mean all that good furniture you set fire to along
with your house."

Slocum turned ghastly white and almost staggered, but quickly recovering
himself, he sprang forward furiously, and for a moment Mrs. Lane thought
he was going to strike her, but glancing out the window she saw that
Selectman Penfield was below, and this reassured her.

"I'll have you arrested for slander as sure as my name's Abiram Slocum,"
he gasped, trying to get out the door in front of which she stood.

"I wouldn't be too hasty; if you wait, you will hear more to get up
that slander claim on, mostlike. Jest you go back and set down while I
have my say, and if you want witnesses to it, Judge Ricker will step
in, I'm sure, or Mr. Penfield either; they are both real handy. As you
said yesterday, _there's underhand business been goin' on in town if the
light o' truth could be let in_, which I'm now doin'."

So Abiram hesitated, and sank back into the chair, casting an uneasy
look at his visitor, who proceeded to state her case both rapidly and
clearly.

"'Twas Friday, the 10th of June, you fired that house, though you did
give into the insurance company 'twas the 9th." (Here again Slocum
jumped, and his hands worked nervously.)

"The 10th was circus day, and most all the town had gone to Northboro.
Likewise Lockwood's field-hands went, and so there were no men folks
working up beyond four corners; this gave you a clear coast.

"You started for the circus with Mis'is Slocum and 'Ram; you turned
back, giving it out you'd got important business at the Mill Farm. But
you didn't go, and turned up before noon at the turnpike store, where
you never trade. There you bought a new gallon can of kerosene, saying
you was going up to the north lots to make a wash of it fer tent-worms
in the apple trees. Now there ain't even a wild crab tree in the north
lots--only corn-fields.

"You went up that way all right, and a-spookin' around the house.
Everything was tight fast, and so the only place you could get in was by
crawlin' through the cellar winder, which you did, tearin' a new pair o'
herrin'-bone pattern trousers so doin'."

Again Slocum started, and his face wore a look of intense wonder mixed
with fear.

"After you looked about for what you didn't find, you spilled the
kerosene about and set fire so's nobody could get what maybe you'd
overlooked.

"Then you scooted back in the corn lot and hid the can in the big
blasted chestnut stump, and when a hue and cry was raised walked down as
innercent as May, from hoein' corn that wasn't yet above ground!"

By this time Slocum had pulled himself together, and his defiance
returned.

"Woman, you are crazy, and what you say is perfectully redeclous; I'll
have you behind asylum bars, if not in jail. Mere talk! You can't prove
a word you say, and what is this 'thing' that I couldn't find and wanted
to burn? Just tell me that!"

"Prove? Oh, yes, I can; Lauretta Ann Lane is no random talker.

"Here's the pants you wore, and that you sold the pedler the same
afternoon--they smell yet o' kerosene, and here's the piece ye tore out
on the winder-catch!" And Mrs. Lane whipped the telltale trousers out of
her egg-basket.

"The kerosene can's in the stump yet, but I've got it all straight; that
poor Polack woman you turned out of house and home seen you hide it. Now
what else was there?" And Mrs. Lane affected a lapse of memory.

"Oh, yes; you wanted to know what you was a-lookin' for. Why, don't
you know? It was a big lawyer's envelope marked 'Papers concerning the
Turner Mill Farm Property,--to be recorded.'"

Slocum breathed hard and grasped the table edge to steady himself.

"Jest why you wanted them papers I don't know, but Lawyer Cole in
Northboro, who's got 'em, is goin' to find out."

"Lawyer Cole has them?" Slocum whispered hoarsely; "Lawyer Cole, did you
say?"

"Yes, I did!" repeated Mrs. Lane; "and if you don't think the testimony
I've been givin' you is true, and consider it a slander, I've got it
writ out, and I'll have him search that out too."

"No, no," said Slocum, speaking as if to himself. "How did you ever
find--" and then he remembered and stopped. Mrs. Lane waited a few
minutes, and then said:--

"It's full noon now, and I must get home to dinner, so I'll trouble
you for that rent receipt. Thanks, and I'll give you a word of advice
in return. The Lord mostly finds out evil-doers, and not infrequent He
trusts women to help Him, and I want you to consider that if I don't
give this matter a public airin', it isn't from either pity or fear of
you, but because I don't want the county to know that we harboured such
a skunk among us so long; my last word being that you'd better get away
from my neighbourhood before I change my mind!"

So it came about that before Christmas Abiram Slocum gave it out that
his wife's health was poor and he had been advised to go to California,
where he intended to buy a vineyard, hinting at the same time that as
he expected to sell a large tract of land to Mr. Clarke, he had no
further interest in Laurelville; and though only four people knew the
real reason, the whole village rejoiced without the slightest effort at
concealment.

At the same time Joshua Lane found that his work as administrator of the
O'More property had only begun instead of being closed.




XIV

THE FIRE-ESCAPE


What had Bird O'More been doing these many days? It did not need the
skill of a magician to tell why even her notes to her Laurelville
friends had been brief at best and then finally ceased. A single peep at
her surroundings would have told the tale, and the more completely she
became merged in them, the more hopeless she felt them to be.

Her weekly work in distributing the flowers was a bright spot indeed, as
well as her visits to Tessie; but as she looked forward to the time when
frost would kill the blossoms, the Flower Mission be closed, and the
liberty of streets and parks cut off for confinement in the dark flat,
her heart sank indeed.

All her hopes were centred about going to school, and the possibilities
of meeting teachers who would understand her desire to learn, and
help her with sympathy. Meanwhile, the city summer had told upon her
country-bred body even more than on her sensitive temperament, and she
grew thinner every day, until finally her aunt was compelled to see
it in spite of herself, and promised to take her down to Coney Island
or Rockaway Beach "some day" when she was not busy, to freshen her up
a bit; but that day never came, and as little Billy was constantly
improving, her uncle had eyes only for him. In fact, the change in the
little cripple was little short of marvellous. Of course his lameness
remained, but his cheeks were round, his lips had lost their blue tint,
and to hear him cry or complain was a rare sound indeed. That all this
came of Bird's devoted care her uncle was quite convinced; for it was
she who gave Billy his morning bath, and managed,--no easy task,--that
the battered tub should not again be used for a cupboard. It was Bird
who took his food into the fire-escape bower, and coaxed and tempted
him until he had eaten sufficient, and it was she who put him nightly
into the little bed opposite her own and taught him to say, as a little
prayer, the verse of the hymn her own mother had sung to her in the
misty long ago:--

   "Jesus, gentle Shepherd, hear me;
    Bless thy little lamb to-night:
    Through the darkness be thou near me;
    Keep me safe till morning light."

But for Billy, Bird could not have endured through that dreadful summer.
As it was, she often fingered her "keepsake," still hanging about her
neck, the thought comforting her that with the mysterious coin in it she
could get back once more to the little village that seemed like heaven
to her, no matter what happened after. Often, in fact, the only thing
that kept her from running away was the belief that if her good friends
could take her permanently, they would have sent for her, and pride,
heroic pride, born of Old and New England, was still strong in Ladybird.

"She'll perk up when school begins and she gets acquainted with girls
her own age," said O'More, cheerfully, as his attention was called to
her pale cheeks by his wife. "I'm owin' her good will for what she's
done for Billy, else I most wish I'd left her up there with those
hayseeds that wanted her. Somehow she don't fit in here, for all
that she never complains. She's different from us, and she makes me
uncomfortable, lookin' so solemn at me if I chance to take off my coat
and collar of a night at supper to ease up a bit. Terence was different
from us, too, and it's bred in the bone."

"Let well enough alone," said Mrs. O'More, glad to have Billy so
completely taken off her hands; "folks can't afford to be different to
their own, unless they've got the price. I've made her a good dress out
of a remnant of bright plaid I bought, so next week she can shell off
them shabby black duds that give me the shivers every time I see them.
Maybe fixin' up like other girls 'll bring her to and liven her. She's
queer though, sure enough, don't give no sass, and it ain't natural; I
never seen a girl her age before that didn't talk back, and sometimes it
riles me to see her keep so close shet when I up and let fly."

In September school began, but this brought further disappointment,
for Bird had hoped to find a friend at least in the teacher. She was,
however, graded according to her size and age, not ability, as if she
had been a wooden box, and found herself in an overcrowded room, a
weak-eyed little Italian, with brass earrings, seated on one side of
her, and the Polish sausage-seller's daughter on the other, her dirty
hands heavy with glass rings, which caused her to keep whispering
behind Bird's back as to her lack of jewellery and style; while at the
first recess this little Slav told the astonished Bird, "If yer tink
to get in vid us, you'll got to pomp you 'air; dis crowt, we's stylish
barticular--ve iss."

As to the teacher in trim shirt-waist, with pretty hands and hair, to
whom the class recited in chorus, Bird longed to speak to her, to touch
her, but she fled to a purer atmosphere as soon as school was out, and
was remote as the stars.

As the weather grew cool, the fire-escape arbour was abandoned; they
could spend less time out of doors, and Bird felt caged indeed. The
engine-house now was the limit of their walks, for it grew dark very
soon after school was out. Still they never tired of seeing the horses
dash out, and Billy called Big Dave "my fireman," and used to shout to
him as he passed in the street. So the autumn passed.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a clear, cold afternoon a little before Christmas; the shops were
gay with pretty things, and the streets with people. Billy was in a
fever of excitement because his father, who had left home on a business
trip a few days before, had promised him a Christmas tree, and Bird had
gone out to buy the candles and some little toys to put on it, at a
street stall. Billy, however, did not go, for he was not to see the toys
until Christmas Eve.

Bird wandered across to Broadway at 23rd Street, and then followed the
stream of shoppers southward. Was it only a year since last Christmas
when she had helped trim the tree at Sunday-school in Laurelville and
had sung the treble-solo part in--

   "Watchman! tell us of the night;
    What the signs of promise are."

Would there ever again be any signs of promise for her? Somehow she
had never before felt so lonely for her father as in that merry crowd.
She wondered if he saw and was disappointed in her, and what Lammy was
doing. Going up on the hill probably with the other village children to
cut the Christmas tree and greens for church.

Not minding where she went, she followed the crowd on past and around
Union Square and down town again. Then realizing that she was facing
away from home and had not bought her candles, she looked up and saw on
the opposite side of the street a beautiful gray stone church. At one
side and joined to it was what looked like a house set well back from
the street, from which it was separated by a wide garden. People were
going in and out of the church by twos and threes.

A voice seemed to call Bird, and she too crossed Broadway and timidly
pushed open the swinging door.

At first she could see nothing, as the only lights in the church were
near the chancel. Then different objects began to outline themselves.
There was no service going on, the people having come in merely for a
few quiet moments.

Bird stood quite still in the little open space by a side door back of
the pews; it was the first really peaceful time she had known since
the day that she and Lammy carried the red peonies to the hillside
graveyard, and as she thought of it, she seemed to smell the sweet
spruce fragrance of those runaway Christmas trees that watched where her
parents slept.

A flock of little choir boys trooped in from an opposite door for the
final practice of their Christmas carols and grouped themselves in
the stalls. Next a quiver of sound rushed through the church as the
great organ drew its breath and swelled its lungs, as if humming the
melody before breaking into voice. Then above its tones rang a clear
boy-soprano.

   "Watchman! tell us of the night
    What the signs of promise are."

and the chorus answered--

   "Traveller! o'er yon mountain height,
    See that glory-beaming star."

The answering echo quivered in Bird's throat, suffocating her, and as,
unable to stand, she knelt trembling upon the floor the odour of spruce
again enveloped her, and groping, she found that she was really leaning
against a pile of small trees that had been brought there to decorate
the church for Christmas Eve, and as the door opened, men came in
bringing more--dozens and dozens of them, it seemed.

Bird picked up a broken twig, and in spite of its sharpness pressed it
against her face, kissing it passionately, never noticing that she was
directly in the passage between the door and aisle, where presently a
gentleman coming hurriedly in stumbled over her.

He was about to pass on with a curt apology, but glancing down, he saw
that it was a little girl, and that though comfortably dressed and
not actually poor, her face showed signs of distress and tears, so he
stopped.

"What is it, my child?" he said. "Have you lost your way, or what? Come
here and sit in this pew while you tell me about it. I've a daughter at
home only a couple of years older than you, and she doesn't like to have
any one sad at Christmas time."

It was months since any one had spoken to Bird in the gentle tongue that
had been her father's and was her own, and though the tears started
anew, she made haste to obey, lest he should suddenly disappear like all
her pleasant dreams.

He was an alert, middle-aged man of affairs. He had a fine presence and
keen eyes and, without making her feel that he was prying, succeeded in
drawing out the bare facts of her story, nothing more, so that he had no
idea that the trouble was more than a country-bred child's homesickness
at being shut up in the city, and having to go to school instead of
reading all day long and trying to paint flowers.

"So you used to live in Laurelville?" he said; "why, I have a country
place near there, not far from Northboro, my native town, where I
built an Art School, and I have little city girls come to us there
every summer for a playtime. If you will remember and write, or come
to me when the next summer vacation begins, you shall be one of them.
Meanwhile keep this, my address." He handed her a card and passed on,
for he was a good man and rich, with many people to make happy at
Christmas time, and to be both rich and good in New York one must work
very hard indeed.

Going out into the street again, Bird read the name on the card before
slipping it into her pocket. Wonder of wonders! it was Clarke, the same
as that of the wall-paper manufacturer whose manager had asked Terry to
make designs for him. Of course he must be Marion Clarke's father. The
address was different from the one of the factory, but Bird knew enough
of the city now to guess that this number on the card was of his house,
and she now remembered that people had said that he conducted many
various manufactories.

So he had built the School of Design at Northboro that she had dreamed
about ever since she went there with her father to look at an exhibition
of drawings! Could it be that this card was the Christmas sign of hope
and promise to her? She almost flew homeward after buying the candles
and little toys, and laughed and chatted so cheerfully with Billy when
she gave him his supper, that her cousin Larry, who had always teased
her for being set up, remarked to his mother, "Ladybird is coming down
from her perch some; maybe she'll get to be like us, after all." But it
was upward, not downward, that the brave, clipped wings were struggling.

       *       *       *       *       *

Between Christmas and New Year there came a snow-storm, and then
bitterly cold weather. In Laurelville snow meant sleighing, coasting,
bracing air, and rosy cheeks; in East 24th Street it signified soaked
skirts, sodden shoes, and sore throats, while for Billy it brought
unhappy shut-in days, for his crutch slipped dangerously in icy weather.

One evening Mrs. O'More was called out to sit with a sick neighbour. She
told Bird not to wait up as she might be late, and she would take the
key with her, as the boys had keys of their own if they came in first.

Bird was used to thus staying shut into the flat alone, and so after
she heard the key turn in the door of their narrow hallway, she amused
herself for perhaps an hour by drawing, and then went to bed. She had
been dragging Billy about on his sled up and down the street all the
afternoon, so she soon fell into a heavy sleep.

It must have been a couple of hours after when she waked up suddenly
and tried vainly to think where she was. The room felt hot and airless,
and a strange smell of scorched leather filled the air. She managed
to get on her feet, pulled on a few clothes, and tried to open a side
window, but it stuck fast. Going to the front, she raised the sash, and
as she did so, a cloud of smoke poured into the room, while the shouts
and clashing of gongs in the street told what it was that had wakened
her--the fire-engines! The great sales stables with their tons of hay
and straw were on fire, and the house also, while in the street all was
in an uproar of frightened horses and men.

Rushing back to her room, she shook Billy awake and, wrapping a few
clothes about him, dragged him toward the hall door. It was locked of
course, as Mrs. O'More had taken the key. By this time the smoke and
flames were pouring in the front windows. Ah, the fire-escape! Through
the kitchen she struggled, and out on to the icy balcony, having the
sense to close the window behind her.

The back yards were full of firemen, and excited people hung from the
windows of opposite buildings. Bird tried to raise the trap in the floor
door, but the boxes of frozen earth that had held the morning-glories
bore it down, making it useless, and the one below was hopelessly heaped
with litter.

Would nobody see her? Billy clung to her, sobbing pitifully, for he
was lightly covered, and shivered with cold as well as fear. The
window-frame inside was catching, and heat also came up from below. Was
this the end? Must the wild bird die in her cage?

Suddenly a great shout arose in the rear; people had seen and were
pointing them out. Up came the firemen, climbing, clinging, battering
down the obstructions before them. Ah, those wonderful firemen that
keep our faith in old-time valour!

A moment more, and an axe struck open the prisoned trap-door, a head
came through, and a voice cried, "Good God, it's Bird and little Billy!"

"Dave, my fireman!" sobbed the boy, flinging himself into the strong
arms. "Take him," commanded Bird, as the man hesitated an instant; "I
can follow." Down the ladder they went step by step until the flames
from the lower story crept through and stopped them again, and the
slender fire ladder, held by strong arms, shot up to them, and Dave's
mate grasped Bird and carried her down to safety. Then the firemen
cheered, and tears rolled down Big Dave's cheeks unchecked.

Kind, if rough, people took them in and warmed and fed them, and more
kind people guided Mrs. O'More to them when she rushed frantically home.
But little Billy had suffered a nervous shock, and lay there moaning and
seeming to think that the fire still pursued him.

"He will need great care and nursing to pull him through, for he is
naturally delicate," said the doctor the next day when they had moved
into a couple of furnished rooms that were rented to Mrs. O'More by a
friend in a near-by street until she could pull herself together, as
they had lost everything. "He must either go to a hospital or have a
nurse," continued the doctor, gravely. But Mrs. O'More could not be made
to see it.

"His father'd never forgive me if I put him out o' me hands," she said;
"he'll pick up from the fright after a bit, and what with John away,
and never saving a cent of cash no more than the boys, and the business
all burned out along with us, I've not money in hand for the wasting on
nurses."

Bird knew better,--knew that Billy was very sick, and she could not let
him die so. Ah! the keepsake, the precious coin! Now was the time to
spend it, for there could be no greater necessity than this. What if it
was not enough? Even if it was not much, it might do until her uncle got
back, and then she knew Billy would have care if his father begged in
the street for it.

Going away in a corner, she unfastened the silver chain and detached the
little bag from it. With difficulty she ripped the thong stitches, but
instead of a coin, out of many wrappings fell a slender band of gold
set with one large diamond. As she turned the ring over in surprise,
some letters within caught her eye--"Bertha Rawley, from her godfather,
J. S."

This was the name of Terence O'More's mother, and the ring had been a
wedding gift from her godfather, and the one valuable possession that
she had clung to all her troubled life. But Bird knew nothing of this.

What could Bird do with it? She pondered--her city life had made her
shrewd; she knew the miseries of the poor who went to the pawn shops,
and guessed that any one in the neighbourhood might undervalue the ring,
or likely enough say that she stole it.

Mr. Clarke--she would go to him! Now was the time! She borrowed a hat
and wrap from the woman of whom the rooms were rented and stole out. In
an hour she came back with a triumphant look upon her face, and laying a
roll of bills before her aunt, said, "I've sold my keepsake; now we will
have a nurse for Billy right away."

After she understood about the money, and found that it was one hundred
dollars, Mrs. O'More broke down and cried like a baby, telling Bird
that she was a real lady and no mistake. And then adding, to Bird's
indignation, "I wonder did you get the value o' the ring, or did he
cheat you, the old skin!" But, nevertheless, the nurse came, and not an
hour too soon.

Meanwhile a certain rich man sat at his library desk, holding a diamond
ring in his hand, saying, half aloud: "I believe the girl's story,
though I suppose most people would say she stole the ring, or was given
it by those who did. It is healthier to believe than to doubt. I shall
investigate the matter to-morrow and keep the ring for the child. It
is a fine stone worth four times the sum I gave her, but she would not
take any more than the one hundred dollars, nor was it wise for me to
press her. Ah! letters inside! Bertha Rawley! She said her grandmother
was an Englishwoman. That new superintendent of the Northboro Art School
is named Rawley. He studied at South Kensington. I wonder if they could
be related. O'More. I think that name comes into that Mill Farm deed
mix-up. I will write to Rawley at once and see what is known about the
girl in Laurelville, for something tells me that child is 'one of these
little ones' who should be helped."




XV

THE BIRD IS FREED


January was half over before it was possible for the Lanes to take their
long-promised trip to New York to look up Bird and bring her back, as
her uncle had exacted, a legal sister to Lammy.

Moving from the small house into the large one, even though the
necessary repairs were to be made by degrees, was more of an undertaking
than Mrs. Lane had bargained for. Also it took Lammy a long time to get
"the bones back in his legs," though happiness and Dr. Jedd's tonics
worked wonders.

Dr. Jedd had suggested that a furnace required much less care than three
or four stoves, and so one had been put in. Mrs. Jedd, who had very
good taste, and a tactful way of expressing it that never gave offence,
suggested to Mrs. Lane that, instead of covering the mahogany parlour
set with red plush, the floor with a red-figured tapestry brussels,
replacing the small window-panes with great sheets of glass, bricking
up the wide fireplace, and then closing the whole room up except,
as Joshua said, for funerals, it should be turned into a comfortable
living-room.

This suited Joshua, the older boys, and Lammy exactly, and though
Lauretta Ann demurred at first, saying, "It didn't seem hardly
respectable not to hev a best room," she quickly yielded, and said that
it "would be a real comfort to have a separate place to eat in when
there was a lot of baking on hand and the kitchen all of a tousle,
likewise to set in after meals."

So the old furniture was recovered with a suitable dull green corduroy,
and some comfortable Morris chairs added, "that pa and the boys
wouldn't be tempted to set back on the hind legs of the mahogany, which
is brittle." A deep red rug, that would not have to be untacked at
housecleaning times, covered the centre of the floor, with Grandmother
Lane's long Thanksgiving dinner-table in the centre, and a smaller
round one with folding leaves in the corner, for the entertaining of
the friends who were constantly dropping in for a chat and a cup of tea
and crullers or a cut of mince pie, for no one in the county had such a
reputation for crullers and mince meat, combined with a lavish use of
them, as Lauretta Ann Lane.

Next Mrs. Jedd ventured to suggest that the fireplace be left open and
some of the big logs, with which Aunt Jimmy had always kept the woodshed
filled, simply because her mother had done so before her, used for a
nightly hearth fire.

Mrs. Lane said she hadn't any andirons and the ashes would make dust,
but Joshua was so pleased with the idea of returning to old ways that
she yielded; and when, on the old fire-board being removed to clean
the chimney of soot and swallows' nests, a pair of tall andirons and a
fender were found, the matter settled itself, and Mrs. Lane soon came
to take pride in the cheerful blaze, while the best dishes, which were
of really handsome blue and white India porcelain, were ranged in racks
over the mantel-shelf.

Then there was a sunny southwest window, and Joshua fastened a long
shelf in front of this for his wife's geraniums, wax-plant, and
wandering Jew that had shut out the light from the best window in the
kitchen, and these brought in the welcome touch of greenery in spite of
the particoloured crimped paper with which she insisted upon decorating
the pots.

"How Bird will love this room!" Lammy said a dozen times a day, as he
remembered how prettily she had arranged the scanty furnishings at the
house above the crossroads, and disliked everything that savoured of
show or cheap finery, and it seemed to him that Bird's companionship
was the only thing necessary to prove that heaven, instead of being a
far-away region, at least had a branch at the fruit farm in Laurelville.

The doctor said that Lammy must not return to school until the midwinter
term, and so he spent his time in the shop back of the barn, making many
little knickknacks for the house, not a few of them being intended for
Bird's room, for which he also designed a low book-shelf that made a
seat in the dormer window, and a table with a hinge that she could use
when she wished to draw or paint, and then close against the wall.

This room was next to Mrs. Lane's, and had two dormer windows and a deep
press closet lighted by a high window, under which the washstand stood.
It was furnished with a white enamelled bed and a plain white painted
dresser, upon which, Lammy said, Bird could paint whatever flowers she
chose. There were frilled curtains of striped dimity at the windows,
and a quilt and bed valance of the same, for Mrs. Lane despised any
ornamental fabric that would not wash and "bile." The floor was covered
with matting, but three sheepskin rugs of home raising and dyed fox
colour were placed, one at the side of the bed, one before the bureau,
and one under the wall table, upon which Bird's paint-box stood close
to the leather-paper portfolio that Lammy had made to hold the precious
sketches.

He had tried his best to find a wall paper with a red "piney" border,
but they told him at the great paper warehouse at Northboro that they
had never seen such a paper, so he took wild-rose sprays instead.

Lammy had also filled a small bark-covered box with Christmas ferns,
ebony spleenwort, wintergreen, partridge-berries, and moss, for the
window-ledge, while fresh festoons of ground-pine topped the windows
even though Christmas was long past. In fact, Lammy could hardly keep
away from the room, and often when he went in, he met his mother, for
whom it had the same attraction, and then they would both laugh happily
and, closing the door, come away hand in hand.

It never occurred to a single member of this simple, warm-hearted
family, that there was any possibility of there being a slip between cup
and lip, and in this faith they presently set out upon their pilgrimage
to New York, for which event Lammy wore a high collar and a new suit,
his first to have long trousers.

The minister's wife and Dinah Lucky took joint charge of the house while
the Lanes were in New York, for they intended staying several days,
perhaps a week, as Dr. Jedd said the change was exactly what they all
needed after the doings and anxieties of the past eight months, and Mr.
Cole, the lawyer from Northboro, gave them the card of a good hotel
close to the Grand Central Station, where they would be well treated and
neither snubbed nor overcharged. For he well knew that in a New York
hotel, Laurelville's Sunday-best clothes looked as strangely out of
place as Dr. Jedd's carryall would on Fifth Avenue.

During the past few weeks, Alfred Rawley, the new superintendent of
the Northboro School of Industrial Art, had made several visits to the
Lanes, at first upon business connected with Aunt Jimmy's legacy, and
then because he seemed to like to come. He was a fine-looking man of
fifty, and not only a stranger in Northboro, but a bachelor without home
ties. He seemed greatly interested in Bird, about whom Lammy talked so
constantly that the visitor could not but hear of her, and asked to see
the portfolio of drawings in which were some of hers, and he praised
them very highly for their promise.

The Lanes arrived in New York just before dark of a Tuesday afternoon,
and spent the rest of the evening in looking out of their windows at the
remarkable and confused thoroughfare below them that was made still more
of a spectacle by the glare of electric lights. Lammy wished to go and
look for Bird at once, but his father wouldn't hear of doing so until
broad daylight, saying:--

"Sakes alive, it ain't safe. I've been across Hill's swamp without a
lantern on a foggy night a-callin' up lost sheep, but that down there
with them queer kind o' two-wheel carts that bob along in narrow places
like teeter snipe crossin' the mill-dam, I'll not venture it, leastwise
not with mother along." So Lammy went to bed to kill time, but a little
later curiosity got the better of Joshua, and he spent an hour in the
lobby, where he learned, besides several other things, that the "teeter
snipe" carts were called "hansome cabs."

To the surprise of the early-rising country folk, it was eleven
o'clock the next morning before they found themselves ready to take a
south-bound Fourth Avenue car, for the visit to Bird, and Joshua told
the conductor four times in ten blocks where they wished to get off,
and what they were going for, while Mrs. Lane sat still, smiling and
quivering all over from the shiney tips of her first boots (other than
Congress gaiters) to the jet fandango atop of a real Northboro store
bonnet, and the smile was so infectious that it soon spread through the
entire car.

When they got off at 24th Street and made the sidewalk in tremulous
safety, they marched east in silence, counting the numbers as they went.

"'Tain't much of a neighbourhood," sniffed Mrs. Lane, wondering at the
ash barrels and pails of swill that lined the way.

"Don't jedge hasty, mother," said Joshua; "we mustn't be hard on
city folks that ain't got our advantages in the way o' pigs to turn
swill into meat, and bog-holes ter swaller ashes what don't go to
road-makin'."

"We must be near there," gasped Lauretta Ann, presently. She had been
persuaded to have her new gown made a "stylish length" by Hope Snippin,
the village dressmaker, in consequence of which she was grasping her
skirts on both sides, floundering and plunging along very much like an
old-style market schooner, with its sails fouled in the rigging.

"Oh, mother, look there!" said Lammy, with white, trembling lips. He
had been running on ahead and keeping track of the numbers, but he now
stood still, pointing to a half block of burned and ruined buildings,
walled in ice and draped with cruel icicles that seemed to pierce his
very flesh as he gazed at them.

For a minute they were all fairly speechless and stood open-mouthed,
then Joshua, recovering first, settled his teeth firmly back in place,
and laughing feebly, said: "Been a fire, I reckon; thet's nothing. I've
heard somethin' gets afire as often as every week in N'York. They must
be somewhere, and we'll jest calm down and ask the neighbours over the
way--in course they'll know."

But to Joshua's wonder they didn't, at least not definitely, and all he
could learn was that the O'Mores had moved somewhere a couple of blocks
"over."

"Gosh, but ain't N'York a heathen town," muttered Joshua; "jest think,
folks burned out an' their neighbours don't take no trouble about
'em; we might even get knocked down, and I bet they wouldn't be a bit
surprised. I'd like to strike fer home."

As they wandered helplessly along block after block, the crowd of
workmen and children in the streets coming home to dinner told that it
was noon.

There was no use in going they did not know where, and they had not met
a single policeman whom they could question. As they stood upon a corner
consulting as to what they had best do, a group of girls coming up and
dividing passed on either side of them, one bold-looking chit in a red
plush hat and soiled gown singing out something about "When Reuben comes
to town," and giving Lammy a push at the same time.

As he turned to avoid her, he heard his name called, and breaking from
her mates, a slender little figure with big black eyes dropped her
satchel and flung her arms around his neck, heedless of the merriment
and jeers of her companions. Bird was found at last!

[Illustration: "_Bird was found at last._"]

There was no longer any use in trying to keep up the barrier of pride,
or of pretending she was happy, and Bird led her friends home to the new
flat, wherein O'More had established his family on his return.

That afternoon there was a long powwow in which Mrs. O'More made herself
very disagreeable, as she had come to rely upon Bird and did not wish
to have Billy back upon her hands, but John O'More stood firm by his
promise, saying, even if he'd never made it, Bird should have her choice
after the way she'd stood by Billy in time of need. "She stuck by her
blood kin, and she's a lady through and through, and we're different,
and it's neither's fault that we're a reproach to each other," was
O'More's summing up. "If you can keep her, you can take her, but God
help little Billy! The doctor says good care a couple o' years more, an'
he'll have a chance for his leg. I can pay for care, but it's not to be
bought around here."

Mrs. Lane saw the tears in the rough man's eyes, and her big
mother-heart throbbed, and to some purpose, as usual.

"Our doctor's wife would take him to board, I guess," she said, after
thinking a minute. "She took a little boy from Northboro last summer,
and did real well by him, her children bein' grown now and out of hand.
Dr. Jedd, he'd give him care besides. I'll take him along with us if you
think he'll grieve, and you can write or come up and settle it."

It was only then that Bird's happiness was complete, and little Billy
hugged and hugged her, and cried in his piping voice, "Now we're going
to fly away out of the cage to your country for _sure_ this time," and
Bird answered joyfully and truthfully, "Yes."

"And the sooner we'll fly, the better I'll like it," added Joshua.
"This very afternoon would suit me."

But Lauretta Ann had determined upon two things: she was going to buy
the material for a black silk gown in New York, also a handsome china
jar to contain the remains of the pewter tea-pot and be "a moniment
to Aunt Jimmy," in the centre of the India china on the living-room
mantel-shelf. Mrs. O'More, sullenly accepting her defeat, and now in her
element, which was buying dress goods, offered to conduct the stranger
through the mazes of Sixth Avenue department stores; so after a hasty
lunch they set out, while her husband and Joshua Lane talked matters
over, and the children were in a seventh heaven of anticipation.

"One thing's on me mind,--that ring the girl sold to buy doctorin' for
Billy. I only hope she got the worth of it, and that the man's on the
square, for she won't give me the name of the gent that bought it, and
when I'm picked a bit out o' me trouble, I'd like to buy back the same,
for the keepsake is her only fortune. Maybe some day you can coax the
name out o' her."

"Likely I can--plenty o' time for that," drawled Joshua, who usually
knew more than he appeared to.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next afternoon five tired but happy people arrived at the Centre
and electrified the neighbourhood by hiring a hack to take them to
Laurelville, Joshua having only been persuaded to stay two days of the
proposed week's excursion.

"I'm goin' to have Hope Snippin up to-morrow morning to shorten my
gown," was Mrs. Lane's greeting to the minister's wife when she opened
the door in alarm at the unexpected return, while Twinkle leaped into
Bird's arms, fairly screaming with dog joy.

It was evident, however, that the sudden return was not wholly a
surprise. Somebody had sent a telegram to somebody, and Joshua's manner
in the interval before supper cast the suspicion upon him. After Bird
had seen her pretty room and coaxed Billy, who was nodding drowsily, to
eat his bread and milk and go to bed before the real supper, she came
down to the living-room, where the table was spread for the first time
instead of in the kitchen, for Dinah Lucky came in a few hours every day
now to do the heavy work and give Mrs. Lane more leisure. A stranger
was sitting by the fire. He rose and took Bird by the hand very gently
and drew her to the lounge beside him, at the same time handing her a
letter. She was too much surprised to notice that no one introduced her
or told his name. She opened the letter; her keepsake ring rolled into
her lap as she read:--

  "DEAR BERTHA O'MORE: I know all about you now, and I believed in
  you from the first. Here is your ring; wear it about your neck as
  before for a keepsake, until some day, ten years or so hence--then
  ask the one you love best to put it upon your left hand. With the
  respect of your friend,

  "MARION CLARKE'S FATHER.

  "P.S. The bearer of this letter is Alfred Rawley, your
  grandmother's youngest brother!"

In spite of her bewilderment, her first thought was, "So he was really
Marion's father!" Next spring she would beg him to give Tessie the
holiday that he had offered her that Christmastide in the twilight of
the church.

Joshua Lane capered about like a young kid as his wife tried to chase
him into a corner, exclaiming, "Now you jest up and tell me how long
you've known all this, and not told your lawful wife!"

"Wal, let me see," he said, counting on his fingers; "considerable
longer than it'll take us to eat supper," was all the answer she
received.

       *       *       *       *       *

That night Bird opened her bedroom window and looked out into the frosty
moonlight, where far away in the distance the runaway Christmas trees
were outlined against the sky and the roots of red peony that Lammy
planted were waiting under the ground for their spring blooming time to
come. Stretching out her arms as she drew in great reviving breaths of
the clear, frosty air, then clasping her hands together, she whispered,
"Terry, dear, you know it all; you know your Bird is free again, and
that she remembers, and now you must help her to fly the right way."

[Illustration]




DOGTOWN

_Being some Chapters from the Annals of the Waddles Family, set down in
the Language of the House People_

By MABEL OSGOOD WRIGHT

Author of "Tommy Anne," "Birdcraft," etc., etc.

_Illustrated by Portraits from Life by the Author_

  =Cloth=      =12mo=      =$1.50, net=

  "The dogs are entirely delightful, made alive and personal as
  only the closest intimacy of knowledge and understanding could make
  them."--_The Nation._

  "It is a book you want for a Christmas present for the child or
  grown-up dog-lover."--_American Sportsman._


FLOWERS AND FERNS IN THEIR HAUNTS

By MABEL OSGOOD WRIGHT

_With Illustrations from Photographs by the Author and_ J. HORACE
MCFARLAND

  =Cloth=      =12mo=      =$2.50, net=

  "The reader of Mrs. Wright's handsome volume will wend his way
  into a fairy world of loveliness, and find not only serious wildwood
  lore, but poetry also, and sentiment and pictures of the pen that
  will stay with him through winter days of snow and ice.... A careful
  and interesting companion, its many illustrations being particularly
  useful."--_New York Tribune._


THE FRIENDSHIP OF NATURE

_A New England Chronicle of Birds and Flowers_

By MABEL OSGOOD WRIGHT

  =18mo=      =Cloth, 75 cts.=      =Large Paper, $3.00=

  "A dainty little volume, exhaling the perfume and radiating
  the hues of both cultivated and wild flowers, echoing the songs
  of birds, and illustrated with exquisite pen pictures of bits of
  garden, field, and woodland scenery. The author is an intimate of
  nature. She relishes its beauties with the keenest delight, and
  describes them with a musical flow of language that carries us
  along from a 'May Day' to a 'Winter Mood' in a thoroughly sustained
  effort: and as we drift with the current of her fancy and her
  tribute to nature, we gather much that is informatory, for she
  has made a close study of the habits of birds and the legendry of
  flowers."--_Richmond Dispatch._


Four-Footed Americans and Their Kin

BY MABEL OSGOOD WRIGHT

Edited by FRANK M. CHAPMAN. Illustrated by ERNEST SETON-THOMPSON

  =Cloth.=      =Crown 8vo.=      =$1.50, net=

  "It deserves commendation for its fascinating style, and for the
  fund of information which it contains regarding the familiar and
  many unfamiliar animals of this country. It is an ideal book for
  children, and doubtless older folk will find in its pages much of
  interest."--_The Dial._

  "Books like this are cups of delight to wide-awake and inquisitive
  girls and boys. Here is a gossipy history of American quadrupeds,
  bright, entertaining, and thoroughly instructive. The text, by Mrs.
  Wright, has all the fascination that distinguishes her other outdoor
  books."--_The Independent._


Citizen Bird

_Scenes from Bird-life in Plain English for a Beginner_

By MABEL O. WRIGHT and DR. ELLIOTT COUES

Profusely illustrated by LOUIS AGASSIZ FUERTES

  =Cloth.=      =Crown 8vo.=      =$1.50, net=

  "When two writers of marked ability in both literature and
  natural history write to produce a work giving scope to their
  special talents, the public has reason to expect a masterpiece
  of its kind. In the 'Citizen Bird,' by Mabel O. Wright and Dr.
  Elliott Coues, this expectation is realized--seldom is the plan of
  a book so admirably conceived, and in every detail so excellently
  fulfilled."--_The Dial._

  "There is no other book in existence so well fitted for arousing
  and directing the interest that all children feel toward the
  birds."--_Tribune_, Chicago.


Birdcraft

_A Field-Book of Two Hundred Song, Game, and Water Birds_

BY MABEL OSGOOD WRIGHT

With eighty full-page plates by Louis Agassiz Fuertes

  "One of the best books that amateurs in the study of ornithology
  can find ... direct, forcible, plain, and pleasing."--_Chautauquan._

  "Of books on birds there are many, all more or less valuable,
  but 'Birdcraft,' by MABEL O. WRIGHT, has peculiar merits that will
  endear it to amateur ornithologists.... A large number of excellent
  illustrations throw light on the text and help to make a book that
  will arouse the delight and win the gratitude of every lover of
  birds."--_Saturday Evening Gazette_, Boston.


Tommy-Anne and the Three Hearts

BY MABEL OSGOOD WRIGHT

With many illustrations by ALBERT D. BLASHFIELD

  =Cloth.=      =Crown 8vo.=      =$1.50=

  "This book is calculated to interest children in nature, and grown
  folks, too, will find themselves catching the author's enthusiasm.
  As for Tommy-Anne herself, she is bound to make friends wherever
  she is known. The more of such books as these, the better for the
  children. One Tommy-Anne is worth a whole shelf of the average
  juvenile literature."--_The Critic._


Wabeno, the Magician

_The Sequel to Tommy-Anne and the Three Hearts_

By MABEL OSGOOD WRIGHT

Fully illustrated by JOSEPH M. GLEESON

  =Cloth.=      =Crown 8vo.=      =$1.50=

  "Mrs. Wright's book teaches her young readers to use their eyes
  and ears, but it does more in that it cultivates in them a genuine
  love for nature and for every member of the animal kingdom. The best
  of the book is that it is never dull."--_Boston Budget._


The Dream Fox Story Book

BY MABEL OSGOOD WRIGHT

With eighty drawings by OLIVER HERFORD

  =Cloth.=      =Small quarto.=      =$1.50, net=

  Mrs. Wright's new book for young people recounts the marvellous
  adventures of Billy Benton, his acquaintance with the Dream Fox and
  the Night Mare, and what came of it. It differs from the author's
  previous stories, as it is purely imaginative and somewhat similar
  to "Alice in Wonderland."

  There are eight full-page illustrations, showing Billy at moments
  of greatest interest, and also seventy drawings scattered throughout
  the text. These illustrations are by Oliver Herford, who has entered
  thoroughly into the spirit of the text, so that the pictures seem an
  integral part of the story.


  THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
  66 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK




Transcriber's note


Text in italics has been surrounded by _underscores_ and small capitals
have been replaced with all capitals.

A few punctuation errors have been corrected. Otherwise the original has
been preserved, including inconsistent spelling and hyphenation.





End of Project Gutenberg's Aunt Jimmy's Will, by Mabel Osgood Wright

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AUNT JIMMY'S WILL ***

***** This file should be named 42437.txt or 42437.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/4/3/42437/

Produced by eagkw, Greg Bergquist and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

