The Project Gutenberg EBook of Friendship Club Cook Book, by
The Friendship Club of Madison WI

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Friendship Club Cook Book

Author: The Friendship Club of Madison WI

Release Date: May 2, 2013 [EBook #42631]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRIENDSHIP CLUB COOK BOOK ***




Produced by Dianna Adair, Paul Clark, UW Digital Collections
Center, University of Wisconsin; Friendship Club (Madison,
WI) and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net






    Transcriber's Note:

    Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
    possible. Missing punctuation and spaces have been added, and
    capitalization has been fixed. Some other changes have been made.
    They are listed at the end of the text.

    Hyphens have been doubled where they represent dashes.
    Underlined text has been marked with _underscores_.




Friendship Club Cook Book


[Illustration]




[Illustration]


DORA LEVITAN MEMORIAL

Gift of

MORTIMER LEVITAN




FOREWARD


The Friendship Club is an inter-racial women's social club. It was
founded two years ago in Madison by a group of Negro and white women,
who felt that in developing mutual understanding among themselves, they
were thus answering a most grave result of segregation--ignorance.

In the course of its short history, the club has brought together white,
Negro, Chinese, Jewish, Catholic and Protestant women; working and
professional women, students and teachers, mothers and housewives.

In informal gatherings, at our pot-luck suppers, sewing bees, teas and
coffee hours, the women of the Friendship Club have gained insight into
each others problems and re-affirmed their confidence that if people
of different races, creeds and national origins would but have the
opportunity to know and appreciate each other, it would be a long step
forward towards solving some of the trying problems which face us all.

This little book is a token of our friendship and faith in each other
and in all people.

 1951                                               Madison, Wisconsin




FRIENDSHIP CLUB COOK BOOK

CHRISTMAS--1951




CONTENTS


    Meats, Entrees, Fish, One-Dish Meals           WHITE

    Hot Vegetables, Salads, Salad Dressings        GOLD

    Cookies, Cakes, Frostings, Desserts            WHITE

    Breads, Hot Breads, Breakfast Specialties      GREEN




In this little cookbook you will find the favorite recipes of the Club
members and many of their friends. They are favorites for one or more of
three reasons--economy, ease of preparation, or unusual tastiness.

The simplicity of the book is in keeping with the simplicity of our
belief--our differences are superficial; our likenesses are fundamental.
For we are all members of a single race--the human race.




SWEDISH MEATBALLS


    2 C soft bread crumbs
    3/4 C water
    1 lb. ground beef
    6 T dried milk
    1 egg--slightly beaten
    2 T minced onion
    11/2 t salt
    1/4 t nutmeg
    _1/8 t pepper_
    1/4 C flour
    1/4 C fat
    2 C milk
    1 t salt
    1/4 t nutmeg

Soak bread in water. Add to meat. Sprinkle dried milk over this. Blend
thoroughly. Add rest of ingredients (except flour and fat).

Make 1" meatballs; roll in flour; brown in fat. Remove from skillet.

Add fat to pan to make 4 T. Combine 2 T. cornstarch with small amount of
milk to make paste. Add milk to 2 C.

Add seasoning and add mixture to melted fat. Cook over low heat,
stirring constantly until thick. Return meatballs to gravy and reheat.




CREOLE CHICKEN


    2 poulets (spring chickens)
    2 large onions sliced
    2 cloves garlic
    6 large tomatoes
    6 sweet green peppers
    2 or 3 sprigs thyme
    2 sprigs parsley
    1 bay leaf
    2 T butter
    2 T flour
    2 C stock or water
    salt
    pepper

Disjoint chicken, season well with salt and pepper. Cook chicken in
melted butter until brown all over. Add onion and brown lightly.
Sprinkle with flour, mix and cook until flour browns. Add sliced
tomatoes, chopped garlic and herbs and peppers. Cover and simmer for 20
minutes. Add hot stock or water, season highly with salt and pepper and
simmer for 45 minutes more. Serve pieces of chicken with sauce poured
over them. Serve with rice.




CHEESE BAKE


    stale bread cut in pieces
    onion chopped
    cheese grated or sliced
      (any process cheese although Swiss cheese is best)
    1-2 eggs
    milk (about 1 C)
    salt
    pepper

Grease a deep baking dish. Cover bottom with a layer of bread, then
cheese and onion. Alternate layers ending with bread. Beat egg, milk and
seasoning. Pour slowly over layers. Milk mixture should fill half the
dish. Bake in moderate-hot oven about 45 minutes or until brown.




SWISS CHEESE PIE


    1-9" pie shell
    1/2-1/4 lb. Swiss cheese grated
    1-2 eggs separated
    1 t cornstarch
    1 C milk

Mix egg yolks, cheese, milk, cornstarch and seasoning. Add stiffly
beaten egg whites. Pour into unbaked pie shell and bake until brown.
About 1/2 hour.


Variations:

a) An onion sauteed in fat may be added to the cheese mixture.

b) Pie shell may be lined with sliced tomatoes.




BACON AND BEEF BURGERS


    5 slices bacon
    1 lb. ground beef
    2 T chopped onion
    1 egg, beaten
    1/2 C sharp cheese grated
    11/2 T catsup
    11/2 T Worcestershire sauce
    1/2 t salt
    1/4 t pepper

Combine all the ingredients except the bacon, mixing well. Pat the meat
into a roll and slice one inch thick. Wrap each slice with a strip of
bacon fastening with a toothpick. Broil or pan broil 5 minutes on each
side.




SUKI YAKI (Japanese beef & vegetables)


    1 lb. beef cut in thin strips and pounded flat
      (sirloin is excellent)
    green onions
    celery
    watercress
    leeks
    any of the above vegetables plus any other vegetables may be used
      except starchy ones like potatoes
    1 T sugar
    1 T soy sauce
    fat for frying
    1/2-1 C beef stock or bouillon

Fry meat and vegetables sliced very thin in fat in saucepan until brown.
Moisten with stock, add sugar and soy sauce and let simmer for 15-20
minutes or until beef is tender. Serve over dry rice.

note: Pork or chicken may be substituted for beef




ORANGE MEAT LOAF


    1 egg
    1/3 C milk
    1 onion chopped
    2 t salt
    1/4 t pepper
    1 T Worcestershire Sauce
    11/2 C bread crumbs
    1/2 lb. ground beef
    1/2 lb. ground pork
    1/2 lb. ground veal
    10-12 orange sections
    2 T sugar
    2 T light corn syrup
    2 T orange juice

Combine egg, milk, salt, pepper, Worcestershire sauce, bread crumbs and
meat. Mix well; shape into loaf about 7 inches long and 2 inches high
in greased baking pan. Cut slits across top of loaf and tuck in orange
sections. Combine orange juice, sugar and corn syrup. Pour over top of
loaf, reserving 1/3 to use for basting. Bake in moderate oven about 1
hour, basting often.




SPAGHETTI WITH GARLIC & OIL


    1/2-1 lb. spaghetti
    4-5 T olive oil
    3-4 cloves garlic
    salt
    pepper
    parsley
    boiling water

Boil spaghetti in plenty of water so that strands are well separated
from each other. Cook until tender but still firm. Do not break the
strands of spaghetti and do not overcook. Drain cooked spaghetti in a
colander. Put spaghetti in a frying pan with oil in which the garlic has
been browned. Sprinkle with salt, pepper and parsley. Mix well & let
simmer a few minutes over low heat. Serve on hot platter.




SPICED CHICKEN STEW


    1 stewing hen cut in pieces
    1 large onion chopped
    4 bay leaves
    4 whole cloves
    1 can tomato soup
    salt & pepper

Make a layer of the onion in the bottom of a large saucepan. Put the
spices on the onion and then the pieces of chicken. Pour a can of tomato
soup over the top. Bring to a boil and reduce flame so that chicken
cooks slowly. When chicken is tender and browned remove spices and use
gravy over rice or potatoes. Gravy should be salted before serving.




VEAL TONGUE


    4 small veal tongues
    2 bay leaves
    1 onion
    3 cloves

Boil tongue until tender. Take out of juice and remove outer skin. Put
back in juice, add salt and pepper, bay leaves, onions and cloves. Cook
1/2 hour.




CHINESE CHICKEN


    1 small chicken, cut into serving pieces


_Sauce_

    1 T chopped Dow Soo
    11/2 t chopped garlic
    11/2 t salt
    2 T soy sauce
    1/2 C water

Brown chicken in hot pan quickly. Let chicken simmer in pan with sauce
for 3/4 hour or until tender. Saute green peppers and tomatoes in
another until tender. Season to taste. Add cooked chicken. Thicken gravy
if desired.

Note: beef or pork may be substituted for chicken.

Dow Soo, a Chinese spice may be purchased in Chinese importing shops or
in some restaurants.




POT ROAST IN PRESSURE COOKER


    Chuck roast, round bone or blade
    1 onion sliced
    2 T water
    salt
    pepper
    1 bay leaf (op)
    fat
    potatoes
    carrots

Brown meat well on all sides in fat. Add other ingredients and cook 20
minutes per pound at 15 pounds pressure. Let stand _at least 8 hours_
before using. Thicken gravy if desired.




LIVER AND RICE


    1 lb. beef, calf or lamb liver
    1 medium sized onion
    2 T savory fat (bacon or chicken)
    2 t soy sauce
    salt & pepper to taste
    11/2 T cornstarch
    1 C bouillon

Cut liver into small pieces. Brown the liver and sliced onion quickly
in hot fat. Add the cornstarch to a little of the bouillon and mix to
a smooth paste. Add to the rest of the bouillon and cook until thick
and clear. Add the soy sauce and seasoning, then the browned liver and
onion. Serve over dry rice.




CREAM PEAS & TUNA FISH


    3 T butter
    2 T flour
    2 C warm milk
    1 can tuna fish
    1 C peas
    toast

Make cream sauce and cook until thickened. Add tuna and peas. Serve on
toast.




VEAL PAPRIKA


    2 lbs. boneless veal steak--pounded paper thin
    1 lb. mushrooms
    1 medium onion
    2 T salad oil

Brown onions & mushrooms in oil and remove from skillet. Brown
veal--(cut up in serving size pieces). Return onions and mushrooms to
skillet. Add sour cream & seasonings. Simmer 20 minutes. If sour cream
too thick, thin with milk. Make sweet cream sour with few drops vinegar.
If canned mushrooms used, use juice in gravy.




SPAGHETTI WITH MEAT SAUCE IN PRESSURE COOKER


    1 lb. hamburger
    1 onion chopped
    1 can tomato paste
    2 cans tomato sauce
    1 green pepper chopped
    11/2 T Worcestershire sauce
    salt
    pepper
    2 bay leaves

Mash the meat with a fork.

Add onion, green pepper, paste, sauce, spices and cook at 15 pounds
pressure for 10 minutes. It is best to add salt and pepper after cooking
to taste. Remove bay leaves. Serve meat sauce over cooked spaghetti.
This may be made earlier and reheated when ready to use but long
simmering is not necessary.




BAKED SNAPPER CUBA


    french dressing (marinade)
    1/3 C lime juice
    2/3 C olive oil
    1 T soy sauce
    dash garlic salt
    dash fresh ground black pepper

Marinate a big snapper or any baking fish in 1 cup of the french
dressing for 4-6 hours. If fish is split for stuffing, marinate the
inside of the fish too. Stuff with bread stuffing if desired.

Bake at 450 deg. for 5-6 minutes or until well seared, brush plenty of the
marinade over the fish. Cover and bake until tender, basting with the
marinade frequently.

A little basil or thyme or crushed bay leaves may be added to the fish
before baking.

This is a recipe from Havana, Cuba.




LASAGNE


    2 T. oil
    1 lb. hamburger--crumbled
    2 cloves garlic--crushed
    2 8 oz. cans tomato sauce
    11/2 t salt; 1/4 t pepper
    1/2 t oregano
    1/2 lb. lasagne noodles
    mazzarella cheese (1/2 lb) sliced
    3/4 lb. cottage cheese
    parmesan cheese-grated

Heat oil. Brown hamburger and garlic. Add sauce and seasonings. Simmer
until thickened (20-30 minutes). Cook noodles in water with a little oil
about 15 minutes (until tender). Fill casserole with alternate layers:

    noodles
    mazzarella cheese
    cottage cheese
    meat sauce
    parmesan cheese

End with meat sauce and parmesan cheese. Bake in oven 375 deg. 15-20
minutes.




SQUAW CORN


    1 can corn
    1 lb. hamburger
    1/2 green pepper
    1/2 onion
    salt & pepper
    1 can tomatoes

Fry hamburger crumbling it while it cooks, then add onions and diced
green pepper. Fry. Add corn and tomatoes. Season to taste.




BEEF PORCUPINE


    1 lb. hamburger
    1 C cooked rice
    2 t catsup
    1/2 onion diced
    1 egg
    1 can tomato paste
    1 can water

Fry in fat until brown, then add tomato paste and water. Cook until
done.




CREOLE JAMBALAYA WITH SAUSAGES


    1 C rice
    1/2 lb. or more sausages
    1 large onion
    1 clove garlic
    1/2 lb. tomatoes
    1/2 chilli pepper
    salt
    pepper
    cayenne
    butter

Cook rice and let stand so that the water will evaporate and the rice
will be dry. Chop onion and garlic and fry to a light golden colour in
butter. Quarter the tomatoes and add to the onion, crushing them to
extract the juice. Fry the sausages separately and when done cut in 2
inch lengths. Put the cooked rice in a deep pan, add the fried onion,
garlic and tomatoes, and the butter in which they were cooked. Add the
sausages, mix well, season with salt, pepper, dash cayenne and finely
chopped chilli pepper. Cover and simmer very gently for 30 minutes,
stirring often. Serve very hot.




SOUR CREAM VEAL STEW


    3 lb boneless veal
    3 medium onions
    3 T fat
    salt & pepper to taste
    1 qt. stock (beef bouillon cubes & water)
    stalk celery
    sprig parsley
    pinch thyme
    4 medium potatoes
    1/2 qt. mushrooms
    1 C sour cream

Fry onions. Remove from fat. Fry veal seasoned to taste. Return onions
and add stock and seasonings. Cover and simmer about 2 hours. Add and
cook until tender 4 potatoes and mushrooms. Add sour cream just before
serving and heat long enough for thorough blending.




MEAT LOAF


    11/2 lb. ground beef
    1/2 lb ground pork
    1/2 C cracker or dry bread crumbs
    1 egg
    2 strips browned bacon
    1 medium onion, chopped
    small can tomato sauce


Saute onion in bacon fat.

Chop crisp bacon fine.

Combine other ingredients.

Add onion and chopped bacon.

Bake in moderate oven (350 deg.) for one hour


LIVER AND ONIONS

Soak 1 lb. of liver in enough milk to cover for one hour.

Saute one large onion sliced into rings.

Dip liver pieces in salted flour; fry on both sides until brown; cover
tightly and simmer for 20 minutes.

Cover with browned sauteed onion rings and serve hot.




CHILI VEAL


    1 large onion
    2 green peppers
    3 large peeled tomatoes or 1 large can tomatoes
    1 t salt
    1 t chili powder
    2 C gravy or tomato soup (condensed)
    3-4 C pieces of cooked cold veal or pot roast

Saute chopped onion & green peppers in bacon fat.

Add tomatoes & seasoning. Cook 15 minutes.

Add gravy or soup. Cook 5 minutes.

Add meat. Cook until thoroughly heated.

Serve on broad noodles or rice.




MASHED-POTATO-COATED MEAT LOAF


_Loaf_

    3 large pepper
    1 large onion
    1 C cracker crumbs
    31/2 C tomatoes (No. 21/2 can)
    1 lb ground beef
    1 lb ground pork
    1/2 t salt
    1/8 t paprika
    5 slices bacon
    juice from tomatoes


_Potato_-_coating_

    6 medium potatoes
    1/4 C margarine
    1/2 C hot milk
    salt & pepper
    1 egg yolk

Grind pepper and onion. Add crumbs. Drain tomatoes and add (saving
juice). Add meat and seasoning. Shape into loaf and dredge. Cover with
bacon. Bake for 1 hour at 350 deg.. Baste frequently with tomato juice.

For potato coating: Cook peeled potatoes in boiling salted water. Drain
and mash well. Add margarine, milk, salt, pepper, and egg yolk. Beat
until fluffy. Cover loaf completely; brush with melted butter. Brown in
broiler.




BLINTZES


_Batter_

    2 eggs
    1 C flour
    11/2 C milk
    pinch salt
    grease for pan


_Filling_

    1-12 oz. dry cottage cheese
    1 egg
    1 T melted butter
    1 t sugar
    salt to taste
    pinch pepper

Pour batter into small frying pan (8"), so that batter just covers
bottom of pan. Cook over low heat until set and dry but not brown. Turn
sheets of batter out on towel until filled. Pancakes should not be
thicker than three sheets of paper.

Filling: Mash cheese well or put through sieve. Add other ingredients.
Put T of filling on a pancake, roll, tuck in ends to make envelope, fry
in butter or shortening (veg.). Blintzes filled or unfilled keep well
in refrigerator until fried. Can be served with sour cream or sprinkled
with sugar.




HOT SLAW--GERMAN CABBAGE


    1 small head cabbage
    4 T diced bacon cooked to light brown
    1/2 C hot water
    2-3 t sugar
    2 T vinegar
    salt and pepper

Steam cabbage, bacon and hot water over low heat for twenty minutes.
Add more water if necessary. When done add the sugar, vinegar, salt &
pepper. Simmer for 5 minutes more with cover on.




SPINACH PANCAKES


    2 C cooked spinach, well drained
    1 egg, beaten
    1/2 t salt
    1/4 t pepper
    1/4-1/2 C cracker meal, flour or bread crumbs
    shortening

Mix all the ingredients together except for the shortening, adding the
cracker meal last. Add enough cracker meal so that the mixture will hold
its shape. Drop by tablespoon into hot shortening until brown and crisp
on the surface.




ITALIAN SQUASH OR EGGPLANT


    1 medium egg plant
    1 medium summer squash
    1 green pepper
    2-3 tomatoes, sliced
    1/2 C water (if vegetables not juicy)
    dash of salt, pepper, cinnamon
    handful of grated Swiss or Parmesan cheese
    oil

Cut egg plant, squash and pepper in walnut-sized pieces (squash and egg
plant may be substituted for each other). Saute in salad oil. Sprinkle
with salt, sugar, cinnamon. Add tomatoes, and water if needed. Cover and
cook over slow heat 20-30 minutes. Add cheese, cover and cook for five
minutes.




TURNIPS WITH CARAWAY SEEDS


    1 medium sized turnip
    1 t sugar
    salt
    caraway seeds
    fat
    1 C water

Cut turnips lengthwise into strips. Melt sugar in pan until brown. Add
water at once. Add turnips. Sprinkle with salt and caraway seeds. Add a
piece of fat or butter. Cook for twenty minutes or until done.




CARAWAY POTATOES


    medium sized potatoes
    salt
    caraway seeds
    oil

Scrub potatoes. Cut in half. Brush cut side with oil. Sprinkle with salt
and caraway seeds. Put cut side up in baking dish and bake tender.




DUTCH POTATOES


    1 onion chopped
    1 T fat
    3 medium potatoes cubed
    2 T chopped parsley
    salt & pepper

Brown onion in hot fat. Add potatoes, parsley, and seasonings. Barely
cover with hot water. Cook covered until potatoes are tender.




RAW POTATO PANCAKES (LATKES)


    3 large potatoes grated
    2 eggs
    1/2 t baking pdr.
    1 t salt
    1/2 t pepper
    cracker meal, matzo meal or flour
    vegetable shortening or oil

Add all the ingredients to the grated potatoes, mixing well. Add enough
cracker meal to absorb the liquid from the potatoes so that the mixture
can be dropped by the spoonful into hot fat or oil. Fry until brown and
crisp. The edges of the pancake should be very crisp and the inside
soft. Serve with applesauce or sour cream.

note: a medium-sized onion may be grated into the potatoes and the
pancakes served with meat.




SALADS


Raw grated yellow turnips, carrots, or beets make a very good salad. For
their dressing take oil, vinegar (or lemon), a little milk or cream and
salt. To turnips and beets add a few grains of caraway seeds.

Any kind of raw vegetable, or chopped fruit can be put in a suitable
flavor of Jello. Marshmellow (chopped) is good mixed with fruit or
celery.




MAYONNAISE


    1 egg yolk
    1/2 t salt
    2/3 C salad oil
    2 T vinegar
    1 t Worcestershire sauce

Put egg yolk into a small chilled bowl or saucer. Stir in salt. Add oil,
a few drops at a time, stirring vigorously after each addition. After a
few additions more oil may be added. When the mixture thickens add the
vinegar alternately with the oil. Add the Worcestershire sauce last. If
the mixture should separate add another egg yolk a little at a time.

note: mayonnaise is easy to make if the oil & vinegar are well chilled.




SOUR CREAM DRESSING


    1 C thick sour cream
    1/2 C vinegar (scant)
    1 t salt
    1/2 t pepper
    1 T sugar
    1 T celery seed (op)
    dash paprika (op)

Mix all ingredients until well blended. Store in jar in refrigerator.
Celery seed may be added for variety. Very good on cabbage slaw.




CARROT CASSEROLE


    1 C (heaping) mashed carrots cooked in salted water
    1-2 C cracker crumbs
    1/2-1 C diced cheese
    1 small onion diced
    1/4 C diced green pepper
    1 C milk
    salt
    pepper
    butter on top

Mix ingredients and place in greased casserole dish. Can be mixed
several days ahead and cooked as needed. For economy use maximum
crackers, minimum cheese.

Bake for 1 hr.--325 deg.




CARROT RING


    1 C butter or Oleo (no other shortening)
    1/2 C brown sugar
    2 C raw grated carrots
    11/4 C f
    1 t baking pdr.
    1/2 t salt
    2 eggs
    1 T lemon juice
    1 T grated lemon rind
    1/2 t soda, dissolved in 1 T hot water

Cream butter and sugar. Add ingredients in order given. Put in ring mold
which is set in a bowl of hot water. Bake in moderate oven about one
hour.




DELICATE SPICE COOKIES


    1 C sugar, white or brown
    3/4 C shortening
    1 egg
    2 C flour
    2 t soda
    1 t salt
    4 T molasses
    1/2 t cinnamon
    1/4 t ginger
    1/4 t cloves

Put ingredients together in the order given. Mix thoroughly. Pinch off
pieces of dough the size of a marble. Roll in granulated sugar. Bake at
350 deg., 12-15 minutes.




QUICK DOUGHNUTS


    3 T shortening
    2/3 C sugar
    2 eggs, well beaten
    31/2 C sifted flour
    4 t baking pdr.
    1 t salt
    1/4 t cinnamon (op)
    1/8 t cloves (op)
    1/8 t nutmeg
    2/3 C milk

Cream shortening and sugar, blend in eggs. Sift dry ingredients together
and add alternately with milk to make dough the consistency of biscuit
dough (amount of flour may vary) Roll out 1/2 inch on a floured board
and cut with a doughnut cutter. Fry a few at a time in deep hot fat
(360 deg.-375 deg.) turning as soon as the doughnuts rise to the top of the fat.
When cool dust with confectioner's sugar.




BANANA CAKE


    1/2 C shortening
    1 C sugar
    3/4 C brown sugar
    2 eggs well beaten
    1 t vanilla extract
    2 C flour
    1/2 t salt
    1/2 t soda
    1/4 C sour milk
    1 C banana pulp mashed

Cream shortening & sugar, add eggs & vanilla and beat well. Add sifted
dry ingredients alternately with sour milk & banana pulp, beating well
after each addition. Bake in greased 61/2-101/2 inch loaf pan in a
moderate oven for 50 minutes. Frost with nut frosting.




HONEY CAKE


    1 C honey, or molasses or corn sirup
      (or any desired combination of these)
    3 T sugar
    2 C flour
    4 t baking pdr.
    1/2 C milk (or more)
    1/2 C chopped walnuts
    peel of one orange cut up fine
    dash of cinnamon, cloves, anise

Heat sugar and honey. Sift dry ingredients and spices. Add warm sirup
to dry ingredients. Add orange peel and nuts. Add enough milk so that
batter is thin and can be poured easily. Pour into greased pan, layer
or loaf. Bake in slow oven for 45 minutes. Increase heat somewhat for
second half of baking. When done brush warm cake with sweetened milk and
sprinkle with nuts (op.). Serve next day, slice thin.

This is a Swiss recipe and uses no eggs and little sugar.




GOLDEN FROSTING


    2 C sugar
    1 t vinegar
    1/2 C hot water
    2 T butter
    2 egg yolks
    1 t baking pdr.
    1 t orange juice
    1 t lemon juice
    1 t grated orange rind

Combine sugar, vinegar, water. Stir & cook until mixture boils. Cover
and cook without stirring until syrup spins a thread 10 inches long.
(232 deg.F) Add butter. Beat egg yolks until thick. Pour syrup over the
egg yolks in a fine stream, beating vigorously. Add baking powder &
flavoring. Beat with beater until creamy. Store in refrigerator until
needed. May be thinned with more fruit juice if necessary.




SOFT CHOCOLATE FROSTING


    1/2 C sugar
    11/2 T cornstarch
    1 1-ounce square unsweetened chocolate
    pinch salt
    1/2 C water _boiling_
    11/2 T butter or margarine
    1 t vanilla flavoring
    1/2 t rum extract (op)

Mix sugar, cornstarch and salt. Cut chocolate into small pieces and add
to sugar mixture. Add boiling water; cook until thick. Remove from heat;
add butter and vanilla. Spread on cake as a frosting or filling. Can be
used hot.




RANGER COOKIES


    1 C shortening
    1 C white sugar
    1 C brown sugar
    2 eggs
    1 t vanilla
    2 C flour
    1 t soda
    1/2 t baking powder
    1/2 t salt
    2 C oatmeal
    2 C Rice Krispies
    1 C coconut

Cream shortening and sugar. Add the eggs and vanilla and mix until
smooth. Add flour which has been sifted with soda and baking powder
and salt. Add oatmeal, cereal and coconut. Mold dough in balls size of
walnut and press slightly on cookie sheet. Bake at 350 F. Large yield.




CHERRY PIE FILLING


    2-21/2 T cornstarch
    2/3 C cherry juice
    1/2 C sugar
    2 T butter
    2 T orange juice
    2 t lemon juice
    2 2/3 C drained sour cherries

Mix dry ingredients and fruit juices. Cook until clear and thick. Remove
from heat and add butter and cherries. Fill pie shell and bake in hot
oven until pastry is browned.

Variation: omit orange and lemon juice and use 1 t vanilla and 1/2 t
almond extract for flavoring. Substitute brown sugar for white.

After cherries are added to the thickened sauce, cook the cherries for
about 5 minutes and then cool. The cooked cherries may be then put into
a baked pie shell. Whipped cream can be put over serving or over the
whole cooled pie filling.




DELICATE FRENCH COOKIES


    1/2 lb. butter
    1/2 lb. cream cheese
    2 T sugar
    1 t salt
    2 C flour
    * * * * * *
    1 egg beaten (with 1 T water)
    granulated sugar
    chopped nuts

Mix butter, cheese, sugar & salt until the consistance is like thick
cream. Add flour and make a ball of the dough. Do not use any liquids.
Wrap in wax paper and towel and put in the refrigerator over night. (the
dough keeps well for a week). Roll out 1/3 of the dough at a time. Roll
the dough 1/4 inch thick and fold over 4 times. Roll out again 1/4 inch
thick and cut with cookie cutter. Dip top surface of cookies in beaten
egg, sugar and chopped nuts. Bake on greased sheet in hot oven until
puffed and brown. Remove carefully.




CRY BABIES


    1/2 C strong hot coffee
    1/2 C molasses
    1/2 C sugar
    1/2 C butter
    2 eggs
    1 t baking pdr.
    1 t ginger
    1 t nutmeg
    4 C flour
    1/2 t soda

Melt the butter with the coffee. Add sugar, molasses and the well beaten
eggs. Sift the spices, flour, baking powder and soda. Add to the liquid
ingredients. Beat well. Chill. Drop in tablespoonfuls on a well buttered
baking sheet or pan. Bake 10 minutes in a moderate oven (350 deg.F) Frost
while hot. Makes 4 dozen Cry Babies.




STRAWBERRY DESSERT


    1 package frozen strawberries
    1/2 pint whipping cream
    1 t vanilla
    dash salt
    2 T powdered sugar
    strawberry gelatine in a ring mold

Let berries defrost and drain off the syrup. Whip the cream with the
sugar, vanilla and salt. Mix the berries with the cream and put into
the center of the ring of gelatine which has been unmolded onto a large
platter. Cut a slice of the gelatine and top with the berries and cream.
Serve with small cookies.




SCHENBELI


    2 C flour
    1 C sugar
    2 eggs
    1/8 lb butter
    peelings of 1/2 lemon grated
    juice of 1 lemon
    fat for deep frying

Cream sugar and butter. Add eggs, beat well. Add lemon peelings and
juice. Add flour, beat well. Knead dough a few times. Let dough stand
in a cool place for 1 hour. Roll out dough on lightly floured board and
shape into rope like strips around size of thumb. Deep fry in hot fat
until brown. Sprinkle with confectioner's sugar. Makes 50-60.




STRUDEL


    21/2 C flour
    1 t salt
    2 eggs beaten
    2 T butter
    1/2 C warm water


Filling

    5 C sliced apples
    1 T lemon rind grated
    1 C brown sugar
    3 T melted butter
    1/2 C raisins
    1/2 C chopped nuts

Sift flour & salt. Cut in butter, add eggs and water. Knead well, beat
or throw dough until it blisters. Let stand in warm place under cloth
for 20 minutes. Cover table with white cloth and flour it. Pull dough
out on the cloth until paper thin. Spread on filling. Roll as for jelly
roll. Grease top. Bake roll for 10 minutes at 450 deg., then for 20 minutes
at 400 deg.. Cool and slice.




CARAMELIZED CUSTARD


    3 eggs
    1/4 C sugar
    1/8 t salt
    2 C milk, scalded
    1/2 t vanilla extract
    1/2-1 C brown sugar

Spread sugar (brown) in the bottom of a baking dish. Pour the following
custard over it. Add sugar and salt to well beaten eggs. Stir in scalded
milk slowly. Add flavoring. Place baking dish with custard and brown
sugar in a pan of hot water and bake in a moderate oven until firm. Cool
and invert onto a platter. The brown sugar forms a caramel sauce. Use
more or less brown sugar depending on how much sauce is desired.




PEACH SCALLOP


Arrange alternate layers of 3 layers of each:

    11/2 C sliced peaches
    1/2 C light brown sugar
    2 T butter
    2 C cake crumbs (last layer)

Over top pour 1/2 C evaporated milk diluted with 1/4 C water. Bake until
brown.

If canned peaches are used use juice for sauce.




POPPY-SEED COOKIES


    4 C sifted flour
    3 t baking pdr.
    1/4 t salt
    1 C shortening
    1/2 C brown sugar
    2 C granulated sugar
    2 eggs, well beaten
    1 C poppy seed
    1 T vanilla

Cream shortening, add sugar gradually and cream together thoroughly. Add
eggs, poppy-seed and vanilla. Add flour sifted with baking powder and
salt. Mix well. Shape stiff dough into rolls, 11/2 inches in diameter.
Wrap in waxed paper and chill well or overnight. Slice 1/8 inch thick.
Bake on ungreased cookie sheet in 425 deg. oven or until lightly browned.

This is a very sweet cookie. If less sweetness and more richness is
desired cut white sugar to 11/2 cups and flour to 3 cups. 7 dozen
cookies.




ECONOMY ANGEL FOOD CAKE


    1 C (scant) egg whites
    11/4 C sugar
    1 C cake flour sifted 4 times (once before measuring)
    1 t cream of tartar
    1/2 t salt
    1 t lemon extract or 1/2 t vanilla and 1/2 t almond extr.
    nutmeg if desired

Beat egg whites until stiff with cream of tartar and salt. With wire
whisk fold in sifted sugar and flavoring. Fold in flour through sifter.

Bake in ungreased chimney pan an hour or more at 250 deg., or by the new
method (1/2 hour at 425 deg.) until wire tester comes out clean. Invert on
chimney to cool.

Cut with vertical motion with very sharp knife, wiping clean after each
cut with moist cloth.




PFEFFERNUESSE


    41/2 C sifted flour
    1/4 t soda
    1 t each: cloves, nutmeg, salt
    1/8 t cinnamon
    1/4 t black pepper
    2 t anise seed
    4 eggs slightly beaten
    2 C (packed brown sugar)

Combine eggs and brown sugar. Add dry ingredients and mix. Shape into
walnut-sized balls and put on greased baking sheet. Let stand overnight
covered with towel. Bake 20 to 25 minutes (350 deg.). Shake few cookies
at time in paper bag with confectioner's sugar. Keep tightly covered.
Become softer the longer kept.




QUICK CHOCOLATE CAKE


    1 C sour milk or buttermilk
    1 C brown or white sugar
    1 egg
    2 sq baking chocolate
    2 T shortening
    1 t vanilla
    1 t baking soda
    11/2 C flour

Dissolve sugar in milk. Add egg and beat well. Melt chocolate and
shortening together. Add other ingredients in order given beating well
after each addition. Bake in moderate oven in greased 8" baking pan or
in cupcake tins.




GERMAN SWEET CHOCOLATE CAKE.


    1/2 C shortening
    2 C brown sugar
    2 eggs
    1 cake Germain's Sweet Chocolate dissolved in 1/2 C hot water
    1 C sour milk with 1/2 t soda
    2 2/3 C flour
    2 t baking pdr.
    1/8 t salt


Frosting

    2 oz. bitter chocolate
    1 C powdered sugar
    1 egg
    1 t vanilla
    1/4 C milk
    1 T soft butter

Cream shortening and sugar. Add eggs. Beat well. Add chocolate, and then
milk and dry ingredients alternately. Bake in 3 8" pans at 350 deg. until
tester comes out clean.

When cool ice with frosting.

_Frosting_: Melt chocolate. Mix 1 C sugar, egg, vanilla, milk and
butter. Place bowl this mixture in pan of _cold_ water. Add melted
chocolate. Beat with rotary beater until stiff. For variation add 2
drops peppermint extract.




LEMON MERINGUE PIE


    5 T corn starch
    2 C water
    1 C sugar
    1/4 t salt
    3 eggs (slightly beaten)
    2 T butter
    5 T lemon juice
    2 t lemon rind


Meringue:

Beat 3 egg whites stiff, adding 6 T sugar. Bake for 15 minutes in 325 deg.
oven. After it has become brown turn off oven and let cool in oven.

Mix corn starch with 1/2 C water in top of double boiler. Blend in sugar
and salt. Add remainder of water. Stir constantly over low heat until
mixture boils. Cover and cook over boiling water 10 minutes. Gradually
pour hot mixture over beaten egg yolks. Stirring constantly return to
double boiler and cook 2 minutes longer. Remove from heat, add butter,
lemon juice and rind. Mix well and cool. Pour into 8" pie shell.




SINGLE 8" PIE CRUST


    1 C flour
    1/2 t salt
    1/3 C shortening
    21/2 T water

Sift together flour and salt. Cut in shortening until it is the size of
peas. Sprinkle the water over the mixture and make into ball. Roll out
on floured board. Build up fluted edge and prick bottom with fork to
prevent puffing. Bake for 10-12 minutes in 475 deg. oven.




QUICK LOAF CAKE


    2 eggs
    1 C sugar
    1 C flour
    1 t baking pdr.
    1/4 t salt
    1/2 C milk, scalded
    2 T melted shortening

Beat eggs until very light with rotary beater. Add baking powder and
salt and mix well. Melt shortening in hot milk and add all at once to
egg mixture. Fold in flour. Bake in greased loaf pan in a moderate oven
until brown.




SEVEN-MINUTE FROSTING IN THREE MINUTES


    2 egg whites
    1 C brown sugar firmly packed
    1/2 C water
    dash salt
    1 t vanilla extract

Place all ingredients except vanilla extract in a double boiler; mix
well. Cook over boiling water, beating with beater until mixture holds
peaks, about 3 minutes. Remove from heat, add vanilla and beat until of
spreading consistency (not usually necessary).

note: If very dark brown sugar is used, omit the vanilla since the
frosting will have a caramel taste. Use the vanilla with yellow sugar.




ECONOMY SPONGE CAKE


    6 egg yolks
    1 cup sugar
    1/2 C hot water
    11/2 C cake flour sifted 4 times (once before measuring)
    2 t baking pdr.
    1/2 t salt
    1 t lemon extract
    nutmeg if desired

Beat egg yolks until lemon colored. Add sugar, hot water and stir
until sugar dissolved. Sift dry ingredients into egg mixture, beating
constantly. Add flavoring, and beat five hundred times (2 or 3 minutes
on mixer).

Bake in chimney pan at 325 deg.-350 deg. for 45 minutes or longer until tester
comes out clean. Invert on chimney to cool. Cut as Angel food.




WHIPPED CREAM FROSTING


    1 C whipping cream
    2 t powdered coffee
    4 T powdered sugar
    1/2 t vanilla flavoring
      or
    1/2 t rum flavoring
      or
    1/4 t almond flavoring
    4 T cocoa
    dash salt

Mix cream with coffee or cocoa or both. Add sugar, one of the flavorings
and salt. Beat until stiff and use to frost any kind of chocolate,
white, yellow, chiffon or sponge type cake. Do not use with fruit
flavored cakes.

note: The coffee & cocoa makes a mocha flavored frosting. This is a very
stiff mixture and may be thinned with light cream to make spreading
easier.

The coffee alone, without cocoa used on devil's food cake is especially
good. The cocoa, without the coffee, makes a lightly flavored chocolate
frosting.




PICKLED WATERMELON RIND


    7 lbs. rind (skinned)
    31/2 lb. gran. sugar
    1 pt. white vinegar
    1/2 t oil of cloves
    1/2 t oil of cinnamon

Wash rind, and cut into desired size, 1"x1", or oblong. Cover rind with
boiling water. Parboil in this water until the rind can be pierced with
a fork, but not too soft. Bring sirup, made of remaining ingredients,
to boil. Pour over drained rind. Cover tightly and put in cool place
overnight. In the morning drain off sirup, boil for few minutes and pour
over rind again. Do the same thing the next morning. On 3rd morning heat
rind in sirup slowly until boiling. Fill sterilized jars, cover with wax
and seal.




CHEESE STRAWS


    2 C flour
    1/4 t salt
    1/2 C shortening
    11/2 C grated cheese
    2 t Worcestershire sauce
    cayenne pepper

Sift flour and salt. Cut in shortening and grated cheese. Mix with
Worcestershire sauce until blended. Press into a ball and roll on
floured board to 1/4 inch thickness. Cut in strips about 1/2 inch wide.
Bake in hot oven 8-10 minutes until golden brown. Sprinkle very lightly
with cayenne pepper if desired.




CLAM DIP FOR POTATO CHIPS


    1 clove garlic
    6 oz. cream cheese
    1 t Worcestershire sauce (op)
    1 t lemon juice
    1/2 t salt
    1/2 C minced clams
    1 T clam juice

Rub bowl with garlic. Blend cheese with seasonings. Add drained clams
and juices. Chill.




ALL PURPOSE PASTRY


    3 C flour
    1 C vegetable shortening (not margarine)
    2 T sugar
    1 t salt
    1/2-3/4 C ice water

Cut shortening into sifted dry ingredients. Add ice water and work
quickly into a ball of dough. Wrap in wax paper and towel and place in
refrigerator.

Use as needed. Keeps indefinitely. Can be used for filled meat patties,
fruit horns, pies etc.




WAFFLES


    1 C flour
    3 t baking pdr.
    1/2 t salt
    3 eggs separated
    11/4 C milk
    1/4 C melted shortening
    1 C cornmeal

Mix and sift dry ingredients. Combine well-beaten egg yolks and milk.
Add to flour mixture, beating until smooth. Add shortening and fold in
stiffly beaten egg whites. Bake in hot waffle iron. Yield--6 waffles




HUSH PUPPIES


    1/2 C corn meal
    1/4 C flour
    1 t baking pdr.
    salt
    1 T shortening (veg)
    1 egg
    milk to make dough

Mix ingredients and form into balls. Brown in deep fat.




BUTTERMILK PANCAKES


    1 egg, beaten
    1 C buttermilk
    1 C flour
    1 t salt
    3 t sugar
    1 t soda dissolved in a little hot water
    1 T butter melted
    1 t baking pdr.

Add ingredients in order given, mixing well after each addition. Bake on
hot, lightly greased griddle.




BUCCELLATE (Italian Bread)


    1/4 lb. butter
    11/2 C sugar
    2 eggs separated
    21/2 t baking pdr.
    1 C milk
    31/2 C flour
    1 handful anise seed
    1 t vanilla extract

Cream butter and sugar. Add egg yolks and beat well. Add milk and beat
well. Mix in dry ingredients. Add stiffly beaten egg whites and beat
well. Bake in well greased pan at 350 deg. until brown.




BIRCHER MUES


_for each serving_

    5 heaping teaspoons quick-cooking oatmeal (raw)
    1 apple, banana or berries
    1 T lemon juice
    1 T sweetened condensed milk (or sugar & milk or honey & milk)
    few chopped walnut meats
    1 t wheat germ (op)

In each bowl put the oatmeal, and cover with water to moisten. Add
grated apple, thinly sliced banana, fresh berries or a combination of
these. Add juice and milk; nuts and wheat germ.




SOUP BALLS (Kneidlach)


    3 eggs
    1 medium onion, chopped or grated
    1 t salt
    matzo or cracker meal
    4 T chicken fat, melted

Beat eggs until light & foamy. Add other ingredients. Enough meal should
be added so a loose dough is formed. Put in refrigerator to chill.
The dough will become stiffer when cold. Form into balls the size of
a walnut and drop into boiling chicken soup. Cover and let cook 15
minutes. Serve with soup or as a meat garnish.




BUCKWHEAT KNISHES (Dumplings)


    1/2 lb. buckwheat groats (medium grind)
    4 eggs
    3 C flour
    2 T butter
    1/2 lb. potatoes, boiled
    3 onions, chopped
    2 t salt
    6 C boiling water

note: The recipe for filling can be used as a base for gravy to be
served with meat. (Kasha)

The stuffing: Mix the buckwheat with 1 egg and place into the oven for
10 or 15 minutes. When the buckwheat is browned add to the boiling
water. Add 1 teas. salt, 1 tablespoon of butter and allow to boil 30
minutes on slow fire. Fry the onions and mix with the buckwheat.

The dough: Mash the potatoes; add 3 eggs, 1 teaspoon salt. Add flour and
knead a thin dough. Cut the dough into sections; place some buckwheat
mixture on each and roll into a dumpling. Bake in buttered pan in oven
for 35 minutes, moderate temperature.




NEVER FAIL HOT CAKES


    1 C flour
    1 t baking pdr.
    1/2 t salt
    1 T sugar
    1 egg, beaten
    3/4 C milk
    3 T melted shortening

Sift dry ingredients together. Combine egg and milk and add gradually
to dry ingredients to make smooth batter (beat with rotary beater). Add
shortening. Drop batter on hot, greased baking sheet. (do not re-grease
sheet between bakings). Makes about one dozen.




    Transcriber's notes:

    The following is a list of changes made to the original.

    BAKED SNAPPER CUBA:

    "sexared" changed to "seared"

    LASAGNE:

    "organo" changed to "oregano" in list of ingredients

    BEEF PORCUPINE:

    "hamberger" changed to "hamburger" in list of ingredients

    SOUR CREAM VEAL STEW:

    "bouillion" changed to "bouillon" in list of ingredients

    HOT SLAW--GERMAN CABBAGE:

    "wate water" changed to "water"

    SALADS:

    "mild" changed to "milk"

    SOFT CHOCOLATE FROSTING:

    "margerine" changed to "margarine" in list of ingredients

    RANGER COOKIES:

    "Crean" changed to "Cream"
    "soze" changed to "size"

    STRUDEL:

    "raisens" changed to "raisins" in list of ingredients

    GERMAN SWEET CHOCOLATE CAKE:

    Repeated "in" removed from
    "Place bowl this mixture in in pan of _cold_ water."

    LEMON MERINGUE PIE:

    "sligthly" changed to "slightly" in list of ingredients

    SINGLE 8" PIE CRUST:

    "Buil" changed to "Build"

    CLAM DIP FOR POTATO CHIPS

    "Worstershire" changed to "Worcestershire" in list of ingredients

    ALL PURPOSE PASTRY:

    "margerine" changed to "margarine" in list of ingredients
    "indefinately" changed to "indefinitely"

    BIRCHER MUES:

    "teasoons" changed to "teaspoons" in list of ingredients





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Friendship Club Cook Book, by
The Friendship Club of Madison WI

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRIENDSHIP CLUB COOK BOOK ***

***** This file should be named 42631.txt or 42631.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/6/3/42631/

Produced by Dianna Adair, Paul Clark, UW Digital Collections
Center, University of Wisconsin; Friendship Club (Madison,
WI) and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
