The Project Gutenberg EBook of A History of the City of Brooklyn and Kings
County Volume II, by Stephen M. Ostrander

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A History of the City of Brooklyn and Kings County Volume II

Author: Stephen M. Ostrander

Editor: Alexander Black

Release Date: May 14, 2013 [EBook #42712]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF BROOKLYN, KINGS CNTY, VOL 2 ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Charlie Howard, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









Transcriber's note: Volume I of this eBook is available at Project
Gutenberg as eText #41979.


[Illustration: VILLAGE OF BROOKLYN IN 1816]




    A HISTORY
    OF THE
    CITY OF BROOKLYN
    AND
    KINGS COUNTY

    BY

    STEPHEN M. OSTRANDER, M.A.

    LATE MEMBER OF THE HOLLAND SOCIETY, THE LONG ISLAND HISTORICAL
    SOCIETY, AND THE SOCIETY OF OLD BROOKLYNITES

    _EDITED, WITH INTRODUCTION AND NOTES, BY_

    ALEXANDER BLACK

    AUTHOR OF "THE STORY OF OHIO," ETC.

    IN TWO VOLUMES

    VOLUME II.

    BROOKLYN
    Published by Subscription
    1894




    Copyright 1894,
    BY ANNIE A. OSTRANDER.

    _All rights reserved._


    This edition is limited to five hundred
    copies, of which this is No. 21




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER IX

  BROOKLYN AFTER THE REVOLUTION

  1784-1810

  Effect of the British Occupation on Life and Business in the
    County. Brooklyn particularly disturbed. Town Meetings
    resumed. The Prison Ships and their Terrible Legacy.
    Tragedies of the Wallabout. Movement to honor the Dead.
    Burial of the Remains. The Tammany Enterprise and the
    Removal of the Bones. Further Removal to Fort Greene.
    Organization of the Brooklyn Fire Department. The Ferry.
    The Mail Stage. New Roads. Planning "Olympia." Early
    Advertisements. Circulating Library and Schools. The
    Rain-water Doctor. Kings County Medical Society. Flatlands.
    Gravesend. Flatbush, the County Seat. Mills. Erasmus Hall.
    New Utrecht. Bushwick, its Church, Tavern, Graveyard,
    and Mills. The Boundary Dispute. The Beginnings of
    Williamsburgh. Rival Ferries. "The Father of Williamsburgh"     1


  CHAPTER X

  BROOKLYN VILLAGE

  1811-1833

  Brooklyn during the "Critical Period" in American History.
    The Embargo and the War of 1812. Military Preparations.
    Fortifications. Fort Greene and Cobble Hill. Peace. Robert
    Fulton. The "Nassau's" First Trip. Progress of Fulton
    Ferry. The Village incorporated. First Trustees. The
    Sunday-School Union. Long Island Bank. Board of Health. The
    Sale of Liquor. Care of the Poor. Real Estate. Village
    Expenses. Guy's Picture of Brooklyn in 1820. The Village
    of that Period. Characters of the Period. Old Families
    and Estates. The County Courts removed to Brooklyn.
    Apprentices' Library. Prisoners at the Almshouse. Growth
    of the Village. The Brooklyn "Evening Star." Movement for
    Incorporation as a City. Opposition of New York. Passage of
    the Incorporation Act                                          47


  CHAPTER XI

  THE CITY OF BROOKLYN

  1834-1860

  Government of the City. George Hall, first Mayor. Plans
    for a City Hall. Contention among the Aldermen. Albert
    G. Stevens and the Clerkship. The Jamaica Railroad. Real
    Estate. The "Brooklyn Eagle." Walt Whitman. Henry C.
    Murphy. Brooklyn City Railroad. The City Court established.
    County Institutions. The Penitentiary. Packer Institute
    and the Polytechnic. Williamsburgh becomes a City.
    Progress of Williamsburgh. Mayor Wall and the Aldermen.
    Discussion of Annexation with Brooklyn. The "Brooklyn
    Times." Consolidation of the Two Cities. Mayor Hall's
    Address. Nassau Water Company and the Introduction of
    Ridgewood Water. Plans for New Court House. Proposal
    to use Washington Park. County Cares and Expenditures.
    Metropolitan Police                                            80


  CHAPTER XII

  THE PERIOD OF THE CIVIL WAR

  1861-1865

  Election of Mayor Kalbfleisch. The Call for Troops. The
    Militia. Filling the Regiments. Money for Equipment.
    Rebuking Disloyalty. War Meeting at Fort Greene. Work of
    Women. The County sends 10,000 Men in 1861. Launching of
    the Monitor at Greenpoint. The Draft Riots. Colonel Wood
    elected Mayor. Return of the "Brooklyn Phalanx." The
    Sanitary Fair. Its Features and Successes. The Calico Ball.
    Significance of the Fair. The Christian Commission. Action
    of the Supervisors of the County. The Oceanus Excursion.
    Storrs and Beecher at Sumter. News of Lincoln's Death.
    Service of the National Guard. The "Fighting Fourteenth."
    The Newspapers. Court House finished                          117


  CHAPTER XIII

  BROOKLYN AFTER THE WAR

  1866-1876

  Administration of Samuel Booth. Metropolitan Sanitary
    District created. Cholera. Erie Basin Docks. The County
    Institutions and their Work. The Gowanus Canal and the
    Wallabout Improvement. The Department of Survey and
    Inspection of Buildings. Establishing Fire Limits. Building
    Regulations. Prospect Park. The Ocean Parkway. The Fire
    Department. The Public Schools. The East River Bridge.
    Early Discussion of the Great Enterprise. The Construction
    begun. Death of Roebling. The Ferries. Messages of Mayor
    Kalbfleisch. Erection of a Brooklyn Department of Police.
    Samuel S. Powell again Mayor. A New City Charter. Movement
    toward Consolidation with New York. Henry Ward Beecher.
    Frederick A. Schroeder elected Mayor                          132


  CHAPTER XIV

  THE MODERN CITY

  1877-1893

  Rapid Transit. James Howell, Jr., elected Mayor. Work on
    the Bridge. Passage of "Single Head" Bill. John Fiske
    on the "Brooklyn System." Seth Low elected Mayor. His
    Interpretation of the "Brooklyn System." Reelection of Low.
    Opening of the Bridge. Bridge Statistics. Ferries and Water
    Front. Erie Basin. The Sugar Industry. Navy Yard. Wallabout
    Market. Development of the City. Prospect Park. Theatres
    and Public Buildings. National Guard. Public Schools.
    Brooklyn Institute. Private Educational Institutions.
    Libraries. Churches, Religious Societies, Hospitals, and
    Benevolent Associations. Clubs. Literature, Art, and Music.
    The Academy of Music. "The City of Homes"                     167

  APPENDIX                                                        235

  INDEX                                                           271




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


VOLUME II

  VILLAGE OF BROOKLYN IN 1816. (From the Village Map
    of Jeremiah Lott, 1816, and the Map by Poppleton
    and Lott in 1819, showing Pierrepont and
    adjacent Estates)                              _Frontispiece_

  EARLY FERRY ADVERTISEMENT. (From Historical
    Sketch of Fulton Ferry and its Associated
    Ferries, 1879)                                  _Facing page_  28

  FERRY PASSAGE CERTIFICATE, 1816                                  40

  FULTON FERRY BOAT WM. CUTTING, BUILT IN 1827. (From
    Historical Sketch of Fulton Ferry)                             62

  GUY'S SNOW SCENE IN BROOKLYN, 1820. (From the Painting
    owned by the Brooklyn Institute)                               70

  FAC-SIMILE (same size) OF LETTER BY WALT WHITMAN IN
    POSSESSION OF CHARLES M. SKINNER, ESQ., BROOKLYN               90

  CRUISER BROOKLYN, BUILT IN 1858                                 122

  STATUE OF HENRY WARD BEECHER IN FRONT OF CITY HALL.
    (From a Drawing by H. D. Eggleston)                           140

  STATUE OF J. S. T. STRANAHAN AT THE ENTRANCE
    TO PROSPECT PARK. (From a Drawing by H. D. Eggleston)         180

  STATUE OF ALEXANDER HAMILTON IN FRONT OF HAMILTON CLUB HOUSE    200


  APPENDIX

  CHART SHOWING EAST RIVER SOUNDINGS AND PIER LINES               262




HISTORY OF BROOKLYN




CHAPTER IX

BROOKLYN AFTER THE REVOLUTION

1784-1810


  Effect of the British Occupation on Life and Business in the
    County. Brooklyn particularly disturbed. Town Meetings resumed.
    The Prison Ships and their Terrible Legacy. Tragedies of the
    Wallabout. Movement to honor the Dead. Burial of the Remains.
    The Tammany Enterprise and the Removal of the Bones. Further
    Removal to Fort Greene. Organization of the Brooklyn Fire
    Department. The Ferry. The Mail Stage. New Roads. Planning
    "Olympia." Early Advertisements. Circulating Library and
    Schools. The Rain-water Doctor. Kings County Medical Society.
    Flatlands. Gravesend. Flatbush, the County Seat. Mills. Erasmus
    Hall. New Utrecht. Bushwick, its Church, Tavern, Graveyard, and
    Mills. The Boundary Dispute. The Beginnings of Williamsburgh.
    Rival Ferries. "The Father of Williamsburgh."


During the whole period of the Revolution Brooklyn had been peculiarly
disturbed. More than any other of the county towns, it had been
distracted and prostrated. Farms had been pillaged and the property
of exiled Whigs given over to Tory friends of the Governor. Military
occupation naturally resulted in great damage to property. "Farmers
were despoiled of their cattle, horses, swine, poultry, vegetables,
and of almost every necessary article of subsistence, except their
grain, which fortunately had been housed before the invasion. Their
houses were also plundered of every article which the cupidity of a
lawless soldiery deemed worthy of possession, and much furniture was
wantonly destroyed. At the close of this year's campaign, De Heister,
the Hessian general, returned to Europe with a shipload of plundered
property."[1] While the other towns were receiving pay for the board
of prisoners, and thus being justified in maintaining their crops,
Brooklyn remained a garrison town until the end.

After the evacuation, Brooklyn's farmers and tradesmen at once turned
their attention to the restoration of the orderly conditions existing
before the war. It also became necessary to reorganize the local
government. In April, 1784, was held the first town meeting since
April, 1776. Jacob Sharpe was chosen town clerk, and Leffert Lefferts,
the previous clerk, was called upon to produce the town records. The
result of this demand has already been described in the reference to
the missing records.

Before proceeding further with the narrative of Brooklyn's growth
after the Revolution, it will be necessary to return for a moment to
certain sad circumstances that followed the battle of Brooklyn and
other successes of the British. The battle of Long Island was fought
August 27, 1776, and Fort Washington was captured in November. These
victories gave the British between 4000 and 5000 prisoners. At that
time there were only two small jails in New York city. One was called
the Bridewell, and was situated in Broadway near Chambers Street,
and the other was known as the New Jail. These prisons could not
accommodate the daily increasing number of prisoners. It was a dark
hour in American history; success seemed to perch upon the banners of
the enemy. Large accessions of prisoners were made, and quarters had
to be provided for them. The churches were taken without ceremony and
converted into receptacles for the captives. The sugar-houses were used
for the same purpose. One of these was situated in Liberty Street,
adjoining the old Middle Dutch Church. That church was also used.
Within its walls thousands of prisoners were placed, regardless of
comfort or sanitary rules. If its walls could speak they would tell a
tale which would make a sad record.

The old North Dutch Church on the corner of Fair Street and Horse and
Cart Lane (now Fulton and William streets) was also used as a prison
pen, and within its walls a thousand persons were held. Within a few
years this venerable landmark has succumbed to the march of progress.

The infamous Cunningham was at this time provost marshal of the city.
He possessed the instincts of a brute, and often seemed to own the
spirit of a demon. The sick and dying received no sympathy or care from
him. Healthy men were placed in the same room with those having the
smallpox and other maladies. Prisoners were not allowed sufficient food
or bedding, and their clothes were scanty. The food was not fit to give
to the beasts. The men must have reached the verge of starvation to
induce them to partake of the unwholesome mess of wormy and mouldy food
dealt out to them. The allowance made to the men was a loaf of bread,
one quart of peas, half a pint of rice, and one and a half pounds
of pork for six days. Large numbers died from want, privation, and
exhaustion. So crowded were these prisons that there was no room to lie
down and rest. The impure atmosphere engendered disease. Every morning
the cry was heard, "Rebels, bring out your dead." All who had died
during the night were carelessly thrown into the dead-cart and carried
to the trenches in the neighborhood of Canal Street, and buried without
a vestige of ceremony.

But the horrors of the city prisons were more than repeated in the
tragedies of the prison ships in the bend of the Wallabout. The first
vessels used were the freight transports which had been employed in
conveying troops to Staten Island in 1776. These transports were for a
short time anchored in Gravesend Bay, and received the prisoners taken
on Long Island. When New York was conquered they were removed to the
city. The Good Hope and Scorpion for a while were anchored off the
Battery, and subsequently were taken to Wallabout Bay, and with other
vessels were used as prisons. Two vessels at a time were kept in this
service. Among the vessels thus used were the Whitley, Falmouth, Prince
of Wales, Scorpion, Bristol, and Old Jersey.

In 1780 one of the vessels was burned by the unhappy captives, who
hoped thereby to regain their liberty. The effort was unsuccessful,
and the prisoners were removed to the Old Jersey, which continued in
service until the end of the war.

Wallabout Bay had the shape of a horse-shoe. The Jersey was anchored at
a point which is now represented by the west end of the Cob Dock. If
Cumberland Street were continued in a straight line to a point between
the Navy Yard proper and the Cob Dock, it would pass over the spot
where this vessel was anchored.

Historians agree in saying that the treatment on all these vessels
was alike, and that the Jersey was not exceptional. The Jersey was
the largest of all, and having remained in service for so long a time
had the most prisoners. On that account she has attracted the most
attention.

The crew on board each ship consisted of a captain, mates, steward, a
few sailors and marines, and about thirty soldiers. Each prisoner on
his arrival was carefully searched for arms and valuables. His name
and rank were duly registered. He was allowed to retain his clothing
and bedding, and to use these, but during confinement was supplied
with nothing additional. The examination having been completed, he
was conducted to the hold of the vessel, to become the companion of a
thousand other patriots, many of whom were covered with rags and filth,
and pale and emaciated from the constant inhalation of the pestiferous
and noxious atmosphere which impregnated the vessel. Strong men could
not long resist inroads of sickness and disease. Many were taken down
with typhus fever, dysentery, and smallpox. The vessel was filled
continually with the vilest malaria. The guns were removed, portholes
securely fastened, and in their place were two tiers of lights to
admit air. Each of these air holes was about twenty inches square,
and fastened by cross-bars to prevent escape. The steward supplied
each mess with a daily allowance of biscuit, pork or beef, and rancid
butter. The food was of the poorest which could be obtained, and of
itself was sufficient to breed disease. The biscuits were mouldy and
worm-eaten, the flour was sour, and the meat badly tainted. It was
cooked in a common kettle, which was never cleaned, with impure water,
and became a slow but sure poison. The prisoners were kept in the
holds between the two decks, and the lower dungeon was used for the
foreigners who had enlisted in freedom's cause. Here again the morning
salutation was, "Rebels, bring out your dead." The command was obeyed,
and all who had found relief in death were brought upon deck. Prisoners
were allowed to sew a blanket over the remains of their dead companions
before burial. The dead were taken in boats to the shore, put in holes
dug in the sand, and carelessly covered. Frequently they were washed
from their resting place by the incoming tide. Often while walking
along the old Wallabout road, between Cumberland Street and the Navy
Yard, I have seen the remains of the gallant patriots who lost their
lives on the Jersey. In the "'fifties" of the present century it was no
uncommon thing for pieces of bone and human skulls to be dug up on the
borders of the old road.

The only relief the prisoners had was permission to remain on deck
until sunset. When the golden orb of day sunk beneath the horizon, the
ears of all were saluted with the obnoxious cry, "Down, rebels, down."
When all had retired to the hold, the hatchway was closed, leaving only
a small trap open to admit air. At this trapdoor a sentinel was placed,
with instructions to allow but one man to ascend at a time during the
night. The sentinels possessed the same cruel spirit as their masters.
A prisoner who had been confined on the Jersey for fourteen months
said that, on occasions when the prisoners gathered at the hatchway
to obtain fresh air, the sentinel repeatedly thrust his bayonet among
them and killed several. These acts created a desire for revenge. Many
of the men were enabled to endure their trials by the thought that the
night of darkness would soon pass away, and the day dawn when they
could take vengeance on the scoundrels who had treated them with so
much brutality.

An instance of this determination to be revenged is narrated in the
life of Silas Talbot. It appears that two brothers belonging to the
same rifle corps were made prisoners and sent on board the Jersey. The
elder was attacked with fever and became delirious. One night, as his
end was fast approaching, reason resumed its sway, and, while lamenting
his sad fate and breathing a prayer for his mother, he begged for a
little water. His brother entreated the guard to give him some, but the
request was brutally refused. The sick boy drew near to death, and his
last struggle came. The brother offered the guard a guinea for an inch
of candle to enable him to behold the last gasping smile of love and
affection. This request was refused. "Now," said he, "if it please God
that I ever regain my liberty, I'll be a most bitter enemy." He soon
after became a free man, and, to show how well he kept his word, it is
only necessary to say that when the war closed "he had 8 large and 127
small notches in his rifle stock." These notches probably represented 8
officers and 127 privates.

On one occasion 130 men were brought to the Jersey by the villain
Sprout, who was commissary of prisoners. As he approached the black
unsightly hulk, he pointed to her sardonically, and told his captives,
"There, rebels, there is the cage for you."

The same bitter round was the daily portion of the men,--during the day
a little air and sunlight, and being compelled to listen to the curses
and imprecations of their captors, while at night they had to breathe
the stifling air between decks, and listen to the groans of the sick
and dying, without the power to give them any relief.

Some of the men were assigned to wash and scrub the decks. This of
itself was a great blessing, as it gave them occupation and additional
rations. During the night watches it was as dark as Egypt between
decks, for no sort of light was allowed. Delirious men would wander
about and stumble over their fellows. Sometimes the warning shout would
be heard, that a madman was creeping in the darkness with a knife in
his hand. At times a soldier would wake up to find that the brother at
his side had become a corpse. The soldiers in charge of the prisoners
were mostly Hessians, and were universally hated as mercenaries.

Yet no amount of cruelty could drive patriotism from the hearts of the
captives. On the 4th of July, 1782, they determined to celebrate the
anniversary in a fitting manner. On the morning of that day, they came
on deck with thirteen national flags, fastened on brooms. The flags
were seized, torn, and trampled under foot by the guards, who looked
upon the act as an insult. Nothing daunted, the men determined to have
their pleasure, and began to sing national melodies. The guards became
enraged, considered themselves insulted, and drove the prisoners below
at an early hour, at the point of the bayonet, and closed the hatches.
The prisoners again commenced to sing. At nine o'clock in the evening
an order was given requiring them to cease. This order not being
instantly complied with, the animosity of the guards was aroused, and
they descended with lanterns and lances. Terror and consternation at
once reigned supreme. The retreating prisoners were sorely pressed by
the guards, who unmercifully cut and slashed away, wounding every one
within their reach, and inflicting in many instances deadly blows.
They then returned to the deck, leaving the wounded to suffer, without
the means to have their wounds properly dressed. In consequence of
this explosion of patriotism, a new torture was devised. The men, as a
punishment, were kept below on the following day until noon, and thus
were prevented from the enjoyment of the sun and air for six long weary
hours. During this time they were also deprived of rations and water.
As a result of the night's diabolism ten dead bodies were brought on
deck in the morning.

To show the heartlessness of the guards, an incident is narrated of a
man who was supposed to be dead, and had been sewed up in his hammock
and carried on deck preparatory to burial. He was observed to move,
and the attention of the officer in charge was called to the fact that
he was still living. "In with him," said the officer; "if he is not
dead, he soon will be." The sailor took a knife, cut open the hammock,
and discovered that the man was still alive. Doubtless many men who had
swooned away were buried alive.

At the time of these occurrences, the government did not possess the
ability to make exchanges. The captives on the prison ships were mostly
privateersmen, and, not being in the regular Continental service,
Congress was unwilling to restore healthy soldiers to the ranks of
the enemy, thereby adding to their strength without a full and exact
equivalent.

The Americans had entered into an agreement to exchange officer for
officer and soldier for soldier. They had but few naval prisoners, and
thus could make no exchange for the unfortunate ones on these ships.
Our authorities were compelled to let their captives on the water go
at large, for want of suitable places to keep them. Washington took
a lively interest in the matter, and entered into a correspondence
with Henry Clinton and Admiral Digby on the subject, threatening
retaliation. He, however, threatened and expostulated in vain.

The American rebels were urged by the British officers to enter their
service. Some did enlist, with the hope uppermost in their minds that
they would be able to desert.

The prisoners were released at the close of the war. The old Jersey was
destroyed, and its decaying timbers became buried in the mud.

The bones of the prison-ship martyrs lay for many years bleaching on
the banks of Wallabout Bay, where they had been rudely buried by the
British. The action of the tide upon the sandy banks gradually washed
away the little earth which had been thrown over them, thereby causing
the sacred relics to become exposed to view. The attention of Congress
was frequently called to the necessity of providing a suitable resting
place for these honored remains. The sight of these bones strewn upon
the banks of the bay was enough to awaken the interest of the nation.
At last the citizens of Brooklyn became aroused, and at a town meeting
held in 1792, a resolution was passed requesting John Jackson, who
had collected a large number of the bones on his farm, which then
included the land now used by the Navy Yard, to allow the relics in his
possession and under his control to be removed to the Reformed Dutch
Church graveyard for burial, and a monument erected over them. General
Jeremiah Johnson was the chairman of the committee. The application
was refused, Jackson having other intentions as to their interment.
Jackson was a blunt man, and a firm believer in the principles of
Democracy as enunciated by Jefferson. He was one of the sachems of the
Tammany Society or Columbian Order.

He had several hogsheads full of bones which he had collected upon the
beach. To consummate his plan he offered to the Tammany Society a plot
in his farm for land whereon a suitable monument might be erected.

Tammany accepted the trust, and in February, 1803, entered actively
upon the work. The society at once proposed and caused to be presented
to Congress a stirring and forcible memorial on the subject. Congress,
however, came to no determination in the matter, and the matter
remained quiescent until 1808. Between the time of the acceptance of
the offer by Tammany and the action by Congress in 1808, Benjamin
Aycrigg, a prominent and influential citizen, became greatly interested
in the measure. In the summer of 1805, noticing the exposed condition
of these remains on the beach of the bay, his patriotic heart was
horrified by the sight; his soul was filled with indignation that steps
had not been taken to have them decently interred. He, in the same
year, made a contract with an Irishman living at the Wallabout to
collect all the exposed bones. The remains thus collected formed a part
of those subsequently placed in the vault erected on the Jackson lot by
the Tammany Society.

In 1808 Tammany again renewed its labors. At a meeting of the society
a committee was appointed, called the Wallabout Committee, consisting
of Jacob Vandervoort, John Jackson, Burdett Stryker, Issachar Cozzens,
Robert Townsend, Jr., Benjamin Watson, and Samuel Coudrey. This
committee was deeply interested in the work, and used every available
means to enlist public sympathy and assistance. Memorials were prepared
and circulated, and appeals made through the press and otherwise,
urging the citizens to come forward and aid the sacred cause. In their
efforts they did not confine themselves to New York, but sought to
create a national interest in the undertaking. The patriotism of the
people was appealed to, and the effort was crowned with success. When
the subject was thus forcibly presented, the citizens of the young
republic realized their obligation to provide a proper burial place
for the dust and bones of her brave sons, through whose death the
nation rose into existence. The measure was presented in a way which
could not be resisted. The inhabitants of all sections became greatly
interested, and nobly responded to the call, and the committee, finding
so many ready to aid, assist, and approve, were enabled to commence
the erection of the structure much sooner than they had at first
anticipated.

The spot given was situated in Jackson Street (now Hudson Avenue), near
York Street, abutting the Navy Yard wall. The street was named after
the owner of the land. The name was afterward changed to Hudson Avenue.

The land was formally deeded by Jackson to the Tammany Society in 1803.
When all things were ready the society caused the remains collected by
Jackson, with all the bones found upon the beach, to be committed to
the tomb with appropriate ceremonies.

The arrangements for laying the corner-stone were completed, and the
13th of April, 1808, fixed for that interesting ceremony. The order of
exercises was as follows: At eleven o'clock the procession formed at
the ferry, foot of Main Street, marched through that street to Sands
Street, thence to Bridge Street, along Bridge to York Street, through
York Street to Jackson, and thence to the ground.

As Major Aycrigg had ever manifested unabated interest in this labor of
love, he was properly selected as grand marshal of the day.

The first division of the procession consisted of a company of United
States marines, under command of Lieutenant-Commandant Johnson. The
second division was composed of citizens of New York and Brooklyn. The
third division embraced the committees of the various civic societies.
The fourth division contained the Grand Sachem of the Tammany Society,
Father of the Council, and orator of the day. The fifth division
carried the corner-stone with the following inscription:--

    IN THE NAME OF
    THE SPIRITS OF THE DEPARTED FREE.
    Sacred to the memory of that portion of
    AMERICAN FREEMEN, SOLDIERS AND CITIZENS,
    who perished on board the
    PRISON SHIPS OF THE BRITISH
    at the Wallabout during the
    REVOLUTION.
    This corner-stone of the vault erected by the
    TAMMANY SOCIETY
    OR COLUMBIAN ORDER

    Nassau Island, Season of Blossoms, year of the discovery
    the 316th, of the institution the 19th, and of the American
    Independence the 22d.

    JACOB VANDERVOORT,     }
    JOHN JACKSON,          }
    BURDETT STRYKER,       } Wallabout
    ISSACHAR COZZENS,      } Committee.
    ROBERT TOWNSEND, JR.,  }
    BENJAMIN WATSON,       }
    SAMUEL COUDREY,        }

    Daniel and William Campbell, builders, April 6, 1808.


The sixth division was composed of a detachment of artillery under
command of Lieutenant Townsend.

The procession having reached the ground, the artillery were stationed
upon a neighboring hill, and the various divisions took the positions
assigned them.

The oration, which was a brilliant effort, was delivered by Joseph
D. Foy. The stone was then lowered to its place and duly laid by
Benjamin Romaine, Grand Sachem of the Tammany Society, assisted by
the committee, after which a grand salute was fired, and the band
discoursed sweet and solemn notes.

The vault was completed in May, 1808. Arrangements were made for an
imposing display, and no pains were spared in preparation. The various
societies and public bodies were ready and anxious to do all in their
power to render the occasion impressive and memorable. The citizens
turned out _en masse_ on the 26th of May, 1808, to bear testimony to
the worth of these brave men whose obsequies were to be celebrated.
They assembled at ten o'clock in the park in front of the City Hall,
New York, under command of Brigadier Generals Morton and Steddiford,
Garret Sickels, Grand Marshal, assisted by twelve aides.

The inscription on the pedestal was as follows:--

    [Front.]
    AMERICANS REMEMBER THE BRITISH.
    [Right side.]
    YOUTH OF MY COUNTRY
    MARTYRDOM PREFERRED TO SLAVERY.
    [Left side.]
    SIRES OF COLUMBIA
    transmit to posterity the cruelties practiced on board the
    "BRITISH PRISON SHIPS."
    [Rear.]
    "Tyrants dread the gathering storm
    While Freemen, Freemen's Obsequies perform."

The orator of the day was Dr. Benjamin DeWitt, who delivered an able
and patriotic address to the assembled multitude. He feelingly depicted
the sufferings endured in British dungeons, and drew tears to many eyes
by his eloquent and touching remarks, referring to the tyranny of the
oppressors and the patience of the patriots. The oration concluded, in
painful silence the coffins were committed to their resting place. Rev.
Mr. Williston then pronounced the benediction, "To the King, Immortal,
Invisible, the All-wise God, be glory everlasting, amen." The occasion
was one long remembered in both cities.

During many years these relics remained forgotten in their sepulchre.
The grade of Jackson Street was altered so as to take a part of the
sacred ground. Jackson, when he gave the land, was not far-sighted
enough to have secured the passage of an act to preserve its precincts
intact, free from invasion by streets, and exempt from taxation. The
land at one time was sold for taxes. It seemed as if the past had been
forgotten. Then it was that Benjamin Romaine came forward and purchased
the lot. In order to preserve it from desecration, he adopted it as
his family burial plot. He resolved to be buried there himself, and
placed within the vault a coffin designed for his mortal remains. He
constructed the ante-chamber over the tomb. Upon the property he placed
the following inscription:--

    First--The portal to the tomb of 11,500 patriot prisoners of
    war who died in dungeons and pestilential prison ships in and
    about the City of New York during the war of our Revolution.
    The top is capped with two large urns in black, and a white
    globe in the centre.

    Second--The interior of the tomb contains thirteen coffins
    assigned in the order as observed in the Declaration of
    Independence, and inserted thus--New Hampshire, Massachusetts,
    Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania,
    Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina,
    and Georgia.

    Third--Thirteen beautifully turned posts, painted white, and
    capped with a small urn in black, and between the posts the
    above-named States are fully lettered.

    Fourth--In 1778, the Colonial Congress promulgated the Federal
    League compact, though it was not finally ratified until 1781,
    only two years before the peace of 1783.

    Fifth--In 1789, our General National Convention, to form a more
    perfect unison, did ordain the present Constitution of the
    United States of America, to be one entire Sovereignty, and in
    strict adhesion to the equally necessary State rights. Such a
    republic must endure forever.

In 1842, a large number of citizens applied to the Legislature for
permission to remove the remains to a more private place. Romaine
vigorously and eloquently objected to the proposed change, and the
matter was permitted to rest quietly until after his death in 1844.
During the following year attention was again called to the forlorn
and neglected condition of the sepulchre. Henry C. Murphy was then
in Congress, representing Kings and Richmond counties. The abject
condition of the vault was brought to the notice of Congress, and
action taken. The military committee recommended an appropriation of
$20,000 to secure a permanent tomb and monument. The report was drawn
by Henry C. Murphy, whose exertions in this behalf were untiring. The
effort, however, was not successful.

Samuel Boughton, John T. Hildreth, John H. Baker, and other
public-spirited men, holding diverse political views, started
subscription papers, and published articles in the papers urging the
importance of immediate action to accomplish the praiseworthy object.

In 1855, a meeting was held and a Martyrs' Monument Association formed.
This association intended to have representatives from each State and
Territory. The committee started with commendable energy. They early
took the ground that Fort Greene was the proper site. Plans were
proposed and subscriptions solicited. For a long time nothing more was
done. The Common Council agreed to permit the use of Fort Greene. It
was not until June, 1873, that the remains of the prison-ship martyrs
were carried to the vault on the face of Fort Greene.[2]

The narrative here concluded has passed far beyond the limits
of the period to which this chapter is devoted. Turning to the
post-Revolutionary period, we find the county towns resuming a normal
course of life. The Dutchmen who gathered at the Brooklyn church
ceased to talk of war. The Episcopalians, who worshiped in John
Middagh's barn, at the corner of Henry and Poplar streets, turned from
politics to denominational questions, and the "Independents" built
a meeting-house on the Fulton Street ground afterwards taken by St.
Anne's Buildings.

We learn from the "Corporation Manual" (1869) that the first step
toward a fire department within the limits of the present city was
taken in April, 1785, by the organization of a fire-company. At a
meeting of the freeholders of the town, held at the house of Widow
Moser, in Fulton Street, near the ferry, it was agreed that the company
should be composed of seven members, who should be commissioned as
firemen for one year. They selected the following persons as the
members of the company: Henry Stanton, captain; Abraham Stoothoof,
John Doughty, Jr., Thomas Havens, J. Van Cott, and Martin Woodward.
They also voted to raise by tax the sum of L150 for the purchase of a
fire-engine. Among the regulations agreed upon for the government of
the new company was a requirement that the members should meet on the
first Saturday of each month, to play, clean, and work their engine,
and that in case of their non-attendance, upon notification from their
captain, a fine of eight shillings should be imposed upon them, and
that upon the captain, in the event of his neglecting properly to
notify the members, a fine of sixteen shillings should be imposed. The
engine was in due time procured. It was constructed by Jacob Boome,
of New York city, who had just then commenced business as the first
engine-builder ever located in that city. Previous to his time, the
fire-engines had generally been imported from England. The company
adopted the name of "Washington Engine Company No. 1," and was, up to
the time of dissolution of the Volunteer Department, still in active
existence. Their engine-house was situated in a lane, now called Front
Street, near its junction with Fulton Street.

The firemen continued to be chosen annually in town meeting, and the
appointment was much sought after as conferring respectability of
position in the community. On the 30th of April, 1787, the number of
firemen was increased to eleven, and it was resolved that each fireman
should take out a license, for which he should pay a fee of four
shillings, the sums thus accruing being appropriated to the ordinary
expenses of the company.

On the 15th of March, 1788, came the first state legislation relative
to the firemen of Brooklyn. In 1794 there were about fifty families
residing within the limits of the fire district; the entire population,
including some 100 slaves, numbering 350 souls. There were about
seventy-five buildings in the district, mainly located between what
is now called Henry Street and the ferry. Those devoted to business
purposes were generally near the ferry, where a supply of water from
the river could readily and easily be obtained. Although fires were
of exceedingly rare occurrence, and trivial in their character, yet
nine years of use, or rather disuse and decay and rust, had rendered
the engine unserviceable. In view of this fact, on the first Tuesday
of April, 1794, it was resolved in town meeting that a subscription
should be authorized to raise the funds necessary for the purchase of a
new engine. The sum of L188 19s. was speedily collected, and a new and
more powerful engine was procured. In 1795 the Legislature extended
the limits of the fire district, and increased the volunteer force to
thirty men. In town meeting it was resolved that each house should be
provided with two fire-buckets, under a penalty of two shillings for
every neglect so to provide after due notification. In 1796 a fire-bell
was purchased by popular subscription, and set up in the storehouse of
Jacob Remsen, at Fulton and Front streets, in sight of the ferry.

In the awarding of the ferry lease in 1789, it was ordered "that
the boats, together with their masts and sails, be of such form and
dimensions as the wardens of the port of New York should approve; that
each boat be constantly worked and managed by two sober, discreet, and
able-bodied experienced watermen; that each boat be always furnished
with four good oars and two boat-hooks."[3] A new ferry at Catherine
Street was established in 1795.

Although the ferry was in active operation, traveling by land was by
exceedingly primitive stages. As late as 1793, according to Furman,
there was no post-office on any part of Long Island, and no mail
carried on it. It was not until about the opening of the present
century that the first post-route was started. As late as 1835 "the
regular mail stage left Brooklyn once a week, on Thursday, having
arrived from Easthampton and Sag Harbor the afternoon of the previous
day; and this was the only conveyance travelers could then have through
this Island, unless they took a private carriage." The practice was to
leave Brooklyn about nine in the morning, to dine at Hempstead, and
then "jog on to Babylon, where they put up for the night."[4]

By the enterprise of the Flushing Bridge and Road Company, incorporated
in 1802, the distance between Flushing and Brooklyn was shortened about
four miles. Three years later the Wallabout and Brooklyn Toll Bridge
Company laid out a road extending from the Cripplebush road to the
easterly side of the Wallabout mill pond, over which a bridge connected
with Sands Street.

[Illustration: New-York and Brooklyn Ferry.

Such persons as are inclined to compound, agreeable to law, in the
Steam Ferry-Boat, Barges, or common Horse Boats, will be pleased to
apply to the subscribers, who are authorized to settle the same.

    GEORGE HICKS, Brooklyn.
    JOHN PINTARD, 52 Wall st.

     Commutation for a single person not
       transferable, for 12 months,        $10 00
       Do.    do.    8 months,               6 67
    May 3, 1814                     6m.

EARLY FERRY ADVERTISEMENT]

Within the limits of the town[5] the spirit of real estate enterprise
appeared in various quarters, but perhaps the most ambitious
undertaking was that of the holders of the Sands and Jackson tract,
surveyed in 1787, and lying on the East River between the Wallabout
and the Brooklyn ferry. To the prospective village planned for this
region was given the name of Olympia, after the habit of bestowing
classical names which began to appear in post-Revolutionary days. In
1801 John Jackson sold forty acres of Wallabout lands to the United
States for $40,000.

The columns of the "Long Island Weekly Intelligencer," published by
Roberson & Little, booksellers and stationers, at the corner of Old
Ferry and Front streets, give interesting glimpses of this period. In
1806 Henry Hewlet dealt in "general merchandise" near the Old Ferry;
John Cole was coach-maker; Dr. Lowe's office was "at the Rev. Mr.
Lowe's, corner of Red Hook Road." There was demand for five apprentices
at Amos Cheney's shipyard. Benjamin Hilton sold china, glass, and
earthenware, "at New York prices," in Old Ferry Street. Postmaster
Bunce had fifty-three letters that had not been called for.

In a later issue of the "Intelligencer" the editor remarks that he has
been "requested to suggest the propriety of each family placing lights
in front of their houses, not having the advantage of lamps, as great
inconvenience and loss of time arises from the neglect, particularly on
dark nights."

In 1808 the town appropriated $1500 for the erection of a new "poor
house." The county court house of this period was at Flatbush, then the
county seat. The old court house had been burned in 1758. The money
required to build the new court house was raised by an assessment
upon the inhabitants of the county. This building continued in use
thirty-four years, when, by reason of its dilapidated condition, a new
court house and jail were built in 1792. The court house cost $2944.71.
The contractor was Thomas Fardon, and the plans for the building were
furnished by Messrs. Stanton, Newton, and James Robertson. In referring
to the court house, Furman says that "in 1800 the court house was let
to James Simson for one year at L3 in money." In this agreement "the
justices reserved for themselves the chamber in the said house called
the court chamber, at the time of their publique sessions, courts of
common pleas, and private meetings; as also the room called the prison,
for the use of the sheriff if he had occasion for it." The building
stood for forty years, when it was destroyed by fire.

Meanwhile the hamlet of Brooklyn took on many of the characteristics
of a maturing village. Joseph B. Pierson removed from New York to
Brooklyn in 1809, and opened a circulating library on Main Street,
two doors from Sands Street. In the "Long Island Star" of June, 1809,
George Hamilton advertised a select school where "students were taught
to make their own pens." Hamilton was succeeded by John Gibbons, who in
September announced the opening of an academy for both sexes, where the
various educational branches are "taught on unerring principles." Mrs.
Gibbons was to "instruct little girls in Spelling, Reading, Sewing, and
Marking." To the notice of an evening school for young men is appended:
"N. B. Good pronunciation."

Two years later there was a private school opposite the post office;
John Mabon taught the Brooklyn Select Academy; and at the inn of
Benjamin Smith, on Christmas-eve, an exhibition was given by the pupils
of Platt Kennedy. At this time the town had a floor-cloth factory,
eight or ten looms were at work in Crichton's cotton goods manufactory,
and over one hundred people worked in rope-walks. Abraham Remsen kept
the one dry goods store at Fulton and Front streets.

Over the Black Horse tavern lived for a time the "Rain-water Doctor,"
who was consulted by people coming great distances. This strange man
dealt mostly in herbs and simples, but his specialty was rain water,
which he praised as containing power to cure all manner of ills. He
often signed himself, "Sylvan, Enemy of Human Diseases." Sylvan was
evidently the first of a long list of "rain-water" quacks, against whom
the regular practitioners of this and later periods had occasion to
contend.[6]

At the time when the census of Long Island (in 1811) estimated the
population of Brooklyn at 4402, rapid progress had also been made by
other towns in the county. Flatlands, which does not seem to have been
particularly disturbed by the British occupation,--the church and
schools continuing their regular sessions throughout the period,--built
a new church in 1794, which was painted red and sanded, and had
Lombardy poplars in front and rear. Church-going was a cold experience
in those days, the new church, like its predecessors, being without
means of heating, save the foot-stoves carried by women. It was not
until 1825 that a large wood-stove was introduced. The schoolhouse
stood within the original lines of the graveyard.

Gravesend, which had passed through an active early period, had in 1810
a population of 520. The hamlet was conservative in its habits of life
and slow in numerical growth. To reach Coney Island from Gravesend
at this time, it was necessary to ford the creek at low tide. The
Coney Island Bridge and Road Company was organized in 1823. To get
their letters the Gravesend people were obliged to go to Flatbush.[7]
The old schoolhouse, after being in service for sixty years, was in
1788 succeeded by a larger building, which was in service for half
a century. The Reformed Church records were still kept in the Dutch
language. The church was a long low building with a gallery, under
which, on the west side, were the negro quarters.

Flatbush had had a taste of the Revolutionary fighting, and suffered
considerably during the British occupation.[8]

The mill finished in 1804, on John C. Vanderveer's farm, is described
as the first mill on the island. The mills became a prominent feature
of Flatbush scenery. Clustered near them were some of the quaintest
examples of Dutch and colonial architecture that were to be found in
this country. The examples surviving to-day give a distinctive charm to
this village. In due time the stocks which had stood in front of the
court house, the near-by whipping-post,[9] and the public brew-house
all disappeared.

On the 2d of July, 1791, public notice was given of the plan for
building a county court house and jail at Flatbush. The notice stated
that the conditions would be made known by application to Charles
Doughty, Brooklyn Ferry, and that propositions in writing would be
received until July 15 by him and Johannes E. Lott, of Flatbush, and
Rutgert Van Brunt of Gravesend.

Cruger, while mayor of New York city, had his residence within the
village. Generals Howe, Clinton, and other leading Tories had their
headquarters within its limits subsequent to the battle of Brooklyn.

Erasmus Hall, at Flatbush, was erected in 1786, its charter bearing
the same date as that of the Easthampton Academy. The first public
exhibition of Erasmus Hall was held September 27, 1787, "and the
scene," says Stiles, "was graced by the presence of the Governor of
the State, several members of the Assembly, and a large concourse of
prominent gentlemen of the vicinity." The subject of public instruction
continued to be agitated in the public prints and the pulpit, and the
attention of the Legislature was repeatedly called by the Governor's
messages to the paramount need of having a regular school system
throughout the State. Finally, in 1795, that body passed "an act for
the encouragement of schools," and made an appropriation of $50,000 per
annum for five years "for the purpose of encouraging and maintaining
schools in the several cities and towns in this State in which children
of the inhabitants residing in the State shall be instructed in the
English language or be taught English grammar, arithmetic, mathematics,
and such other branches of knowledge as are most useful and necessary
to complete a good English education."

The Rev. Dr. John H. Livingston, who, with Senator John Vanderbilt,
brought about, the establishment of the academy, was succeeded as
principal by Dr. Wilson, who also held a professorship at Columbia
College. The records of the academy reveal an interesting list of
names, and the institution has held an important relation to the
educational interests of Flatbush.

New Utrecht, where the first resistance to the British forces had been
offered, and whose church had been used as a hospital and also as a
riding-school by the British officers, was quick to assume its wonted
ways after the departure of the troops when peace with England had been
declared. During the period between 1787 and 1818 the Rev. Petrus Lowe
was the pastor.[10]

The progress of Bushwick after the Revolution was noteworthy. The old
Dutch church had been built early in the last century. The dominies
from Brooklyn and Flatbush had previously ministered to the people
when occasion called. The old octagonal church received a new roof in
1790, a front gallery five years later, and so it remained until 1840.
Stiles[11] mentions Messrs. Freeman and Antonides as the earliest
pastors, and Peter Lowe as serving here until 1808. A regiment of
Hessians had their winter quarters here in 1776, barracks being put
up on the land of Abraham Luqueer, and free use being made of wood
from the Wallabout swamp. The case of Hendrick Suydam was typical.
Suydam had to give quarters in his house,[12] and the filthy habits
of these unsavory mercenaries were shockingly characteristic of this
unhappy period. Stiles mentions, among the "patriots of Bushwick," John
Provost, John A. Meserole, John I. Meserole, Jacob Van Cott, David
Miller, William Conselyea, Nicholas Wyckoff, and Alexander Whaley,
but no such list gives due honor to the service of all the Bushwick
patriots.

After the Revolution Bushwick had "three distinct settlements or
centres of population." These were "Het Dorp," the original town plot
at the junction of North Second Street and Bushwick Avenue; "Het Kivis
Padt," on the cross-roads at the junction of Bushwick Avenue and the
Flushing Road; and "Het Strand," along the East River shore. The first
mentioned was the centre of village activity, with the old church for
chief landmark.

Of the town house with its tall liberty pole, Field[13] writes: "Long
after the Revolution the old town house continued to be the high seat
of justice, and to resound with the republican roar of vociferous
electors on town meeting days. The first Tuesday in April and the
fourth of July, in each succeeding year, found Het Dorp suddenly
metamorphosed from a sleepy Dutch hamlet into a brawling, swaggering
country town, with very debauched habits. Our Dutch youth had a most
enthusiastic tendency, and ready facility in adopting the convivial
customs and uproarious festivity of the loud-voiced and arrogant
Anglo-American youngers.[14] One day the close-fisted electors of
Bushwick devised a plan for easing the public burdens by making the
town house pay part of the annual taxes, and accordingly it was
rented to a Dutch publican, who afforded shelter to the justices and
constables, and by his potent liquors contributed to furnish them with
employment.

"In this mild partnership, so quietly aiding to fill each others'
pockets, our old friend Chas. Zimmerman had a share, until he was
ousted, because he was a better customer than landlord. The services
of the church were conducted in the Dutch language until about the
year 1830. The clergyman had the care of five churches, each of which
received his spiritual services in turn. The homely but pious men who
performed these duties were sometimes learned and dignified gentlemen,
always a little aristocratic in their ways, for the dominie of a Dutch
colony was an important functionary, whom the Governor-General himself
could not snub with impunity. One of their self-indulgent customs would
strike a modern community with horror. On arriving at the church,
just before the time for Sunday service, the good dominie was wont to
refresh himself from the fatigue of his long ride with a glass of some
of the potent liquors of the time at the bar of the town house.

"At last the electors of Bushwick got tired of keeping a hotel, and
unanimously quit-claimed their title to the church. Some time after the
venerable structure [the town house] was sold to an infidel Yankee,
at whose bar the good dominie could no longer feel free to take an
inspiriting cup before entering the pulpit, and the glory of the town
house of Bushwick departed."

[Illustration: FERRY PASSAGE CERTIFICATE, 1816]

The graveyard of the original Dutch settlement lay in sight of the
church, and the last remains within its borders were not disturbed
until 1879, when the bones were removed in boxes and placed under
the Bushwick Church. Not far distant were the De Voe, De Bevoise,
and Wyckoff houses, the last named built by Theodorus Polhemus, of
Flatbush.[15]

On the river front was the famous tavern of "Charlum" Titus. Toward
Bushwick Creek was the Wartman homestead. On Division Avenue was the
Boerum house; the Remsen house was on Clymer Street. Peter Miller,
Frederic De Voe, and William Van Cott were prominent residents.

On Newtown Creek stood Luqueer's mill, built in 1664, by Abraham
Jansen, and the second to be erected within the limits of the present
city of Brooklyn. Freekes' mill at Gowanus was the oldest, a pond being
formed by damming the head of Gowanus Kill. Remsen's mill was at the
Wallabout. It was built in 1710, and it was from the vantage ground of
his residence here that Rem Remsen witnessed so many of the prison-ship
horrors. Remsen performed many humane acts toward the unfortunates of
the floating dungeons.

The boundary dispute between Newtown and Bushwick--a wrangle beginning
in Stuyvesant's day and lasting until 1769--forms one of the most
picturesque features of political life in the history of the two
towns. "Arbitration Rock," as a famous landmark in the survey was
called, having been destroyed, a new rock was placed in position by
Nicholas Wyckoff, with the permission of the Commissioners appointed to
resurvey the line in 1880, and still remains.

We have seen that one section of the town of Bushwick, or rather an
outlying group of farms and houses, lay on the river front. Traffic to
and from New York naturally passed through this river section of the
settlement. At the beginning of the century Richard M. Woodhull, a New
York merchant, established a horse-ferry from Corlaer's Hook, close to
the foot of the present Grand Street, New York, to the foot of the Long
Island road, now bearing the name of North Second Street.

The New York landing-place of the ferry was then considerably above the
settled part of the town. In New York at this period the tendency of
development still was along the eastern side of the island. "The seat
of the foreign trade," says Mr. Janvier, "was the East River front; of
the wholesale domestic trade, in Pearl and Broad streets, and about
Hanover Square; of the retail trade, in William, between Fulton and
Wall. Nassau Street and upper Pearl Street were places of fashionable
residence; as were also lower Broadway and the Battery. Upper Broadway,
paved as far as Warren Street, no longer was looked upon as remote and
inaccessible; and people with exceptionally long heads were beginning,
even, to talk of it as a street with a future; being thereto moved,
no doubt, by consideration of its magnificent appearance as the great
central thoroughfare of the city upon Mangin's prophetic map."

Notwithstanding the development of New York on the East River side,
there were two miles of travel between Woodhull's ferry and the
business part of the city. Woodhull bought and "boomed" property in
the vicinity of the ferry road on the Long Island side, then known
as Bushwick Street, and to the settlement in this region he gave the
name of Williamsburgh, "in compliment to his friend, Colonel Williams,
U. S. engineer, by whom it was surveyed." A ferry-house, a tavern, a
hay-press, appeared on the scene.

"An auction was held," writes John M. Stearns,[16] "at which a few
building lots were disposed of. But the amount realized came far short
of restoring to Woodhull the money he had thus prematurely invested.
His project was fully a quarter of a century too soon. It required half
a million of people in the city of New York, before settlers could be
induced to move across the East River away from the attractions of a
commercial city. Woodhull found that notes matured long before he could
realize from the property; and barely six years had passed before he
was a bankrupt, and the site of his new city became subject to sale by
the sheriff. By divers shifts the calamity was deferred until September
11, 1811, when the right, title, and interest of Richard M. Woodhull
in the original purchase, and in five acres of the Francis J. Titus
estate, purchased by him in 1805, near Fifth Street, was sold by the
sheriff in favor of one Roosevelt. James H. Maxwell, the son-in-law
of Woodhull, became the purchaser of Williamsburgh; but not having
the means to continue his title thereto, it again passed under the
sheriff's hammer, although a sufficient number of lots had by this time
been sold to prevent its re-appropriation to farm and garden purposes."

Then came Thomas Morrell, of Newtown, who bought the Titus homestead
farm of twenty-eight acres, prepared a map, and set down Grand Street
as a dividing line. In 1812, Morrell obtained from New York city a
grant for a ferry from Grand Street, Bushwick, to Grand Street, New
York.

This new town site, extending between North Second Street as far over
as the present South First Street, received the name of Yorkton.
The rivalry between the Morrell and the Woodhull ferry became very
heated. "While Morrell succeeded as to the ferry," writes Mr. Stearns,
"Woodhull managed to preserve the name Williamsburgh; which applied
at first to the thirteen acres originally purchased, and had extended
itself to adjoining lands so as to embrace about thirty acres, as seen
in Poppleton's map in 1814, and another in 1815, of property of J.
Homer Maxwell. But the first ferry had landed at Williamsburgh, and
the turnpike went through Williamsburgh out into the island. Hence,
both the country people and the people coming from the city, when
coming to the ferry, spoke of coming to Williamsburgh. Thus Yorkton was
soon unknown save on Loss's map, and in the transactions of certain
land-jobbers. Similarly the designations of old farm locations, being
obsolete to the idea of a city or a village, grew into disuse; and the
whole territory between Wallabout Bay and Bushwick Creek became known
as Williamsburgh."

At this time the owners of shore property refused to have a road opened
through their property or along the shore. The two ferries were not
connected by shore road, nor with the Wallabout region, and neither
ferry prospered during the lifetime of either Woodhull or Morrell.
General Johnson, in going from his Wallabout farm to Williamsburgh,
"had to open and shut no less than seventeen barred gates within a
distance of a mile and a half along the shore." The owners opposed
Johnson's movement for a road, but with the aid of the Legislature the
road was opened, business at the ferries immediately improved, and
Williamsburgh began to grow. A Methodist congregation built a church
in 1808; a hotel appeared at about the same time, and in 1814 there
were 759 persons in the town. Noah Waterbury, by the building of a
distillery at the foot of North Second Street and other enterprises,
earned the title of "The Father of Williamsburgh."




CHAPTER X

BROOKLYN VILLAGE

1811-1833

  Brooklyn during the "Critical Period" in American History.
    The Embargo and the War of 1812. Military Preparations.
    Fortifications. Fort Greene and Cobble Hill. Peace. Robert
    Fulton. The "Nassau's" First Trip. Progress of Fulton Ferry.
    The Village Incorporated. First Trustees. The Sunday-School
    Union. Long Island Bank. Board of Health. The Sale of Liquor.
    Care of the Poor. Real Estate. Village Expenses. Guy's Picture
    of Brooklyn in 1820. The Village of that Period. Characters of
    the Period. Old Families and Estates. The County Courts removed
    to Brooklyn. Apprentices' Library. Prisoners at the Almshouse.
    Growth of the Village. The Brooklyn "Evening Star." Movement
    for Incorporation as a City. Opposition of New York. Passage of
    the Incorporation Act.


As the hamlet of Brooklyn waxed in size and took on the characteristics
of an organized community, with a formulated political plan, a fire
department, a commercial nucleus that justified a petition[17] to the
Legislature for the establishment of a local bank, and a population
of nearly 5000 people, it began to feel more directly and inevitably
than it ever had theretofore the effect of political and commercial
movements in the State, and in the nation as a whole.

The early years of the present century, during which Napoleon was
terrorizing Europe, were years of formative uncertainties to the
young United States. John Fiske has called this time "the critical
period" of American history. Speaking of the extraordinary commercial
manifestations of the post-Revolutionary period, Mr. Fiske says:
"Meanwhile, the different States, with their different tariff and
tonnage acts, began to make commercial war upon one another. No sooner
had the other three New England States virtually closed their ports to
British shipping than Connecticut threw hers wide open, an act which
she followed up by laying duties upon imports from Massachusetts.
Pennsylvania discriminated against Delaware, and New Jersey, pillaged
at once by both her greater neighbors, was compared to a cask tapped at
both ends.

"The conduct of New York became especially selfish and blameworthy.
That rapid growth, which was so soon to carry the city and the State
to a position of primacy in the Union, had already begun. After the
departure of the British the revival of business went on with leaps
and bounds. The feeling of local patriotism waxed strong, and in no
one was it more completely manifested than in George Clinton, the
Revolutionary general, whom the people elected Governor for nine
successive terms. From a humble origin, by dint of shrewdness and
untiring push, Clinton had come to be for the moment the most powerful
man in the State of New York. He had come to look upon the State
almost as if it were his own private manor, and his life was devoted
to furthering its interests as he understood them. It was his first
article of faith that New York must be the greatest State in the
Union. But his conceptions of statesmanship were extremely narrow.
In his mind, the welfare of New York meant the pulling down and
thrusting aside of all her neighbors and rivals. He was the vigorous
and steadfast advocate of every illiberal and exclusive measure, and
the most uncompromising enemy to a closer union of the States. His
great popular strength and the commercial importance of the community
in which he held sway made him at this time the most dangerous man in
America."

The relations of the States became more amicable in the early years
of the century, the rival commonwealths being drawn together by a
general obligation of self-defense as against England. In 1808 had come
Jefferson's Embargo Act, of whose influence in New York John Lambert
writes: "Everything wore a dismal aspect at New York. The embargo had
now continued upwards of three months, and the salutary check which
Congress imagined it would have upon the conduct of the belligerent
powers was extremely doubtful, while the ruination of the commerce of
the United States appeared certain if such destructive measures were
persisted in. Already had 120 failures taken place among the merchants
and traders, to the amount of more than 5,000,000 dollars; and there
were above 500 vessels in the harbor which were lying up useless,
and rotting for want of employment. Thousands of sailors were either
destitute of bread, wandering about the country, or had entered the
British service. The merchants had shut up their counting-houses and
discharged their clerks; and the farmers refrained from cultivating
their land; for if they brought their produce to market they could not
sell it at all, or were obliged to dispose of it for only a fourth of
its value."

Elsewhere in his journal, Lambert writes: "The amount of tonnage
belonging to the port of New York in 1806 was 183,671 tons, and the
number of vessels in the harbor on the 25th of December, 1807, when the
embargo took place, was 537. The moneys collected in New York for the
national treasury, on the imports and tonnage, have for several years
amounted to one fourth of the public revenue. In 1806 the sum collected
was 6,500,000 dollars, which, after deducting the drawbacks, left a net
revenue of 4,500,000 dollars, which was paid into the treasury of the
United States as the proceeds of one year. In the year 1808 the whole
of this immense sum had vanished!"

In June, 1812, came the declaration of war with Great Britain. The news
occasioned considerable excitement in Brooklyn, whose middle-aged men
retained a lively recollection of the British occupation. In the "Star"
of July 8 appeared this announcement: "A new company of Horse or Flying
Artillery is lately raised in this vicinity, under the command of
Captain John Wilson. This company promises, under the able management
of Captain Wilson, to equal, if not excel, any company in the State.
The Artillerists of Captain Barbarin are fast progressing in a system
of discipline and improvement, which can alone in the hour of trial
render courage effectual. We understand this company have volunteered
their services to Government, and are accepted. The Riflemen of Captain
Stryker and the Fusileers of Captain Herbert are respectable in number
and discipline. The county of Kings is in no respect behind her
neighbors in military patriotism."

The Fusileers wore green "coatees" and Roman leather caps. The green
frocks of the Rifles were trimmed with yellow fringe, a feature of the
costume which is reputed to have originated the appellation "Katydids."
In August the Artillery practiced at a target, and John S. King won a
medal.

Two years elapsed before Brooklyn was actually threatened with war. In
1814 the fear that the British fleet might, as in the Revolutionary
descent, land at Gravesend, was naturally entertained. The committee of
defense decided to build two fortified camps on Brooklyn Heights and
on the heights of Harlem. Volunteers for labor on local and suburban
defenses were called for, and there was a patriotic response. A company
of students from Columbia Academy, Bergen, N. J., performed work on
the Brooklyn Heights fortifications.[18] The Long Island defenses
extended from the Wallabout to Fort Greene, to Bergen's Heights (on
Jacob Bergen's property), and to Fort Lawrence.

On the 9th of August, 1814, General Mapes, of New York, with a body
of volunteers, broke ground for the intrenchments at Fort Greene. The
work was carried on day by day by a different corps of volunteers. One
day the labor would be performed by the tanners and curriers and the
veteran corps of artillery; on another day, in happy unison, would
be seen working, side by side, a brigade of infantry, a military
association of young men, the Hamilton Society, and students of
medicine; on another, a delegation from Flatbush would be seen engaged
earnestly on the work; on another, the people of Flatlands would
be armed with pick and shovel; then Gravesend dug in the trenches.
Irishmen were not to be outdone; they proved their patriotism and
love of liberty by volunteering, 1200 strong, to labor in the cause.
Then the burghers from New Utrecht gave a helping hand. The free
colored people gladly gave their aid. Jamaica came, headed by Dominie
Schoonmaker, and with them came the principal of the academy, with
his pupils. Workmen came from New York, Newark, Paulus Hook, and
Morris County, N. J. A company came from Hanover Township, headed
by their pastor, Rev. Dr. Phelps, and labored for a day upon these
fortifications. So, too, the members of the Baptist Church in New York
came, with their pastor, Rev. Dr. Archibald Macloy, and did a day's
work. Rev. Dr. Macloy was the father of Congressman Macloy, who ably
represented the seventh ward of New York and a part of Kings County
before the late civil war.

The erection of the defenses of Brooklyn was thus not a local affair.
It was one in which the neighboring cities, towns, and States took
part. The people were enthusiastic. The Grand Lodge of Masons enlisted
in the service, and the watchword of the day was: "The Master expects
every Mason to do his duty." Old Fortitude Lodge, which still exists,
rendered a day's service. A company of ladies came from New York,
forming a procession, with music, marched to Fort Greene, and used
the shovel and the spade for several hours. The people had one mind
and were actuated by one purpose. The work advanced rapidly, for, as
in the days of Nehemiah, the "people had a mind to work," and their
efforts were crowned with success. These were the times when the
people willingly gave their money for the good of the country, without
expecting to receive it again with compound interest.

Early in September the works were completed. The Twenty-second Brigade
of Infantry, composed of 1750 men, was stationed within the lines.
Heavy artillery was mounted. Brigadier General Jeremiah Johnson was
in command. He was a natural soldier, and possessed every element
of character necessary to lead a brigade. Stern and unflinching in
the performance of duty, he yet had a warm and generous heart, which
led him to take an active interest in the welfare of the men in his
command. The soldiers loved him, and rendered willing obedience to his
orders. Being a resident of Brooklyn, he knew or was known by most of
his men personally.

At the fort on Cobble Hill worked military companies under command of
Captains Stryker, Cowenhoven, and Herbert, the "exempts" of Bedford
and the Wallabout, Fire Company No. 2 of Brooklyn, and a company of
Bushwick people headed by Pastor Bassett. "Next to the duties which
we owe to Heaven," said the Bushwick people at their meeting, "those
which belong to our country demand our chief attention."

The volunteers worked with the utmost zeal, laboring by moonlight when
sunset still left work to do. The Sixty-fourth Regiment, of Kings
County, was commanded by Francis Titus, with Albert C. Van Brunt as
second major, and Daniel Barre as adjutant. New Utrecht's company was
headed by Captain William Dewyre; Brooklyn's company was headed by
Captain Joseph Dean; the Wallabout and Bushwick company, by Captain
Francis Stillman; the Gowanus company, by Captain Peter Cowenhoven, and
later by Captain John T. Bergen; the Gravesend and Flatbush companies,
by Captain Jeremiah Lott.

Brooklyn was, indeed, ready, but fortunately the crisis for which it
prepared did not appear. On the evening of February 11, 1815, came
the news of peace with Great Britain. On the evening of the 21st
Brooklyn was illuminated in a spirit of rejoicing, and the band of the
Forty-first Regiment, then stationed in the village, voiced the delight
of the people.

Meanwhile, various important advances had been made by Brooklyn and her
neighbors. In 1812, Robert Fulton having made a successful experiment
with his first steamboat, the Clermont, a steam ferry was opened
between New York City and Paulus Hook, Jersey City. In that year Fulton
and his "backer," Robert R. Livingston, offered to the corporation of
the city of New York a proposition to establish a steam ferry from Fly
Market Slip to Brooklyn.[19] The proposition was accepted, and it was
decided to run the boats from Burling Slip. "As, however, the slip was
not then filled in, and the cost of filling was estimated at $30,000,
it was finally concluded to establish the ferry at Beekman Slip
(present Fulton Street, New York), which was accordingly purchased for
that purpose by the corporation from Mr. Peter Schermerhorn. Beekman
Slip at that time extended only to Pearl Street. Fair Street, which
then ran from Broadway to Cliff Street, was extended through the block
between Cliff and Pearl streets to join Beekman Slip. To this newly
extended Fair Street, from the East River to Broadway, and to Partition
Street, which then extended from Broadway to the Hudson River, was
given the name of Fulton Street, in honor of the distinguished
inventor, in consequence of the establishing of whose steam ferry this
street was about to become a great highroad of travel and traffic. The
ferry from Fly Market Slip was discontinued.

"The lease of the ferry was granted to Robert Fulton and William
Cutting (his brother-in-law), for twenty-five years,--from the 1st
of May, 1814, to May, 1839,--at an annual rental of $4000 for the
first eighteen years, and $4500 for the last seven years. The lessees
were to put on the ferry one steamboat similar to the Paulus Hook
ferry-boat; to run once an hour from each side of the ferry, from
half an hour before sunrise to half an hour after sunset; to furnish
in addition such barges, etc., as were required by previous acts of
the Legislature; and on or before the 1st of May, 1819, they were to
provide another steamboat in all respects equal to the first, and when
that was done a boat should start from each side of the river every
half hour. As a compensation to the lessees for the increase of expense
which would be incurred in conducting the ferry upon such an enlarged
scale, the corporation covenanted to apply to the Legislature for a
modification and increase in the rates of ferriage; and in case the
bill passed before May 1, 1819, Messrs. Fulton and Cutting agreed to
put on their second boat at the earliest possible date thereafter. In
case of its failing to pass, they were to be permitted to receive four
cents for each and every passenger who might choose to cross the river
in the steamboat, but the fare in barges was to remain as it had been,
viz., two cents."[20]

The proposed bill successfully passed the Legislature, and Fulton
and Cutting formed a stock company, called the New York and Brooklyn
Steamboat Ferry Association, with a capital of $68,000. The first
steam ferry-boat, called the Nassau, began running on Sunday, May 10,
1814. "This noble boat," said the Long Island "Star," "surpassed the
expectations of the public in the rapidity of her movements. Her trips
varied from five to twelve minutes, according to tide and weather....
Carriages and wagons, however crowded, pass on and off the boat with
the same facility as in passing a bridge. There is a spacious room
below the deck where the passengers may be secure from the weather,
etc." On one of the first day's trips an engineer was fatally hurt.

The Nassau made forty trips on the following Sunday, and became a
useful and popular institution. She was used after business hours for
pleasure excursions on the river. The plan of construction was that of
a double boat, with the wheel in the centre, the engine-house on deck
and the passenger cabin in one of the hulls. Peter Coffee, the first
pilot, died in 1876, aged ninety-nine years. One end of the deckhouse
of the Nassau was occupied by a pensioner of Fulton's, who sold candies
and cakes.

While the Nassau was in operation the horse ferry-boats were also used
on the Fulton Ferry. These horse ferry-boats were peculiar craft. The
first horse-boats were single-enders, and were compelled to turn around
in crossing the river. Subsequently double-enders were used. All these
boats had two hulls, about twenty feet apart and covered over by a
single deck. Between these hulls were placed the paddle-wheels, working
upon the shafting propelled by horses.

"By an invention of Mr. John G. Murphy, father of ex-Senator Henry
C. Murphy, the managers of these boats were enabled to reverse their
machinery without changing the position of the horses. The steamboat
was very popular with the public. Owing to its success there was soon
a very marked desire in both cities for the addition of the second
steamboat, in accordance with the terms of the contract made by the
lessees with the city of New York. Objection was made by the lessees
on the ground of additional expense, and boats run by horse power were
substituted. In 1815 Robert Fulton died. Mr. Cutting, who had lived
in New York, removed to Brooklyn, and died at his residence on the
Heights in 1821. The winter of 1821-22 was one of the most severe in
the history of the country. The ferries were obstructed by enormous
quantities of floating ice. Great cakes became jammed between the
double hulls, and travel was practically suspended. Brooklyn had grown
rapidly, and an uproar arose in which the ferry management was roundly
assailed. Who can tell but it was here that the original idea of the
East River Bridge was first born? In 1827 a steamboat similar to the
Nassau, and called the William Cutting, was put on the ferry, but even
this did not satisfy the public, who were eagerly seeking more extended
accommodations. In 1833 Messrs. David Leavitt and Silas Butler secured
a controlling interest in the stock of the company, and sought to meet
the anticipations of the people by adding two new steamboats, the
Relief and the Olive Branch. Unlike their predecessors, these boats had
single hulls and side wheels. Subsequently agitation in the southern
part of Brooklyn led to the establishment of the South Ferry."

In 1817, the Loisian Academy, which had been started four years before,
received a salaried teacher, and was removed to the small frame house
on Concord and Adams streets, where Public School No. 1 was afterward
built.

Brooklyn began soon after the Revolution to think seriously of the
matter of incorporation as a village. On January 8, 1816, a public
meeting was held at the public house of Lawrence Brown, "to take
into consideration the proposed application for an incorporation of
Brooklyn. A committee, consisting of Thomas Everit, Alden Spooner,
Joshua Sands, the Reverend John Ireland, and John Doughty, met the
following day at the house of H. B. Pierrepont. On April 12th the act
incorporating the village passed the Legislature."

[Illustration: FULTON FERRY-BOAT, WM. CUTTING

_Built in 1827_]

The section of the town of Brooklyn, commonly known by the name
of the Fire District, and contained within the following bounds,
namely: "Beginning at the public landing, south of Pierrepont's
distillery, formerly the property of Philip Livingston, deceased, on
the East River, thence running along the public road leading from said
landing to its intersection with Red Hook Lane, thence along said Red
Hook Lane to where it intersects the Jamaica Turnpike Road, thence
a northeast course to the head of the Walleboght mill pond, thence
through the centre of said mill pond to the East River, and thence
down the East River to the place of beginning,"--was incorporated as
a village, by the name of the Village of Brooklyn; and by the act the
village was constituted a road district, and declared exempt from
the superintendence of the commissioners of highways of the town of
Brooklyn, and the Trustees of the village were invested with all the
powers over the road district, and subjected to all the duties in
relation thereto which by law were given to or enjoined upon the said
commissioners, etc.[21]

The Trustees were required to make a survey and map of the village,
to be kept by the clerk, subject to the inspection of the people, "in
order that no resident might plead ignorance of the permanent plan
to be adopted for opening, laying out, leveling, and regulating the
streets of said village." In pursuance of the requirements of this
law, the Trustees caused to be made a survey and map of the village,
which was adopted by them on the 8th of April, 1819. By a law passed
in 1824, the Trustees were authorized to "widen and alter all public
roads, streets, and highways, already laid out ... to such convenient
breadth, not exceeding sixty feet, as they should judge fit;" also to
lay out new roads and streets. In 1827 the village was divided into
five districts.

The first Trustees of the village were Andrew Mercein, John Garrison,
John Doughty, John Seaman, and John Dean.

The first named of these Trustees appears as one of the principal
founders of a Sunday School which was "in operation in the village of
Brooklyn" in 1816. This school seems to have been designed and operated
on broad grounds. While combining "moral and religious instruction with
ordinary school learning," parents or guardians were privileged to say
"what catechism" they wished the children to study. As a result of this
school movement the Brooklyn Sunday School Union Society was afterward
organized. The school met for a time in Thomas Kirk's printing-office
on Adams Street, but found the schoolhouse quarters on the same street
to be more desirable.

Previous to 1814 there were two markets in Brooklyn: one at the foot of
the old Ferry Street (which began to acquire the name Fulton Street,
after the steamboats began running and Fulton Street had been named on
the New York side); the other at the foot of Main Street. Both were
taken down in 1814.

The Long Island Bank was incorporated in 1824, with a capital of
$300,000, divided into 6000 shares. In the same year the Brooklyn Fire
Insurance Company came into existence.

On the village map adopted April 8, 1819, sixty-seven streets appear,
besides a number of alleys. Several of the streets were sixty feet
wide. Doughty Street was the narrowest, being only twenty feet wide.

In 1820 the population of the town had increased to 7175. The village
population was 5210.

In 1822 there were four distilleries in the town, which at that time
contained but little over 7000 inhabitants. This was a distillery to
every 1750 inhabitants. All the grocers appear to have sold liquors.

In 1826 the population of the village was about 9000. The sum of the
excise fees paid over to the overseers of the poor in that year was
$3627, the significance of which large amount need not be pointed out.

In 1824 a bill was introduced into the Senate, by John Lefferts,
to organize a board of health in the village of Brooklyn. The act
constituted the Trustees a board of health. By its provisions the
president and clerk of the village became the officers of the board.
The president's salary was fixed at $150 per annum, and the physician
appointed by the board received $200 yearly.

The introduction of swill milk into the city appears to belong to
a later period. It became the practice for milk-dealers to send to
the various distilleries and purchase swill, which they fed to their
cows. The stables were generally long, low buildings divided into
narrow stalls, and afforded accommodation for forty or fifty cows.
The swill cost one shilling a hogshead, and was fed hot to the cows.
The principal distilleries were Cunningham's on Front and Washington
streets; Manley's, corner of Tillary and Gold streets; Birdsall's, John
A. Cross's, and Wilson's. The two latter were at the Wallabout.

In 1824 the real estate of Brooklyn was assessed at $2,111,390, and the
personal property at $438,690; making a total of $2,550,080.

On the 14th of January, 1830, the Supervisors of the county purchased
the poor-house farm at Flatbush. On the 9th of July, 1831, the
corner-stone of the building was laid, on which occasion an address was
delivered by General Jeremiah Johnson, who afterwards became Mayor. He
served as Supervisor continuously from 1800 to 1822, and distinguished
himself in the War of 1812, a part of the time being in command of the
fortifications on Fort Greene.

The expense of supporting the poor of the town of Brooklyn during the
year 1830 was $7233.13. The taxes for all expenses amounted to only
sixty cents on every hundred dollars of valuation of real and personal
property.

The items of village expense as estimated August 18, 1830, were as
follows:--

    Village watch                $3,000
    Fire department               1,400
    Public cisterns                 300
    Interest on village stocks      600
    Repairs of wells and pumps      900
    Salaries of officers          1,200
    Contingent expenses           2,600
                                -------
                                $10,000

On the 2d of September, 1830, the Kings County Temperance Society was
formed at Flatbush. The Hon. Leffert Lefferts was elected president.

The population of the town as ascertained by the census of 1830 was
15,292. The village contained about two thirds of the town population.

Furman, the indefatigable collector of statistics, says that in 1832
Brooklyn (the village) was divided into five districts, which together
contained 12,302 inhabitants. In the village there were 110 licensed
and 68 unlicensed taverns. This was at the rate of one tavern to every
69 persons. The second district appears to have enjoyed the privilege
of having the most taverns. It contained 79 in a population of 2801, or
one to every 36 inhabitants. In view of the fact that the proportion of
saloons to population to-day is one to every 225 persons, those rash
debaters who persist in finding a movement toward ruin in modern life
may find the figures significant.

An interesting glimpse of Brooklyn as it appeared in 1820 is furnished
by Guy's well-known picture, painted from a Front Street window, and
showing a cluster of houses in the heart of the village. The scene
is of winter, and the figures in the foreground snow are in most
instances likenesses of people of the day. The Brooklyn Institute is
in possession of the picture. At the time of the fire which, in 1890,
destroyed the Institute building, then on Washington Street, and since
completely obliterated to make way for the Bridge approach, it was
slightly damaged; but it remains one of the most interesting memorials
of an interesting period. According to the key published in Stiles, the
picture represents stores and dwellings of Thomas W. Birdsall, Abiel
Titus, Edward Coope, Geo. Fricke, Diana Rapalje, Mrs. Middagh, Benjamin
Meeker, Mrs. Chester, Robert Cunningham, Jacob Hicks, Joshua Sands,
Augustus Graham, Burdett Stryker, Selah Smith, and Dr. Ball, as well
as the figures of Mrs. Harmer, Mrs. Guy, Jacob Patchen, and Judge John
Garrison.

Diana Rapalje, a daughter of Garrett Rapalje, was one of the prominent
figures in the village, formerly a "favorite in Presidential circles at
Washington, and latterly an eccentric of haughty bearing." Her house
was bought by Colonel Alden Spooner, who printed the "Star" under its
roof. Near the ferry stairs was the house of William Furman, overseer
of the poor, who was one of the founders of the Catherine Street Ferry,
and served as the first judge of the county between 1808 and 1823. He
served in the state Legislature, and filled other important commercial
and political offices. His son, Gabriel Furman, was the author of the
"Notes" on the antiquities of Long Island, which have been so useful to
later writers. At Birdsall tavern, on the Fulton Road, people bought
the New York papers, and Quakers made it a stopping-place. Near at hand
was the house of Henry Dawson, who ran the "sixpenny boats." In a low
stone house lived "the gentlemen Hicks," and in the same region to the
south were "Milk" Hicks and "Spetler" Hicks, other prominent members
of a family whose name is closely associated with the early history
of the Heights. Here also were the Middagh and Pierrepont properties,
which were greatly improved by a street plan originated by Hezekiah
Pierrepont. On the Middagh estate was a house built by Thomas Kirk for
a home and printing-office, and afterward occupied by George L. Bird,
the editor of the "Patriot." To this house, too, came James Harper, the
grandfather of the distinguished publishers, Harper and Brothers.

[Illustration: GUY'S SNOW SCENE IN BROOKLYN, 1820]

John Doughty occupied the house formerly owned by Diana Rapalje.
Doughty was intimately connected with Brooklyn's village life, as
fireman, assessor, town clerk, overseer of highways, president of the
fire department, school-committee-man, and collector of the village.
A picturesque figure was Jacob Patchen, a pungent, unmanageable man,
conspicuous in the village life by his obstinacy and determination.

Over the wheelwright shop of George Smith, opposite the lower corner
of Hicks Street, was the court-room of Judge Garrison. Garrison was
born at Gravesend in 1764. He served as fireman, trustee, school
commissioner, and justice. Joralemon's Lane was a rough country road,
at the foot of which had been Pierrepont's Anchor gin distillery,
which was converted about 1819 into a candle-factory, and again became
a distillery. The road had been laid out by Peter Remsen and Philip
Livingston. The site of the present City Hall was then an open field,
while the site of the county court house was occupied by a famous
resort known as the Military Garden.

The Pierrepont mansion stood at the foot of Montague Street. It
was built by John Cornell, and became Pierrepont property in
1802. Hezekiah Pierrepont was a dignified and influential member
of a community in which his exertions were always for broad and
public-spirited plans. Teunis Joralemon, who had been a harness-maker
in Flatbush, bought part of the Livingston estate, on which he
practiced market gardening. He filled the offices of justice of
the peace and Trustee, and other offices, but was of a temperament
antipodal to that of Pierrepont, hotly opposing new streets, especially
through his own property, and scorning the distinction of having
Joralemon Street named after him. Another prominent estate was that
of the Fleets. The name of Bergen is prominently associated with
the progress of the village. At Bedford Corners were the Meseroles,
Ryersons, Lefferts, Vandervoorts, Suydams, Tiebouts, Cowenhovens, and
other old families.

In December, 1821, the subject of removing the court house from
Flatbush to Brooklyn was agitated in the papers, and on the 21st of
January, 1825, a meeting was held at Duflons, whereat a committee
was appointed to obtain the removal of the court house and jail from
Flatbush to Brooklyn. In 1826 the subject was brought to the attention
of the Legislature, and that body passed an act that the court of
common pleas and general sessions should alternate between Flatbush
and the Apprentices' Library Building in Cranberry Street, then just
finished. The court of common pleas in those days corresponded to the
county court of our time. The county clerk's office was removed to
Brooklyn in March, 1819. The county court began to hold sessions in
Brooklyn in January, 1827.

The Trustees of the village of Brooklyn deemed a debtors' prison a
very important addition to the city. On the 19th of February, 1829,
Joseph Sprague, president of the Board of Trustees, made a report on
the subject of fitting up under the market a prison-room for debtors.
In accordance therewith a lockup was provided and cells built under the
market. These cells were oftentimes crowded, and but little provision
was made for the comfort of the occupants. The Bridge approach now
passes over the old lockup.

During those early days prisoners were also confined in cells in the
almshouse, then situated on the south side of Nassau Street, between
Bridge and Jay streets. The building is still standing, and has been
converted into dwellings.

The agitation relative to the removal of the court house still
continued. The Supervisors took the matter in hand. They were empowered
in 1829 to raise by tax a sum of money for the purchase of lots, and
the erection of a suitable building in Brooklyn to accommodate the
courts and jail when completed. It may well be supposed that Flatbush
did not relish the idea of the removal, and, being anxious to retain
her precedence among the towns, her representatives strenuously opposed
the change, and their votes for a short time delayed the inevitable.
The elements, however, aided those who urged the removal, by the
burning of the jail and court house, as heretofore stated, and the way
was opened for a new building. The next year an act was passed by the
Legislature providing for the building of a jail and court house in
Brooklyn.

Under the provisions of this law three commissioners were chosen to
purchase a suitable site for the buildings. The act also provided
that when the court house was finished and ready for occupancy, a
certificate to that effect should be obtained from the first judge of
the county, and that thereafter all terms of the court of common pleas
and general sessions of the peace should be held in the new building,
and that all processes and writs should be made returnable thereat. It
might be stated that subsequent to the fire at Flatbush, and prior to
the occupation of the new building, the courts were temporarily held at
the Apprentices' Library, and were removed to Hall's Exchange Building.
Baily, writing in 1840, says: "The Kings County courts are held in
the large building called the Exchange, situated on the corner of
Cranberry and Fulton streets. It is a plain brick building without any
extraordinary architectural beauty." The court-room was on the second
floor. On the first floor of the building was Bokee & Clem's hardware
store. David A. Bokee was an influential politician of the Whig school.
His store for a time was the headquarters of the Whigs, who would
assemble almost daily for consultation. Bokee ran for Mayor in 1843
against Joseph Sprague, the latter being elected by 311 majority. The
Whigs elected him an Alderman, and he served during the years 1840-43,
1845-48. He was state senator in 1848 and 1849, congressman from 1849
to 1851, and naval officer from 1851 to 1853. Mr. Bokee was one of the
leading members of the First Baptist Church.

The Apprentices' Library Building, where the courts were held, was a
notable structure. One of the principal sources of its fame arose from
the fact that its corner-stone was laid on the 4th of July, 1825, by
that earnest and zealous friend of American institutions, Lafayette.
It was taken down in 1858 to make room for the Armory, which was
afterward sold. Previous to the erection of the City Hall it served as
the municipal building. The Common Council and Board of Education met
there. The municipal court also held its sessions in the building, and
it afforded room for the post office and county clerk's office. On the
1st of May, 1828, an act was passed by the Legislature providing for
the erection of a fire-proof county clerk's office in Brooklyn. The
Legislature, on the 25th of April, 1833, passed an act for the erection
of a court house and jail in Kings County. By this act Losee Van
Nostrand, Joseph Moser, and Peter Canaver were appointed commissioners
to purchase a suitable site or sites in the village of Brooklyn for the
same. To defray the expenses to be incurred in erecting the buildings,
the supervisors were authorized to create a public stock to the amount
of $25,000. A building committee of five persons was directed to be
appointed by the Supervisors of the county, and the president and
Trustees of the village, within sixty days after the passage of the
act. The act also provided that when the court house and jail, or
either of them, should be so far completed as to permit either of them
being used for the purpose intended, that the first judge of the county
should sign a declaration to that effect, and file the same in the
office of the clerk of said county. The clerk thereupon was to publish
the notice in the papers printed in the county, and from and after this
publication the terms of the court of common pleas and general sessions
should be held in the court-room, and from and after such declaration
relating to the jail it should become the common jail of the county.
This act was amended February 17, 1834, so as to declare that the
second section of the act of 1833 authorized the Supervisors to create
stock, not only for the purchase of a site, but also for erecting
buildings.

Meanwhile the village had been flourishing in other directions. Its
general growth was marked not only by the increase in population, but
by the increase in the number of commercial institutions, churches, and
schools. A second bank was chartered. A "night boat" began running on
the ferry. There was an effort to establish a theatre; and a building
for this purpose, subsequently abandoned, was erected, in 1828, on
Fulton Street, between Nassau and Concord. The Brooklyn "Evening
Star" began daily publication, and continued to be a daily paper for
six months, when insufficient patronage made it necessary to suspend
daily issue. Stone walks were laid. The movement resulting in the
formation of the Brooklyn Gaslight Company was begun. A second bank was
chartered. A temperance society, a dispensary, a tract society, and a
literary association (the Hamilton) were organized. There began to be
talk of water-works and of railroads. Fulton Street was widened, boats
appeared on the South Ferry, and the boom in real estate indicated the
growing popularity of the village.

The movement for the incorporation of Brooklyn as a city met the
determined opposition of a large proportion of New York's inhabitants,
who maintained that the propriety of natural growth demanded that
Brooklyn and New York should become one city. From the earliest days
of their common existence New York had grudged Brooklyn an independent
life. The "water-rights" quarrels occupy much space in the early
records. Under the early charter New York claimed ownership in the
East River, and of Brooklyn land to low-water mark, and afterward to
high-water mark. This brought many disputes in the matter of ferry
rights,[22] and the spirit of this early dispute survived in the later
attitude of New York. In the year 1824 the town on Manhattan Island
received an income of over eight thousand dollars from the East River
ferries. The legislative provision for Brooklyn's harbor-master had
been declared to be an encroachment on the rights of New York.[23]

Despite strong opposition, Brooklyn triumphed at Albany, and in April,
1834, became a full-fledged city.




CHAPTER XI

THE CITY OF BROOKLYN

1834-1860

  Government of the City. George Hall, first Mayor. Plans for a
    City Hall. Contention among the Aldermen. Albert G. Stevens
    and the Clerkship. The Jamaica Railroad. Real Estate. The
    "Brooklyn Eagle." Walt Whitman. Henry C. Murphy. Brooklyn City
    Railroad. The City Court established. County Institutions.
    The Penitentiary. Packer Institute and the Polytechnic.
    Williamsburgh becomes a City. Progress of Williamsburgh. Mayor
    Wall and the Aldermen. Discussion of Annexation with Brooklyn.
    The "Brooklyn Times." Consolidation of the Two Cities. Mayor
    Hall's Address. Nassau Water Company and the Introduction of
    Ridgewood Water. Plans for New Court House. Proposal to use
    Washington Park. County Cares and Expenditures. Metropolitan
    Police.


The act of incorporation erected the city of Brooklyn from the village
and town of Brooklyn, dividing the city into nine wards. By Section
50 of this act, provision is made against closing or altering streets
"within the first seven wards, or fire and watch district, set apart
as such by the owners thereof, etc., and graded, leveled, paved, or
macadamized, and against closing or altering streets in said city laid
out and opened and used as such for ten years from the passage of this
act, without the consent of the Common Council." The act was otherwise
conservative in adjusting the new plans to existing conditions.

The government of the city was vested in a mayor and a board of
aldermen, the latter, to the number of two from each ward, to be
elected annually. The selection of a mayor was conferred upon the
Aldermen, whose first choice was George Hall.

Hall was born in New York, in 1795, in the year preceding his father's
purchase of the Valley Grove Farm at Flatbush. He was educated at
Erasmus Hall, and chose to follow his father's trade of painter and
glazier. He made friends, and established a good business position.
In 1826 he became a Trustee in the third district of the city. He
became president of the village, and in 1833 was reelected after a hot
contest, the bitterness of which resulted from Hall's support of the
movement to exclude hogs from the public streets, and to prevent the
unlicensed selling of liquor in groceries and elsewhere. The defeat
of what was called the "Whig-Hog-Rum" party was announced amid much
excitement.

In the July following the choice of Hall as Mayor of the new city, it
was resolved to raise $50,000 for the purchase of ground for a city
hall. General agreement fixed upon the junction of Fulton and Joralemon
streets as sufficiently central. In January of the following year
(1835) a committee of the corporation reported favorably on low lands
of the Wallabout for a city park, and before the close of the year
ground was selling for $1000 an acre.

In May the Aldermen chose Jonathan Trotter for Mayor. Trotter was an
Englishman who had been in this country since 1818, and who in 1828 had
opened a leather-dressing factory in Brooklyn. He became an Alderman,
representing the fourth ward, in 1834.

In 1834 the total valuation was $15,642,290; in 1835 it was
$26,390,151; in 1836 it was $32,428,942; and in 1837, $26,895,074.
Previous to 1838, the assessments were made by wards, and it is
impossible to give the aggregates. The valuation and total taxation for
subsequent years, up to 1860, are as follows:--

    YEAR.      VALUATION.        TAXATION.
    1838      $25,198,956       $112,817.94
    1839       26,440,634        145,331.39
    1840       25,447,146        134,139.66
    1841       25,596,862        151,038.24
    1842       24,715,380        159,205.84
    1843       21,812,941        159,189.64
    1844       23,260,385        176,271.21
    1845       24,788,886        163,726.24
    1846       26,918,613        227,433.94
    1847       29,927,029        250,244.13
    1848       31,246,305        306,138.16
    1849       32,446,330        404,332.90
    1850       36,665,399        411,044.78
    1851       45,005,518        572,776.63
    1852       58,058,485        617,855.64
    1853       68,328,546        772,915.81
    1854       72,849,503        959,209.18
    1855       94,791,215      1,532,692.68
    1856       95,859,735      1,381,114.39
    1857       99,016,598      1,783,834.19
    1858      104,475,275      1,567,948.39
    1859      101,052,666      1,256,820.94
    1860      103,680,566      1,969,794.00

In 1835 there were thirteen churches in Brooklyn, as follows: St.
Ann's, St. John's, and Christ Church, Episcopalian; Sands Street, York
Street, and Washington Street, Methodist, and the African Methodist;
First, Second, and Third Presbyterian; St. James', Roman Catholic;
Nassau Street, Baptist; and Joralemon Street, Dutch Reformed. St.
Luke's (then Trinity) Church, in Clinton Avenue, was organized in
this year. The population was 24,310, making a church for each 1807
persons. In 1847 there were fifty-two churches in the city, or one to
each 1442 inhabitants.

On the 10th of September, the plan of the City Hall was submitted
to the Common Council and approved. The corner-stone, as originally
planned, was laid April 28, 1836, by the Mayor. The building, if it
had been completed in accordance with first intentions, would have
rendered unnecessary the building of the new Court House and municipal
buildings. It was started during the inflation times of 1836. The era
of wild speculation came to an end. The bubble burst, and work upon
the city building was suspended on August 7, 1837. The walls, which
had risen above the basement, stood for many years, when the work was
resumed and carried to completion on a much smaller scale. The City
Hall, as originally planned, was intended to cover the entire square in
front of the present edifice.

On the 4th of August, 1836, the Apprentices' Library, having been
purchased by the corporation of the city for $11,000, was officially
named the City Buildings.

During the time the Common Council met in the City Buildings, Whigs and
Democrats were very belligerent. The cause of the trouble grew out of
the election for Alderman of the seventh ward. That ward then embraced
the area of the present seventh, eleventh, nineteenth, and twentieth
wards. The charter election was held in the public schoolhouse on
Classen Avenue, between Flushing and Park avenues, on the 11th of
March, 1843, and resulted in a tie between John A. Cross and Zebulon
Chadbourne, the former being a Whig and the latter a Democrat. A
protracted lawsuit followed. Albert H. Osborn, whose seat was to
be filled, held over, and ever after the people declared that his
initials, A. H. O., stood for Alderman Hold Over.

The contention ran high, and bitterness and rancor marked the
deliberations of the Aldermen. At a regular meeting of the Board,
held at the City Buildings May 8, a separation took place between the
Whig and Democratic members, occasioned by the fight between Cross
and Chadbourne for the seat from the seventh ward. The Whig members
retired to Hull's Exchange Buildings, whilst the Democrats remained
in possession of the City Buildings, and made their appointments. The
Whigs did the same.

On the 15th of May a writ of mandamus was served on Alfred G. Stevens,
who had been appointed clerk of the Common Council by the Democrats May
8. His election was secured by the vote of A. H. Osborne, without whose
holding over the Board would have been a tie.

On the 23d of May the mandamus which had been obtained by Worthington
Hodgkinson, the clerk appointed by the Whigs, was argued before the
Supreme Court. On the 9th of July, 1843, the motion to displace Stevens
and substitute Hodgkinson was decided and denied by the Supreme Court,
Chief Justice Nelson and Greene C. Bronson presiding. The decision did
not suit the Whigs, and was carried to the Supreme Court at Albany, and
argued October 21, 1843. Abraham Crist appeared for the relator, and
John Greenwood for the defendant. Shortly afterwards the court decided
in favor of the defendant.

The matter was again argued November 24 before Judge Kent in New York,
on a motion to obtain the books and papers of the Common Council in the
hands of Mr. Stevens. On the 27th Judge Kent again decided in favor of
Mr. Stevens.

On the 1st of December the Whig Aldermen were arrested for misdemeanor
in neglecting to perform their duty. The complaint was abandoned. On
the 5th of December the grand jury found bills of indictment against
the several Whig Aldermen for neglecting to serve as members of the
Common Council. At this time Seth Low (grandfather of the president of
Columbia College) represented the fourth ward in the Common Council.
The indictment against the Whig Aldermen grew out of an effort on their
part to indict Mayor Sprague. It was a case of the biter being bitten.
The grand jury refused to indict the Mayor, and indicted his accusers.
The indictment was, however, not pressed to trial.

Meanwhile the Jamaica Railroad had obtained permission to occupy
Atlantic Street, and other projects matured. The population of the city
had, in 1835, reached 24,310, showing a gain of 9013 in fifteen years.

Trotter was reelected Mayor, and was succeeded by Jeremiah Johnson, a
man whose contemporaries revered him, and whose name occupies, and must
always occupy, a high place in the annals of the city. General Johnson
was reelected, and was succeeded by Cyrus P. Smith, who was elected by
vote of the people, and who also was reelected.

The fluster in the real-estate market was paralleled by the financial
excitement, which resulted in the suspension of specie payments by the
three banks of the city. The year of General Johnson's reelection was
one of general business depression, but the community rallied quickly
from the blow inflicted by disordered markets.

In 1841 the Democrats of the county received representation in a new
newspaper, the "Brooklyn Eagle and Kings County Democrat." The movement
for the establishment of the "Eagle" was led by Henry C. Murphy, with
whom Richard Adams Locke was associated in the editorship. The first
number appeared in October, and the Democrats were not loth to give the
lusty young journal full credit for the success of the campaign, in
which its voice gave no uncertain sound.

Directing the helm of the "Eagle" enterprise was the clear-sighted,
practical genius of Isaac Van Anden, who soon came into complete
control of the paper, and remained sole proprietor until the year 1872.
The "Eagle" had its days of adversity; but it had a field, and it had
vitality, and its growth was sure and steady. Following Murphy in its
early editorship were William B. Marsh, Walt Whitman,[24] S. G. Arnold
(under whose editorial leadership the name of the paper was abbreviated
to "Brooklyn Daily Eagle"), and Henry McCloskey. In 1861 McCloskey was
succeeded by Thomas Kinsella, who gave force and distinction to the
editorial page of the flourishing paper. Kinsella died in 1884, after
having made himself a power in the community. He was succeeded by his
first lieutenant on the "Eagle" staff, that graceful writer and orator,
Andrew McLean, who afterward took the editorship of the Brooklyn
"Citizen." That the "Eagle" was destined to be lucky with its editors,
received further indication in the appearance of St. Clair McKelway at
the post of command. Mr. McKelway's brilliant gifts as a speaker and as
a writer have given to him peculiar prominence in the social, artistic,
and political life of the city and the State.

The policy of the "Eagle" has been independently Democratic from the
outset, a policy which has fostered, as it has been favored by, a
singularly representative constituency. The paper is now controlled
by the Eagle Association, of which Colonel William Hester is the
president, William Van Anden Hester is secretary, and Harry S.
Kingsley is treasurer. Its business management, like its editorial
management,--if these may consistently be separated,--has been
aggressive and liberal, and goes far toward explaining the present
national reputation of the paper.

[Illustration: FACSIMILE (same size) OF LETTER BY WALT WHITMAN IN
POSSESSION OF CHARLES M. SKINNER, ESQ., BROOKLYN

(Transcriber's note: Text of letter is in Footnote 24.)]

Henry C. Murphy, who had, as we have seen, taken so important a part
in the starting of the "Eagle," was a young Democrat of prominence in
the county. Born in the village of Brooklyn, Murphy had been educated
at Columbia College, where he distinguished himself as a writer as well
as in general scholarship, and was admitted to the bar in 1833. During
his student years, he had taken part in debates in the Young Men's
Literary Association, which afterward became the Hamilton Literary
Association, with Murphy as president. To this association belongs
the honor of popularizing the lyceum lecture system, which afterward
became so potent a factor in American civilization, and which in this
city represented the beginning of the Brooklyn Lyceum and the Brooklyn
Institute. In 1834 he was appointed assistant corporation counsel of
the city, and in the following year he formed a legal partnership with
the leading lawyer of the city, John A. Lott. This firm, which Judge
Vanderbilt afterward joined, won great influence in the city, with
whose early politics it was so closely connected.

In 1842 Murphy was chosen Mayor of Brooklyn. He was then but thirty
years of age. His administration was forcible throughout, and
consistently resulted in his election to Congress, of which he was one
of the youngest members. He was a candidate for reelection, but was
defeated by Henry L. Seaman. In the State Constitutional Convention of
1846, he was a delegate from Kings County, with Tunis G. Bergen and
Conrad Schwackhammer, and in the autumn of the same year he was again
elected to Congress by a large vote.

Upon the election of Buchanan, Murphy was appointed Minister to the
Hague. On his return to this country he was elected to the state Senate
as an avowed champion of the Union cause. In the later political life
of Brooklyn, Murphy took an active interest; and local enterprises,
such as the bridge and various railroads, claimed his attention and
support. He made important historical collections, wrote valuable
contributions to local history, edited the "Journal" of Dankers and
Sluyter, and was a leader in the establishment of the Long Island
Historical Society.

Murphy was succeeded as Mayor of Brooklyn by Joseph Sprague. The city
had now 30,000 population, and thirty-five miles of paved and lighted
streets. The Atlantic Dock Company had been incorporated. Thirty-five
churches opened their doors on Sunday. A line of stages ran from the
ferry to East Brooklyn, and soon afterward a line was established
between Fulton and South ferries. In the year of Sprague's election 570
new buildings were finished or in course of erection. During Sprague's
second term the Brooklyn City Hospital was incorporated.

Sprague was succeeded by Thomas G. Talmadge, who was followed by
Francis Burdett Stryker. In March, 1848, gaslight came into use.

It was in the same year that Augustus Graham indelibly wrote his name
in the annals of Brooklyn, by his munificent gifts to the Brooklyn City
Hospital, and to the establishment of the Brooklyn Institute in the
building on Washington Street built for the Brooklyn Lyceum.

A fire which took place in September destroyed three churches, the
post-office, two newspaper offices, and other property to the value of
a million and a half of dollars, and might have been more disastrous
had not the flames been checked by the destruction of buildings in
their path.

Edward Copeland was elected Mayor in 1849. Cypress Hills Cemetery had
been established in 1848. In the following year the Cemetery of the
Evergreens was incorporated. The ground for Greenwood Cemetery had
already been secured.

The idea of a bridge to connect New York and Brooklyn, which had
occasionally been discussed at earlier times, was now seriously taken
up. The water front assumed a constantly increasing activity.

Copeland was followed in the mayoralty by Samuel Smith, Conklin Brush,
and Edward C. Lambert. The latter was able to congratulate the city on
a population of 120,000, and the position of seventh city in the Union.

The Brooklyn City Railroad, incorporated in 1853, began in July of the
following year the running of street cars on Myrtle Avenue, Fulton
Street, and Fulton Avenue. In August cars were running to Greenwood.

The act of May 9, 1846 (Session Laws 1846, chapter 166), authorized
the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commonalty of the city of Brooklyn to create
a temporary loan, in addition to the loans already authorized, not
exceeding the sum of $100,000, for the purpose of erecting a city hall,
and provision was made for the issuance of bonds for the purpose.

The Legislature at their session on the 12th of April, 1848, amended
the 4th section of the act of April 21, 1846, authorizing the
Supervisors to create a loan, and provide further accommodations for
the confinement of prisoners, so as to read as follows:--

    SEC. 4. The Board of Supervisors of said county, if land should
    be purchased, are authorized to remove as many prisoners
    sentenced to hard labor in the County Jail, as they may deem
    necessary, to the lands so purchased; to place them under such
    keeper or keepers as they may appoint for that purpose, and
    to employ them in erecting said penitentiary and workhouse,
    or such other labor as may be deemed expedient; and they may
    also authorize and direct the superintendents of the poor of
    said county to take charge of the establishment (subject to
    the directions of said Board), and provide the necessary food
    and clothing for said prisoners, and for those committed as
    herein next provided. And it shall be lawful for the several
    magistrates and justices of the peace in said county to commit
    all offenders convicted before them of petty causes, offenses
    or misdemeanors, who are in their judgment proper subjects for
    the penitentiary and workhouse in their discretion.

The city court of Brooklyn was established by an act of the
Legislature, March 24, 1849. It had but one judge until 1870, when it
was reorganized with three.

On the 10th of March, 1849, an act was passed authorizing the Mayor and
Common Council to create a loan, in addition to the loans which had
already been authorized by law, not exceeding $50,000, to complete and
finish the City Hall.

By virtue of the laws of 1850, chapter 23, the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Commonalty were authorized to create an additional loan of $15,000,
for the purpose of completing the City Hall of Brooklyn, paying for
the fences, ornamenting the grounds belonging thereto, and all other
necessary expenses for the full completion and protection of the same.

The subject of building a new court house was again agitated in 1852.
On the 17th of September in that year a special committee was appointed
by the Board of Supervisors to consider the matter. On the 18th of
January, 1853, they reported in favor of applying to the Legislature to
carry out the work.

On the 29th of June, 1846, Charles G. Taylor offered a resolution in
the Board of Supervisors declaring that it was expedient to purchase
lands for the purpose of erecting a workhouse and penitentiary thereon,
in accordance with the act of the Legislature passed April 21, 1846.
Charles G. Taylor, Barnet Johnson, and James Debevoise, the committee
having the matter in charge, reported that 18 acres could be purchased
at $200 per acre, and 29 acres for $180 per acre. On the 4th of August,
1846, a resolution was adopted that the same should be purchased, if
the titles proved good. On the 4th of December, 1846, Seth Low, John
Skillman, and Tunis G. Bergen were appointed a committee to present
plans and details.

In April, 1846, the county treasurer issued $2000 of bonds for the
erection of the Penitentiary. In 1849 $10,000 more were issued. The
total amount of bonds issued up to March 2, 1854, was $155,000. On the
5th of June, 1855, the committee reported that the cost thus far of the
easterly and main wing was $111,433.49.

The new Penitentiary was occupied as early as January, 1854, although
it was not completed until August, 1856. The total amount of bonds
issued for the Penitentiary was $205,000.

It was not until May 3, 1855, that steps were taken to build the female
wing of the new Penitentiary.

On the 5th of April, 1853, an act was passed by the Legislature
requiring that whenever the Penitentiary should be ready for the
reception of prisoners, the Board of Supervisors should file a
certificate thereof in the office of the clerk of the county, and
publish a notice thereof for three weeks in one or more newspapers,
and that thereafter all persons who, on conviction, are liable to
imprisonment for not less than thirty days, should be sent there by the
magistrates. The Penitentiary is situated on a spot familiarly called
Crow Hill, and is bounded by Nostrand, Rogers, President, and Carroll
streets. It faces on Carroll Street. Prisoners have been sent here from
all parts of the State, and, through the efficient management of its
wardens, it has been rendered nearly, if not wholly, self-supporting.

The increase of business and the unsuitableness of location rendered it
necessary to change the place for holding the courts. The Legislature
was again appealed to, and in 1853 an act was passed authorizing the
county to borrow a sum not to exceed $100,000, to purchase a site, and
erect buildings for such county offices as the Board of Supervisors
might designate. Many sites were offered, and various and diverse
propositions and suggestions were made. Some were anxious to have
the Court House built on Fort Greene, holding that it would, from
its elevation, give character to the building. The matter slumbered
until October 10, 1855, when it was again brought up and postponed
indefinitely. The difficulty of securing a suitable site now presented
itself. Seventeen lots on Vanderbilt Avenue near Baltic Street
were proposed, and the Board resolved to purchase them. Soon after
the purchase the people, realizing that it was not a proper place,
instituted opposition.

When the City Hall was opened the courts were transferred to that
building. The room long occupied by Justice Courtney was used by the
Supreme and county courts. A small room opposite, now occupied by
the Bureau of Elections, was appropriated for the purpose of holding
special terms. The county clerk's office occupied a part of the
apartments of the present comptroller. The surrogate's court occupied
the Court Street portion of the comptroller's present rooms, whilst the
register's office was opposite, in the rooms of the present auditor.
The city court was held in the room now used by the city clerk. Hall's
Exchange Building, in which the courts had been held, was destroyed in
the great fire of 1848, and the courts were, thereupon, transferred to
the City Hall.

In those days the sheriff lived with his family in the jail on Raymond
Street.

If the city was forced to look to the building of its penal
institutions and courts of justice, institutions of another kind were
springing into being. In 1854 the Brooklyn Female Academy became the
Packer Collegiate Institute for Girls; and in the same year a boy's
academy was established, with the title of the Brooklyn Collegiate and
Polytechnic Institute. The development of these important educational
institutions has been one of the most gratifying incidents in the life
of the city.

As early as 1848 there had been serious talk of the civic union of
Williamsburgh and Brooklyn.

The village of Williamsburgh was incorporated in 1827. Its boundaries
then were: "Beginning at the bay, or river, opposite to the town of
Brooklyn, and running thence easterly along the division line between
the towns of Bushwick and Brooklyn, to the lands of Abraham A. Remsen;
thence northerly by the same to a road or highway, at a place called
Sweed's Fly; thence by the said highway to the dwelling-house, late
of John Vandervoort, deceased; thence in a straight line northerly, to
a small ditch or creek, against the meadow of John Skillman; thence by
said creek to Norman's Hill; thence by the middle or centre of Norman's
Hill to the East River; thence by the same to the place of beginning."

The first officers of the Board of Trustees were Noah Waterbury,
president; Abraham Meserole, secretary; and Lewis Sanford, treasurer.
In 1829 Williamsburgh had a population of 1007. In 1835 Williamsburgh
and Bushwick together had a population of 3314. It was in this year
that the "Williamsburgh Gazette" was started. Within a few years came
the Williamsburgh Lyceum, the Houston Street Ferry, the "Williamsburgh
Democrat," and a Bible Society.

By chapter 144 of Laws of 1850 (p. 242), passed April 4, 1850, so much
of the territory of the city of Brooklyn as lay east of the centre of
Division Avenue, between the intersection of South Sixth Street, in the
village of Williamsburgh, and Flushing Avenue, in the city of Brooklyn,
was annexed to the village of Williamsburgh; the city of Brooklyn was
divided into eleven wards (therein described), and the Common Council
of the city was authorized, under certain restrictions and limitations,
to cause streets and avenues to be opened and widened, and to be
regulated, graded, and paved, public squares and parks to be opened,
regulated, and ornamented, etc., and to close up and discontinue roads,
streets, lanes, and avenues, etc.[25]

By chapter 102 of Laws of 1835 (p. 88), passed April 18, 1835, a
portion of the town of Bushwick--"beginning at the southeast corner
of the present village of Williamsburgh, running thence southeasterly
along the line that divides the town of Bushwick and the city of
Brooklyn, to a turnpike road leading from Brooklyn to Newtown and
Flushing, at a point near, and southwesterly of, the house of
Charles DeBevoise, thence running along said road northeasterly to
the crossroads, thence northerly along the road leading to Bushwick
Church to the Williamsburgh and Jamaica turnpike, thence northerly
along the road, passing the church, and leading to Newtown Bridge,
about twelve hundred feet, to an abrupt angle in said road turning
to the east, thence westerly about eighteen hundred feet until it
intersects the head of navigation of a branch of Bushwick Creek,
thence westerly along said branch creek, according to its meanderings,
to the main creek, which is the present boundary of the said village of
Williamsburgh, thence southerly along the eastern boundary line of the
said village of Williamsburgh to the place of beginning"--was annexed
to Williamsburgh, and Nicholas Wyckoff, David Johnson, Peter Stagg,
Robert Ainslie, and John Leonard were appointed commissioners to lay
out streets.

In 1840 the town of Williamsburgh was created, and eleven years later
the city of Williamsburgh was incorporated, comprising the village of
Williamsburgh. The city was divided into three wards, and the Common
Council was authorized, under certain restrictions and limitations, to
cause streets and avenues to be opened and widened, and public squares
and parks to be opened.

The city charter was drawn by S. M. Meeker, counselor of the village,
a lawyer, whose name was prominent in the annals of this section of
Brooklyn for many years. Mr. Meeker was counsel of the Williamsburgh
Savings Bank when chosen its president in 1881. He was a prime mover in
the establishment of the First National Bank.

Abraham J. Berry was the first Mayor of the city of Williamsburgh,
William H. Butler being city clerk, George Thompson, attorney and
counsel, and Jas. F. Kenny, comptroller. In the first year of the
new city's life the Farmers' and Citizens' Bank, the Williamsburgh
City Bank, the Williamsburgh City Fire Insurance Company, and the
Williamsburgh Medical Society were incorporated. The population was
estimated at over 40,000. Over 9000 children attended school, and
there were fifteen private schools. A year later the Mechanics' (now
the Manufacturers') National Bank was established, and a number of new
churches appeared. There were twenty-five Sunday-schools of different
denominations. The Young Men's Christian Association of Williamsburgh
began its career under favorable auspices.[26]

William Wall, elected Mayor on the Whig ticket in 1854, was soon at
swords' points with the Aldermen, whose resolutions he vetoed with
remarkable frequency. His antagonism toward the Aldermen led him to
take an active part with those who were urging the consolidation of the
cities of Brooklyn and Williamsburgh.

The movement toward annexation was accompanied by all of the conflict
of opinion that inevitably characterizes such movements. The Brooklyn
"Star," in March, remarked editorially: "We know there are some
amongst us who prate of greater taxation and inequalities in favor
of Williamsburgh. There are those in Williamsburgh who argue that
Brooklyn has greatly the advantage. We are rather disposed to argue
that it is like a well-assorted union between man and wife, where, with
kindred feelings and objects, both have the advantage. No matter how
the property relations may seem to be, we are convinced that time will
vindicate the advantage of the union.

"We hope our members of the Legislature will not be persuaded by
individual efforts and desires to thwart the will of three committees
clearly expressed, with Brooklyn at their head, lifting up the loudest
voice. We have taken some pains to ascertain the public sentiment, and
it is at this day more clearly in favor of the union than when the vote
was taken."

The Williamsburgh "Times" warmly supported the consolidation movement.
When the bill prepared by the Consolidation Commission was before
the Legislature for action, the "Times" said (March 24): "With the
exception of the amendment relative to the office-holders, the bill is
nearly in all respects as it passed from the hands of the commissions.
Thus the hopes of the friends of consolidation seem in a fair way of
being realized, and after a world of pain and trouble the parturition
of the new city is at hand. Let us trust that the friends of this
measure will not meet with an entire disappointment. There are two
grounds for hope in this connection. Brooklyn has been at least a
little better governed than ourselves, and a large city can be more
cheaply managed than a small one."

The publication of the Williamsburgh "Times" was begun in 1848 by
Aaron Smith and George C. Bennett. Bennett, who previously had been
associated with Levi Darbee and Isaac A. Smith in printing the
Williamsburgh "Morning Post,"[27] acquired control of the "Times,"
and made it a pronounced Whig organ. In 1859 an interest in the paper
was secured by Bernard Peters, and under this favoring partnership
the paper rapidly advanced in circulation and influence. Bernard
Peters, who subsequently became sole proprietor of the paper, had made
an important journalistic record at Hartford, Conn., and was already
well known in Brooklyn as a Universalist clergyman, whose ringing
Union sermons and addresses had aroused public interest during the
war period. The later history of the "Times," under Peters' energetic
editorship, has been one of consistent progress in public confidence.
In politics the "Times" has been Republican, while its policy, to avoid
any partisanship that might impair its value as a newspaper, has been
strongly worked out with the notable business management of William C.
Bryant.

By the act of the Legislature passed in April, 1854, all that part of
the county of Kings known as the cities of Brooklyn and Williamsburgh
and the town of Bushwick, and bounded easterly by the town of Newtown,
Queens County, south by the towns of New Lots, Flatbush, and New
Utrecht, west by the town of New Utrecht and the Bay of New York,
and north by the East River, was consolidated into one municipal
corporation called the city of Brooklyn, and divided into eighteen
wards, therein described, and into the eastern and western districts.

A year later all local distinctions in relation to the eastern and
western districts were abolished, except as to the Fire Department.

George Hall, who had been first Mayor of Brooklyn upon its
incorporation as a city, became the first Mayor of the consolidated
cities of Brooklyn and Williamsburgh. In his inaugural address the
Mayor said:--

    "It is now twenty-one years since I was called by the Common
    Council to preside over the affairs of the late city of
    Brooklyn, then first ushered into existence. The population
    of the city at that time consisted of about 20,000 persons,
    residing for the most part within the distance of about three
    quarters of a mile from Fulton Ferry. Beyond this limit no
    streets of any consequence were laid out, and the ground
    was chiefly occupied for agricultural purposes. The shores,
    throughout nearly their whole extent, were in their natural
    condition, washed by the East River and the bay. There were
    two ferries, by which communication was had with the city
    of New York, ceasing at twelve o'clock at night. There were
    within the city two banks, two insurance companies, one savings
    bank, fifteen churches, three public schools, and two weekly
    newspapers. Of commerce and manufactures it can scarcely be
    said to have had any, its business consisting chiefly of that
    which was required for supplying the wants of its inhabitants.
    Sixteen of its streets were lighted with public lamps, of
    which thirteen had been supplied within the previous year. The
    assessed value of the taxable property was $7,829,684, of which
    $6,457,084 consisted of real estate and $1,372,600 of personal
    property.

    "Williamsburgh was incorporated as a village in 1827. Its
    growth was comparatively slow until after the year 1840. At the
    taking of the census in that year it was found to contain 5094
    inhabitants, and since that time it has advanced with almost
    unparalleled rapidity, having attained a population of 30,780
    in 1850. It was chartered as a city in 1851.

    "Within the comparatively short period of twenty-one years what
    vast changes have taken place! Bushwick, from a thinly settled
    township, has advanced with rapid strides, and yesterday
    contained within its limits two large villages, together
    numbering a population of about 7000 persons. Williamsburgh,
    from a hamlet, became a city with about 50,000 inhabitants.
    Brooklyn, judging from its past increase, yesterday contained
    a population of about 145,000, and on this day--the three
    places consolidated into one municipal corporation--takes its
    stand as the third city in the Empire State, with an aggregate
    population of about 200,000 inhabitants."[28]

Under the new charter the Board of Aldermen consisted of one alderman
elected from each ward. A new board of education came into existence
and held its first meeting in February. Other incorporations were those
of the Fire Department, the Nassau Water Company, and the Brooklyn
Sunday School Union.

The Williamsburgh Ferry Company had been authorized in 1853 to build
and maintain docks, wharves, bulkheads, and piers on the land under
water in the East River, in front of their lands in the city of
Williamsburgh between the foot of South Sixth Street and the foot of
South Eighth Street, and extending into the river to a line not more
than sixty-five feet from the front of the largest pier on the property.

The Common Council voted a subscription of $1,000,000 to the stock of
the Nassau Water Company, on condition that the company show $2,000,000
paid capital stock, and the Aldermen afterward added $300,000 to the
subscription. In July of the following year (1856), work on the Nassau
Water Works was begun at Reservoir Hill, Flatbush Avenue. The occasion
of breaking ground was signalized by imposing ceremonies.

In his January address Mayor Hall announced the opening of fourteen
miles of new streets, and the erection of 1034 new buildings.

The business of the city was rapidly increasing, and with the
annexation of Williamsburgh the municipality needed all the
accommodations afforded in the City Hall for the transaction of its
business. The judges were complaining of the cramped condition of their
rooms, and the need of further accommodations. The question of a new
court house was publicly discussed. It was not, however, until July 6,
1859, that anything definite was done. The Board of Supervisors awoke
to the necessity of the hour, and decided to renew their efforts to
accomplish the desired result. On the 18th of July, 1860, they resolved
to make a new application to the Legislature for authority to purchase
land and erect the necessary buildings thereon.

On the 17th of April an act was passed authorizing the Board of
Supervisors of Kings County to build a court house for the county.
The county treasurer was authorized by the act, under the direction
of the Board of Supervisors, to borrow on the credit of the county a
sum not exceeding $100,000, and to give his official bonds, in such
form as the Board might prescribe, for the payment of the same, with
interest payable annually or semi-annually as the Board might direct.
The money so collected was to be expended, under the direction of the
Supervisors, in the purchase of lands and the erection of a building
for the proper accommodation of the courts and county officials. The
act also provided for a levy of tax to pay the principal and interest.
The Board of Supervisors was authorized to select and determine the
location; and when completed, and ready for occupancy, and notice
thereof filed, by the Board with the clerk of said county, the same
should become for all purposes the court house of the county.

On the 23d of May, 1860, a special committee was appointed to select a
proper site for the building, and to report to the Board. Every owner
of lots was anxious to dispose of them to the county. Washington Park
had its advocates. So favorably did the Supervisors look upon that
location, that a committee was appointed to confer with the Board of
Aldermen on the subject. When it began to look as if a portion of
that famous old hill would be chosen, the abutting owners sent in a
remonstrance, claiming that as the park had been paid for in part by
assessment on the surrounding property, the city had no right to grant
any such privilege. The city fathers, adopting this view of the case,
gave the Board no satisfaction, and the scheme was abandoned.

A circular was prepared, and invitations extended to architects to
submit plans. The plans were to be deposited with Albert H. Osborn,
clerk of the Board of Supervisors, on or before June 3, 1861. A large
number were submitted, some coming from St. Louis. The plan of King and
Tackritz of Brooklyn was finally accepted.

In March, 1861, the special committee appointed by the Supervisors
purchased the land on which the present building stands for $70,000.
The land having cost $70,000, only $30,000 was left of the sum directed
to be raised to purchase the land and erect the building. As that was
insufficient for the purpose, the aid of the Legislature was again
invoked, and the passage of an additional act obtained, authorizing
the Supervisors to borrow, on the credit of the county, an additional
sum of $100,000 to be expended under their direction for the erection
of a building or buildings, for the use of the courts and county
offices.

In 1858 the expense of supporting the almshouse, and the several
institutions connected therewith, was $158,604.66. Including
expenditures for out-door relief, the aggregate cost of supporting
the poor of the county was $192,079.77. The average number of inmates
during the year ending August 1, 1858, was 1495. The cost for the
support of each of them was $106.09, or $2.04 per week. This was a
decrease on each as compared with the previous year.

The expenses of the several departments were as follows: Almshouse,
$36,530.15; hospital, $51,755.19; lunatic asylum, $33,068.26; nursery,
$20,571.31; store, $605; miscellaneous, not including temporary relief,
$16,074.07.

The total number remaining July 31, 1857, was 1274; number admitted
during year, 8570; number of infants boarded out during year, 123;
number temporarily relieved, in Brooklyn, Western District, 20,793;
Eastern District, 11,661; Flatlands, Flatbush, and New Lots, 378; New
Utrecht, 108; making a total of 32,940; and the total number relieved
and supported wholly or in part during the year ending July 31, 1858,
was 41,623. The population of the county was at this time about
254,000. The number relieved was 16-1/3 per cent. of the population.

It may be interesting to state the number of persons remaining in these
institutions at the termination of previous fiscal years. The official
statement is as follows: 1849, 494; 1850, 592; 1851, 662; 1852, 873;
1853, 969; 1854, 1156; 1855, 1533; 1856, 1347; 1857, 1274; 1858, 1239.

The number admitted to the hospital during the year 1858 was 2299, of
whom 148 were born in the hospital.

During the seven years from August 1, 1850, to August 1, 1857, there
were 235 cases of small-pox, of which only 35 died. Of those admitted
into the hospital during 1857 and 1858, 565 were born in the United
States, 1261 in Ireland, and 369 in Germany. On the 31st of July, 1858,
there were 268 patients in the lunatic asylum. In 1850 the number in
the asylum was only 91. The nursery had, in 1858, 111 boys and 103
girls; total, 214.

On the 31st of July, 1862, there were in the almshouse, 373; in the
nursery, 260; in the lunatic asylum, 366. In 1863 there were 404 in
the almshouse; in the nursery, 217; and in the lunatic asylum, 396.

The total number relieved and supported, in whole or in part, for the
year ending July 31, 1863, was 22,879. The population of the city at
the time was 295,000. The net cost was $141,640.52.

Mayor Hall was succeeded by Samuel S. Powell, who served for three
terms. During his occupancy of the Mayor's chair many significant
advances were made in the growth of the city. In April, 1857, the
Metropolitan Police law went into effect. By this enactment the
counties of New York, Kings, Westchester, and Richmond, and the towns
of Newtown, Flushing, and Jamaica were placed under a single system of
police. The first commissioners from Brooklyn were J. S. T. Stranahan,
James W. Nye, and James Bowen.

Ridgewood water was supplied to the city through mains which were
opened on December 4, 1858. In April of the following year the event
was marked by a public demonstration. The Brooklyn Academy of Music was
incorporated in 1859, and the collegiate department of the Long Island
College Hospital was opened.




CHAPTER XII

THE PERIOD OF THE CIVIL WAR

1861-1865

  Election of Mayor Kalbfleisch. The Call for Troops. The
    Militia. Filling the Regiments. Money for Equipment. Rebuking
    Disloyalty. War Meeting at Fort Greene. Work of Women. The
    County sends 10,000 Men in 1861. Launching of the Monitor at
    Greenpoint. The Draft Riots. Colonel Wood elected Mayor. Return
    of the "Brooklyn Phalanx." The Sanitary Fair. Its Features
    and Successes. The Calico Ball. Significance of the Fair. The
    Christian Commission. Action of the Supervisors of the County.
    The Oceanus Excursion. Storrs and Beecher at Sumter. News of
    Lincoln's Death. Service of the National Guard. The "Fighting
    Fourteenth." The Newspapers. Court House finished.


The sense of impending and imminent danger, which made itself felt
throughout the country in the winter of 1860-61, was strongly apparent
in Brooklyn, and when the crash came the city was not unprepared in any
sense.

It was only a few days after the election of Martin Kalbfleisch as
Mayor[29] that Brooklyn was startled by the news that Fort Sumter had
surrendered.

The announcement occasioned intense excitement throughout the city. In
a remarkably short space of time the strength of the city's loyalty
to the Union cause made itself felt. Those who sympathized with the
South, or who were wavering in their allegiance, were made to feel
the necessity for modifying their views, or for avoiding any sign of
disloyalty. The national flag appeared in every quarter of the city.
Its absence was noted wherever that absence could be construed into a
sign of unpatriotic feeling. Crowds threatened violence to Southern
sympathizers. The Mayor urged moderation, and the early excesses of
patriotism soon passed.

Meanwhile, volunteers flocked to the flag. The four militia regiments
in the Fifth Brigade were the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, Twenty-eighth,
and Seventieth. At the time of the alarm the regiments were not
numerically strong. Less than 300 men were in the Thirteenth; less than
200 in the Fourteenth; the Twenty-eighth and Seventieth were somewhat
stronger.

At the call of the President the regiments rapidly filled. Captain W.
H. Hogan organized an artillery company. In the Eastern District, the
Forty-seventh Regiment was organized, with Colonel J. V. Meserole in
command. Amid enthusiastic demonstrations the Fourteenth left for the
front in May, 1861.

The scenes during the first hours of the war period were those
characteristic of every community in which the Union sentiment was
strong and unquestionable. Every class in the community made response.
Plymouth Church, from whose pulpit had come the loyal and stirring
oratory of Henry Ward Beecher, subscribed $1000 toward the equipment of
the local regiments. A sum equally generous came from the Pierrepont
Street Baptist Church. The Union Ferry Company offered to continue the
salaries of any of its employees who might volunteer, thus assuring
the safety of their families. Local business men and corporations gave
similar demonstrations of patriotism. The appropriations of the Common
Council began with a provision for the disbursement of $75,000 for the
relief of the families of those who should volunteer. The Kings County
Medical Society resolved that its members should attend gratuitously
the families of volunteers.

There were signs of lukewarmness in certain quarters, and definite
manifestations of sympathy with the South; but these met with decisive
rebuke whenever they appeared. The Navy Yard was threatened, or was
supposed to be threatened, by incendiary rebel sympathizers, but prompt
action prevented the possibility of any form of attack.

A war meeting at Fort Greene drew out 50,000 people, and elicited
demonstrations of hearty patriotism. A corps of Brooklyn women
volunteered as nurses, and lint societies were organized by energetic
women who undertook to supply equipment for the nurses. Women in the
Clinton Avenue Congregational Church supplied over fifteen hundred
yards of bandaging to the Twenty-eighth Regiment, which, amid great
enthusiasm, followed the Thirteenth to the front. Brooklyn was largely
represented in the organizing of the Twenty-first New York Volunteers.
The organization of the Forty-eighth New York, under Colonel Perry, the
First Long Island Regiment, the Nineteenth New York Volunteers (East
New York), and the Fifth Independent Battery followed.

In 1861 the city and county sent out 10,000 men. The draft of 1862
rather staggered the city at its first coming, but the rally was
enthusiastic, and the patriotic work proceeded. The armories of the
city became centres of loyal activity.

The new fighting engine, the Monitor, was launched at Greenpoint in
January, 1862. In March the novel iron craft had her struggle with the
rebel Merrimac in Hampton Roads.

Greenpoint sent over a company to the Thirty-first New York Volunteers.

In 1863 the local militia, or National Guard, included the Thirteenth
Regiment, under Colonel Woodward; the Twenty-third, Colonel Everdell;
the Twenty-eighth, Colonel Bennett; the Forty-seventh, Colonel
Meserole; the Fifty-second, Colonel Cole; the Fifty-sixth, Colonel
Adams. In the Southern trips, such as those made by the Twenty-third
and the Forty-seventh regiments, the National Guard performed excellent
service aside from the heavier duty in action.

The New York draft riots of 1863 naturally affected Brooklyn very
closely, not only in such instances of mob violence as the firing of
the grain elevators in the Atlantic Basin, but in the menacing and
really dangerous movements incident to the reign of terror. Brooklyn
volunteers lent important aid in the defense of the State Arsenal in
New York.

To facilitate recruiting in the county, the Supervisors, in November,
1863, resolved upon acquiring a loan of $250,000, and $300 bounty was
afterward paid to each recruit.

Mayor Kalbfleisch was succeeded as Mayor in 1864 by Colonel Wood, who
had organized the Fourteenth Regiment, was wounded and captured at the
first Bull Run, and was released by exchange in 1862.

The return of the "Brooklyn Phalanx," the First Long Island Regiment,
under Colonel Cross, in January, 1864, was the occasion for an immense
demonstration. The regiment had taken part in fourteen battles, and
came home with 234 men out of 1000.

An event of the war period that is to be regarded as of the highest
significance, not only for the relation it bore to the necessities of
the war, but to the progress of the city, was what is known as the
great Sanitary fair.

[Illustration: CRUISER BROOKLYN, BUILT IN 1858]

This Brooklyn and Long Island fair was instituted by the War Fund
Committee of Brooklyn and Kings County, and the Woman's Relief
Association of Brooklyn, which was known as the Brooklyn Auxiliary of
the United States Sanitary Commission. The fair committee was organized
with A. A. Low as president. Arrangements for cooperation between all
the churches and private and public societies in the city were
efficiently perfected, and a public meeting was held at the Academy of
Music in January, 1864. Meetings to promote the same object were held
at Flatbush, Greenpoint, and elsewhere. Buildings were erected adjacent
to the Academy to give shelter to the Museum of Arts, a restaurant, a
department of relics and curiosities, and quarters for the "Drum Beat,"
a journal published during the fair, under the editorship of the Rev.
Dr. Storrs and Francis Williams.

The fair opened on Washington's Birthday with a great military parade.
The Academy presented a brilliant spectacle. The art display in the
Assembly rooms was a triumph in the art annals of the city; the New
England Kitchen ingeniously duplicated the features of a colonial New
England domestic scene.

On March 11 the fair closed with a memorable calico ball. In the hall
of manufactures was a huge broom, sent from Cincinnati, and bearing
this inscription: "Sent by the managers of the Cincinnati Fair,
Greeting: We have swept up $240,000; Brooklyn, beat this if you can."
Brooklyn's reply, in the words of an individual respondent, was:
"Brooklyn sees the $240,000, and goes $150,000 better." Such, indeed,
were the superb figures of profit from this remarkable enterprise.

The fair has been much extolled for its influence on the city itself.
"The first great act of self-assertion ever made by the city of
Brooklyn," is a typical comment on the event. However the fair may
be regarded in this light, it was a brilliantly successful effort.
The service of the Women's Relief Association, of which Mrs. J. S.
T. Stranahan was the distinguished leader, was in the highest degree
admirable.

The Christian Commission for Brooklyn and Long Island, to act in
concert with the United States Christian Commission, was organized in
March. Before the close of the war this commission had sent out 1210
Bibles and parts of the Scriptures; 4033 psalm books and hymn books;
50,544 magazines and pamphlets; 177,520 newspapers and periodicals, and
other printing, making up a total of 1,078,304.

The Supervisors of the county repeatedly took measures to stimulate
volunteers. In July (1864) the Board directed its bounty committee
"to pay to any person furnishing an accepted volunteer or recruit for
three years' United States service, the sum not exceeding $300, the
same as paid to any drafted man furnishing a substitute, and to be paid
upon the like certificate of the United States officer, and without
regard to the person furnishing such recruit being liable to be drafted
into the United States service."

In July, shortly after the laying of the corner-stone of an armory in
the Eastern District, the committee began paying "hand-money" prizes
of $175 and upward to persons bringing recruits. In September the
news that Kings County was "out of the draft" was hailed with great
satisfaction.

Early in 1865 the evidences that the war was drawing to a close clearly
appeared. A party of excursionists which left Brooklyn, in April, on
the steamer Oceanus, learned at Charleston of Lee's surrender, and
witnessed the restoration of the flag on Sumter. The Rev. Dr. Storrs
and Henry Ward Beecher were present and spoke. The party heard of
Lincoln's assassination before reaching home.

The tragedy of Ford's Theatre, by which the strong hand of Lincoln
was taken from the government of the nation, threw the city into
profound gloom. The War Fund Committee opened subscriptions, which were
limited to one dollar from each person, and the result of this prompt,
patriotic, and well-managed movement was the statue of Lincoln by Henry
K. Brown, which occupies a commanding place in Prospect Park Plaza.[30]

The record of Brooklyn's National Guard organizations is an honorable
one. The Thirteenth Regiment (National Guard), the first company of
which, known as the Brooklyn Light Guard, was organized as long ago
as 1827, had for its first colonel Abel Smith. The call of President
Lincoln in 1861 elicited a unanimous offer of service from the
Thirteenth, which went farther south than any other New York regiment,
save the Eleventh. It formed a part of the left wing of McClellan's
army. When the regiment was called into active service for the third
time, John B. Woodward was in command.[31]

The Fourteenth Regiment has the distinction of being the only one of
the National Guard regiments that served throughout the war. It left
for the front under command of Colonel Alfred M. Wood. At Bull Run, at
Gettysburg, in the Wilderness, and elsewhere, it performed heavy and
prolonged service. In twenty-one battles its mettle was tested, and the
record made by the "red-legged devils" is a brilliant and honorable one.

The Twenty-third Regiment was the outgrowth of one of the Home Guard
companies of the war period. It was summoned to Harrisburgh, Penn.,
in 1863, being then in command of Colonel Everdell. The subsequent
history of the regiment has been one of steady rise in efficiency and
distinction.

The Forty-seventh Regiment, organized, as already stated, under the
leadership of J. V. Meserole,[32] was called to Washington, and was
recalled after thirty days' service in consequence of the draft riots,
in which, with the Forty-third, it performed valuable service.

The Third Battery was organized in 1864, by Major E. O. Hotchkiss.

Brooklyn is estimated to have contributed 30,000 men to the guards
and armies of the Union during the war; but this estimate would not
represent the highly creditable extent of the city's support to the
great cause which saw its triumph in 1865.

During the years of the war the voice of the Brooklyn press gave no
uncertain sound. The "Eagle" had become a lusty leader of public
opinion. The "Times" on the other side of the city was making for
itself a creditable name. The "Daily Union," established in 1863,
voiced the ardor of the Union cause with energetic patriotism. German
readers found in the "Long Island Anzeiger,"[33] started in 1864,
cordial support to every good Northern principle in a strain worthy of
the young journal's editor, Colonel Henry E. Roehr, who had been one
of the earliest volunteers, and won many honors at the front. In 1872
Colonel Roehr began the publication of a German daily paper, the "Freie
Presse."

On the 7th of April, 1863, the Legislature passed another act
authorizing the Supervisors to raise a sum not exceeding $125,000, to
be used in the erection and furnishing of the Court House building.

The ground on which the Court House stands is 140 feet on Fulton and
Joralemon streets, by 351 feet deep. No better location could have
been selected. The building was constructed under the direction of
the Board of Supervisors, of which body the late General Crook was
chairman. The building committee were Samuel Booth, Charles C. Talbot,
William H. Hazzard, Charles A. Carnaville, Gilliam Schenck, and George
G. Herman. The architects were Gamaliel King and Henry Teckritz.

The ground was broken October, 1861, and the corner-stone was laid May
20, 1862, by the Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted Masons of New York,
Daniel T. Walden of Brooklyn officiating as Grand Master. Addresses
were made on the occasion by Mayor Kalbfleisch, representing the city;
General Crook, president of the Board of Supervisors, representing the
county; Judge John A. Lott, for the judiciary; and Dr. Storrs delivered
an eloquent address.

Owing to the unsettled condition of the country, during the Rebellion,
the work did not advance rapidly. The price of materials increased,
and labor commanded war prices. Many of the contractors declined to
proceed, and new and less advantageous contracts had to be made. The
price of the carpenters' work alone was increased $5000, and the
feverish state of the times added more than $100,000 to the expense.
The total cost of the building, land, and furniture was $551,757.28.

The building is erected on the site of the old Military Garden. When
the land was purchased and the building erected, there were some old
buildings between it and Boerum Place. The Court House was placed on
a line with the street, in order that it might not be hidden by the
adjoining structures. It is a great pity that the Supervisors did not
see that in the process of time the adjoining land would be owned
by the county. Had they thought of this, they could have placed the
edifice twenty feet further back from the street, and thereby greatly
improved its appearance.

It is to be noted that the Court House was constructed within the sum
appropriated. Its manner of construction is in striking contrast to
the methods pursued in New York. It stands to-day a monument to the
integrity and capacity of the Board of Supervisors, and all in any wise
concerned in its construction.

The building was finished in February, 1865, and thrown open to public
inspection on the evenings of February 28 and March 1, 1865.[34]




CHAPTER XIII

BROOKLYN AFTER THE WAR

1866-1876

  Administration of Samuel Booth. Metropolitan Sanitary District
    created. Cholera. Erie Basin Docks. The County Institutions and
    their Work. The Gowanus Canal and the Wallabout Improvement.
    The Department of Survey and Inspection of Buildings.
    Establishing Fire Limits. Building Regulations. Prospect
    Park. The Ocean Parkway. The Fire Department. The Public
    Schools. The East River Bridge. Early Discussion of the Great
    Enterprise. The Construction begun. Death of Roebling. The
    Ferries. Messages of Mayor Kalbfleisch. Erection of a Brooklyn
    Department of Police. Samuel S. Powell again Mayor. A New City
    Charter. Movement toward Consolidation with New York. Henry
    Ward Beecher. Frederick A. Schroeder elected Mayor.


When Samuel Booth entered the office of Mayor in 1866, the city of
Brooklyn, in common with other communities throughout the country,
was suffering from the results of the strain imposed by the war and
its resulting incidents; and the fact that his own party was in the
minority in the Board of Aldermen did not lighten the burden of the
Mayor. Notwithstanding these political conditions no veto by Booth was
overridden by the Board.

In February of this year the Legislature created a metropolitan
sanitary district corresponding to the metropolitan police district,
and a board of health composed of the police commissioners, four
sanitary commissioners, and the health officer of the port of New York.
Brooklyn was represented in this board by Dr. James Crane, as sanitary
commissioner, and T. G. Bergen as police commissioner. Dr. John T.
Conkling was made assistant sanitary superintendent, and Dr. R. Cresson
Stiles was made deputy registrar of vital statistics for Brooklyn. To
this force six sanitary inspectors were added.

This movement represented the practical beginnings of that interesting
modern system of sanitary inspection and regulation by which the cities
of New York and Brooklyn have in recent years attained such improved
conditions. The movement had been urged by the prevalence of cholera
in Europe, and the new board found occasion to make great exertions
to prevent the entrance of the disease here. The disease appeared in
New York in April, and Brooklyn's first case was reported on July 8.
In spite of the precautions the disease gained considerable headway
in sections of the city where the sanitary conditions were worst, and
the total number of cases in Brooklyn reached 816. More than a quarter
of the total number of cases occurred in the twelfth ward. The number
of deaths in the city reached 573. The cholera hospital, opened at
Hamilton Avenue and Van Brunt Street in July, was closed on October 1.

In October the completion of the large Erie Basin dry docks was the
occasion of a celebration. These great docks, built by a Boston
syndicate, have since been used by most of the large iron ships that
are docked at the port of New York. The chamber of Dock No. 1 is 510
feet long, and 112 feet wide at the top. Dock No. 2 is 610 feet long
and 124 feet wide at the top.

In this month occurred also the interesting occasion marked by the
presentation of the medals ordered by the Common Council for each
honorably discharged, or still serving, Brooklyn soldier who had done
his share toward the saving of the Union.

Among the legacies of the war was a great deal of poverty that public
provision had not obliterated. An exceptional degree of distress
appeared during the decade following the war.

There were admitted into the almshouse during the year ending July 31,
1868, 5500 persons, and at the close of the year there remained 1995.
The total number relieved by the commissioners during the year was
44,734. The amount expended was $464,800.61, being an average of $10.40
to each person relieved. Of the number relieved, 7273 were in the
institutions. The population of the county at this time was 375,000. It
will be seen that 11.9 per cent, of the population received aid from
the public institutions. In addition to this, many others received
assistance from the churches and benevolent societies.

Formerly the county was divided into districts, to which the poor would
come to receive assistance. During the year ending July 31, 1870,
38,270 persons applied for and received aid. This was about ten per
cent, of the population. The amount expended was $128,602.83.

This system has been discontinued, and the work is done by other
agencies, notably by the Society for Improving the Condition of the
Poor. This society, officered by public-spirited and efficient men,
has made a highly creditable record. Connected with the society is an
effective advisory committee, selected from each ward. Every case is
carefully investigated, and imposition is rendered almost impossible.
In 1880 the number of cases investigated was 2755; of these 214, or
about eight per cent., were rejected. The number relieved who were
found worthy was about one fourteenth of the number receiving aid in
1870, while the disbursements were only $23,009.68, or 18.5 per cent.
of the former expense.

During the year ending July 31, 1869, there were remaining in the
lunatic asylum of the county, 557. The whole number under treatment
during the year was 818. Of those remaining, 225 were males and 322
females. There were admitted, during the year, 286. The whole number
admitted into the almshouse in 1869 was 2090.

The number treated in the hospital in 1863 was 2023; in 1864, 2601; in
1866, 3505; in 1867, 2828; in 1868, 2613. In the hospital there were
treated, in 1876, 4270 persons.

By an act of the Legislature in May, 1867, the Inebriates' Home for
Kings County was incorporated. A movement led by A. E. Mudie resulted
in the establishment of a Brooklyn branch of the American Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.

The Legislature provided at this session for the dredging and docking
of Gowanus Canal, and for the "Wallabout Improvement," under the
direction of a commissioner. Another provision of the Legislature was
for a department for the survey and inspection of buildings in the
Western District of the city. A section of this law provided that the
chief officer of this department should be called the "Superintendent
of Buildings." He was to be appointed by the board of trustees of the
fire department, and confirmed by the Board of Aldermen. He was to have
been an "exempt fireman" for five years, a fire underwriter for ten
years, and was to be, ex officio, a member of the board of trustees of
the fire department.

Concerning the duties of inspectors the law said:--

    "It shall be the duty of the inspectors to examine all
    buildings whereon violations are reported, and all buildings
    reported dangerous or damaged by fire, and make a written
    report of such examinations to the superintendent, with their
    opinion relative thereto; to reexamine all buildings under
    applications to raise, enlarge, alter, or build upon, and
    report to the superintendent the condition of the same, with
    their opinion relative thereto; and in the absence of the
    superintendent they shall be empowered to act with all the
    powers enjoyed and possessed by said superintendent. And
    the said inspectors shall perform such other duties as the
    superintendent of buildings may from time to time require of
    them.

    "The inspectors of buildings shall be under the direction of
    the superintendent, and shall attend all fires occurring in
    their respective districts, and report to the chief engineer
    or assistant engineer present, all information they may have
    relative to the construction and condition of the buildings
    or premises on fire, and the adjoining buildings, whether the
    same be dangerous or otherwise, and report in writing to said
    department, all such buildings damaged by fire or otherwise,
    with a statement of the nature and amount of such damages,
    as near as they can ascertain, together with the street and
    number of such building, the name of the owners, lessees, and
    occupants, and for what purpose occupied; and said inspectors
    shall examine all buildings in course of erection, alteration,
    and repair throughout their respective districts, at least once
    every day (Sundays and holidays excepted), and shall report
    in writing, forthwith, to the superintendent, all violations
    of any of the several divisions of this act, together with
    the street and number of the building or premises upon which
    violations are found, and the names of the owners, agents,
    lessees, occupants, builders, masons, carpenters, roofers,
    furnace builders, and architects, and all other matters
    relative thereto, and shall report in the same manner all
    new buildings in their respective districts, and the clerk
    shall perform such duties as may be assigned him by the
    superintendent. All the officers appointed under this act
    shall, so far as may be necessary for the performance of their
    respective duties, have the right to enter any building or
    premises in said city."

The fire limits of the city were then fixed to "comprise all that
portion of said city beginning at the East River at the northwest
corner of the United States Navy Yard, and running thence southwesterly
and southeasterly along said Navy Yard to the centre of Navy Street;
thence southerly along the centre of Navy Street to the northerly
side of Flushing Avenue; thence easterly along the northerly side of
Flushing Avenue to the centre of Washington Avenue; thence southerly
along the centre of Washington Avenue to the southerly side of Warren
Street; thence westerly along the southerly side of Warren Street to
the easterly side of Vanderbilt Avenue; thence southerly along the
easterly side of Vanderbilt Avenue, and across Flatbush Avenue in a
straight line, to the southeasterly corner of Union Street and Ninth
Avenue; thence southerly along the easterly side of Ninth Avenue to
the northerly side of Fifteenth Street; thence easterly along the
northerly side of Fifteenth Street to the centre of Tenth Avenue;
thence southerly along the centre of Tenth Avenue to the centre of
Twenty-first Street; thence westerly along the centre of Twenty-first
Street to a point distant one hundred feet west of the westerly side
of Third Avenue; thence northerly and parallel with Third Avenue, and
one hundred feet westerly therefrom, to a point distant one hundred
feet southerly from the southerly side of Hamilton Avenue; thence
northwesterly and parallel with Hamilton Avenue, and one hundred feet
southerly therefrom, to a point distant one hundred feet easterly from
the easterly side of Columbia Street; thence southerly and parallel
with Columbia Street, and one hundred feet easterly therefrom, to a
point distant one hundred feet southerly from the southerly side of
Nelson Street; thence westerly and parallel with Nelson Street, and
one hundred feet southerly therefrom, in a straight line, to a point
distant one hundred feet easterly from the easterly side of Richard
Street; thence southerly and parallel with Richard Street, and one
hundred feet easterly therefrom, to a point distant one hundred feet
southerly from the southerly side of King Street; thence westerly and
parallel with King Street, and one hundred feet southerly therefrom,
to the East River, and thence along the easterly shore of the East
River to the point or place of beginning at the said northwest corner
of the United States Navy Yard; and also extending from the centre of
Washington Avenue along both sides of Fulton Avenue, one hundred feet
on each side, to the easterly side of Bedford Avenue, and such further
portion of the Western District of said city as the Common Council of
the city of Brooklyn by ordinance may from time to time, as hereinafter
provided, include therein."

[Illustration: STATUE OF HENRY WARD BEECHER IN FRONT OF CITY HALL]

The act provided in detail rules for building within the fire limits,
and regulations appertaining to building in general. Thus it was
provided that "no timber shall be used in the front or rear walls of
any dwelling, store, or storehouse, or other building hereafter built
or erected within the Western District of said city, where stone,
brick, or iron is commonly used; each lintel on the inside of the front
or rear wall or side walls shall have a secure brick arch over it,
and no wall strips in any wall thereof shall exceed in thickness one
half of one inch, and in width two and one half inches; and no bond
timber in any wall thereof shall in width and thickness exceed the
width and thickness of a course of brick; and no bond timber shall be
more than six feet in length; and such bond timbers shall be laid at
least eighteen inches apart from each other, longitudinally, on either
side of any wall, and the continuous line thereof shall be broken every
six feet by inserting a brick of eight inches; and no front, rear, or
other wall of any such dwelling, store, storehouse, or other building
now erected, or hereafter to be erected, as aforesaid, within the fire
limits, or as they may hereafter be extended as aforesaid, or any brick
or stone building or buildings in the Western District of the city of
Brooklyn, shall be cut off or altered below, to be supported in any
manner, in whole or in part, by wood, but shall be wholly supported by
brick, stone, or iron; and no wood or timber shall be used between such
wall and such supporters; but it shall be lawful to insert a lintel of
wood over the doors and windows of the first story of stores, of oak or
Georgia pine, of such length and size as shall be first approved and
determined by the superintendent of buildings."

An important movement, begun before the war, culminating in 1860,
and bearing fruit soon after the close of the war, resulted in the
establishment of one of Brooklyn's chief objects of pride,--Prospect
Park. The actual construction of the park began in 1866, and was
steadily continued until 1874.

The laying out and adornment of the park was placed in the hands of
a commission, of which J. S. T. Stranahan, always a leading figure
in the park movement, was the president. This commission, originally
constituted under an act of the Legislature for the laying out,
adornment, and management of the park, had its powers and duties
increased by succeeding laws, until it had under its control Washington
Park, City Park, Carroll Park, the Parade Ground, and all the public
grounds appertaining to the city.

In their report for 1868 the commissioners said: "The propriety, if not
the absolute necessity, of an extension of Prospect Park at its western
angle, so as to allow the principal drive in that direction to be
carried out according to the original design, has been repeatedly urged
in former reports of the board, and the Legislature was on more than
one occasion applied to for permission to make the desired acquisition;
but without success. The commissioners have now, however, the pleasure
of stating that an act was passed at the last session, authorizing this
extension, and directing the board to apply to the Supreme Court for
the appointment of commissioners to estimate the value of the land so
taken."

The ground under treatment during the year covered by this report
represented over two hundred acres. "The finished drives," says this
report, "now amount to nearly three miles and a quarter, being a little
more than two miles in excess of that which we were able to report
last year. Of bridle paths, we have nearly a mile and a half finished
or well progressed; and of walks three miles and three quarters are
completed, and nearly five additional miles in progress. The very
large and continually increasing number of delighted visitors show
how thoroughly these walks and drives are appreciated by them. A fine
specimen of rustic work has been erected near the main entrance to the
park for a summer house; and a vine-covered trellis-work, with seats
overlooking the children's play-ground, commands a beautiful sea and
island view, and, when covered with the foliage and flowers of climbing
plants, will afford grateful shelter to all such as may be disposed to
linger in its shade."

The arrangement of the park steadily advanced until it has become one
of the most beautiful in the world. Covering 525 acres, its meadows,
woodland, lakes, and drives combine to create a picture of remarkable
beauty. The lakes cover 50 acres; the woodland, 110 acres; the meadows,
70 acres; the gardens and shrubbery, 200 acres; and there are over 60
acres of water-way. Five and a half miles of main drives were laid out,
and minor drives and walks covering a distance of thirteen miles.

The later creation of the Ocean Parkway was a desirable movement,
resulting as it did in a driveway running southward from the park to
the sea,--a distance of five and a half miles. This magnificent drive
is 210 feet wide for its entire length, being subdivided into a main
and two minor roadways, with lines of shade-trees to mark the receding
lines.

The Parade Ground, adjoining the park on the east, was a popular
device. The broad field has contributed an important factor in the
summer life of the city, its acres being in constant demand during the
out-door season for all manner of sports.

These improvements and others associated with the minor parks of the
city have placed heavy obligations on the park commissioners.

A permanent board of water and sewerage commissioners was created by
an act of April 2, 1869. The board received exclusive power to cause
streets to be repaved, regraded, and repaired; to cause cross-walks
to be relaid and sidewalks to be reflagged; and generally to have
such other improvements, in and about such streets so to be repaved,
regraded, or repaired, to be made, as in their judgment the public
wants and convenience shall require. The board held other authority,
afterward vested in the board of city works.

The charter of the Nassau Water Company was obtained in 1855. In 1857
the city had acquired all the contracts, property, and rights of the
Nassau Company. The thirty-six inch main laid from Ridgewood in 1858
was followed by an additional forty-eight inch main laid in 1867. Three
mains have since been added, giving the city water from a drainage area
of seventy-four square miles.

The act of 1869, by which the fire department of the city was
reorganized, called upon the Mayor, the street commissioners, the
president of the Board of Aldermen, the city treasurer, and the
comptroller, to appoint four citizens as fire commissioners: "Said
commissioners, on being qualified, shall meet and reorganize the
fire department of the city of Brooklyn, by electing one of said
commissioners to be president, and appointing a person to be secretary;
whereupon they shall possess and have all the power and authority
conferred upon or possessed by any and all officers of the present fire
departments of the city of Brooklyn, and of each division thereof,
except such power and authority as is now vested by law in the trustees
of the fire departments of the Eastern and Western districts of the
city of Brooklyn, which said divisions shall continue distinct from
each other, so far as relates to the Widows' and Orphans' Fund of each
district, but for no other purpose; and the persons elected and now
acting as the trustees of the Widows' and Orphans' Fund of the Eastern
District, and those elected and acting as trustees of the Widows' and
Orphans' Fund of the Western District, shall remain and continue to
have and exercise, each division respectively, all such powers and
duties as are now vested by law in said boards, with regard to the
Widows' and Orphans' Fund of each district" (sec. 2).

By the report of School Superintendent Buckley, issued in July (1869),
it appeared that the whole number of pupils attending the public
day schools numbered 70,000. In the evening schools 10,000 more were
taught, while the private schools received 22,142 scholars. At this
time the value of the schoolhouse sites in the city was placed at
$276,386; that of the buildings at $709,727.

Building throughout the city became very active. The widening of
Broadway in the Eastern District materially affected the prosperity
of that section of the city, to which Broadway became the leading
business artery. Grand Street developed into a busy thoroughfare, and
Fourth Street, now northern Bedford Avenue, became the third important
street of this section. For a site for a new building on Broadway at
Fifth (now Driggs Street), the Williamsburgh Savings Bank paid the then
enormous sum of $210,000. The superb structure afterward erected on
this ground is one of the most imposing in the city, its classic dome
rearing itself among those objects in the city which command first
attention from Bridge spectators.

In 1869 it was estimated that Brooklyn had 500 miles of streets, and
150 miles of sewer. Mayor Kalbfleisch's message reported a total of
3307 buildings erected in 1868. The assessed value of real and personal
property in the county was $199,840,551.

But most momentous of the movements of this period was that looking
to the building of the first East River bridge. The possibility of a
bridge over the East River had been discussed early in the history
of the two cities. General Johnson[35] had discussed the feasibility
of the suggestion, and had argued that the plan was quite within
the possibilities of engineering science. Thomas Pope, in a volume
published in 1811, by Alexander Niven, 120 Duane Street, New York,
describes his idea of a "flying pendent lever bridge," which was
intensely original as well as impossible.

In 1836 General Swift proposed the erection of a dike over the river.
The dike was to have a central drawbridge, and was to give foundation
to a broad boulevard, running between the two cities. At a later day
Colonel Julius A. Adams of Brooklyn, while engaged upon the bridge
of the Lexington and Danville Railroad, over the Kentucky River,
conceived the idea of an East River bridge, to extend from Fulton
Ferry on the Brooklyn side to a point near Chatham Square, on the
New York side. The intention was to have the main body of the bridge
built of two elliptic tubes, placed side by side, and supported by
ribbons of steel. There were to be three platforms for travelers,
and it is claimed by its projector that the capacity would have been
greater than that of the present structure. Colonel Adams communicated
his plan to Mr. William C. Kingsley, who was largely engaged in the
contracting business in this city. Mr. Kingsley entered heartily into
the spirit of the enterprise, and carefully examined the diagrams
submitted by the engineer. He spent several months in a thorough and
exhaustive examination of the entire question, studied the needs of
the two cities, and finally became thoroughly impressed with the
practicability and feasibility of the scheme. In connection with the
project he consulted with some of the eminent and public-spirited
citizens of Brooklyn, among them James S. T. Stranahan, Henry C.
Murphy, Judge Alexander McCue, Isaac Van Anden, Seymour L. Husted,
and Thomas Kinsella.[36] The more these gentlemen talked and thought
about the matter, the deeper interest they felt in it. Mr. Kingsley
in particular continued undisturbed in the belief that the time for
bridging the river had come, and he persisted in this view until the
enterprise was carried beyond the region of remote speculation into
the clear atmosphere of intelligently directed and practical effort.
The Hon. Henry C. Murphy at the time represented Kings County in the
state Senate, where he wielded a vast influence, and was regarded as
one of the leaders of his party in the State. Upon the basis of Colonel
Adams's plans a bill was prepared providing for the construction of
a bridge across the East River. Copies of the original drawings were
taken to Albany and exhibited in the Senate and Assembly Chamber. The
project received Senator Murphy's unflagging support, and through his
endeavors and the energetic and untiring aid of its projectors, it
became a law.

The act incorporating the New York Bridge Company was passed by the
Legislature on April 16, 1867. It named as incorporators the following
citizens of New York and Brooklyn:--

    John T. Hoffman
    Edward Ruggles
    Samuel Booth
    Alexander McCue
    Martin Kalbfleisch
    Charles A. Townsend
    Charles E. Bill
    T. Bailey Myers
    William A. Fowler
    Simeon B. Chittenden
    Smith Ely, Jr.
    Grenville T. Jenks
    Henry E. Pierrepont
    John Roach
    Henry G. Stebbins
    C. L. Mitchell
    Seymour L. Husted
    William W. W. Wood
    Andrew H. Green
    William C. Rushmore
    Alfred W. Craven
    T. B. Cornell
    Isaac Van Anden
    Alfred M. Wood
    William Marshall
    John W. Coombs
    John H. Prentice
    John P. Atkinson
    Edmund W. Corlies
    Ethelbert S. Mills
    Arthur W. Benson
    John W. Hayward
    P. P. Dickinson
    J. Carson Brevoort
    Samuel McLean
    William Hunter, Jr.
    Edmund Driggs
    John Morton

By this act power was given these incorporators and their associates
to acquire real estate for the site of the bridge and approaches; to
borrow money up to the limit of the capital, and to establish laws and
ordinances for the government of the structure upon its completion. The
capital stock was fixed at $5,000,000, in shares of $100 each, and the
directors were given power to increase the capital with the consent
of the stockholders. It was further provided that the incorporators
already named should constitute the first board of directors, holding
their places until June 1, 1868, and that after that the board should
have not less than thirteen nor more than twenty-one members. The
officers were to consist of a president, secretary, and treasurer. The
cities of New York and Brooklyn, or either of them, were empowered
at any time to take the bridge by payment to the corporation of the
cost and 33.33 per cent. additional, provided the bridge be made
free. An additional provision was made that the structure should have
an elevation of at least 130 feet above high tide in the middle of
the river, and that it should in no respect prove an obstruction to
navigation. In conclusion, the law authorized the cities of New York
and Brooklyn, or either of them, to subscribe to the capital stock
of said company such amounts as two thirds of their Common Councils
respectively should determine, to issue bonds in payment of these
subscriptions, and to provide for the payment of interest. It was
subsequently determined that the city of New York might subscribe
$1,500,000 of the total capital; the city of Brooklyn, $3,000,000, and
$500,000 to be paid by the private stockholders.

An enterprise of such magnitude was not carried forward without
extraordinary struggles. To keep the work, so far as possible, out of
politics required much ingenuity and persistence on the part of those
who were actuated by the most public-spirited motives. It was not
possible to wholly eliminate politics and self-seeking. An act of the
Legislature in 1859 provided that New York city should be represented
by its Mayor, comptroller, and president of the Board of Aldermen,
and Brooklyn by the commissioners of the sinking fund. The company was
authorized to occupy land under water on each shore to the distance of
250 feet.

Meanwhile, operations were begun in the direction of an effort to
raise the required $5,000,000 by private subscription, but they were
not successful, and it was determined to apply to the cities for
aid. Application was made to Brooklyn, through the Common Council,
for $3,000,000. After many months the incorporators were successful,
and later, in 1868, the city of New York subscribed the $1,500,000
required, and the stockholders made up the additional $500,000.

The shares, as has been shown, were fixed at $100 each. The list of the
original subscribers, as revealed by the original minute-book still in
the possession of the trustees, is very interesting. It is as follows:--

              SUBSCRIBERS          SHARES.

    Mayor, Aldermen, and Commonalty
        of the City of New York     15,000
    The City of Brooklyn            30,000
    Henry C. Murphy                    100
    Isaac Van Anden                    200
    William Marshall                    50
    Seymour L. Husted                  200
    Samuel McLean                       50
    Arthur W. Benson                    20
    Martin Kalbfleisch                 200
    Alexander McCue                    100
    William M. Tweed                   560
    Peter B. Sweeny                    560
    Hugh Smith                         560
    Henry W. Slocum                    500
    J. S. T. Stranahan                 100
    Grenville T. Jenks                  50
    Kingsley & Keeney                1,600
    John H. Prentice                    50
    William Hunter, Jr.                 50
    John W. Lewis                       50
                                    ------
    Total                           50,000

After the subscriptions were all made, several of the subscribers
withdrew or failed to make good their promises, whereupon Mr. Kingsley
took up their stock and advanced the amount necessary to cover their
deficiencies. In fact, he and the firm he represented took in all over
$300,000 of the entire $500,000 subscribed by the New York Bridge
Company.

John A. Roebling, who had made a brilliant record as a bridge engineer,
was chosen for the responsible post of chief engineer. His son, Colonel
Washington A. Roebling, was made first assistant engineer. The plans
of Roebling having been duly approved by the War Department engineers,
the United States government commission,[37] the Secretary of War,
and lastly of Congress itself, the company was formally organized in
the summer of 1869, with the following directors: Henry C. Murphy, J.
S. T. Stranahan, Henry W. Slocum, John W. Lewis, Seymour L. Husted,
Demas Barnes, Hugh Smith, William Hunter, Jr., Isaac Van Anden, J. H.
Prentice, Alexander McCue, William M. Tweed, Peter B. Sweeny, R. B.
Connolly, Grenville T. Jenks.

At this juncture a distressing accident darkened the opening days of
the great work. "One morning in June, 1869, Mr. Roebling, in company
with Colonel Paine and his other engineering associates, was engaged in
running a line across the East River, making the first survey of the
site for the Brooklyn foundation. Colonel Paine crossed to the New York
side and made the necessary signals, while the chief engineer stood on
the Brooklyn side. Just as the operations were approaching completion
Mr. Roebling was standing on the rack of one of the ferry slips taking
a final observation. At the moment a ferryboat entered the slip and
bumped heavily against the timbers, pressing them back to the point
where the chief engineer was standing. His foot was caught between the
piling and the rack. Colonel Paine, who was on the boat, noticed that
his chief started suddenly, and, while he made no outcry, an expression
of agony overspread his countenance. The first person to reach the side
of the injured man was his son, Colonel Washington A. Roebling, and
Colonel Paine quickly followed him. The chief engineer was assisted to
a carriage, remarking, as he went, 'Oh, what a folly.' He was quickly
driven to his residence on the Heights, and a surgeon was summoned. The
surgeon found that the toes of the right foot were terribly crushed.
It was at once decided that amputation was necessary. Mr. Roebling
rejected the suggestion of an anaesthetic, and personally directed the
operations of the surgeon. Nearly all of his toes were taken off at
the joints, but he maintained his composure throughout, and endeavored
to soothe the apprehensions of his family and friends. During his
subsequent illness he preserved intact the use of his mental faculties,
exhibiting indomitable will power. Eight days elapsed before fears were
entertained of a fatal result. Then the patient complained of a chill,
and it was soon discovered that lockjaw had set in. He lived eight days
longer, and toward the close suffered the most excruciating agonies,
but without complaint, and steadily insisted upon directing the method
of his treatment. Even after the muscular contraction precluded the
possibility of utterance he wrote with a pencil directions for his
attendants. He died of lockjaw just sixteen days after receiving his
injuries."

For a time work on the bridge was paralyzed. As soon as possible the
directors chose Colonel Roebling to succeed his father, and the great
undertaking proceeded.

The mechanical difficulties of the work were enormous. The history of
the labors, by which one difficulty after another was overcome, is one
of the most absorbing in the annals of engineering enterprise. Huge
wooden caissons were sunken on the diving-bell principle to a depth
sufficient to assure firm foundations for the piers, which were built
over them. The Brooklyn caisson was launched on March 19, 1870; the
New York caisson, in September, 1871. The greater difficulties existed
on the New York side, where an area of quicksand made it problematical
whether bed-rock could ever be reached. The foundation on the New York
side was required to be begun at a depth of seventy-eight feet. On the
Brooklyn side brick was used under the caisson. On the New York side
the space remaining after the lowest point had been reached was filled
with concrete.

The most perplexing problem having been solved by the sinking of the
foundations, the work advanced steadily. Difficulties with anchorages,
materials, contracts, expenditures, and appropriations made the work
necessarily slow, and there was a proportionate degree of public
impatience. The distant possibility of a completed bridge was the
permanent theme of newspaper jest and popular song. But the Brooklyn
tower, containing 38,214 yards of masonry, and rising 278 feet above
high water, was completed in the spring of 1875, and by the summer of
1876 the New York tower had also been finished.

During this period the pressure on the various city ferries was
demonstrating the necessity for some relief to the strain of travel
between the two cities. During the year 1869 the Union Ferry Company
carried 42,720,000 passengers; the Roosevelt, Grand, and James Slip
ferries, 7,028,000 passengers; the Greenpoint, 1,622,250; and the
Thirty-fourth Street, 2,250,550. The terms of the new lease of the
Union Ferry Company included a provision that the fare between five and
half-past seven o'clock, morning and evening, be one cent. It was a few
months later that the Brooklyn City Railroad Company reduced its rate
of fare to five cents.

Mayor Kalbfleisch was reelected Mayor. In his message of January
3, 1871, he places the population of the city in 1870 at 400,000;
the taxes levied during the year at $8,000,000; the city debt at
$36,000,000. The period was active in building operations. The
foundations of the still unfinished Roman Catholic Cathedral were laid
in 1868. The Twenty-eighth Regiment armory was completed in 1870. The
Brooklyn Theatre was begun early in the following year, shortly before
the finishing of the new wing of the Long Island College Hospital, and
the laying of the corner-stone of the Church Charity foundation at
Albany Avenue and Herkimer Street.

Brooklyn acquired a police department distinct from that of New York
in 1870. The management and control of this new department was vested
in a board of commissioners, known as the Board of Police of the City
of Brooklyn, composed of the Mayor and two other persons nominated by
him, and appointed by the Aldermen. The first two commissioners thus
chosen were Daniel D. Driggs and Isaac Van Anden. Patrick Campbell
was appointed chief clerk. Henry W. Van Wagner was placed at the
head of the detective squad. The following provisions were embraced
in the law establishing the department. "The commissioners shall
divide said city into precincts, not exceeding one precinct to each
thirty-six of the patrolmen authorized to be appointed. They may also
establish sub-precincts and assign two sergeants, two doormen, and as
many patrolmen as they may deem sufficient to each sub-precinct, and
shall appoint a telegraph operator who shall be assigned to duty by
the chief of police. They shall appoint as many captains of police as
there may be precincts, and assign one captain and as many sergeants
and patrolmen as they shall deem sufficient to each precinct. The
police force shall consist of a chief of police, captains, sergeants,
and patrolmen, who shall be appointed by the commissioners. The number
of sergeants shall not exceed four for each precinct, and one for
each special squad; and the number of patrolmen shall not exceed the
present number now doing duty in said city, unless the Common Council
of the city of Brooklyn shall, by resolution, authorize a greater
number, in which case they shall not exceed the number fixed in such
resolutions; and such resolutions may be passed by the Common Council
from time to time as that body may deem expedient. The commissioners
shall fill all vacancies in the police force as often as they occur."

By the message of Mayor Powell[38] in January, 1872, it appears
that there were 450 men on the police force, supported at an annual
expense of $500,000. The total liabilities of the city were then over
$30,000,000, and the total county debt nearly $4,000,000. During 1871
twenty miles of streets were graded and paved, and 2,596 buildings
erected. In his second message, a year later, the Mayor reported that
the water department was self-sustaining.

The pressure of opinion in favor of a new charter for the city resulted
in the appointment of a committee of one hundred, whose report appeared
in 1872, shortly before the death of ex-Mayor Kalbfleisch. In May the
charter was passed by the State Assembly. By this charter the offices
of Mayor, auditor, and comptroller were made elective; the excise
and police departments were consolidated; the appointment of heads
of departments was placed in the hands of the Mayor and Aldermen,
the departments being as follows: Police and excise, finance, audit,
treasury, collections, arrears, law, assessment, health, fire and
buildings, city works, parks, public instruction.

In November, 1873, John W. Hunter, who had represented the third
district in Congress, was chosen Mayor. The Mayor's message in the
following January shows that the city debt rose from $30,669,768.50 in
1872, and $32,012,884 in 1873, to $37,431,944.

It was in February of this year that a largely attended meeting of the
Municipal Union Society urged the consolidation of Brooklyn and New
York. Meanwhile the town of New Lots, known as East New York, had voted
for annexation to Brooklyn. The city's growth continued at a remarkable
rate. In the decade between 1864 and 1874, 19,660 buildings had been
erected. Of this number 1786 had been built during the year ending 1874.

Perhaps the most sensational incident of the year 1874 was the
announcement of Theodore Tilton's action against the Rev. Henry Ward
Beecher, Brooklyn's foremost preacher and orator. The news that the
pastor of Plymouth Church was to be sued by his former friend upon
charges assailing the integrity of Mr. Beecher's relations with Mrs.
Tilton, created intense excitement in the city, and throughout the
country.

The action was opened in the City Court before Judge Neilson, and the
trial began on January 5, 1875. The public interest aroused by this
extraordinary trial has no parallel in the history of the county.
During the months of the progress it remained the chief topic of public
and private talk in the city. The court room on trial days presented
an historic spectacle, and excitement reached a great height when, at
the end of June, the case was at last closed, and the fate of the great
preacher was placed in the jury's hands. It was on July 2 that the jury
reported its inability to agree. The case was never retried, and the
painful drama thus came to an end.

That such an incident should cast a cloud over Henry Ward Beecher's
life was inevitable. But the cloud passed away. Mr. Beecher remained
at his post, his fame and influence growing; and the celebration of
his seventy-fifth birthday drew to the Academy of Music one of the
most remarkable gatherings ever witnessed in that place. Mr. Beecher's
sister, Harriet Beecher Stowe, the author of "Uncle Tom's Cabin,"
occupied a seat in one of the boxes.[39]

In 1875 the population of the city was estimated at 483,252; that of
the county at 494,570. In November of this year Frederick A. Schroeder
was elected Mayor. Schroeder represented the staunch German element,
which had begun long before this period to form an important proportion
of the city's population. He was the founder of the Germania Savings
Bank. In 1871 he was elected comptroller. His opponent in a heated
mayoralty contest was Edward Rowe.

The most extraordinary incident of the year 1876 was the burning of the
Brooklyn Theatre in December, and the loss of 295 lives. This tragedy
caused intense excitement throughout the city. The temporary morgue on
Adams Street presented the most ghastly spectacle the city had ever
witnessed. After all possible identification had taken place, 100
unclaimed bodies were publicly buried at Greenwood.




CHAPTER XIV

THE MODERN CITY

1877-1890

  Rapid Transit. James Howell, Jr., elected Mayor. Work on the
    Bridge. Passage of "Single Head" Bill. John Fiske on the
    "Brooklyn System." Seth Low elected Mayor. His Interpretation
    of the "Brooklyn System." Reelection of Low. Opening of the
    Bridge. Bridge Statistics. Ferries and Water Front. Erie Basin.
    The Sugar Industry. Navy Yard. Wallabout Market. Development
    of the City. Prospect Park. Theatres and Public Buildings.
    National Guard. Public Schools. Brooklyn Institute. Private
    Educational Institutions. Libraries. Churches, Religious
    Societies, Hospitals, and Benevolent Associations. Clubs.
    Literature, Art, and Music. The Academy of Music. "The City of
    Homes."


Brooklyn had now fairly entered upon what may be called its modern
period. The first wires had been stretched for the great Bridge, and
soon afterward the six years' labor at Hell Gate culminated in the
long-anticipated blast. Ground had been broken for the new Municipal
Building, the Ocean Parkway had been opened for travel, work had begun
on the Brooklyn elevated road, rapid transit trains had begun running
on Atlantic Avenue, the Manhattan Beach and Sea Beach railroads
were opened to Coney Island, which had started upon its career as a
great popular watering-place and pleasure resort, and a line of Annex
ferryboats was opened between Jewell's Wharf and Jersey City.

In the mayoralty contest of 1877 James Howell, Jr., was elected on the
Democratic ticket. The bill which had passed the Legislature at the
previous session reduced the Mayor's salary from $10,000 to $6000.
Mayor Howell took a strong interest in the progress of the Bridge, and
succeeded Henry C. Murphy as a trustee.

Work on the Bridge advanced steadily during the years 1877 and 1878.
The breaking of a strand of the cable at the New York anchorage in
June, 1878, resulted in the death of several workmen. In April, 1880,
farewell services were held in St. Ann's Church, at Washington and
Prospect streets, preparatory to the removal of the building, to make
way for the Bridge approach. The prospective area of the approach
necessitated the removal of much property, and the slow work of
demolition and advance still continues, after fifteen years, to present
unsightly pictures at the threshold of the city.

Mayor Howell's message in January, 1880, revealed the fact that the
taxable value of property in the city had reached $232,925,699, which
was an increase of nearly $3,000,000 over the figures for the previous
year.

An important event for the city was the passage in May, by the
Legislature, of the "Single Head" bill, by the provisions of which
the system of triple heads of departments was abolished, and complete
appointive power and responsibility vested in the Mayor. This radical
step toward municipal reform and good government was one which could
not fail to attract the attention of the country, since Brooklyn was
the first great city to take it, and the experiment was watched with
the liveliest interest by all students of municipal government.

John Fiske, in his admirable work on "Civil Government," thus
succinctly describes the new system of city government: "Besides the
council of [nineteen] Aldermen, the people elect only three city
officers,--the Mayor, comptroller, and auditor. The comptroller is
the principal finance officer and book-keeper of the city; and the
auditor must approve bills against the city, whether great or small,
before they can be paid. The Mayor appoints, without confirmation by
the council, all executive heads of departments; and these executive
heads are individuals, not boards. Thus there is a single police
commissioner, a single fire commissioner, a single health commissioner,
and so on; and each of these heads appoints his own subordinates;
'so that the principle of defined responsibility permeates the city
government from top to bottom.'[40] In a few cases where the work to
be done is rather discretionary than executive in character, it is
intrusted to a board; thus, there is a board of assessors, a board of
education, and a board of elections. These are all appointed by the
Mayor, but for terms not coincident with his own; 'so that, in most
cases, no Mayor would appoint the whole of any such board unless he
were to be twice elected by the people.' But the executive officers are
appointed by the Mayor for terms coincident with his own, that is, for
two years. 'The Mayor is elected at the general election in November;
he takes office on the first of January following, and for one month
the great departments of the city are carried on for him by the
appointees of his predecessor. On the first of January it becomes his
duty to appoint his own heads of departments,' and thus 'each incoming
Mayor has the opportunity to make an administration in all its parts in
sympathy with himself.'

"With all these immense executive powers intrusted to the Mayor,
however, he does not hold the purse-strings. He is a member of a board
of estimates, of which the other four members are the comptroller
and auditor, with the county treasurer and supervisor. This board
recommends the amount to be raised by taxation for the ensuing year.
These estimates are then laid before the council of Aldermen, who
may cut down single items as they see fit, but have not the power to
increase any item. The Mayor must see to it that the administrative
work of the year does not use up more money than is thus allowed to
him."[41]

The first Mayor to act under this charter amendment was Seth Low, who
was elected, in 1881, over Howell by a vote of 45,434 to 40,937.[42]
Low, who was born in Brooklyn, where his family had occupied a
distinguished position, and had graduated from Columbia College in
1870, afterward entering the business house of his father, was in his
thirty-second year when elected to office, a circumstance which, added
to the novelty of the conditions under which his administration must
work, did not fail to attract special attention throughout the country.

In his first message (January, 1882) Low touched upon the important
question of the appointing power:--

    "The manifest purpose of the act is to make the Mayor the
    responsible head of the city government, and to secure a
    homogeneous government by laying upon each Mayor the necessity
    of making his appointments at the beginning of his term. To
    accomplish this purpose the act does some things by direct
    provision and some things by implication. It provides, in
    section I, that the terms of office of certain specified
    officers shall expire on the first of February, 1882. It then
    provides, in section 6, that 'after the first day of January,
    1882, the Mayor of the city of Brooklyn shall have sole and
    exclusive power to appoint the successor of any commissioner
    or other head of department (except the department of finance
    and the department of audit), or of any assessor or member of
    the board of education of said city, when the terms of such
    officers shall respectively expire, or as by law may then or
    thereafter be required to be appointed.'

    "There are certain officers in the city whose terms of office
    expired some time in the year 1881, to wit: The corporation
    counsel, the city treasurer, the collector of taxes, and
    the registrar of arrears, and to these officers the charter
    amendment makes no distinct reference. The reason that the
    present incumbents hold over is that, by section 5 of that
    amendment, all power to appoint during 1881 was taken away
    from the Mayor and Common Council, where it formerly resided,
    without being lodged anywhere else, except that the sole power
    of filling vacancies during 1881 was lodged with the Mayor. The
    evident purpose of this provision was to place the appointment
    of the successors to the present incumbents of these offices in
    the hands of the Mayor to be elected by the people in 1881. So
    much is clear; but it leaves two points uncertain: First, when
    are the successors to the present incumbents to be appointed?
    Second, when appointed, is it for the balance of an unexpired
    term, or for two years?

    "I shall be governed by what I believe to be the clear and
    intelligent purpose of the law. I shall appoint the four
    officers alluded to so that their terms shall begin practically
    on the first of February, or at the same time with the officers
    distinctly mentioned in the act, and I shall appoint them for
    two years."

Speaking further of appointments and removals, Low said:--

    "It is a matter of grave public concern for the people to
    know in what spirit an officer intrusted for the first time
    in the history of our city with such powers purposes to use
    them. The whole theory of the law is that the Mayor shall be
    responsible for the administration of the city's affairs,
    and for the policy which animates the different departments.
    It makes the relation of the different commissioners and
    heads of departments to the Mayor practically that of the
    cabinet officer to his chief. I feel it to be a matter
    of no less importance to my successors than to myself to
    emphasize this thought. It is no reproach to Mr. Evarts that
    President Garfield placed Mr. Blaine at the head of the State
    Department. It is no reproach to Mr. Blaine that President
    Arthur has called Senator Frelinghuysen to succeed him; and
    what is true of the State Department is equally true of a
    purely administrative department like the post-office. It
    will, therefore, be a great injustice to any official who may
    be retired through my action to interpret it into reproach
    upon him, just as it would be equal injustice to me to assume
    that I meant it as such; or to my successor, to hamper him
    with any obligations toward my appointees. The Mayor being
    responsible to the people must be left free from such personal
    embarrassments. I claim this right, as I believe, in the
    interest of good government, for my successors and for myself.

    "The law does not give the Mayor the absolute power of removal.
    I presume it was not thought to be necessary. But the whole
    purpose of the law will be defeated unless the Mayor knows at
    all times and under all circumstances that he is responsible
    because his appointees represent him. If any of them get out of
    harmony with him he must ask for their resignations, and he is
    entitled to receive them on demand. I hazard nothing in saying
    that the people of Brooklyn elected me Mayor with the full
    purpose of placing precisely this responsibility upon me. As
    there is no precedent to govern in this case, I wish to state
    distinctly that the acceptance of an appointment at my hands
    will be evidence to the community that the gentleman accepting
    it has personally given me his assurance that he will without
    delay give me his resignation whenever I ask for it."

The remainder of the message was in the same spirit, and left the
people of Brooklyn in no doubt that the new Mayor meant to interpret
the movement represented by the charter amendments in its most radical
and reformatory light.

Low was renominated in 1883. The Democrats nominated Joseph C.
Hendrix,[43] who led a brilliant campaign. In a hotly contested
election that drew out an extraordinary vote, Low was elected by a vote
of 49,554 against Hendrix's 48,006.

The two administrations of Low demonstrated beyond question the
availability of the "Brooklyn system." In his message for 1884 the
Mayor offered a strong plea in behalf of the public schools, in which
free books had just been introduced.

The president of the board of education made the following urgent
presentation of the case:--

    "Notwithstanding the number of new buildings erected and
    occupied during the year, I am unable to report any relief
    from the general crowded condition that existed at the time
    of my last report. The children come faster than we can make
    room for them, and in some localities for nearly every seat
    provided there are two applicants. As evidence of the demand
    made upon our new schools, at their opening, by primary pupils,
    I cite the following: The new primary building to relieve No.
    24 was opened on the 4th inst., this being the last of the new
    buildings. The crowd of children with their parents seeking
    admission was so great and the excitement so intense that for
    two days two policemen were required to preserve order at the
    doors. In a building seating 676 pupils 899 were registered,
    the average age being 8 years. Only the fifth and sixth primary
    grades are admitted to this building. It is not pleasant for me
    to state that many of these children, 9 and 10 years old, have
    never before had a day's schooling, because there was no public
    school into which they could gain admittance. From the first
    day the class-rooms have been devoted to half-day classes.

    "The registry of attendance in October of this year numbered
    67,314 pupils. Our regular seating capacity is but 64,200, or
    3,114 less than the actual attendance. We have 76 classes,
    numbering over 90 pupils each, and of this number 16 classes
    have over 140 each, the largest class having 218 pupils. A
    large proportion of these crowded classes are from necessity
    divided into half-day sessions.

    "This is our condition after redistricting the city and
    reorganizing several schools, thereby decreasing the number of
    grammar classes, and increasing the number of primary classes
    by eighteen, and after building eight new school buildings,--we
    have been compelled to crowd and pack our school rooms
    without due regard to the convenience, comfort, and health of
    the pupils and to the proper facilities and conditions for
    imparting instruction....

    "We have exhausted every means at our disposal to utilize space
    save one. It is now the purpose of the Committee on Studies to
    so revise the course of study that all grammar class-rooms will
    be full. When this has been done we shall have no resource left
    by which to gain space but to build new buildings."

Possibly the most important achievement in Low's administration was the
framing and passage of the Arrears Bill, which had an immediate and
salutary effect in the management of the city's finances.

An historic event during the period of Low's mayoralty was the opening
of the Bridge on Thursday, May 24, 1883. The two cities were greatly
aroused by the event, and much enthusiasm prevailed.

The ceremonies were held at the Brooklyn Approach, and the formal
programme of ceremonies was as follows:--

    MUSIC:
                    23d Regiment Band.

    PRAYER:
                 Rt. Rev. Bishop Littlejohn.

    PRESENTATION ADDRESS:
                   On behalf of Trustees,
            William C. Kingsley, Vice-President.

    ACCEPTANCE ADDRESS:
            On behalf of the City of Brooklyn,
                 Hon. Seth Low, Mayor.

    ACCEPTANCE ADDRESS:
            On behalf of the City of New York,
              Hon. Franklin Edson, Mayor.

    ORATION:
                 Hon. Abram S. Hewitt.

    ORATION:
              Rev. Richard S. Storrs, D. D.

    MUSIC:
                   7th Regiment Band.

The ceremonies over which James S. T. Stranahan, who had won the
distinction of being called "Brooklyn's first citizen," presided, drew
a large and memorable company. The military marshal of the day was
Maj.-Gen. James Jourdan, commanding the Second Division of the National
Guard, and the arrangements were as follows:--

    "The President of the United States and Cabinet, the Governor
    of the State of New York and Staff, with other distinguished
    Guests, will be escorted from the Fifth Avenue Hotel to the New
    York Anchorage by the 7th Regiment of the 1st Division, N. G.,
    S. N. Y., Emmons Clark, Colonel Commanding, and there received
    by the Trustees and escorted to the Brooklyn Anchorage, from
    which point the 23d Regiment, 2d Division, N. G., S. N. Y.,
    Rodney C. Ward, Colonel Commanding, will act as escort to the
    Brooklyn Approach.

    "To avoid confusion, it is requested that holders of BLUE
    TICKETS will enter Gates marked A at the Roadways on either
    side of the Bridge. Holders of WHITE TICKETS will enter at
    either Gates A or B.

    "Officers of the Army and Navy and the National Guard are
    requested to appear in Uniform. Officials of New York and
    Brooklyn are requested to display their badges of office."

[Illustration: STATUE OF J. S. T. STRANAHAN AT THE ENTRANCE TO PROSPECT
PARK]

In the course of his address Mayor Low said:--

    "As the water of the lakes found the salt sea when the Erie
    Canal was opened, so surely will quick communication seek and
    find this noble bridge; and as the ships have carried hither
    and thither the products of the mighty West, so shall diverging
    railroads transport the people swiftly to their homes in the
    hospitable city of Brooklyn. The Erie Canal is a waterway
    through the land connecting the great West with the older East.
    This bridge is a landway over the water, connecting two cities
    bearing to each other relations in some respects similar. It is
    the function of such works to bless 'both him that gives and
    him that takes.' The development of the West has not belittled,
    but has enlarged New York, and Brooklyn will grow by reason of
    this bridge, not at New York's expense, but to her permanent
    advantage. The Brooklyn of 1900 can hardly be guessed at from
    the city of to-day. The hand of Time is a mighty hand. To those
    who are privileged to live in sight of this noble structure
    every line of it should be eloquent with inspiration. Courage,
    enterprise, skill, faith, endurance,--these are the qualities
    which have made the great bridge, and these are the qualities
    which will make our city great and our people great. God grant
    they never may be lacking in our midst. Gentlemen of the
    Trustees, in accepting the bridge at your hands, I thank you
    warmly in Brooklyn's name for your manifold and arduous labors."

Speaking of a glance forward for twenty-five years, Mayor Edson said:--

    "No one dares accept the possibilities that are forced upon the
    mind in the course of its contemplation. Will these two cities,
    ere then, have been consolidated into one great municipality,
    numbering within its limits more than five millions of
    people? Will the right of self-government have been accorded
    to the great city, thus united, and will her people have
    learned how best to exercise that right? Will the progress of
    improvement and the preparation for commerce, manufactures,
    and trade, and for the comforts of home for poor and rich,
    have kept pace with the demand in the great and growing city?
    Will the establishment of life-giving parks, embellished with
    appropriate fountains and statues and with the numberless
    graces of art, which at once gladden the eye, and raise the
    standard of civilization, have kept abreast with its growth
    in wealth and numbers? These are but few of the pertinent
    questions which must be answered by the zealous and honest
    acts of the generation of men already in active life. Here are
    the possibilities; all the elements and conditions are here;
    but the results must depend upon the wisdom and patriotism and
    energy of those who shall lead in public affairs. May they be
    clothed in a spirit of wisdom and knowledge akin to that which
    inspired those who conceived and executed the great work which
    we receive at your hands and dedicate to-day."

The address of Abram S. Hewitt contained these significant words:--

    "I am here by your favor to speak for the city of New York, and
    I should be the last person to throw any discredit on its fair
    fame; but I think I only give voice to the general feeling,
    when I say that the citizens of New York are satisfied neither
    with the structure of its government, nor with its actual
    administration, even when it is in the hands of intelligent
    and honest officials. Dissatisfied as we are, no man has been
    able to devise a system which commends itself to the general
    approval, and it may be asserted that the remedy is not to
    be found in devices for any special machinery of government.
    Experiments without number have been tried, and suggestions
    in infinite variety have been offered, but to-day no man can
    say that we have approached any nearer to the idea of good
    government which is demanded by the intelligence and the wants
    of the community.

    "If, therefore, New York has not yet learned to govern itself,
    how can it be expected to be better governed by adding half a
    million to its population, and a great territory to its area,
    unless it be with the idea that a 'little leaven leaveneth
    the whole lump'? Is Brooklyn that leaven? And if not, and if
    possibly 'the salt has lost its savor, wherewith shall it be
    salted?' Brooklyn is now struggling with this problem, it
    remains to be seen with what success; but meanwhile it is
    idle to consider the idea of getting rid of our common evils
    by adding them together. Beside, it is a fundamental axiom in
    politics, approved by the experience of older countries as
    well as our own, that the sources of power should never be
    far removed from those who are to feel its exercise. It is the
    violation of this principle which produces chronic revolution
    in France, and makes the British rule so obnoxious to the Irish
    people. This evil is happily avoided when a natural boundary
    circumscribes administration within narrow limits. While,
    therefore, we rejoice together at the new bond between New York
    and Brooklyn, we ought to rejoice the more that it destroys
    none of the conditions which permit each city to govern itself,
    but rather urges them to a generous rivalry in perfecting each
    its own government, recognizing the truth that there is no
    true liberty without law, and that eternal vigilance, which is
    the only safeguard of liberty, can best be exercised within
    limited areas. It would be a most fortunate conclusion if the
    completion of this bridge should arouse public attention to the
    absolute necessity of good municipal government, and recall the
    only principle upon which it can ever be successfully founded.
    There is reason to hope that this result will follow, because
    the erection of this structure shows how a problem, analogous
    to that which confronts us in regard to the city government,
    has been met and solved in the domain of physical science."

The brilliant oration of Dr. Storrs closed with the following glowing
passage:--

    "Local and particular as is the work, therefore, it represents
    that fellowship of the nations which is more and more
    prominently a fact of our times, and which gives to these
    cities incessant augmentation. When by and by on yonder
    island the majestic French statue of 'Liberty' shall stand,
    holding in its hand the radiant crown of electric flames, and
    answering by them to those as brilliant along this causeway,
    our beautiful bay will have taken what specially illuminates
    and adorns it from Central and from Western Europe. The
    distant lands from which oceans divide us, though we touch
    them each moment with the fingers of the telegraph, will have
    set their conspicuous double crown on the head of our harbor.
    The alliances of nations, the peace of the world, will seem to
    find illustrious prediction in such superb and novel regalia.
    Friends and fellow-citizens, let us not forget that in the
    growth of these cities, henceforth united and destined ere
    long to be formally one, lies either a threat or one of the
    most conspicuous promises of the time. Cities have always been
    powers in history. Athens educated Greece as well as adorned
    it, while Corinth filled the throbbing and thirsty Hellenic
    veins with poisoned blood. The weight of Constantinople broke
    the Roman Empire asunder. The capture of the same magnificent
    city gave to the Turks their establishment in Europe for the
    following centuries. Even where they have not had such a
    commanding preeminence of location, the social, political,
    moral force proceeding from cities has been vigorous, in
    impression, immense in extent. The passion in Paris, for a
    hundred years, has created or directed the sentiment of France.
    Berlin is more than the legislative or administrative centre
    of the German Empire, and even a government as autocratic as
    that of the Czar, in a country as undeveloped as Russia, has
    to consult the popular feeling of St. Petersburg or of Moscow.
    In our nation, political power is widely distributed, and
    the largest or wealthiest commercial centre can have but its
    share. Great as is the weight of the aggregate vote in these
    henceforth compacted cities, the vote of the State will always
    overbear it. Amid the suffrages of the nation at large it can
    only be reckoned as one of many consenting or conflicting
    factors. But the influence which constantly proceeds from
    these cities--on their journalism not only, or on the issues
    of their book presses, or on the multitudes going forth from
    them--but on the example presented in them, of educational,
    social, religious life--this, for shadow and check, or for fine
    inspiration, is already of unlimited extent, of incalculable
    force. It must increase as they expand, and are lifted before
    the country to a new elevation. A larger and a smaller sun
    are sometimes associated, astronomers tell us, to form a
    binary centre in the heavens, for what is doubtless an unseen
    system receiving from them impulse and light. On a scale not
    utterly insignificant a parallel may be hereafter suggested
    in the relation of these combined cities to a part, at least,
    of our national system. Their attitude and action during the
    war--successfully closed under the gallant military leadership
    of men whom we gladly welcome and honor--were of vast advantage
    to the national cause. The moral, political, intellectual
    temper which dominates in them as years go on, will touch
    with beauty or scar with scorching and baleful heats extended
    regions. Their religious life, as it glows in intensity, or
    with a faint and failing lustre, will be repeated in answering
    image from the widening frontier. The beneficence which gives
    them grace and consecration, and which, as lately, they follow
    to the grave with universal benediction; or, on the other
    hand, the selfish ambitions which crowd and crush along their
    streets, intent only on accumulated wealth and its sumptuous
    display, or the glittering vices which they accept and set on
    high--these will make impressions on those who never cross the
    continent to our homes, to whom our journals are but names.
    Surely we should not go from this hour, which marks a new era
    in the history of these cities, and which points to their
    future indefinite expansion, without the purpose in each of
    us that so far forth as in us lies, with their increase in
    numbers, wealth, equipment, shall also proceed, with equal
    step, their progress in whatever is noblest and best in private
    and in public life; that all which sets humanity forward shall
    come in them to ampler endowment, more renowned exhibition; so
    that, linked together, as hereafter they must be, and seeing
    'the purple deepening in their robes of power,' they may be
    always increasingly conscious of fulfilled obligation to the
    nation and to God; may make the land, at whose magnificent
    gateway they stand, their constant debtor, and may contribute
    their mighty part toward that ultimate perfect human society
    for which the seer could find no image so meet or majestic as
    that of a city, coming down from above, its stones laid with
    fair colors, its foundations with sapphires, its windows of
    agate, its gates of carbuncles, and all its borders of pleasant
    stones, with the sovereign promise resplendent above it--

        'And great shall be the peace of thy children.'"

The newspapers tendered homage to the leaders of the Bridge movement,
and to the guiding minds of the vast mechanical triumph--to John
A. Roebling, Washington A. Roebling, Henry C. Murphy, William C.
Kingsley, J. S. T. Stranahan, and others who had been prominent in the
labors of organization and of execution.

The original cost of construction amounted to $15,000,000. The total
number of passengers on promenade, roadway, and railroad during 1883
was 5,332,500. The total number in 1892, the year after the promenade
toll was removed, was 41,772,808. The statistics for 1893 show that the
traffic was highest in December and lowest in August. The earnings of
the Bridge are thus shown:--

    From May 23, 1883, to Dec. 1, 1884     $682,755.42
      "  Dec. 1, 1884,  " Dec. 1, 1885      622,680.31
      "    "     1885,  "   "     1886      870,207.43
      "    "     1886,  "   "     1887      938,281.21
      "    "     1887,  "   "     1888    1,012,254.82
      "    "     1888,  "   "     1889    1,120,024.16
      "    "     1889,  "   "     1890    1,239,493.90
      "    "     1890,  "   "     1891    1,176,447.95
      "    "     1891,  "   "     1892    1,801,661.48
      "    "     1892,  "   "     1893    1,590,140.03
                                        --------------
    Total                               $11,053,946.71

The receipts from all sources for the year ending December 1, 1893,
were as follows: City of Brooklyn construction account, $150,000;
city of New York construction account, $75,000; receipts from tolls,
$1,252,908.04; material sold, labor, etc., $559.91; interest,
$2,426.03; rent, real estate, and telegraph wires, $109,246.05. Total,
$1,590,140.03.

The management of the Bridge was formed under control of a board of
twenty trustees, eight being appointed by the Mayor, comptroller,
and auditor of Brooklyn, and eight by the Mayor, comptroller, and
president of the Board of Aldermen of New York city. Under an act of
the Legislature, passed April 4, 1893, on April 12 following, this
board was replaced by the present board of trustees, consisting of two
persons appointed by the Mayor of the city of Brooklyn, two persons
appointed by the Mayor of the city of New York, at a salary of $3000
each, and the mayors and comptrollers of the two cities, members _ex
officio_, the appointed trustees to hold office for five years.

Supplementing the work of the Bridge are the elevated railroads and the
electric or "trolley" system. Six steam railroads run into the city,
four running to Coney Island, one to Rockaway Beach, and one, the Long
Island Railroad, connecting with the railroad system of Long Island.
Sixteen ferries connect the bay and river front with New York. The New
York and Brooklyn Ferry Company carried about 16,000,000 passengers in
1893.

The boundaries of the city, measuring about thirty-two miles, include
an extended water front that is one of the most picturesque in the
country. The Erie basin and Atlantic docks on the southern extremity
of the line represent an immense industry in grain shipments.
Grain-elevators, coaling-stations, store-houses, the chief naval
station in the United States, and the big establishments of the
greatest sugar-refining district in the world, combine to give the
river front an unusual interest.

The great docks on the southwestern water front represent important
industries in which Brooklyn occupies a foremost place. The Atlantic
basin covers forty acres, and is surrounded by brick and granite
warehouses on three sides. These are 100 feet in depth, and three to
five stories high. The basin contains four piers, three of which are
covered, and are 700, 800, and 900 feet in length, by 80 feet in width.
South central pier, 900 feet long, is the largest in the port. In the
basin are seven elevators, six of which are controlled by the New York
Grain Warehousing Company, the seventh being owned by Pinto Brothers.
Atlantic basin is the largest grain-depot in the world. Its frontage
line of basin and piers measures three miles. South central pier is
leased by the Union Hamburg and the Nicaragua and Central American
lines of steamships. Barber & Co. and T. Hogan & Sons control the east
central pier; Funch & Edye's steamships dock at the south central pier,
as do the lines to Bordeaux and Oporto. At the west central pier many
goods from the Indies are unloaded, especially plumbago and cocoa-nut
oil. The entrance to the basin is 200 feet in width. The north pier is
much used by Italian barks. The basin has a uniformed police force of
its own.

In this region also are finely appointed shipyards and dry docks, the
Anglo-American docks, opened in 1866, being the largest in the United
States. The chamber of Dock No. 1 is 510 feet in length, and that of
Dock No. 2,610 feet. Most of the large iron ships that are docked at
the port of New York are hauled up here. On the old Williamsburgh water
front are the vast sugar-refineries, the greatest group of the kind in
the world, and representing Brooklyn's greatest manufacturing interest.
The output of most of these great hives of industry is now controlled
by the American Sugar Refining Company. The largest of the refineries
melts 2000 tons of raw sugar per day, producing over 12,000 barrels of
refined sugar. Vessels from the West Indies and other points as remote
as Java line the piers at this part of the water front, loading with
barreled sugar.

Large cooperages and extensive oil refineries occupy the water front
to the north, the great Standard Oil Company having its plant in this
region.

The United States reservation, known as the Navy Yard, occupies about
112 acres in the bend of the river to which the Dutch gave the name
that still clings, the Wallabout. This is the chief naval station of
the United States. It contains trophies of the three great wars, and
the 6000 feet of water front is always made interesting by the presence
of one or more ships of war.

In 1884 Brooklyn obtained from the United States Government a lease
of the 422,525 square feet of land on the east of the Navy Yard, and
adjoining the Wallabout canal. On this plot a large market has grown up
and supplied the city with a marketing centre of which it long stood
in need. In July, 1890, an act of Congress authorized the sale of the
fee-simple of the land to Brooklyn; the city authorities completing
the purchase in November, 1891, at the valuation of $700,000. Later,
an additional purchase of adjoining land from the federal government
extended the market property to the Wallabout canal, and enabled the
increase of the number of lots for stands to 120. The present area of
the market lands is bounded as follows: On the north by the Wallabout
canal; on the east by the lands of the United States Naval Hospital; on
the south by Flushing Avenue, and on the west by Washington Avenue.

In December, 1892, the national government authorized the sale to
Brooklyn of additional lands of the Navy Yard reservation, abutting
upon the west side of Washington Avenue, and embraced between that
avenue and a line on a continuation of Clinton Avenue, Flushing Avenue,
and the East River,--a tract which would more than double in extent the
area of the market possessions.

Brooklyn's boundaries on the east and south touch a number of large
cemeteries, most noted of which is Greenwood, which holds many
distinguished dead, and many notable monuments. In 1893 there were 5519
interments at the cemetery of the Evergeens, and during the same year
3000 at Cypress Hills, and 18,000 at Calvary Cemetery. There are not
less than thirty cemeteries within the county, a fact that presents a
serious problem in the extension of the city's lines.

The development of Prospect Park has been a matter of great pride and
gratification to the city. In recent years the park has been adorned
by a number of statues. J. S. T. Stranahan has received the unique
honor of a public statue in his lifetime. In the plaza is the statue of
Lincoln already mentioned. Within the park are busts of Thomas Moore,
Washington Irving, and of John Howard Payne, one of Long Island's sons.

The Soldiers' and Sailors' Memorial Arch in the Park Plaza was
proposed by Seth Low in a speech at Greenwood, on Decoration Day. The
Legislature voted $250,000, subscriptions were raised, the competition
for a suitable design was won by John H. Duncan, the corner-stone was
laid in 1889, and the monument was finished in 1892.

The Municipal Building was finished in 1878, at a cost of $200,000,
and the Hall of Records adjoining the county Court House in 1886, at
a cost of $275,000. The most imposing public building in the city
is the Federal Building, bounded by Washington, Johnson, and Adams
streets. This massive structure of Maine granite contains the central
post-office quarters, and the federal courts and offices. The site cost
$413,594.12, and the building $1,258,057.06.

Some of the most important building operations in recent years have
expressed the enterprises of the great bazaars, gathered most thickly
on Fulton Street, but appearing also on other leading thoroughfares.

A glance at the buildings of the city quickly suggests the remarkable
increase in the number of theatres.

According to Gabriel Harrison's "History of the Drama in Brooklyn" the
first dramatic performance in the city took place in a stone building
on the north side of "the old road" (Fulton Street), near the corner
of Front Street. This building had been known for thirty years or
more as Corporation House, belonging to the corporation of the city
of New York. It contained a tavern and a ferry room on its ground
floor and a hall on the second. When the British gained possession of
Brooklyn the house changed hands, and was known while they remained as
the King's Head. It was fitted as a resort for officers and men, and
all sorts of amusements were offered, from bull-baiting to games of
chance. George III.'s birthday was celebrated by illuminations and
fish dinners, to which the Tories of New York came over in rowboats. At
the first dramatic performances here an original farce was acted, of
which General John Burgoyne was the alleged author. It was called "The
Battle of Brooklyn." The title-page reads: "The Battle of Brooklyn; a
farce in two acts, as it was performed in Long Island on Tuesday, 27th
day of August, 1776, by the representatives of the Tyrants of America,
assembled in Philadelphia."

There were also dramatic performances in Greene's Military Garden in
1810, and later. An amphitheatre was built on Fulton Street in 1828.
The assembly rooms of Military Garden were converted into a theatre
in 1848. Chanfrau and Burke opened the Brooklyn Museum in 1850. The
Odeon was built on the site of the present Novelty or Proctor's Theatre
on Driggs Street, in 1852. It was afterward known as Apollo Hall.
Washington Hall, afterward called the Comique, was built at the corner
of Broadway and Fourth Street (now Bedford Avenue); Hooley's Opera
House, at Court and Remsen streets, in 1862, and the Park Theatre was
built a year later. The Brooklyn Theatre was opened in 1871, and
rebuilt after the fire.[44] Hyde & Behman's Theatre was built in 1877,
the Grand Opera House in 1881, the Criterion in 1885, the Amphion in
1888. The completion of the fine Columbia Theatre on Washington Street
was due to the enterprise of Edwin Knowles, who had been a successful
manager of the Grand Opera House, and subsequently of the Amphion.

The newer city armories are further important additions to the city
architecture.

On the first day of January, 1894, the military organizations of
Brooklyn, comprising, with the Seventeenth Separate Company of
Flushing, the entire Second Brigade of the New York National Guard,
numbered about 3000 men. The strength of the brigade in 1892, as shown
at inspection, was 3084. In this number were included the 403 officers
and men of the Thirty-second Regiment, shortly afterward disbanded.
Very few members of that organization are now in the service. In 1893,
inspections of the several commands were held, as follows: Seventeenth
Separate Company, April 3; Signal Corps, October 10; Third Battery,
October 11; Forty-seventh Regiment, October 18; Fourteenth Regiment,
October 19; Thirteenth Regiment, October 21; Twenty-third Regiment,
October 26. The Thirteenth and Fourteenth regiments, which did not
go to the state camp last year, were inspected in the afternoon at
Prospect Park. Below is shown the attendance of each organization:--

MUSTER ROLL FOR 1893.

    ----------------------+----------+---------+--------+-----------
         Organization.    | Present. | Absent. | Total. | Percentage
                          |          |         |        |  Present.
    ----------------------+----------+---------+--------+-----------
    Brigade Commander and |          |         |        |
      Staff               |     11   |    --   |    11  |    --
    Thirteenth Regt       |    529   |   118   |   647  |   81.61
    Fourteenth Regt       |    532   |   149   |   681  |   78.11
    Twenty-third Regt     |    770   |    35   |   805  |   95.65
    Forty-seventh Regt    |    521   |    48   |   569  |   91.56
    Third Battery.        |     68   |     8   |    76  |   89.47
    Seventeenth Sep. Co.  |     51   |     9   |    60  |   85.00
    Signal Corps          |     40   |     1   |    41  |   97.56
                          +----------+---------+--------+-----------
      Total               |  2,522   |   368   | 2,890  |
    ----------------------+----------+---------+--------+-----------


The difficulties arising from inadequate school accommodations, to meet
which Mayor Low and other mayors had urged broad and sufficient action,
continued to hamper the action of the department of public instruction.
The development of the department under the superintendency of William
H. Maxwell has been along thoroughly modern lines. Recent reforms have
had a tendency to improve the quality of teachers by placing obstacles
in the path of the incompetent. To a considerable extent these reforms
have diminished the chances of political interference in the working of
the school system.

The successful establishment, in 1878, of a Central Grammar School,
admitting graduates from the public schools, was followed by the
organization of separate high schools for boys and girls, and afterward
by a manual training school, and a movement for the establishment of
kindergarten classes and definite means of physical culture. On October
31, 1893, there were on register in the public schools of the city
102,468 pupils,--more than 2000 in excess of the sittings. For many
years preceding this date a large number of classes had provided a half
day's schooling only for the registered pupils, forcing the teachers
of these classes to assume responsibility for two large classes of
children on each school day.

[Illustration: STATUE OF ALEXANDER HAMILTON IN FRONT OF THE HAMILTON
CLUB HOUSE]

In his report for the year ending December 31, 1892, Superintendent
Maxwell said:--

    "The child that begins the school course at six ought to
    complete it easily, and be ready to enter the high school,
    at the age of fourteen. In every grade, however, the average
    age is about one year higher than it ought to be. There is
    now a well ascertained consensus of opinion among educational
    authorities that this delay in reaching the high school--in
    getting at such disciplinary studies as languages, geometry,
    and natural science--is detrimental not only to the individual
    child but to the public welfare. In some cases this delay is
    doubtless caused by protracted illness or general physical
    weakness; in some, by the mania--I can call it by no other
    name--which some principals and teachers have for holding
    back pupils from promotion; in some, by positive dullness or
    slowness of wit; but in the majority of cases it arises from
    the crowded condition of the lower primary classes. Instead
    of accommodating more children by swelling the registers of
    these classes, we are accommodating fewer. The teachers in
    these classes, work as hard as they may, are able to prepare
    but a small proportion of their classes for promotion; while
    by reason of lack of proper teaching in the introductory
    classes--a lack which is not chargeable to the teachers--the
    pupils are less able than they otherwise would be to do the
    work of the higher grades as they advance. The consequence
    is that pupils are put through our schools more slowly and
    in smaller numbers than they ought to be. If in a piece of
    machinery or in a living organism a greater strain is put
    on any one part than it is able to bear, the strength and
    efficiency of the whole are proportionately diminished. Just so
    it is with our school system. The strain put upon the seventh
    primary teachers by choking up their classes impairs the
    efficiency of the entire system. The only rational conclusion
    is that _the number of pupils to a class must be limited_."

The movement toward centralizing responsibility in the school
principals began at this time to gather force. It was warmly supported
by the superintendent.

In the Girls' High School, in 1893, the number of registered pupils
was 1626; in the Boys' High School, 692. The annual appropriation for
schools in 1893 was $2,449,735.33; from the city, $1,996,500.00; from
the State, $394,414.82; other sources, $58,820.51.

A training school for teachers was established in 1885. From this
admirable institution the graduates increased in number from 48 in 1886
to 70 in 1892.

With the educational interests of Brooklyn the Brooklyn Institute of
Arts and Sciences is closely associated. In the summer of 1823 several
gentlemen, among whom was Augustus Graham, met at Stevenson's Tavern
for the purpose of establishing for the apprentices of Brooklyn a free
library.[45] They adopted a constitution, and issued to the citizens
of Brooklyn a circular, in which they solicited donations of books
and money with which to effect their purpose. On November 20, 1824,
they were incorporated by the Legislature of the State under the name
of "The Brooklyn Apprentices' Library Association," and on July 4,
1825, the corner-stone of the first building owned by the association
was laid by General Lafayette, at the junction of Henry and Cranberry
streets. As early as 1835 the association had outgrown its original
quarters, and the property having been sold to the city the institution
was removed to a new building in Washington Street, then the centre of
the wealth and culture of our young city. The first lecture delivered
in the newly completed structure was by Prof. James D. Dana.

In order to broaden the scope of the association, an amended charter
was granted by the Legislature in 1843, and the name therein changed
to "The Brooklyn Institute." For many years thereafter the Institute
was a most important factor in the social, literary, scientific, and
educational life of Brooklyn. Its library had a large circulation; in
its public hall took place many social and historic gatherings, and
from its platform were heard such eminent scientific men as Agassiz,
Dana, Gray, Henry, Morse, Mitchell, Torrey, Guyot, and Cooke; such
learned divines as Drs. McCosh, Hitchcock, Storrs, and Buddington, and
such defenders of the liberties of the people as Phillips, Sumner,
Garrison, Emerson, Everett, Curtis, King, Bellows, Chapin, and Beecher.

During this brilliant period of its history (1843-1867), the Institute
received from Mr. Graham two very important donations. On July 4, 1848,
the building, which had been heavily mortgaged, he presented to the
trustees free from all incumbrance, and through his will, made known to
the board of directors on November 28, 1851, shortly after his decease,
he bequeathed to the Institute the sum of $27,000, as a permanent
endowment fund. The will directs that the interest of $10,000 of this
sum shall be used in the support of lectures on scientific subjects
and in the purchase of apparatus and collections illustrating the
sciences; that the interest of $12,000 shall be used in the support of
Sunday evening lectures on "The Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God as
manifested in His Works," and that the balance of $5,000 shall be used
in the support of a school of design and in forming a gallery of fine
arts.

For several years, however, prior to 1867, owing to the erection of the
Academy of Music and other public buildings, the Institute building was
regarded as behind the times. The income from rental of portions of
the building was dwindling to a low figure, and the financial support
of the free library was becoming inadequate. Under these circumstances
the directors remodeled the building in 1867, at an expense of about
$3,000, a part of which was raised by life-membership subscriptions of
$50 and $100, and the balance by a mortgage on the building. For twenty
years (1867-87) this indebtedness necessitated the application of a
portion of the income from the rent of the building and from the Graham
endowment fund to the payment of the interest and the principal of the
debt. Final payment on the mortgage was made early in 1887.

The causes of the partial inactivity of the Institute during the twenty
years (1867-87) are therefore apparent. The most that it was able to
do was to circulate its library, keep up its classes in drawing, and
provide for the annual addresses on the 22d of February. Freed from
debt in 1887, the Institute was enabled once more to use the whole
income from its funds and building for educational purposes, and again
to become an important agent in the work of education in the city.

The property of the Institute in 1887 consisted of the Institute
building and land, valued at $90,000, a library of 12,000 volumes,
a collection of paintings valued at $10,000, and endowment funds of
$46,000. These last comprise the $27,000 bequeathed by Mr. Graham, the
William H. Cary fund of $10,000 for the support of the library, and an
increment of $9,000 realized through premiums on the sale of bonds.

During the year 1887-88 a new era in the history of the Institute was
inaugurated. The board of trustees determined to make the property of
the Institute the nucleus of a broad and comprehensive institution
for the advancement of science and art, and its membership a large
and active association, laboring not only for the advancement of
knowledge, but also for the education of the people, through lectures
and collections, in art and science. It was observed that while Boston
had the Lowell Institute, a society of natural history, and an art
museum; while Philadelphia had the Franklin Institute, an academy
of sciences, and a gallery of fine arts; and while New York had the
Metropolitan Museum and the American Museum, yet that Brooklyn had
nothing corresponding to these institutions. It was felt that Brooklyn
should have an institute of arts and sciences worthy of her wealth, her
position, her culture, and her people; that it was her duty to do more
than she was then doing for the education and enjoyment of her people,
and that some step should be taken looking towards the future growth
and needs of the city in matters of art and science.

Accordingly, a form of organization was adopted which contemplated the
formation of a large association of members, and a continual increase
of the endowment funds and the collections of the Institute. Provision
was made for a subdivision of the membership into departments,
representing various branches of art and science, each department
forming a society by itself and yet enjoying all the privileges of the
general association. A general invitation was extended to citizens
specially interested in science and art to become members of the
Institute. Courses of lectures on science and art were provided.
The directors' room of the Institute was enlarged to accommodate
the meetings of some of the departments contemplated, and a large
lecture-room on the third floor of the Institute building was fitted
up at an expense of $2600 for the occupancy of those departments that
would make use of apparatus and collections at their meetings.

During the first fifteen months after the reorganization of the
Institute a membership of three hundred and fifty persons was recorded.
The Brooklyn Microscopical Society joined the Institute in a body,
with sixty-four members, and became the Department of Microscopy. The
American Astronomical Society, whose members resided mostly in New
York and Brooklyn, became the Department of Astronomy, with thirty-two
members. The Brooklyn Entomological Society united with the Institute,
and became the Entomological Department, with forty-one members. The
Linden Camera Club of Brooklyn became the Department of Photography,
with twenty-six members. Departments of physics, chemistry, botany,
mineralogy, geology, zoology, and archaeology were successively formed.
Each of the above twelve departments began to hold monthly meetings.
The permanent funds and property of the Institute were increased
$3000. Additions were made to the library, and its circulation
increased from 12,000 to 36,000 volumes per year. The lecture courses
were fully attended. The classes in drawing were enlarged, and a
general citizens' movement to secure a museum of arts and sciences for
Brooklyn was inaugurated.

The subsequent growth of the Institute has been remarkable. The old
building on Washington Street was burned in 1890, and the work was
continued in temporary quarters, chiefly in the building of the Young
Men's Christian Association on Fulton Street. During the fourth year
of active work after the reorganization 632 new members were recorded.
The real estate belonging to the old Brooklyn Institute on Washington
Street was sold to the trustees of the New York and Brooklyn Bridge,
and the old Institute was formally consolidated with the new Brooklyn
Institute of Arts and Sciences. By an act of the Legislature the
city was authorized to expend $300,000 in the erection of a Museum
of Arts and Sciences on Prospect Hill, on a favorable site bounded
by the Eastern Parkway, Washington Avenue, old President Street, and
the Prospect Hill reservoir. In the year 1892, 940 new members were
added, bringing the total up to 2622; the number of lectures and class
exercises open to members and others, by the payment of a moderate fee,
was 1397, as against 1134 the previous year; the number of concerts was
increased from eight to fifteen; the average daily attendance on all
the exercises of the Institute for the eight months of active work was
936, and the total attendance for the year, 190,900; the annual income
was increased from $18,934.20 in the previous year to $31,641.58;
special courses of lectures were delivered on American history from the
time of Columbus to the beginning of this century, and a special course
of addresses was given by college presidents on educational problems;
Institute extension courses of lectures were given in the eastern
section of the city; the school of political science was established,
with four classes and ninety-six pupils; the Brooklyn art school was
transferred to new and larger quarters in the Ovington Studio Building,
and the number of pupils was increased from ninety-four to one hundred
and twenty-eight; the department of architecture, acting through its
advisory board, devised a scheme of competition for the best plan
and design for the proposed Museum of Arts and Sciences, which was
accepted by the board of trustees, and adopted by the Mayor and park
commissioner, and the competition so arranged resulted in the award to
the distinguished New York architects, McKim, Mead & White.

Foremost among those who have brought the Institute to its present
influential position in the city have been Gen. John B. Woodward and
Prof. Franklin W. Hooper. Professor Hooper, who had been elected
curator of the Institute in 1889, became director of the new Institute
of Arts and Sciences in 1891.

Mention has already been made of the establishment of Packer Institute
and the Polytechnic Institute. The handsome gift of Mrs. Wm. S. Packer
resulted in the opening of an academy for the education of young
women. Since the time of the opening in 1854, under the presidency of
Dr. Alonzo Crittenden, the Packer Collegiate Institute has enjoyed a
peculiar prominence in the educational work of the city, and has won
a high, if not a foremost, place among academies of the kind in the
United States. Dr. Crittenden was succeeded in 1883 by Dr. Truman
G. Backus, who had filled the professorship of English language and
literature at Vassar, and whose brilliant attainments as a scholar and
director have given new distinction to the institute.

A commanding position likewise has been gained by the Polytechnic
Institute, whose establishment as an academy for young men resulted
from the successful movement, aided by the gift of Mrs. Packer, for
the establishment of a young women's school. A building on Livingston
Street was completed and opened in 1855, Dr. John H. Raymond then being
president of the faculty. Dr. Raymond was succeeded by Dr. David Henry
Cochran, who had for ten years been principal of the State Normal
School at Albany. Under a new charter, secured in 1890, the Brooklyn
Collegiate and Polytechnic Institute received "all the rights, powers,
and dignities given by the law and the ordinances of the regents[46]
to a college, including membership in the University of the State of
New York." Dr. Henry Sanger Snow, an alumnus and a trustee of the
institute, took a leading part in the negotiations which resulted in
the significant change. The new building adjoining the old was first
occupied in September, 1891.

The Adelphi Academy began its life in 1869 as a private school for
both sexes. In 1886 Charles Pratt, then president of the board of
trustees, made gifts to the Institute, by means of which it secured
a new building that was opened in 1888. The since extended buildings
now occupy a large part of the block bounded by Lafayette Avenue,
St. James Place, Clifton Place, and Grand Avenue. The preparatory,
academic, and collegiate departments are supplemented by a kindergarten
and a physical-training school. Art education has always occupied an
important place in the Adelphi Academy. Many well-known artists have
graduated from the art school superintended by Prof. J. B. Whittaker.
The principals of the Adelphi since its establishment have been John
Lockwood, Homer B. Sprague, Stephen G. Taylor, Albert C. Perkins, John
S. Crombie, and Charles H. Levermore.

It is to Charles Pratt, who took so important a part in bringing
Adelphi Academy to its present position, that Brooklyn is indebted for
the school which, more than any other educational institution within
its borders, is distinctively original and of a national fame. Pratt
Institute is frequently compared with Cooper Institute in New York. The
comparison between the wise beneficence of Cooper and that of Pratt
is, indeed, interestingly close; but the likeness between the two great
schools is less perfect. Pratt Institute's remarkable characteristics
are the result of a wise idea logically worked out. The buildings
on Ryerson Street and Grand Avenue contain a unique combination of
departments under a form of management that has proved to be eminently
practical and progressive. Its educational plan illustrates manual and
industrial training, as well as education in high-school and artistic
branches. The methods of teaching domestic art, as well as political,
economic, and natural science, have excited the admiration of students
of education throughout the country. The large free library is one of
many features of the institution.

The kindergarten idea in Brooklyn has had its leading exponent in
Froebel Academy on Tompkins Square. Among other private educational
institutions are St. John's College, the most prominent of the Roman
Catholic schools, situated on Lewis Avenue, between Willoughby Avenue
and Hart Street; St. Francis College, Bedford Academy, St. Joseph's
Institute, Brooklyn Heights Seminary, Long Island Business College,
Brooklyn Latin School, Bryant & Stratton's Business College, Miss
Rounds's School for Girls, Kissick's Business College, and Browne's
Business College.

In special education the Long Island College Hospital and the Brooklyn
College of Pharmacy occupy an important place. The Long Island College
Hospital and Training School for Nurses was chartered in 1858. Its
history as a hospital and as a college has been notable. The graduates
in 1893 numbered 60, bringing the total list of graduates nearly to
1500.

It frequently has been lamented that Brooklyn has no great free
library, and the deficiency is one for which the city deserves a mark
of discredit. But it is due to Brooklyn to observe that she is by no
means without excellent opportunities for those who wish to read.

The Brooklyn Library, which succeeded the old Mercantile Library,
is not free to the public, but the subscription rate is so low in
comparison with the privileges that the institution is in many respects
to be regarded as a great public library. The building on Montague
Street was finished in 1868 at a cost of $227,000, and its beautiful
Gothic front forms one of the genuine ornaments of the city.

The library contains nearly 200,000 volumes, admirably selected. The
catalogue compiled by Stephen B. Noyes was of a character to bring
honor alike to library and librarian. Upon the death of Mr. Noyes
the management of the library came into the competent hands of W. A.
Bardwell, who became librarian in 1888. The reading-rooms are furnished
with 300 periodicals and newspapers. In the reference departments there
were 75,000 readers in 1893, and in the reading-rooms 100,000 readers.
The Brooklyn Library has, indeed, performed an immensely important
service in the development of the city.

The Brooklyn Institute Free Library, formerly in the old Institute
Building on Washington Street, and now at 502 Fulton Street, contains
16,000 well-selected volumes, and is efficiently managed. Pratt
Institute Free Library is a notable instance of a great public service
through a private agency. The library of 42,000 volumes includes 2000
German and 2000 French books. There are an Astral Branch at Franklin
Avenue and Java Street, and delivery stations at Froebel Academy and
754 Driggs Avenue. Reading-room and library are free to the use of all
residents of Brooklyn. The Long Island Free Library, at 571 Atlantic
Avenue, is the result of a well-directed movement. There are but
15,000 volumes, but method of selection and distribution have assured
the usefulness of the work. To this must be added the free public
school libraries, and the substantial free library of the Union for
Christian Work on Schermerhorn Street.

The free library of the Long Island Historical Society naturally
occupies an important place. The reference department of 48,000 volumes
includes the noteworthy publications of the society itself. The Law
Library in the Court House contains 15,000 volumes, and there are 7000
volumes in the library of the Kings County Medical Society.

In addition to the libraries of the Young Men's and the Young Women's
Christian associations,[47] there are over twenty-five special free
reading-rooms throughout the city, most of them connected with
churches.

The large number of churches, and the emphasis laid upon church
interests, once gave to Brooklyn the title of the City of Churches.
The proportion between the number of churches and the population no
longer is so exceptional as to justify such a title, but church life
in Brooklyn is, in many respects, of unique prominence. The greatest
preacher the United States has produced, Henry Ward Beecher,[48]
occupied the pulpit of Plymouth Church during a great formative period
in the city's history. The Rev. Richard S. Storrs, D. D., pastor of the
Congregational Church of the Pilgrims since 1846, the descendant of a
distinguished family of preachers and orators, who has been called the
"Chrysostom of Brooklyn," occupies a place among the most scholarly
of American orators. The popularity of the Rev. T. De Witt Talmage,
pastor of the Brooklyn Tabernacle since 1869, has been unexampled in
the church history of the country. The thirty years' pastorate of the
Rev. Theodore L. Cuyler, at the Lafayette Avenue Presbyterian Church,
constituted a notable force in the advancement of the community. The
enlightened leadership of the Catholic Church by the Right Reverend
John Loughlin, first bishop of Brooklyn, who was succeeded in 1892
by the Right Reverend Charles E. McDonnell, has been a matter for
congratulation in the Catholic Church; and the Episcopal Church has
been under no less obligation to the first bishop of the Protestant
Episcopal Diocese of Long Island, the Right Reverend A. N. Littlejohn,
D. D. When Dr. Littlejohn was elected bishop in 1869, he was succeeded
as rector of Holy Trinity Church by the Rev. Charles Henry Hall, D. D.,
who has been one of Brooklyn's strongest preachers.

St. James' Church, at Jay and Chapel streets, has been the cathedral
church of the Catholic diocese for nearly half a century. The
corner-stone of a great cathedral, to occupy the block bounded by
Lafayette, Clermont, Greene, and Vanderbilt avenues, was laid in 1868,
but only a part of the structure has been completed.

In 1893 the following were the numbers of churches of different
denominations in Brooklyn: Baptist, 40; Congregational, 26; German
Evangelical Association, 5; Jewish, 10; Lutheran, 27; Methodist
Episcopal, 53; Primitive Methodist, 4; Methodist Free, 1; Methodist
Protestant, 1; Presbyterian, 33; Roman Catholic, 63; Reformed
Presbyterian, 1; United Presbyterian, 3; Protestant Episcopal, 45;
Reformed Episcopal, 2; Dutch Reformed, 19; Unitarian, 4; Universalist,
5; miscellaneous, 23.

In the county towns the churches are numbered as follows: Baptist, 1;
Hebrew, 1; Lutheran, 5; Methodist Episcopal, 9; Protestant Episcopal,
8; Methodist Protestant, 1; Reformed, 8; Roman Catholic, 12. In 1893
there were ten so-called Chinese Sunday-schools in Brooklyn, most
of them connected with Protestant churches, and said to enroll 200
members.[49]

Religious societies in Brooklyn include a large list of prosperous and
efficient bodies. Among these may be mentioned the Catholic Historical
Society, the Union Missionary Training Institute, the Baptist Church
Extension Society, Baptist Social Union, City Bible Society, Church
Society of the Methodist Episcopal Church, City Mission and Tract
Society, Brooklyn Sunday School Union, Eastern District Sabbath School
Association, Brooklyn Theosophical Society, Brotherhood of Christian
Unity, Church Charity Foundation, Congregational Church Extension
Society, Congregational Club, Foreign Sunday School Association,
German Young Men's Christian Association, Greenpoint Sunday School
Association, Greenpoint Young Men's Christian Association, Kings County
Sunday School Association, Long Island Baptist Association, Order of
Deaconesses of the Methodist Episcopal Church, Women's Auxiliary,
Unitarian Club, Universalist Club, and the Young People's Baptist Union.

Brooklyn's churches occupy a particularly intimate relation with the
intellectual and social life of the city. The circumstances under
which the Rev. John W. Chadwick, D. D., became a leader in that highly
significant intellectual movement, the Brooklyn Ethical Association,
which has held meetings during a number of seasons at the Second
Unitarian Church, and under which the Rev. John Coleman Adams, D. D.,
instituted the free historical lectures to public school children at
All Souls Universalist Church, have been typical of a wholesome and
progressive tendency in the community.

The work of the churches is supplemented by many and admirable
organizations devoted to the relief of the weak, destitute, and
incompetent. An important position is occupied by the Association for
Improving the Condition of the Poor. The Brooklyn Bureau of Charities,
with central offices on Schermerhorn Street, has "the general purpose
of promoting the welfare of the poor, the suffering, and the friendless
in the city of Brooklyn. The specific objects and methods include:
The promotion of cordial cooperation between benevolent societies,
churches, and individuals; the maintenance of a body of friendly
visitors to the poor; the encouragement of thrift, self-dependence,
and industry; the provision of temporary employment and industrial
instruction."

The Society of St. Vincent de Paul undertakes the general relief of
the poor, without regard to color or creed, the work being done by a
conference in each church (Catholic). The society is governed by a
council composed of the president and vice-president of each conference.

A number of industrial agencies have been devised for the purpose of
supplying temporary work for men and women. A bureau of relief for
needy veterans of the Rebellion was established in Grand Army quarters
at the City Hall. In recent years the number of free dispensaries
throughout the city has greatly increased.

The Brooklyn Hospital, incorporated in 1845, received valuable aid from
Augustus Graham, the founder of the Brooklyn Institute. The present
hospital at Raymond Street and De Kalb Avenue has been in operation
since 1852. St. Catherine's Hospital was established in 1869. The
Memorial Hospital for women and children was founded in 1881; the
Methodist Episcopal Hospital in the same year; St. Mary's Hospital
in 1878; St. John's Hospital in 1871; the German Hospital in 1889;
the Lutheran Hospital in 1881; the Brooklyn Hospital for Contagious
Diseases in 1891; St. Peter's Hospital in 1864; the Brooklyn Home for
Consumptives in 1864; the Eastern District Dispensary and Hospital in
1851; the Long Island Throat and Lung Hospital in 1889; the Brooklyn
Throat Hospital in 1889; the Brooklyn Homoeopathic Hospital in 1852;
the Brooklyn Eye and Ear Hospital in 1868; the Kings County Hospital (a
county institution) in 1837; the Brooklyn Maternity in 1870; the Faith
Home for Incurables in 1878; the Inebriates' Home for Kings County in
1867.

For the protection and relief of children, the city has the Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, the Children's Aid Society,
the Industrial School Association, with six branches, the Nursery and
Infants' Hospital, the Howard Colored Orphan Asylum, the Hebrew Orphan
Asylum, the Orphan Asylum Society, the Roman Catholic Orphan Asylum
Society, with three branches; the Eastern District Industrial School,
the Sheltering Arms Nursery, St. Giles's Home, St. Vincent's Home for
Boys, St. Christopher's Day Nursery, and St. Malachi's Home.

Brooklyn's right to the title of the City of Homes, rather than to
that of the City of Churches, is excellently supported by a study of
its social life; and in no phase is this peculiarity more apparent
than in the club life of the city, which is distinctly in harmony with
the general social life of the city. Several of the city clubs have
"ladies' nights," or special receptions to which ladies are invited,
and to some of the clubs ladies are admitted at certain hours of the
day. "The Union League, with its Romanesque front of cinnamon brick
and brownstone on a semi-square, is near the south end of Bedford
Avenue. Its location is fine, and during the political campaigns it is
an important centre. Medallions of Grant and Lincoln adorn the front,
an eagle with outstretched wings holds up a 'bay,' and a carved bear
stands on the roof, a symbol of the 'grip' that clubdom has on the
modern man. The great hall in this house is one of the finest in the
country. Across the city, a square below the Park plaza, stands the
Montauk, a fine structure, ornate, in light tones of brick, and with a
Greek frieze above the third story, which is unique in architectural
decoration and is a replica of old bas-reliefs. Near by is the mammoth
building of the Riding and Driving Club, the largest and best arranged
structure of the kind in this country. The Hamilton, one of the older
clubs, has a tall building on the corner of Clinton and Remsen streets,
showing an expanse of red brick and brownstone. It has no distinctive
architectural style. Architecturally, a most elaborate club-house is
the Germania on Schermerhorn Street. Its style is a rich but modified
Florentine. The material is pale brown brick. A feature of it is the
great arched doorway. The Bush wick Democratic club-house on Bushwick
Avenue is, architecturally, on the same lines, a reduced version in
stone and terra cotta. The club has but recently taken possession of
this new house. Out in Flatbush, on the avenue, is the Midwood, an old
colonial manse, unaltered, with wide-spreading grounds, its facade
marked by great white columns, such as are almost unknown elsewhere in
the county of Kings to-day. The Hanover, on Bedford Avenue, is a fine
modern double house, with extensions and remodelings. The Brooklyn and
the Oxford clubs have recently enlarged their rather unpretentious
buildings without special reference to architectural beauty. The
Excelsior is a plain city house. The Lincoln has the appearance of
several buildings joined together, but is ornate and striking. Out of
town the Crescent and the Field and Marine clubs have charming country
homes, turreted and porticoed, and surrounded with trees and lawns."[50]

In literary, artistic, musical, dramatic, and social clubs, the city
has become populous. The Academy of Music had its origin in the success
of the Brooklyn Philharmonic Society, the leading organization for
the patronage of music, which was incorporated in 1857. It had been
remarked that the audiences which patronized the concerts of the New
York Philharmonic Society were, in a great part, made up of Brooklyn
people. In 1856 or 1857 it occurred to the heads of several families,
who were the best and most appreciative patrons of the New York
society, that Brooklyn might and ought to have a Philharmonic Society
of its own. The project was inaugurated, and was attended with success.
The subscription list doubled the second season. There were, the second
year, over seven hundred subscribers, and numerous patrons besides. The
Athenaeum was entirely inadequate for the purposes of the society. In
1858, the leading members of the Philharmonic Society, by circulars,
called the attention of several leading citizens to the relative change
that was going on between the two cities, and pointed to the success of
their society as the best evidence that the time had come when a large
lyric hall was demanded by the necessities of our city. About fifty
gentlemen responded to this call, and a preliminary meeting was held
at the Polytechnic Institute, in October, 1858.[51] A public meeting
followed, a popular stock company was formed, and the Academy was
incorporated in 1859. Land in Montague Street was bought for $41,000.
The total expenditure reached $200,000. The Academy became and has
remained the city's leading opera house, and largest place of public
meeting. Most of the greatest musical artists, actors, and orators in
the country have been heard under its roof.

Among the leading musical associations of the city are the Apollo Club,
the Seidl Society, the Brooklyn Choral Society, the Arion Society, the
Brooklyn Maennerchor, the Zoellner Maennerchor, the Amphion Musical
Society, the Caecilia Ladies' Vocal Society, the Concordia Maennerchor,
the Euterpe Chorus and Orchestra, the Deutscher Liederkranz, the
Saengerbund, and the Prospect Heights Choral Society. In recent years
there has appeared a disposition to regard Brooklyn as a musical city.
The increase in the number of musical societies and the patronage of
opera and concert have unquestionably been great. Among the musical
composers, resident in the city, who have made national reputations,
Dudley Buck has been of first prominence.

The Brooklyn Art Association, a development of the Sketch Club, formed
by Brooklyn artists in 1857, erected a handsome building adjoining
the Academy of Music in 1872. The exhibitions held in the association
galleries have been the chief displays of pictures seen within the
city. In recent years the Brooklyn Art Club, a society composed of
artists solely, has attained a large membership, and has exhibited
annually in the Art Association galleries. The Art Association
maintains a free art school. The leading society of art connoisseurs is
the Rembrandt Club.

The Society of Old Brooklynites, the Franklin Literary Society, and
the Bryant Literary Society have won prominence, and a position of
influence has been assumed by the Brooklyn Woman's Club.

In private libraries and art collections Brooklyn has grown rich
within the past twenty-five years. The development of certain valuable
picture collections has induced the wish that the city had a great
museum similar to the Metropolitan in New York, which might receive
contributions by bequest. The advancement of the Brooklyn Institute
promises to supply this need.

The newspapers of Brooklyn have acquired an increasingly influential
position in the life of the city. We have seen how the "Eagle," the
"Times," and the "Freie Presse" attained their established positions.
The "Standard-Union" represents some interesting newspaper history. The
"Union" was started in the midst of the war period, its first editor
being Edward Cary. The paper was purchased in 1870 by Henry C. Bowen,
and Gen. Stewart L. Woodford became editor-in-chief, and H. E. Bowen
(son of Henry C.), the publisher. When General Woodford retired a few
months later, he was succeeded by Theodore Tilton, whose skillful pen
was in the service of the paper until January, 1872, when Henry C.
Bowen assumed the editorship. In the following year the control of the
paper passed to Benjamin F. Tracy, F. A. Schroeder, John F. Henry, and
others associated with them, and Robert Burch, who afterward became
managing editor of the "Eagle," took the post of editor-in-chief. Later
the property came into the hands of Lorin Palmer, and in 1877 the
purchase of the name and good-will of the Brooklyn "Argus," which had
been established as a weekly in 1866 and as a daily in 1873, resulted
in the change of title to "Union-Argus." When the Union Publishing
Company was formed, the name "Argus" was dropped, and the paper was
again known as the "Union" during the aggressive editorship of John
Foord, formerly of the New York "Times," and afterward editor of
"Harper's Weekly." In 1887 the "Standard," which had been established
in 1884, was consolidated with the "Union," and John A. Hatton assumed
the editorship of the "Standard-Union." Soon afterward William Berri
became principal owner of the paper, and in 1890 Murat Halstead,
long the master spirit of Ohio journalism, was called to the chair
of editor-in-chief. The qualities which gave Halstead a national
reputation while editor of the Cincinnati "Commercial Gazette" have not
failed to make his pen a power in Brooklyn and throughout the State.

The "Citizen," established in 1886 by leading Democrats of the city,
since has been a forceful and consistent organ of the local Democracy.
The editorship of Andrew McLean has been one of eloquence and energy,
uniting a consummate knowledge of Brooklyn with a rare sagacity in
estimating men and affairs.

The establishment of "Brooklyn Life" by Frederick Mitchell Munroe and
John Angus McKay was a felicitous stroke in Brooklyn journalism. "Life"
has enjoyed a unique popularity as a weekly review of Brooklyn social,
artistic, and literary affairs.

Brooklyn journalism has been quick to reflect the life and sentiment
of the city. It has been energetic, original, and clean. The fact that
only two of the newspapers, the "Eagle" and the "Citizen," publish
Sunday editions, is one which of itself indicates the presence of a
conservative element in the city. The establishment of Travelers'
Bureaus by the "Eagle," under the direction of the assistant business
manager, Herbert F. Gunnison, was a piece of characteristic enterprise.

The political complexion of Brooklyn and Kings County during the
past two or three decades has become increasingly Democratic, with
periodical Republican relapses. In the incumbency of the sheriff's
office, for example, there has been an interesting alternation in
parties since 1875. During the same period the two parties have been
represented with approximate evenness in the Mayor's office. In
leadership of the Democratic party Henry C. Murphy was succeeded by his
energetic lieutenant, Hugh McLaughlin, who has retained the position
at the head of the party since before the Rebellion. The period and
completeness of this local leadership probably finds no parallel in
American political history. No analogous situation has ever existed
in the Republican party, which has never had a generally recognized
leader, and whose successes at the polls have been those of a party
or a public feeling in opposition to the dominant organized party.
Both independent Democratic and independent Republican movements and
leaderships have played an important part in the later activities of
political life.

Of the commercial development of Brooklyn since 1876, it is to be said
that it has advanced more remarkably on the water front than elsewhere.
The traffic in grain, sugar, and oil, with the extensive cooperage
and ship-building and repairing operations, constitutes an important
element in any estimate of the city's prominence in manufactures.

In the value of products[52] the sugar industry stands first, the
foundry and machine-shop interests coming second, and slaughtering
and meat-packing third. Fourth and fifth positions are to be given
respectively to chemical industries and the grinding of coffee and
spices. Cordage and twine making has for a long time occupied a
prominent place in Brooklyn. Other prominent industries are in boots
and shoes, furnishing goods, and paper hangings. The National Meter
Company plant in South Brooklyn is the largest in the world.

One of the most striking illustrations of Brooklyn's advancement in
commercial affairs has been the increase in the number and importance
of its financial institutions. The city's first banks were the Long
Island Bank,[53] incorporated in 1824; the Brooklyn Savings Bank,
incorporated in 1827; the Atlantic Bank, incorporated in 1836; the Bank
of Williamsburgh, incorporated in 1839; the South Brooklyn Savings
Bank, incorporated in 1850; and the Williamsburgh Savings Bank,
incorporated in 1851. The first fire insurance company (the Brooklyn)
was contemporaneous with the first bank. The Long Island Insurance
Company was organized in 1833. In 1893 four insurance companies had
their home offices in Brooklyn; there were twenty-three banks of
deposit, fourteen savings banks, four safe deposit companies, seven
trust companies, four title guarantee companies, and four savings
institutions. In the same year there were about one hundred and ten
strictly local securities.




APPENDIX


I

FRANCIS LEWIS[54]

One of the names ever to be remembered in the history of Brooklyn, and
of the State and country, is that of Francis Lewis, who was an ardent
patriot, and sacrificed his all to secure the independence of the
colonies. As he resided for more than twenty years on Long Island, he
can justly be claimed as one of her sons, and as such richly deserves
a place in her history. Few men displayed so much zeal in the cause of
liberty, or evinced such readiness to endure the hardships which the
struggle necessarily entailed.

His career covered a period of fourscore years and ten. He spent
sixty-eight of these years in the New Netherlands,--forty-one of them
under the rule of England; seven years in the cause of the Revolution;
and twenty years as a citizen of the Republic of the United States,
upon whose banner he ever looked with pleasure and delight.

Born amidst the wilds of rocky Wales, in the town of Llandaff, in
1713, he possessed the sturdy endurance and perseverance for which the
ancient Britons, from whom he was descended, were proverbial. In such a
clime, and under such circumstances, he early learned to bear patiently
the privations of life, and thus was fitted and prepared for the great
work which characterized his eventful career.

His father, the Rev. William Lewis, was a worthy minister of the
Established Church of England, and his mother was the daughter of the
Rev. Dr. Pettingill, a clergyman of the same faith, whose parish was
in the north of Wales. Young Lewis did not long enjoy a parent's care,
being left an orphan at the early age of four or five. His education
and training were now committed to a maternal aunt, who ever manifested
a deep interest in his welfare. This relative and adopted mother took
particular pains to have him thoroughly instructed in his native
language, and instilled into him those deep religious principles, which
formed a marked and striking phase of his character. Not satisfied
with the means of education to be obtained in his mountain home, she
sent her ward to Scotland to visit some relatives in the Highlands,
amongst whom he soon acquired a perfect familiarity with the Gaelic
tongue. Remaining in Scotland a short time, he was transferred to
the care of an uncle, who held the position of Dean of St. Paul's in
London. The Dean at once gave him the advantages of the celebrated
school at Westminster. The opportunities thus afforded were embraced
and appreciated. By his assiduity and proficiency he soon won a
distinguished place as a scholar. His progress was rapid, and when he
left the school he had obtained a complete classical education.

On leaving school the natural bent of his mind appeared to be for
commercial pursuits. In order to prepare him for the path he had
chosen, he was apprenticed to a merchant in London.

When Lewis reached manhood he came into possession of the little
fortune left by his father, and thereupon resolved to engage in
ventures on his own account. Perceiving that the old world did not
present a suitable field of operation for a young man with a small
capital, he anticipated the advice of the Sage of Chappaqua, and
determined to seek his fortune in the new and promising western world.
Collecting his effects together, he converted them into money, which
he invested in such articles of merchandise as he thought marketable,
and, with his stock in trade, sailed for New York, where he arrived in
the spring of 1735. He was disappointed in finding that his stock of
goods could not be sold in New York, by reason of the limited demand.
A man of his energy was ready to overcome all difficulties. In the
emergency he entered into a partnership with Edward Annesly, with whom
he left a portion of his goods for sale, shipping the remainder to
Philadelphia, whither he himself went to superintend their disposal.
In the latter city he remained two years, and then returned to New
York. Once more in New Amsterdam, he entered into business, becoming
extensively engaged in foreign trade. While thus employed, and on June
15, 1745, realizing the truth of Scripture "that it is not good for
man to be alone," he entered the holy and sacred relation of marriage
with Miss Elizabeth Annesly, his partner's sister. The issue of this
marriage was seven children, three only of whom survived infancy. One
of his sons, Morgan Lewis, greatly distinguished himself, subsequently
becoming governor of the State of New York.

During the remarkably severe winter of 1741 Lewis drove his horse and
sleigh from New York to Barnstable, the entire length of Long Island
Sound, on the ice. This must have been an interesting episode in his
life. Referring to the intensity of the cold season, the "Boston
Post" of January 12, 1741, says: "For these three weeks we have had
a continued series of extreme cold weather, so that our harbors and
rivers are continually frozen up. On Charles River a tent is erected
for the entertainment of travellers. From Point Alderton, along the
South Shore, the ice is continued for the space of above 20 miles."

The Boston "News Letter" of March 5, 1741, contains the statement that
"people ride every day from Stratford, Conn., to Long Island, which is
three leagues across, which was never known before."

It appears that the temperature did not moderate with the appearance of
spring, as the same paper, on April 2, again alludes to the subject,
saying, "that people from Thompson Island, Squantum, and the adjacent
neighborhood have come fifteen Sabbaths successively upon the ice to
our meeting."

Francis Lewis being an active and industrious man, his business often
required his presence abroad, and led him to travel extensively in
Europe. At various times he visited Russia, the Orkney and Shetland
Islands, and on two occasions endured the terror and discomfort of
shipwreck on the coast of Ireland.

On his return from the old world he found the affairs of the colony in
a very unsettled condition. The French war was engaging the attention
of the people. During a short period he was employed as agent to supply
the wants of the British troops. The romance of his life was now about
to commence. In the performance of his duties, he was present in
August, 1756, when Fort Oswego was reduced, and compelled to surrender
to the French General de Montcalm. The fort at this time was commanded
by Colonel Mersey, one of his warm personal friends. In the emergency
attending the bombardment, Lewis, to serve his friend, acted as his
aid. Montcalm on the 10th of August approached the fort at the head
of a mixed array of 5000 men, consisting of Europeans, Canadians, and
Indians. The garrison having used up all their ammunition, Mersey
spiked the cannon, and crossed the river to Little Oswego, without the
loss of a single man. Montcalm at once took possession of the deserted
fort, and immediately began a heavy fire, which was kept up without
intermission. The next day Mersey was killed by a shot while standing
by the side of Lewis. The commander having fallen, the garrison at once
capitulated, surrendering themselves prisoners of war. It consisted
of 1400 men, composing three regiments, one of which was the Jersey
Blues, under Col. Peter Schuyler. By the terms of the surrender they
were to be exempted from plunder, taken to Montreal, and treated with
humanity. The French, however, did not regard the promise which they
had made. When the surrender was effected, Montcalm soon forgot his
pledge, and shamefully allowed one of the Indian warriors to select
thirty of the prisoners to treat as he pleased. Lewis was one of the
number chosen, and naturally expected a speedy and cruel death. He was,
however, saved in a most unexpected manner. The family tradition on
the subject, handed down by his son, and communicated to the writer by
a gentleman of this city, who received it from Governor Morgan Lewis
himself, is that Francis Lewis soon ascertained that he understood
their dialect, and could freely converse with them, so that they
comprehended what he said. His ability to communicate with the Indians
in their own tongue pleased the chieftain, who extended to him the
utmost kindness, and on his arrival at Montreal sought by every means
within his power to induce the French commander to allow him to return
to his family, without being compelled to pay any ransom. The request
so urgently made was refused. Lewis was sent as a prisoner of war to
France, and upon being exchanged was permitted to return to America.

The British government, in consideration of the services he had
rendered, gave him a grant of 5000 acres of land, but as the fees
amounted to more than the land was worth he never took out the
necessary patent, the warrant for which was left in the Secretary of
State's office.

Many have looked upon this tradition concerning Francis Lewis as
mythical. Had it been false, a man of his sterling qualities would have
contradicted the statements published during his lifetime. Some have
supposed that he gathered more or less knowledge of the Indian dialect
through business intercourse. It presents a very interesting feature
in American history, opening up as it does a wide field for research.
As it deserves more than a passing notice, it will not be out of place
to turn aside for a moment, and consider how it was that Francis Lewis
understood the Indian warrior.

It frequently has been claimed that Madoc, a Welshman, made voyages to
America, long before Columbus was born. It has been conceded by many
authorities that Prince Madoc, a Welsh navigator, upon the death of
his father resolved to seek a new home, and thereby avoid contention
with his brothers and relatives as to the succession. This was about
the year 1170. He prepared his ships and munitions of war, and sailing
westward came to a country theretofore unknown. Upon his return to his
native land he gave a glowing account of the richness and beauty of
the land he had visited. Restless in spirit, he could not long remain
satisfied with the crags of Cambria, and prepared a fleet of ten sails,
once more bent his course westward, and was never heard of again.
There are many curious evidences that in early times Welsh tribes of
Indians, or Indians speaking the Welsh language, were to be found on
the continent of America.

Dr. John Williams published in London, in 1791, a very interesting
inquiry into the truth concerning the discovery of America by Prince
Madoc. In his treatise much valuable information is to be found, and
many strong arguments in favor of the claim that the Welsh settled
America more than 300 years anterior to the discovery by Columbus. Dr.
Williams refers to the Lewis incident, and published his book twelve
years before the death of Francis Lewis.

To return from our digression, Francis Lewis could not be idle. On his
return from his enforced trip to France, we find him once again engaged
in business. He was a man in advance of his time, and well knew the
value of newspaper advertisements. The following is a copy of one of
his announcements, published in the "New York Gazette and Weekly Post
Boy," the leading journal of the day:--

    "Just imported and to be sold by Francis Lewis in the Fly,
    Alamodes, Lutestrings, Ducapes, Damasks, Mantua Silks,
    Grazettes, Padajoy's Velvets, India Taffities, Groganes, Sewing
    Silks, etc."

The commercial trips taken by Lewis gave him an enlarged view of men
and things. In Europe he had witnessed the aggressions of the rich
landed proprietors upon the poorer classes, and the untold wrongs
perpetrated upon the white slaves of the mines and manufacturing towns.
His natural, inherent sense of right led him to endorse and freely
proclaim the doctrine, "that all men are born free and equal." Wherever
he went he beheld the outrages which the assumed leaders imposed upon
the common people. He saw how utterly powerless they were to remove the
burdens and restrictions which stood in the way of their advancement.
Everywhere he found power trampling upon human rights. In him the
downtrodden and oppressed ever found a faithful friend and helper. As
he always kept his eyes and ears open, he was prepared with force and
vigor to oppose the encroachments of the British Crown upon the rights
of the people. Looking upon America as the home of the oppressed, with
whom he always sympathized, he at once became greatly attached to his
adopted country.

Watching with close scrutiny every act of the mother country, he early
foresaw that the demands of Great Britain would eventually result in a
rupture.

George II. died October 25, 1760, and was succeeded by his grandson,
George III., a young man of twenty-two years of age. Shortly after
his accession, and on the 18th of November, 1761, Lieutenant-Governor
Cadwallader Colden assumed control of affairs in the colony of New
York, during the temporary absence of Governor Monckton. Governor
Monckton returned after capturing the island of Martinique in June,
1762, and remained in office until June, 1763, when he returned to his
native land, again leaving the management of affairs in the hands of
Lieutenant-Governor Colden.

During Monckton's career, it may be said that the principles of liberty
were first invaded by an assault upon the independence of the judiciary
by the board of trade. Justice Pratt was appointed chief justice in the
place of De Lancey. The board of trade declared that he should hold
office during the pleasure of the King, and not during good behavior,
as had always been the rule. Such a declaration and assumption gave
the King power to remove for political reasons any judge in the land,
thus making the judge but a tool of the King, and depriving him of
that independence which could alone render his decisions entitled to
respect. The people naturally looked upon this action as an invasion
of their civil rights, and calculated to destroy the confidence of the
community in the expounders of the law. To their credit be it said that
both Monckton and Colden boldly opposed the measure.

The Provincial Assembly looked upon the conditions imposed relative to
the appointment of the chief justice with detestation. They opposed
it bitterly, manifesting their opposition by absolutely refusing to
make any provision for the payment of his salary until he received
a commission, which would place him above and beyond legislative
political control. The board of trade refused to surrender, or in any
wise alter the conditions they had adopted. As the Assembly would make
no provision for his salary, it was suggested that the royal quit-rents
should be applied to the object. The plan was adopted, and thus the
judiciary passed under the control of the sovereign, and the death
knell of its independence was sounded.

Colden was destined to wield the reins of government during an
important and trying time. The storm cloud could be seen gradually
rising. At first appearing no larger than a man's hand, it slowly
increased until at last the black and heavy clouds seemed ready to
break forth at any moment with devastating fury. Everything looked
dark and gloomy, and betokened the approaching storm. The mutterings
of the people grew louder and more threatening. The government did
not heed them, but made their demands more arrogant, seeming to take
the Egyptian taskmasters as their guide. Parliament acted as if they
considered the colonies fit subjects for plunder.

In 1763 the subject of taxing the colonies was brought up in
Parliament, and a measure introduced for its imposition. This was
antagonized by the Provincial Assembly of New York, and denounced as
arrogant and illegal.

Lord Grenville was the chancellor of the English exchequer. To him
belongs the credit of suggesting the proposition of raising a revenue
by a direct tax upon the colonies. He, then, was the initiator of the
abuses which led to the independence of the people.

Lord Grenville understood human nature, and therefore resolved to
accomplish his purpose by degrees. He sought to gradually obtain entire
control over the finances and resources of the colonies, take from the
people their liberties, and render them merely subservient vassals
of the Crown. He proposed as an entering wedge that a tax should be
imposed upon foreign productions, and that stamp duties should be
created. As such measures were always unpopular, he saw at once that
men and means would have to be provided for the collection of the
duties. He well knew that the people would not tamely submit to the
enforcement of such burdens. In order to carry the law into effect, he
proposed the creation of an army of 10,000 men, believing that such
a force would act upon the fears of the subjects, and compel them to
submit quietly to the great wrong.

The thunderings of discontent grew louder and louder; and the murmurs
resounded on every side. Grenville became prime minister in 1764, and
by reason of his elevation exerted a great and controlling influence
over Parliament. He was now in a position to successfully carry out
the schemes he had proposed the year before. Upon assuming his new
position, next to the Crown itself, he forcibly urged upon Parliament
his peculiar methods to raise revenue. He contended that the home
government had the right to impose such duties and taxes as they
thought proper, without consulting the wishes of the colonists. An act
was passed in accordance with his views, providing a tax upon various
articles, which formerly had been admitted free of duty.

The Provincial Assembly of the colony of New York protested against
these tyrannical acts, and forwarded a strong and forcible memorial
to the ministry. The manliness manifested by the Assembly in thus
declaring its rights brought down upon them the animosity of the Crown;
led to the suspension of their legislative prerogatives, thereby
depriving the people of representation in the affairs of the colony.
New York was not the only province that sent protests. While the
Assembly of New York spoke boldly and fearlessly, the sister colonies
were more suppliant. If the other colonies had displayed the same
determination to oppose the inroads upon their rights as New York
evinced, it would have resulted at the outset in a repeal of the odious
measures.

The Stamp Act was passed on the 22d of March, 1765, to take effect on
the 1st of November ensuing. The colonial Governor Colden declared that
he would enforce the law. This enunciation did not terrify the people,
as a fixed resolve permeated the masses to oppose its enforcement
at all hazards. Citizens obtained copies of the act, and in broad
daylight hawked them about the street with a death's head bearing the
inscription, "The Folly of England and the Ruin of America." Meetings,
public and private, were held throughout the city, and in the outlying
sections of the colony. The subject was earnestly discussed on the
streets and in all places of public resort. Lewis was amongst the first
to refuse submission to or acquiescence in the royal demands. Love of
liberty and justice induced him to enlist in the cause of the patriots
against the enactments of Parliament. This was the grand principle
which induced him to unite with the devoted band which sprang into
existence, and was known as the "Sons of Liberty." The avowed object
of this noble company was to concert and adopt measures whereby the
exercise of an undue power by the mother country might be defeated.

When the Provincial Assembly of New York, apprehending danger, and
realizing the necessity of united action on the part of all the
colonies, deemed it wise and prudent to recommend a congress of
delegates to assemble in New York on the 7th of October, 1765, to
consider what action should be taken to oppose the repulsive Stamp Act,
Mr. Lewis was elected to represent New York as a delegate, and when
they met took his seat in the convention. His head, heart, and soul
were enlisted in the cause, and he earnestly advocated the adoption of
the Bill of Rights.

He was one of the men selected to circulate the principles of the Sons
of Liberty, and seek the formation of similar societies throughout
the colonies. In this grand work he was associated with Isaac Sears,
Marrinus Willett, Gershom Mott, Hugh Hughes, William Wiley, Thomas
Robinson, Flores Bancker, and Edward Laight, all of whom were tried
patriots, whose deeds of daring and earnest labors will live in the
memory of a grateful people while time shall last. Truly have they
"left behind them footprints on the sands of time," and "their actions
smell sweet and blossom in their dust."

At this time Francis Lewis resided at Whitestone, L. I., having removed
with his family to his country home early in 1765. His residence in
Queens County did not prevent his acting with the Sons of Liberty. In
those days many of the prominent officials lived in Brooklyn and on the
Island.

The appointment of this committee resulted in the selection of a
correspondent in London, who kept the patriots informed as to the
projected movements of the British authorities, by which means they
were enabled to adopt measures to thwart the purposes of the Crown. The
information received from time to time led to a desire for a closer
union of the colonies. The old Dutch maxim, which has been preserved
and adopted as part of the seal of our good city of Brooklyn, "In union
is strength," was uppermost in their minds, and induced them to invite
the respective colonies to send delegates to a congress to assemble in
New York on the 7th of October, 1765.

Some New England writers have given the credit of the formation of this
congress to Massachusetts. This is an unhistorical assumption. Whilst
New England men did yeoman service in the cause, they did not enlist in
it until they had been spurred on by the "Sons of Liberty" of New York.
This congress of delegates owed its existence to the persistency of New
Yorkers, and was by them first called together.

The congress was organized by the election of Timothy Ruggles, of
Massachusetts, as president. The session lasted for three weeks. The
measures introduced and the work accomplished were mainly initiated
by the delegates from New York. A declaration of rights, prepared
and submitted by John Cruger, Mayor of New York, was adopted; and a
memorial and statement of grievances for presentation to Parliament
was prepared and introduced by Robert R. Livingston, also of New York.
Livingston subsequently was a member of the Continental Congress, and
associated with Jefferson on the committee appointed to draft the
Declaration of Independence. Livingston's address to Parliament was
signed by nearly all the members. The declaration of rights was a
vigorous and forcible document. It announced the grand principle that
"taxation without representation is tyranny," and declared that as the
colonies were so remote as to preclude representation in Parliament,
the right of taxation only vested in the legislative authorities. It
boldly denounced the Stamp Act as tyrannical, and demanded its repeal.

Prior to the assembling of this congress a committee waited upon
Governor Colden to solicit his aid and encouragement. As Colden had
in former times advocated the rights of the people, it was but natural
to expect encouragement and support from him in this trying hour. The
committee was disappointed. To their infinite surprise and disgust
he declared the congress to be "unconstitutional, unprecedented, and
unlawful," and announced that he should give it no countenance.

It is within the bounds of reason to say that Jefferson, in the
production of his inimitable paper, caught his inspiration from these
noble documents emanating from the Dutchmen of New York, and so readily
endorsed by their associates in this congress. The doctrine brought
over in the Mayflower led for a time to proscription, whilst the
lesson taught by the Dutch settlers was freedom and toleration. The
forefathers of New England who sought the New World to enjoy religious
liberty refused to grant the same privilege to others. The Dutch, on
the other hand, extended a welcome to the Pilgrims, gave them a home
at Delft Haven for eleven years, afforded an asylum to the persecuted
Quakers who fled from New England, and always exercised the precept
enunciated at a later day by the martyr Lincoln, "with malice toward
none, with charity for all."

The acts and enunciations of the congress were approved by the people,
and adopted by the Colonial Assembly which met in November. Shortly
after the ratification of the petitions by the Colonial Assembly,
Governor Colden wrote to the home government that "whatever happens in
this place has the greatest influence on the other colonies. They have
their eyes perpetually on it, and they govern themselves accordingly."

The Stamp Act was to take effect on the 1st of November, 1765. The
merchants on the eve of the 1st were greatly excited. With one accord,
they congregated at Burns's Coffee House, near the Battery, and with
united voice passed the following resolution: "To import no goods
from England until the Stamp Act be repealed; to countermand all
orders already sent for spring goods; to sell no goods from England
on commission; to abide by these resolutions until they should be
rescinded by a general meeting called for that purpose."

The Sons of Liberty, in order to carry on their work so well
commenced, appointed from their number a committee of five, which
was termed the non-importation committee, whose duty it was to enter
into correspondence with the other colonies, and, by enlisting their
sympathy, induce them to cooperate in the work, and adopt a similar
policy.

The stamps reached New York October 29, 1765. In order to protect them
from the rage of the people, they were placed on board of a British
man-of-war, in the harbor. Governor Colden declared that he could not
be intimidated; that the stamps should be delivered in due time. The
Governor was in a dilemma, as neither threats nor persuasion could
induce the people to aid or assist in the removal.

The 1st of November came. Business was entirely suspended. Every
heart was burdened with anxiety. The flags on the shipping were
placed at half-mast, and the church bells tolled mournfully. Many
private residences displayed the insignia of mourning. On every side
it appeared as if a great and dire calamity had visited the colony.
Handbills denouncing the administration appeared in public places as
if by magic, and the people were warned not to give in their adhesion
to the Crown by purchasing the condemned stamps. Activity marked the
rank and file of the Sons of Liberty. During the day they bent their
energies in making preparations for an evening display. Shortly after
dark they assembled and proceeded to the Commons, in the neighborhood
of the present City Hall, where a gallows was quickly erected, and an
effigy of Governor Colden suspended therefrom. A piece of stamped paper
was placed in his hand, a drum at his back, and a placard on his breast
with the inscription, "To the Rebel Drummer of 1745." Another company
carried a life-sized figure of Colden, seated in a chair, through the
streets to the Fort. When they reached Colden's residence they broke
open his stable, took therefrom his coach of state, placed the image
in the coach, and with it returned and joined their companions in the
park. With them they formed into line, and once again proceeded to
the Fort and demanded admission. At this time the Fort was under the
command of General Gage, who wisely withheld his fire, well knowing
that the first shot would madden and infuriate the populace. As
admission to the Fort was refused, the citizens repaired to the Bowling
Green, kindled a fire, and placed thereon the Governor's coach, image,
and the effigy which had been suspended on the gallows. The Sons of
Liberty could not hold the people in check. The residence of James, one
of the Crown officers, was visited, and because he had advocated the
Stamp Act his house was reduced to ashes.

The excitement did not abate. Colden well knew that his successor was
expected daily, and he was anxious to lift the responsibility from his
own shoulders, and place it on those of his successor. This proffer on
the part of Colden did not satisfy the people; they wanted the entire
control of the stamps themselves. Again the Sons of Liberty assembled,
fully equipped, resolved to obtain the stamps at all hazards, and,
if needs be, storm the Fort itself. The Governor became alarmed, and
agreed to deliver them to the Mayor and Corporation. The stamps were
thereupon transferred to John Cruger, the Mayor, who gave a receipt on
behalf of the city, "to take charge, and care of, and be accountable
in case they shall be destroyed or carried out of the province." The
Sons of Liberty, satisfied with the results of their labors, quietly
dispersed. This was the 5th of November. Peace and quietude once again
reigned.

Sir Henry Moore, the new Governor, arrived November 13, 1765, and
wisely declared at the outset that he would have nothing to do with the
detested stamps, and directed that those he had brought with him should
be deposited with the others in the City Hall.

The spirit of hatred to the Stamp Act, manifested in the province
of New York, proved contagious. The colony of Maryland caught the
infection, and drove from her midst a stamp agent, who sought a refuge
on Long Island. Hither the Sons of Liberty followed him, and compelled
him to resign his office, under the solemnity of an oath. This act
on the part of the Sons of Liberty was greatly appreciated by the
inhabitants of Maryland.

The spirit displayed by the inhabitants of New York continued to
spread, until at last the different colonies became one in spirit.
Parliament saw it would be useless to attempt the enforcement of the
Stamp Act, and repealed it February 20, 1766. The news reached New York
March 20, 1766, filling the community with untold joy. A dinner was
given, and a liberty pole erected, bearing the inscription, "The King,
Pitt, and Liberty." This pole was destined to become the rallying-spot
of the Sons of Liberty.

Peace did not last long. In 1767, the chancellor of the exchequer
introduced and secured the passage of a bill, imposing duties on all
tea, glass, paper, painters' colors, and lead, imported into the
colony. This measure was looked upon as a fresh invasion of their
rights by the inhabitants, and a new burst of feeling appeared.

In 1768 a new Assembly was convened. Kings County was represented by
Simon Boerum, John Rapalje, and Abraham Schenck. At the opening of the
session in October, a correspondence was entered into with the colony
of Massachusetts, responsive to a circular sent by that colony, asking
their aid, sympathy, and cooperation in securing a removal of common
grievances. In unmistakable terms the Assembly denounced the outrages.
The public prints were equally emphatic. The boldness of the Assembly
led to its dissolution, and a new one in the interest of the Crown
was convened in 1769. The new body catered to the Royalists, passing
resolutions in the interest of the Crown, thereby exciting the Sons
of Liberty to renewed efforts. In December, 1769, the patriots again
circulated handbills, denouncing the Assembly as base betrayers of the
sacred trust reposed in them. The Assembly received no consideration at
the hands of the malcontents.

In January, 1770, the Royalist soldiers, to show contempt for the
citizens of the city, attempted to destroy the liberty pole. They
even, in their fury at the failure of the effort, broke into the
building occupied by the Sons of Liberty, and destroyed its windows
and furniture. During several nights in succession the soldiers
renewed their endeavors to destroy the emblem of liberty. At last they
succeeded, manifesting their spite by cutting it in small pieces, which
they placed in front of the headquarters of the patriots. The insult
was understood, and fresh conflicts arose, the soldiers and the people
finally coming into violent collision in the so-called battle of Golden
Hill.

Early in 1770 Parliament repealed all the duties except that on tea.

In 1771 Francis Lewis removed his family to New York, and entered into
business with his son. This connection did not last long. The political
atmosphere was surcharged with dissatisfaction. The storm cloud of
dissension still hung threateningly, and the future looked black and
dismal. In such a state of affairs his course was not doubtful.

The English authorities resolved to enforce the duty on tea. The
vessels containing it sailed from England October 26, 1773. The events
that followed are familiar in American history.

The New York "tea party" was a greater success than the one in
Boston, as the New Yorkers not only threw the tea overboard, but also
confiscated one of the vessels, and sent the captains of both back in
the other craft, disheartened and crestfallen.

On the 22d of April, 1775, Lewis, having relinquished business, was
elected by a convention of delegates from Kings, Queens, New York,
and the other counties, to represent the province in the Continental
Congress to assemble in Philadelphia. At this time Lewis lived on Long
Island. The colony had two governors. Tryon represented the Crown and
the Royalists, and General Nathaniel Woodhull, of Suffolk County, was
president pro tem. of the Provincial Council, possessing the functions
of a governor. Antagonism existed between the two. The Provincial
Council directed the guns to be removed from the Battery. This was
opposed by Tryon. On the 23d of August, 1775, the committee proceeded
to discharge the duty assigned them. The British ship Asia was in the
harbor, having just arrived from Boston, and by direction of Tryon at
once opened her broadside. Morgan Lewis, son of Francis Lewis, during
his lifetime stated that at this time the first ball shot from an
English ship, during the war, struck his father's house on the Long
Island shore, shattering the beam under his mother's foot. The family
were greatly terrified, and hastily sought a refuge in the neighboring
hills.

The Provincial Congress met in New York in December, 1775. Francis
Lewis was continued a delegate to the Continental Congress for 1776.
His appears as one of the immortal fifty-six names appended to the
Declaration of Independence. On that occasion, in the impetuosity of
his enthusiasm, he exclaimed: "Now we must hang together or we shall
hang separately."

The convention of representatives of the State of New York, which met
at White Plains, July 9, 1776, unanimously ratified the acts of their
delegates. Two of the signers of the Declaration from New York, to wit,
Francis Lewis and William Floyd, were residents of Long Island. It will
thus be seen that our island sent one half of the State delegation.

Lewis was now kept busy in political matters. During several subsequent
years he was appointed to represent the State in national affairs.
Whilst in Congress his advice was often sought, and his prudence
and business tact made him a valuable member. Always maintaining a
spotless reputation, he secured and retained the confidence of his
associates. Matters which required caution and discretion were referred
to him. Valuable service was rendered by him in purchasing clothing for
the army, and in importing arms and ammunition. Besides all this he
was frequently employed on committees and in the secret service of the
government.

At the time the Tories occupied New York, and terror and consternation
filled the hearts of all, he, with Messrs. Sherman and Gerry, was
appointed a committee by Congress to repair to New York, ascertain the
condition of the army, and devise means to supply its wants.

In 1775 Lewis removed his family to his country residence at
Whitestone, L. I. It did not prove wise on his part, as it was stepping
into the hornet's nest. Shortly after the occupation of the island by
General Howe, and on August 23, 1776, a party of British light horse,
under Colonel Burch, plundered his home, destroyed his library and
valuable papers, and removed such articles as they could conveniently
carry away, leaving him barely sufficient means with which to pay his
debts. At this time he was sixty-three years old, and by this wanton
act was placed in a truly pitiable condition. They were not satisfied
with the destruction of his property, but thirsted for vengeance on the
man who dared to proclaim himself a friend of liberty by signing the
Declaration of Independence, which was an indictment by the grand jury
of the people against the tyranny of Great Britain. The vandal invaders
took Mrs. Lewis a prisoner, and retained her in close confinement
several months, without allowing her either a bed to rest upon or a
change of clothing.

The attention of Congress was directed to her situation in November,
1776. A resolution was passed to exchange Mrs. Grace Kempe, wife of
John Tabor Kempe, the Tory attorney-general of New York, whom the
Americans held as a prisoner, for Mrs. Lewis. In the effort they were
unsuccessful. Washington became greatly interested in her behalf, and
through his instrumentality she was at last released. She had endured
intense suffering, which impaired her constitution, and resulted in her
death within two years thereafter. She was buried in the graveyard of
Christ Church, Philadelphia.

About this time Lewis's son Francis was married to a Miss Ludlow. The
Ludlow family strenuously opposed the match, saying that his father was
a notorious rebel and would certainly be hanged, and they did not want
to be allied to a family whose head was destined to meet such a fate.

By the terms of the resolution passed by Congress, October 14, 1777,
each State was entitled to a representation of seven members, and
unless two members were in attendance, the State would have no vote.
The cabal took advantage of the fact that New York had but two members
in town, and, as one of them was sick and unable to attend, the State
would thereby have no vote in the deliberations of Congress. They
determined to raise the issue in Congress by appointing a committee to
arrest Washington at Valley Forge. Francis Lewis was the only member
from New York capable of taking his seat. The other member, Col. Wm.
Duer, was very sick; but, loving his country more than his life,
immediately upon learning the necessity of his presence sent for his
physician, and demanded to know whether he could be removed and taken
to the halls of Congress. The doctor replied, "Yes; but at the expense
of your life!" "Do you mean that I would expire before reaching the
place?" "No; but I would not answer for your life twenty-four hours
afterwards." "Very well, sir," the noble Roman replied; "you have
done your duty, prepare a litter for me; if you refuse, some one else
shall do it; but I prefer your care in this case." The litter was
prepared, and the patient made ready to sacrifice his life, to defeat
the machinations of the misguided men who sought to degrade Washington.
Fortunately the sacrifice was prevented by the opportune arrival of
Gouverneur Morris, another delegate, who, on reaching the headquarters
of the New York delegation, found Colonel Duer on the litter, covered
with blankets, attended by his physician and carriers, ready to go to
the Court House, where Congress was to meet. Lewis and Morris being
present gave New York a vote, and forced the evil-minded members to see
that their scheme could not be safely advocated, and the effort was
abandoned.

When Lewis retired from Congress, that body, in consideration of
his services, and remembering his many sacrifices, appointed him
commissioner of the board of admiralty, which position he accepted. In
April, 1784, Lewis was an earnest worker in the reorganization of the
Chamber of Commerce, which he had been instrumental in founding, and
assisted in procuring its charter, which passed the Legislature April
13, 1784.

Lewis lived to see the accomplishment of his heart's desire, and was
permitted to live in the infant republic for which he had spent his
time and fortune for a period of twenty-seven years.

His children followed in his footsteps. One of them, Francis Lewis,
Jr., represented Queens County in the Assembly of 1788. The other son,
Morgan, was born October 16, 1754, graduated at Princeton College in
1773, studied law with John Jay, and joined the army under Washington
in 1775. At first he was captain of a rifle company, but rose rapidly,
becoming, in 1776, colonel and chief-of-staff under General Gates. He
was at the battle of Saratoga, and distinguished himself under General
Clinton in the Mohawk Valley. After the war, he continued his legal
studies, and was admitted to the bar. Soon after he was appointed judge
of the court of common pleas. In 1791 he was elected attorney-general,
as the successor of Aaron Burr, holding the position until December 24,
1792, when he became a justice of the Supreme Court. On the 28th of
October, 1801, he took his seat as chief justice of the Supreme Court
of the State of New York. Other honors awaited him. He was Governor
of the State from 1804 to 1807, succeeding Governor Clinton as the
third Governor of the Commonwealth. At the election, party spirit and
feeling were manifested to a great degree. Aaron Burr was his opponent,
and displayed great anxiety to secure the election. Although Lewis was
a Jeffersonian, he received the warm support of Alexander Hamilton.
It was mainly through the efforts of Hamilton that his success in the
contest was secured. Hamilton's labors in behalf of Lewis embittered
Burr, and formed one of the main causes which a few months later led to
his untimely end at the hands of the miscreant intriguer Burr. Burr was
a student with Lewis at Princeton, and graduated in 1772, one year in
advance of the Governor.

On several subsequent occasions, Morgan Lewis was elected state
senator, and also chancellor of the University. In 1812 he was
appointed quartermaster, and became a major-general in 1813. During
that year he was engaged in operations on the Niagara River, and
commanded the defenses in New York city in 1814. In 1828, when
seventy-four years of age, he was elected a presidential elector for
the fifth district of New York.

Lewis Avenue, Brooklyn, was named in his honor.

Morgan Lewis was a man of great scholastic attainments. The New York
Historical Society elected him their president in 1835. In 1839 he
was chosen president of the Society of the Cincinnati, holding the
office until his death, April 7, 1844. He was the last but one of the
Revolutionary soldiers who filled that position. He was grand master of
the Free Masons at the time of his death, and was buried by the craft
with their impressive ceremonies. He was married at Clermont on the
Hudson in May, 1779, to Gertrude, the sister of Chancellor Livingston.

On the 6th of August, 1784, Morgan Lewis purchased eighty acres of land
in Brooklyn, bounded by the Gowanus Road, and the road leading from
Brooklyn to Flatbush. It was a portion of the estate belonging to John
Rapelje, which became forfeited by his allegiance to the Tories, and
was sold by the commissioners appointed to sell the property of all who
adhered to the Crown.

Francis Lewis, the hero and patriot, spent his last days in comparative
poverty; but his heart was cheered by the fact that he had given his
fortune to his country, and spent his life in her service.

On the 30th of December, 1803, at the ripe age of ninety years, having
witnessed the inauguration of three Presidents, all of whom were his
warm and personal friends, his life-work closed.


II

DUTCH NOMENCLATURE

In a letter written from Holland to the Brooklyn "Eagle," Henry C.
Murphy gave an interesting explanation of the chief characteristics of
Dutch nomenclature. In the course of this letter Mr. Murphy said:--

"In order to show what difficulties the peculiar system adopted in this
country (Holland), and continued by the settlers in our own home, throw
in the way of tracing genealogies, it is to be observed that the first
of these, in point of time, was the patronymic, as it is called, by
which a child took, besides his own baptismal name, that of his father,
with the addition of _zoon_, or _sen_, meaning son. To illustrate
this: if a child were baptized Hendrick, and the baptismal name of his
father were Jan, the child would be called Hendrick Jansen. His son,
if baptized Tunis, would be called Tunis Hendricksen; and the son of
the latter might be Willem, and would have the name Willem Tunisen.
And so we might have the succeeding generations called successively
Garret Willemsen, Marten Garretsen, Adrien Martensen, and so on,
through the whole of the calendar of Christian names; or, as more
frequently happened, there would be repetition, in the second, third,
or fourth generation, of the name of the first; and thus, as these
names were common to the whole people, there were in every community
different lineages of identically the same name. This custom, which
had prevailed in Holland for centuries, was in full vogue at the time
of the settlement of New Netherland. In writing the termination _sen_,
it was frequently contracted into _se_, or _z_, or _s_. Thus the name
of William Barretsen, who commanded in the first three Arctic voyages
of exploration, in 1594, 1595, and 1596, is given in the old accounts
of those voyages, Barretsen, Barentse, Barentz, Barents; sometimes in
one way, sometimes in another, indifferently. Or, to give an example
nearer home, both of the patronymic custom and of the contraction of
the name, the father of Garret Martense, the founder of a family of
that name in Flatbush, was Martin Adriense, and his father was Adriae
Ryerse, who came from Amsterdam. The inconveniences of this practice,
the confusion to which it gave rise, and the difficulty of tracing
families, led ultimately to its abandonment, both in Holland and in our
own country. In doing so, the patronymic, which the person originating
the name bore, was adopted as the surname. Most of the family names
thus formed and originating amongst us may be said to be of American
origin, as they were first fixed in America, though the same names were
adopted by others in Holland. Hence we have the names of such families
of Dutch descent amongst us as Jansen (_anglice_, Johnson), Garretsen,
Cornelisen, Williamsen or Williamson, Hendricksen or Hendrickson,
Clasen, Simonsen or Simonson, Tysen (son of Mathias), Arendsen (son
of Arend), Hansen, Lambertsen or Lambertson, Paulisen, Remsen,[55]
Ryersen, Martense, Adrience, Rutgers, Everts, Phillips, Lefferts, and
others. To trace connection between these families and persons in this
country, it is evident, would be impossible, for the reason stated,
without a regular record.

"Another mode of nomenclature, intended to obviate the difficulty
of an identity of names for the time being, but which rendered
the confusion worse confounded for the future genealogist, was to
add to the patronymic name the occupation or some other personal
characteristic of the individual. Thus, Laurens Jansen, the inventor
of the art of printing, as the Dutch claim, had affixed to his name
that of Coster--that is to say, _sexton_--an office of which he was
in the possession of the emoluments. But the same addition was not
transmitted to his son; and thus the son of Hendrick Jansen Coster
might be called Tunis Hendrickson Brouwer (brewer), and his grandson
might be William Tunissen Bleecker (bleacher)....

"A third practice, evidently designed, like that referred to, to
obviate the confusions of the first, was to append the name of the
place where the person resided, not often of a large city, but of a
particular, limited locality, and frequently of a particular form or
natural object. This custom is denoted in all the family names which
have the prefix of _Van_, _Vander_, _Ver_ (which is a contraction of
_Vander_), and _Ten_, meaning, respectively, _of_, _of the_ and _at
the_.... The prefixes _Vander_ or _Ver_ and _Ten_ were adopted where
the name was derived from a particular spot, thus: Vanderveer (of the
ferry); Vanderburg, of the hill; Vanderbilt (of the bildt, that is,
certain elevations of ground in Guederhoff and New Utrecht); Vanderbeck
(of the brook); Vanderhoff (of the court); Verplanck (of the plank);
Verhultz (of the holly); Verkerk (of the church); Ten Eyck (at the
oak); Tenbroeck (at the marsh)."


III

NEW YORK AND BROOKLYN FERRY RIGHTS

New York City's exclusive claims to the ferry rights are almost as old
as Brooklyn itself. Brooklyn was settled in 1636, and in less than
twenty years, and while there was but a handful of people on this
side of the river, the ferry from Peck Slip to Nassau Island, at a
point corresponding to the present foot of Fulton Street, had become a
public question. In the natural course of things, New York had first
started the ferry. When the English conquered New Netherland, and Peter
Stuyvesant stepped down (with his wooden leg) from the governorship of
New Amsterdam, the conquered province was patented by Charles II. of
England to the Duke of York, who afterwards became James II., and in
whose honor New Amsterdam was re-named New York. The Dutch Governor was
succeeded by an English Governor, the Duke's representative, Nicolls;
and Dutch traditions and codes were succeeded by the famous "Duke's
Laws." The new Governor granted to the little hamlet of Brooklyn a
patent confirmatory of that received from the Dutch Governor, a measure
that was in conformity with the general policy of the conquerors.

This patent, after naming the patentees, and describing the bounds of
the town, and bounding by the river, and not by high or low water mark,
proceeded to say: "Together with all havens, harbors, creeks, marshes,
waters, rivers, lakes, and fisheries." The charter adds: "Moreover, I
do hereby give, ratify, and confirm unto the said patentees and their
associates, and their heirs, successors, and assigns, all the rights
and privileges belonging to a town within their government." Under
this patent the town of Brooklyn first claimed the ownership of land
between high and low water mark on the Brooklyn side, and an equal
right with New York to erect and maintain ferries.

We find no adverse claim on the part of New York until nineteen years
afterward, in 1686, when the Corporation of New York obtained from
Governor Dongan a charter by which the ferries were granted to New
York. But this charter says nothing about water rights, and expressly
reserves the rights of all other persons and bodies corporate or
politic. Moreover, Brooklyn in the same year secured from Dongan a
patent fully confirming that of Nicolls. A similar confirmation was
secured in 1691. But New York was still running the ferry, and to
fortify its claims bought land on the Brooklyn side in 1694.

[Illustration: CHART SHOWING EAST RIVER SOUNDINGS AND PIER LINES]

In the reign of Queen Anne the Corporation of New York induced that
infamous trickster and reprobate, Governor Cornbury, to give New
York a charter, by which it was to be entitled to all "vacant and
unappropriated land" below high water mark from the Wallabout to Red
Hook. The charter was really void, for there was no unappropriated
land in the region named, previous patents and charters having given
them to Brooklyn as a town. In 1721 the colonial legislature confirmed
Brooklyn's rights, but New York's politicians bought for a specific
sum ($5000) a new charter from Governor Montgomerie confirming the
pretended right of New York to ownership in land to high-water mark on
the Brooklyn shore. New York secured a charter ownership in 400 feet
of land under water around the whole lower part of the city, and step
by step, with money and unfaltering political trickery, the city set
itself against the development and independence of Brooklyn. By Section
37 of the Montgomerie charter, the ferry franchise was confirmed
"forever," with a provision that no other person or persons whomsoever
should have the right to establish a ferry or ferries in the premises.
Legislative acts and legal decisions have been piled up around a
pretense, the fallacy and injustice of which appear upon examination of
the early records.

New York was not satisfied with the crafty legislation by which it
sought to overawe the village across the river. It began to question
the right of Brooklyn people to cross to New York in their own boats.
The result was that a Brooklyn man, Hendrick Remsen, sued the New York
Corporation. He won his case; the Corporation appealed to the King,
and the matter remained undecided in consequence of the Revolution.
Although the Constitution of the State confirms all grants of land
within the State made by authority of the King of Great Britain or his
predecessors, prior to August 14, 1775, New York afterward adhered to
its false claims to the river rights. However, by State rulings within
the present century, Brooklyn was permitted to exercise jurisdiction
to low-water mark. A Supreme Court decision in 1821 declares that
the City and County of New York includes the whole of the rivers and
harbor adjoining to actual low-water mark on the opposite shores. It
was only in 1824 that Brooklyn was able to secure from the Legislature
concurrent jurisdiction with New York in the service of process, in
actions civil and criminal, on board of vessels attached to its own
wharves.

When Brooklyn sought to erect itself into a city, New York met the
proposition with the same spirit of unwillingness to recognize in the
sister town any right to individual existence. Every step that Brooklyn
took toward securing municipal rights was hampered by the opposition of
New York politicians. Brooklyn became a city in 1834, in spite of New
York's opposition. New York retired from the fight with its fraudulent
ownership of the river and the "ferry rights," by which it was and
still is able to levy a continuous tax upon Brooklyn.


IV

_STATISTICS FROM THE FEDERAL CENSUS OF 1890_

BROOKLYN MANUFACTURES[56]

FEDERAL CENSUS OF 1890

The tabulated statements presented herewith include only establishments
which reported a product of $500 or more in value during the census
year, and, so far as practicable, only those establishments operating
works located within the corporate limits of the city.


COMPARATIVE STATEMENT OF TOTALS

  ================================================================
  Industries           | Industries | Establishments | Capital[57]
                       |  Reported  |    Reporting   |
  ---------------------+------------+----------------+------------
  All Industries {1880 |     180    |    5,201       | $61,646,749
                 {1890 |     229    |   10,561       | 125,849,052
  ---------------------+------------+----------------+------------

  ============================================================
  Industries           | Hands    |  Wages Paid | Cost of
                       | Employed |             | Materials
                       |          |             | Used
  ---------------------+----------+-------------+-------------
  All Industries {1880 |  47,587  | $22,487,457 | $129,085,091
                 {1890 | 103,683  |  61,975,702 |  137,325,749
  ---------------------+----------+-------------+-------------


  ====================================================================
  Industries           | Miscellaneous | Value of Product | Population
                       | Expenses[58]  |                  |
  ---------------------+---------------+------------------+-----------
  All Industries {1880 |               |  $177,223,142    |  566,663
                 {1890 | $14,824,466   |   248,750,184    |  806,343
  ---------------------+---------------+------------------+-----------

  =========================================================
  Industries           | City Assessed | Municipal Debt[59]
                       |  Valuation    |
  ---------------------+---------------+-------------------
  All Industries {1880 | $232,925,699  |  $38,040,000
                 {1890 |  445,038,201  |   34,639,542
  ---------------------+---------------+-------------------


DETAILED STATEMENT FOR 1890 BY IMPORTANT INDUSTRIES IN BROOKLYN
ELEVENTH CENSUS

  =================================================================
  CLASSIFICATION OF       | Boots and  |             | Coffee and
    INQUIRIES[60]         | shoes--    |  Chemicals  | spice--
                          | factory    |             | roasting and
                          | products   |             | grinding
    _Establishments_:--   |   (65)     |   (36)      |   (13)
  ------------------------+------------+-------------+-------------
  CAPITAL EMPLOYED--      |            |             |
    Aggregate             | $1,327,119 |  $8,483,835 |  $2,963,392
                          |============|=============|=============
  HIRED PROPERTY--        |            |             |
    Total                 |    366,230 |     275,000 |     306,300
                          +------------+-------------+-------------
  PLANT--Total            |    385,934 |   4,888,250 |     546,696
                          +------------+-------------+-------------
    Land                  |     56,700 |   1,196,800 |     198,400
    Buildings             |    113,400 |   1,532,821 |     194,350
    Machinery, tools,     |            |             |
     and implements       |    215,834 |   2,158,629 |     153,946
  LIVE ASSETS--Total      |    574,955 |   3,320,585 |   2,110,396
                          +------------+-------------+-------------
    Raw materials         |    137,612 |   1,365,535 |     721,678
    Stock in process and  |            |             |
      finished product    |    154,802 |     878,468 |     930,671
    Cash, bills, and      |            |             |
      accounts            |            |             |
      receivable, and     |            |             |
      all sundries not    |            |             |
      elsewhere reported  |    282,541 |   1,076,582 |     458,047
                          |            |             |
  WAGES PAID--Aggregate   | $1,032,547 |  $1,140,475 |    $479,036
                          |============|=============|=============
  Average number of       |            |             |
    hands employed        |      2,050 |       1,848 |         794
                          +------------+-------------+-------------
  Males above 16 years    |        840 |       1,295 |         477
  Females above 15 years  |        326 |         289 |          10
  Children                |         24 |          31 |
  Pieceworkers            |        860 |         233 |         307
  MATERIALS USED--        |            |             |
    Aggregate cost        | $1,432,934 |  $7,329,134 | $11,047,538
                          +============+=============+=============
  Principal materials     |  1,381,752 |   7,050,313 |  10,711,647
  Fuel                    |      3,888 |     195,545 |      14,752
  Mill supplies           |            |       9,206 |      20,656
  All other materials     |     47,294 |      74,070 |     300,483
  EXPENSES, MISCELLANEOUS |            |             |
    --Ag'gate             |    $73,249 |    $612,809 |     $84,334
                          +============+=============+=============
  Paid for contract work  |      1,450 |             |
  Rent                    |     25,636 |      22,110 |      21,445
  Power and heat          |      3,720 |         900 |       3,800
  Taxes                   |      4,494 |      48,950 |      11,439
  Insurance               |      4,420 |      29,190 |      11,382
  Repairs, ordinary, of   |            |             |
    b'ld'gs and mach'y    |      5,842 |     149,644 |       6,635
  Interest on cash used   |            |             |
    in the business       |      1,549 |      43,651 |
  All sundries not        |            |             |
    elsewhere reported    |     26,138 |     318,364 |      29,633
  GOODS MANUFACTURED      |            |             |
    --Aggregate           | $2,813,209 | $10,467,109 | $12,247,162
                          +============+=============+=============
  Principal product       |  2,770,689 |  10,425,949 |  12,044,967
  All other products,     |            |             |
    including custom      |            |             |
    work and repairing    |     42,520 |      41,160 |     202,195
  ------------------------+------------+-------------+-------------

  ===============================================================
  CLASSIFICATION OF       |            |            | Foundry and
    INQUIRIES[60]         |  Confec-   | Cordage    | machine
                          |  tionery   | and twine  | shop
                          |            |            | products
    _Establishments_:--   |   (197)    |   (3)      |  (169)
  ------------------------+------------+------------+------------
  CAPITAL EMPLOYED--      |            |            |
    Aggregate             | $2,923,509 | $2,256,400 | $13,725,518
                          |============|============|============
  HIRED PROPERTY--        |            |            |
    Total                 |  1,047,500 |            |   1,473,750
                          +------------+------------+------------
  PLANT--Total            |  1,028,053 |  1,854,300 |   6,046,228
                          +------------+------------+------------
    Land                  |    251,085 |    303,000 |   1,617,500
    Buildings             |    311,225 |    701,000 |   1,362,670
    Machinery, tools,     |            |            |
     and implements       |    465,743 |    850,300 |   3,066,058
  LIVE ASSETS--Total      |    847,956 |    402,100 |   6,205,540
                          +------------+------------+------------
    Raw materials         |    207,660 |    175,600 |   1,182,099
    Stock in process and  |            |            |
      finished product    |    269,041 |     60,500 |   1,525,807
    Cash, bills, and      |            |            |
      accounts            |            |            |
      receivable, and     |            |            |
      all sundries not    |            |            |
      elsewhere reported  |    371,255 |    166,000 |   3,497,634
                          |            |            |
  WAGES PAID--Aggregate   | $1,096,252 |   $650,256 |  $5,641,132
                          |============|============|============
  Average number of       |            |            |
    hands employed        |      2,237 |      1,612 |       7,753
                          +------------+------------+------------
  Males above 16 years    |      1,387 |      1,012 |       6,868
  Females above 15 years  |        552 |        600 |          42
  Children                |         22 |            |           2
  Pieceworkers            |        276 |            |         841
  MATERIALS USED--        |            |            |
    Aggregate cost        | $1,833,791 |  $4,352,63 |  $5,125,183
                          +============+============+============
  Principal materials     |  1,738,998 |   4,206,13 |   4,626,489
  Fuel                    |     25,621 |     105,00 |     210,767
  Mill supplies           |      3,835 |       6,00 |      47,386
  All other materials     |     65,337 |      35,50 |     240,541
  EXPENSES, MISCELLANEOUS |            |            |
    --Ag'gate             |   $194,993 |     $63,18 |    $799,912
                          +============+============+============
  Paid for contract work  |            |            |      12,000
  Rent                    |     73,320 |            |     117,888
  Power and heat          |        120 |            |      14,664
  Taxes                   |      9,981 |      10,14 |      60,267
  Insurance               |      5,050 |       7,54 |      36,223
  Repairs, ordinary, of   |            |            |
    b'ld'gs and mach'y    |      5,730 |      25,00 |      74,565
  Interest on cash used   |            |            |
    in the business       |     13,462 |            |      22,009
  All sundries not        |            |            |
    elsewhere reported    |     87,330 |      20,50 |     462,296
  GOODS MANUFACTURED      |            |            |
    --Aggregate           | $3,731,202 |  $5,625,79 | $15,350,776
                          +============+============+============
  Principal product       |  3,721,071 |   5,622,91 |  14,222,090
  All other products,     |            |            |
    including custom      |            |            |
    work and repairing    |     10,131 |       2,88 |   1,128,686
  ------------------------+------------+------------+------------

  ================================================================
  CLASSIFICATION OF       |            |            | Slaughtering
    INQUIRIES[60]         | Furnishing | Paper      | and meat
                          | goods      | hangings   | packing
                          |            |            |
    _Establishments_:--   |   (67)     |  (5)       |   (63)
  ------------------------+------------+------------+-------------
  CAPITAL EMPLOYED--      |            |            |
    Aggregate             | $1,507,853 | $1,790,121 |  $2,120,822
                          |============|============|=============
  HIRED PROPERTY--        |            |            |
    Total                 |    377,650 |    303,482 |     380,560
                          +------------+------------+-------------
  PLANT--Total            |    427,420 |    401,946 |     918,400
                          +------------+------------+-------------
    Land                  |    110,100 |     31,500 |     317,550
    Buildings             |    142,550 |    121,584 |     346,752
    Machinery, tools,     |            |            |
     and implements       |    174,770 |    248,862 |     254,098
  LIVE ASSETS--Total      |    702,783 |  1,084,693 |     821,862
                          +------------+------------+-------------
    Raw materials         |    312,438 |     61,890 |     114,907
    Stock in process and  |            |            |
      finished product    |    142,902 |    186,974 |     197,490
    Cash, bills, and      |            |            |
      accounts            |            |            |
      receivable, and     |            |            |
      all sundries not    |            |            |
      elsewhere reported  |    247,443 |    835,829 |     509,465
                          |            |            |
  WAGES PAID--Aggregate   | $1,203,461 |   $445,510 |    $532,120
                          |============|============|=============
  Average number of       |            |            |
    hands employed        |      2,218 |        852 |         623
                          +------------+------------+-------------
  Males above 16 years    |        868 |        660 |         607
  Females above 15 years  |        485 |        146 |           3
  Children                |         10 |         20 |
  Pieceworkers            |        855 |         26 |          13
  MATERIALS USED--        |            |            |
    Aggregate cost        | $1,443,218 | $1,067,697 | $11,769,741
                          +============+============+=============
  Principal materials     |  1,389,325 |  1,042,362 |  11,637,737
  Fuel                    |     27,893 |     18,045 |      32,256
  Mill supplies           |     10,308 |        290 |
  All other materials     |     15,692 |      7,000 |      99,748
  EXPENSES, MISCELLANEOUS |            |            |
    --Ag'gate             |    $84,811 |   $300,754 |    $130,096
                          +============+============+=============
  Paid for contract work  |            |            |
  Rent                    |     26,441 |     22,000 |      34,252
  Power and heat          |        600 |            |
  Taxes                   |      4,429 |     15,863 |      13,902
  Insurance               |     10,573 |      7,343 |       9,490
  Repairs, ordinary, of   |            |            |
    b'ld'gs and mach'y    |      9,502 |      1,700 |       8,387
  Interest on cash used   |            |            |
    in the business       |      1,895 |     61,833 |       3,691
  All sundries not        |            |            |
    elsewhere reported    |     31,371 |    192,015 |      60,374
  GOODS MANUFACTURED      |            |            |
    --Aggregate           | $3,315,691 | $2,143,023 | $13,317,789
                          +============+============+=============
  Principal product       |  3,268,994 |  2,143,023 |  13,118,381
  All other products,     |            |            |
    including custom      |            |            |
    work and repairing    |     46,697 |            |     199,408
  ------------------------+------------+------------+-------------

  ======================================
  CLASSIFICATION OF       |  Sugar and
    INQUIRIES[60]         |  molasses
                          |  refining
                          |
    _Establishments_:--   |    (8)
  ------------------------+-------------
  CAPITAL EMPLOYED--      |
    Aggregate             |  $3,999,510
                          |=============
  HIRED PROPERTY--        |
    Total                 |     255,622
                          +-------------
  PLANT--Total            |   1,821,000
                          +-------------
    Land                  |     399,000
    Buildings             |     527,500
    Machinery, tools,     |
     and implements       |     894,500
  LIVE ASSETS--Total      |   1,922,888
                          +-------------
    Raw materials         |     186,214
    Stock in process and  |
      finished product    |     335,016
    Cash, bills, and      |
      accounts            |
      receivable, and     |
      all sundries not    |
      elsewhere reported  |   1,401,658
                          |
  WAGES PAID--Aggregate   |    $330,558
                          |=============
  Average number of       |
    hands employed        |         596
                          +-------------
  Males above 16 years    |         583
  Females above 15 years  |           2
  Children                |
  Pieceworkers            |          11
  MATERIALS USED--        |
    Aggregate cost        | $14,816,112
                          +==============
  Principal materials     |  14,412,045
  Fuel                    |     100,342
  Mill supplies           |      15,986
  All other materials     |     287,739
  EXPENSES, MISCELLANEOUS |
    --Ag'gate             |    $227,760
                          +==============
  Paid for contract work  |
  Rent                    |      20,450
  Power and heat          |         900
  Taxes                   |      21,877
  Insurance               |      21,397
  Repairs, ordinary, of   |
    b'ld'gs and mach'y    |      29,171
  Interest on cash used   |
    in the business       |      65,449
  All sundries not        |
    elsewhere reported    |      68,516
  GOODS MANUFACTURED      |
    --Aggregate           | $16,629,982
                          +==============
  Principal product       |  16,623,134
  All other products,     |
    including custom      |
    work and repairing    |       6,848
  ------------------------+--------------


STATEMENT OF CITY DEBT, DECEMBER 31, 1893

  =======================================================================
  Title of Loan                         |     Amount     |       Amount
                                        |  Dec. 31, 1892 |  Dec. 31, 1893
  --------------------------------------+----------------+---------------
  PERMANENT DEBT PAYABLE FROM TAXATION: |                |
    Prospect Park                       |  $8,697,000.00 |  $8,697,000.00
    New York Bridge                     |  10,013,000.00 |  10,013,000.00
    Soldiers' Aid Fund                  |     112,000.00 |      60,000.00
    Arrearage Fund                      |   2,350,000.00 |   2,350,000.00
    Local Improvement                   |     200,000.00 |
    Certificates of Indebtedness        |     505,160.93 |     434,160.93
    City Bonds (Arrearage of County     |                |
        Taxes)                          |     549,000.00 |     549,000.00
    Main Sewer Relief and Extension     |                |
        Fund                            |   1,250,000.00 |   1,250,000.00
    Local Improvement (Laws of 1888)    |   1,300,000.00 |   1,300,000.00
    Local Improvement (Laws of 1889)    |     900,000.00 |     900,000.00
    Local Improvement (Laws of 1892)    |     300,000.00 |     445,000.00
    School Improvement (Laws of 1888)   |     400,000.00 |     400,000.00
    School Improvement (Laws of 1889)   |     800,000.00 |     800,000.00
    Public Site, Purchase and           |                |
        Construction                    |     500,000.00 |     500,000.00
    Municipal Site                      |     265,000.00 |     265,000.00
    Fourth Precinct Station House       |      50,000.00 |      50,000.00
    Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument     |     220,000.00 |     205,000.00
    Park Purchase                       |     650,000.00 |     650,000.00
    New York and Brooklyn Bridge, Sec. 4,  |                |
      Laws of 1891                      |   1,000,000.00 |   1,000,000.00
    New York and Brooklyn Bridge, Sec. 5,  |                |
      Laws of 1891                      |   1,400,000.00 |   1,450,000.00
    Public Market                       |     750,000.00 |     750,000.00
    School Building Fund                |     304,000.00 |     606,000.00
    Certificate of Indebtedness,        |                |
        ch. 48, Laws of 1892            |     162,844.92 |      54,830.18
    Certificate of Indebtedness,        |                |
        ch. 50, Laws of 1892            |     125,000.00 |     148,852.55
    Certificate of Indebtedness,        |                |
        ch. 45, Laws of 1891            |      15,000.00 |
    Asphalt Repavement Fund             |                |      37,000.00
    Museums of Art and Science          |                |       8,000.00
                                        +----------------+---------------
        Total                           | $32,818,005.85 | $32,932,843.66
                                        |================|===============
  WATER DEBT                            | $14,566,000.00 | $15,316,000.00
                                        +================+===============
  TEMPORARY DEBT PAYABLE FROM TAXATION, |                |
        ETC.:                           |                |
    Fourth Avenue Improvement           |      51,000.00 |      34,000.00
    Eighth Ward Improvement             |     650,000.00 |     650,000.00
    Twenty-sixth and adjacent Ward      |                |
        Sewers                          |     315,000.00 |     499,000.00
    Sewerage Fund(1892)                 |      50,000.00 |     119,000.00
    North Second Street Improvement     |                |      15,000.00
    Tax Certificate (Contagious         |                |
        Disease Hospital)               |                |       7,000.00
                                        +----------------+---------------
        Total                           |  $1,066,000.00 |  $1,324,000.00
                                        +================+===============
  TAX CERTIFICATES                      |  $2,700,000.00 |  $3,400,000.00
  --------------------------------------+----------------+---------------

  ================================================================
  Title of Loan                         |   Increase   | Decrease
                                        |              |
  --------------------------------------+--------------+----------
  PERMANENT DEBT PAYABLE FROM TAXATION: |              |
    Prospect Park                       |              |
    New York Bridge                     |              |
    Soldiers' Aid Fund                  |              |  $52,000
    Arrearage Fund                      |              |
    Local Improvement                   |              |  200,000
    Certificates of Indebtedness        |              |   71,000
    City Bonds (Arrearage of County     |              |
        Taxes)                          |              |
    Main Sewer Relief and Extension     |              |
        Fund                            |              |
    Local Improvement (Laws of 1888)    |              |
    Local Improvement (Laws of 1889)    |              |
    Local Improvement (Laws of 1892)    |  $155,000.00 |
    School Improvement (Laws of 1888)   |              |
    School Improvement (Laws of 1889)   |              |
    Public Site, Purchase and           |              |
        Construction                    |              |
    Municipal Site                      |              |
    Fourth Precinct Station House       |              |
    Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument     |              |   15,000
    Park Purchase                       |              |
    New York and Brooklyn Bridge, Sec. 4,  |              |
      Laws of 1891                      |              |
    New York and Brooklyn Bridge, Sec. 5,  |              |
      Laws of 1891                      |    50,000.00 |
    Public Market                       |              |
    School Building Fund                |   302,000.00 |
    Certificate of Indebtedness,        |              |
        ch. 48, Laws of 1892            |              |  108,014
    Certificate of Indebtedness,        |              |
        ch. 50, Laws of 1892            |     3,852.55 |
    Certificate of Indebtedness,        |              |
        ch. 45, Laws of 1891            |              |   15,000
    Asphalt Repavement Fund             |    37,000.00 |
    Museums of Art and Science          |     8,000.00 |
                                        +--------------+----------
        Total                           |  $575,852.55 | $461,014
                                        |==============|==========
  WATER DEBT                            |  $750,000.00 |
                                        +==============+==========
  TEMPORARY DEBT PAYABLE FROM TAXATION, |              |
        ETC.:                           |              |
    Fourth Avenue Improvement           |              |  $17,000
    Eighth Ward Improvement             |              |
    Twenty-sixth and adjacent Ward      |              |
        Sewers                          |   184,000.00 |
    Sewerage Fund(1892)                 |    69,000.00 |
    North Second Street Improvement     |    15,000.00 |
    Tax Certificate (Contagious         |              |
        Disease Hospital)               |     7,000.00 |
                                        +--------------+----------
        Total                           |  $275,000.00 |  $17,000
                                        +==============+==========
  TAX CERTIFICATES                      |  $700,000.00 |
  --------------------------------------+--------------+----------


  RECAPITULATION

  =======================================================================
  Title of Loan                         |     Amount     |       Amount
                                        |  Dec. 31, 1892 |  Dec. 31, 1893
  --------------------------------------+----------------+---------------
  Permanent Debt                        | $32,818,005.85 | $32,932,843.66
  Water Debt                            |  14,566,000.00 |  15,316,000.00
  Temporary Debt                        |   1,066,000.00 |   1,324,000.00
  Tax Certificates                      |   2,700,000.00 |   3,400,000.00
                                        +----------------+---------------
      Gross Debt                        |  51,150,005.85 |  52,972,843.66
  Sinking Fund                          |   4,636,893.90 |   4,935,344.55
                                        +----------------+---------------
                                        | $46,513,111.95 | $48,037,499.11
  Less 3 and 8 months' Tax              |                |
       Certificates                     |                |     700,000.00
                                        +----------------+---------------
      Net City Debt                     | $46,513,111.95 | $47,337,499.11
  --------------------------------------+----------------+---------------

  ================================================================
  Title of Loan                         |   Increase   | Decrease
                                        |              |
  --------------------------------------+--------------+----------
  Permanent Debt                        |  $114,837.81 |
  Water Debt                            |   750,000.00 |
  Temporary Debt                        |   258,000.00 |
  Tax Certificates                      |   700,000.00 |
                                        +--------------+----------
      Gross Debt                        | 1,822,837.81 |
  Sinking Fund                          |   298,450.65 |
                                        +--------------+----------
                                        |$1,524,387.16 |
  Less 3 and 8 months' Tax              |              |
       Certificates                     |              |
                                        +--------------+----------
      Net City Debt                     |$1,524,387.16 |
  --------------------------------------+--------------+----------




FOOTNOTES:


[1] Stiles, i. p. 326.

[2] In 1888 the State Legislature, at the request of the Society of Old
Brooklynites, passed a resolution urging Congress to provide for the
erection of a monument. A petition containing 25,000 names was sent to
Washington, and the matter was favorably reported from committee, but
no act was passed.

[3] _Historical Sketch of Fulton Ferry_, 1879.

[4] Furman, p. 243.

[5] The state recognition of Brooklyn as a town took place in 1788.

[6] In 1806, the Legislature of New York enacted a law allowing the
incorporation of a State and of County Medical Societies. Under this
act the State Medical Society was organized at once. The medical men
of this county did not act in the matter, however, for several years,
and it was not till March, 1822, that the Kings County Medical Society
was organized. From the organization of the society to the present
time the following gentlemen have been its presidents: Cornelius Low,
1822-1825; J. G. T. Hunt, 1825, till his death in 1830; Thomas W.
Henry, 1831-1833; Charles Ball, 1833-1835; Isaac I. Rapelye, 1835;
Matthew Wendell, 1836; Adrian Vanderveer, 1837-1839; John B. Zabriskie,
1839; Purcell Cooke, 1840-1842; Theodore L. Mason, 1842-1844; Bradley
Parker, 1844; Purcell Cooke, 1845; J. Sullivan Thorne, 1846; Lucius
Hyde, 1847; Chauncey L. Mitchell, 1848; Henry J. Cullen, 1849; James
H. Henry, 1850; Samuel J. Osborne, 1851; George Marvin, 1852; Andrew
Otterson, 1853-1855; George I. Bennet, 1855; T. Anderson Wade, 1856;
Samuel Boyd, 1857; Chauncey L. Mitchell, 1858-1860; Daniel Brooks,
1860; C. R. McClellan, 1861; Samuel Hart, 1862; DeWitt C. Enos, 1863;
Joseph C. Hutchinson, 1864; John T. Conkling, 1865; Andrew Otterson,
1866; William W. Reese, 1867; R. Cresson Stiles, 1868-1870; J. H.
Hobart Burge, 1870-1872; William Henry Thayer, 1872-1874; A. J. C.
Skene, 1874-1876; A. Hutchins, 1876-1879; J. S. Prout, 1879; Charles
Jewett, 1880-1883; G. G. Hopkins, 1883. In 1829 there were thirty-six
active members belonging to the society. In 1836 the Code of Ethics
of the state society was adopted, and in 1848 the Code of Ethics of
the American Medical Association. From its foundation in 1822, till
the repeal of that power by the Legislature in 1881, the Kings County
Society conferred sixteen licenses to practice medicine.--S. M. O.

[7] The first post-office at Gravesend was established in 1843.

[8] J. C. Vanderbilt's _Social History of Flatbush_ gives some
exceedingly interesting glimpses of life in this region during and
after the Revolutionary period.

[9] The "public whipper" received a salary of $15 a year.

[10] Tunis G. Bergen was born at New Utrecht in 1806. The Cropsey
family, prominent at New Utrecht, is descended from Geerte Jans
Kasparse, who came from Holland, with her two sons, Joost and Johannis,
in 1652. Joost, third son of this Joost, had one son, Casper, who held
office in New Utrecht, and died in 1806, leaving six sons and several
daughters. Other descendants were Jerome Ryersen Cropsey, Andrew G.
Cropsey, and William Cropsey. The last named was for several terms
supervisor of New Utrecht.

[11] _History of Kings County_, p. 279.

[12] This fine specimen of old Dutch architecture is still standing on
Evergreen Avenue.

[13] _Historic and Antiquarian Scenes in Brooklyn and its Vicinity_, p.
47.

[14] The assumption that the Dutch youth required to be taught
"convivial customs" by the "arrogant Anglo-American youngers" is
scarcely supported by definite testimony.

[15] The ancestral farm and home of the Wyckoffs is on the boundary
line between Brooklyn and Newtown, beyond Metropolitan Avenue.

[16] "History of Williamsburgh," in Stiles's _History of Kings County_.

[17] Printed in the _Long Island Star_, February 14, 1811.

[18] Furman's MS.

[19] Fulton and Livingston had obtained from the Legislature the
monopoly of steam navigation on all the waters of New York for thirty
years from 1808.

[20] _Historical Sketch of Fulton Ferry._

[21] _Corporation Manual_, 1870.

[22] The Corporation of New York at one time even questioned the right
of Brooklyn's inhabitants to cross the river, ferriage free, in their
own boats.

[23] See Appendix III.

[24] Walt Whitman was born at West Hills, Long Island, in 1819. During
the time of his residence in Brooklyn he did editorial writing for both
the _Times_ and the _Eagle_. In the following letter to Mr. Charles M.
Skinner, of Brooklyn, he describes his newspaper work in this city:--

        328 MICKLE STREET, CAMDEN, NEW JERSEY,
            _January 19, '85_.

    DEAR SIR,--In hasty answer to your request asking me to specify
    over my own signature what year I worked as an editorial
    writer in the Brooklyn _Times_ office, I would say that if
    I remember right it was along in 1856, or just before. I
    recollect (doubtless I am now going to be egotistical about it)
    the question of the new Water Works (magnificently outlined
    by McAlpine, and duly carried out and improved by Kirkwood,
    first-class engineers both) was still pending, and the works,
    though well under way, continued to be strongly opposed by
    many. With the consent of the proprietor, I bent the whole
    weight of the paper steadily in favor of the McAlpine plan, as
    against a flimsy, cheap, and temporary series of works that
    would have long since broken down, and disgraced the city.

    This, with my course on another matter,--the securing to public
    use of Washington Park (old Fort Greene), stoutly championed by
    me some thirty-five years ago, against heavy odds, during an
    editorship of the Brooklyn _Eagle_,--are "feathers in my wings"
    that I would wish to preserve.

    I heard lately with genuine sorrow of the death of George C.
    Bennett. I remember him well as a good, generous, honorable man.

    I send best greetings to your staff, and, indeed, to all the
    Brooklyn journalists.

        WALT WHITMAN.

Whitman's poem "Crossing the Williamsburgh Ferry" is familiar to
readers of his _Leaves of Grass_.

[25] _Brooklyn Compendium._

[26] The Young Men's Christian Association of Brooklyn was organized
during the same year.

[27] Up to the time of present writing morning journalism has never
been successful in Brooklyn, the metropolitan newspapers of New York
having from the outset filled the field, and prevented a financial
success for any but the evening papers.

[28] "Yet, although Brooklyn had thus, at a single bound, jumped from
the seventh to the third position among the cities of the American
Union, it could by no means claim the same relative position in point
of wealth, business, or commercial importance, being outranked in these
respects by several cities of less population. Nor had it risen to its
eminence by virtue of its own inherent vigor and enterprise. Candor
certainly compels the acknowledgment that it was chiefly attributable
to the overflowing prosperity and greatness of its giant neighbor, New
York."--Stiles's _History of Kings County_, vol. i. p. 485.

[29] Martin Kalbfleisch was elected Mayor on the Democratic ticket,
receiving a majority of 5136, in a total vote of 28,280, over his
opponent, Frederick Scholes.

[30] The statue was unveiled in October, 1869. A. A. Low presided, and
the presentation address was made by James P. Wallace, on behalf of the
War Fund Committee. The oration was by Dr. Storrs.

[31] Mr. Beecher was appointed chaplain of the Thirteenth Regiment in
1878. Dr. Storrs had already occupied this post.

[32] Colonel Meserole was made brigadier-general in 1868.

[33] The same name had been chosen by Colonel Roehr's father, Edward
Franz Roehr, for a newspaper first issued in 1854, and running for one
year. Edward Roehr's Williamsburgh printing office and bookstore also
sent forth a Masonic journal called _Der Triangel_, which flourished
for twenty-five years.

[34] In connection with the cupola of the City Hall, a very interesting
incident occurred in 1852. It was noticed that this feature of the
building swayed, and needed to be strengthened. The necessary steps
were taken to render it firm and secure. At the time the men were
engaged in the work the court of oyer and terminer was holding a
session in the room known and distinguished as the Governor's room,
Judge N. B. Morse presiding. One day while the court was engaged in a
criminal trial, a beam which was being raised slipped from the rope,
and fell upon the roof above the court-room, causing the plaster and
ceiling to give way. At once the court officers, jurors, and spectators
became alarmed; some ran for the door, some for the windows, and others
sought refuge under the tables. Judge Morse took a position by one of
the windows, and, shaking his fist at the audience, exclaimed, "The
wicked flee when no man pursueth." A few of the frightened ones got on
their knees and fervently prayed. The prisoner at the bar was the only
one unmoved.--S. M. O.

[35] Manuscript history.

[36] _Brooklyn Eagle_, May 24, 1884.

[37] The single exception to Roebling's plan offered by the commission
was that they demanded a central height of 135 feet, instead of 130
feet, in the central span.

[38] Samuel T. Powell had occupied the Mayor's chair for two terms,
closing in 1861. He again entered the office in 1872.

[39] Mr. Beecher came to Brooklyn in 1847, and died at his post forty
years later, on March 8, 1887. His relations to the city of Brooklyn
were exceptional, and in many respects marvelous. No other single
personality in this city ever won a prominence so significant, so
salutary, so momentous. One of Brooklyn's most brilliant thinkers,
writers, and speakers, the Rev. John W. Chadwick, D.D., has spoken
of Mr. Beecher as 'the most unique and splendid personality of our
civic history; one of the most unique and splendid in the history
of the United States and their colonial beginnings.' The homage to
Beecher's genius as a teacher and leader of men has come from thinking
men wherever the English language is spoken. The homage which belongs
to him as a citizen, as a pastor, as a humanitarian, as a patriot,
has been enthusiastically offered by his fellow-countrymen, and
particularly by his neighbors in the city of Brooklyn. The bronze
monument to Mr. Beecher, designed by John Q. A. Ward, was placed in
front of the City Hall in 1891.

[40] Seth Low on "Municipal Government," in Bryce's _American
Commonwealth_, vol. i. p. 626.

[41] Commenting on the Brooklyn system, Fiske says: "It insures unity
of administration, it encourages promptness and economy, it locates
and defines responsibility, and it is so simple that everybody can
understand it. The people, having but few officers to elect, are
more likely to know something about them. Especially since everybody
understands that the success of the government depends upon the
character of the Mayor, extraordinary pains are taken to secure good
mayors; and the increased interest in city politics is shown by the
fact that in Brooklyn more people vote for Mayor than for Governor or
for President."

[42] The increase in the bulk of the city vote since 1877 is shown by
the fact that the vote for Howell had been 36,343, as against 33,538
for John F. Henry.

[43] Joseph C. Hendrix was appointed postmaster of Brooklyn in 1886,
and made a record in that office unequaled by any postmaster the
city ever had. Indeed, his reforms and innovations made for him a
conspicuous reputation at Washington. In 1892, Hendrix was elected to
Congress. He has rendered highly important service to the city in the
board of education.

[44] See p. 166.

[45] The history of the Institute is taken from the fifth _Year Book_,
1893.

[46] The Regents of the University of the State of New York, who had
granted a provisional charter in 1889.

[47] The present building of the Young Men's Christian Association,
at Fulton and Bond streets, has been occupied since 1885. It has
a circulating library of over 13,000 volumes, a finely equipped
gymnasium, running-track, bowling-alleys, and swimming-tank, two large
lecture-halls, and evening classes registering 700 men. The fine
building of the Young Women's Christian Association, at the junction of
Schermerhorn Street and Flatbush Avenue, has been occupied since 1888.
It has eighteen class-rooms for educational work, a library with about
6000 volumes, a lecture-hall seating 650, assembly-rooms seating 400,
an excellent gymnasium and running-track, and medical department.

[48] See p. 165 of this volume.

[49] The practice of establishing classes for Chinamen in connection
with Sunday-schools has occasioned many and prolonged discussions
in Brooklyn, and has been strongly assailed, particularly in those
instances where the teaching of mature Chinamen was intrusted to young
unmarried women.

[50] _Eagle Almanac_, 1894.

[51] _Corporation Manual_, for 1863, compiled by Henry McCloskey, City
Clerk.

[52] See Appendix.

[53] Leffert Lefferts was the first president of the Long Island Bank.

[54] Read by Mr. Ostrander before the Long Island Historical Society,
February 1, 1881.

[55] Understood to have originated in the shortening of Rembrandt into
Rem.

[56] From compilation in _Eagle Almanac_, 1892.

[57] The value of hired property is not included for 1890, because it
was not reported in 1880.

[58] No inquiry in 1880 relating to "Miscellaneous expenses."

[59] The amount stated represents the "net debt," or the total amount
of municipal debt less sinking fund.

[60] To avoid disclosure of operations of individual establishments,
only such industries as have 3 or more establishments engaged therein
are included.




INDEX

Simple page numbers refer to Vol. I.; page numbers preceded by "ii."
refer to Vol. II.


  Academy of Music, ii. 116, 226.

  Adams, John, 229.

  ---- Julius A., ii. 149.

  ---- Rev. John Coleman, ii. 221.

  Adelphi Academy, ii. 212.

  Aertsen, Huyck, 59, 63.

  ---- Ryniere, 126.

  Ainslie, Robert, ii. 103.

  American Astronomical Society, ii. 208.

  Amersfoort (Flatlands), 55.

  Amphion Musical Society, ii. 228.

  Amphion Theatre, ii. 198.

  Andros, Maj. Ed., 116, 133.

  Apollo Club, ii. 228.

  Apprentices' Library, ii. 73, 75.

  "Arbitration Rock," ii. 42.

  Arion Society, ii. 228.

  Arnold, S. G., ii. 89.

  Assembly, State, meets in Brooklyn, 188;
    patriotic resolutions, 200;
    and Colonial Congress, 208.

  Association for Improving the Condition of the Poor, ii. 221.

  Atkinson, John P., ii. 152.

  Atlantic Bank, ii. 234.

  Atlantic Basin, ii. 191.

  Atlantic Dock Company, ii. 92.

  Aycrigg, Benjamin, ii. 15, 17.


  Backhouse, E. T., 237.

  Backus, Dr. Truman G., ii. 211.

  Baker, John H., ii. 23.

  Ball, Charles, ii. 32.

  Bank of Williamsburgh, ii. 234.

  Barbarin, Captain, ii. 51.

  Bardwell, W. A., ii. 216.

  Barnes, Demas, ii. 156.

  Barnet, Wm., 179.

  Barnum, Ed. B., 190.

  Barre, Daniel, ii. 56.

  Battle of Brooklyn, 247-274.

  Bayard, Nich., 136, 167.

  Bayles, Rich. M., 7.

  Bedford, settled, 101;
    schoolhouse, 102, 161.

  Bedford Academy, ii. 214.

  Bedford Corners, ii. 72.

  Bedford Road, 237.

  Beecher, Henry Ward, ii. 119, 125, 126, 164, 218.

  Bellomont, Governor, 147, 152, 153.

  Bennett, George C, ii. 89, 106.

  ---- George I., ii. 32.

  ---- Wm. Adriaense, 29.

  Benson, A. W., ii. 152, 154.

  Bentyn, Jacques, 29.

  Bergen, Hans Hansen, 39, 67.

  ---- Jacob, ii. 53.

  ---- Jan Hans, 101.

  ---- Johannes, 285.

  ---- John T., 214; ii. 56.

  ---- Michael Hans, 101.

  ---- Tunis G., 102; ii. 92, 97.

  Bergen Hill, 239.

  Berri, Wm., ii. 231.

  Berrian, Cornelius, 126.

  Berry, Abraham J., ii. 104.

  Bibaut, John, 155.

  Bill, Charles E., ii. 151.

  Billing, Th., 235.

  Bird, George L., ii. 70.

  ---- Major, 249.

  Birdsall, T. W., ii. 69.

  Blanco, Jn., 235.

  Bloom, Jacob, 235.

  Board of Health, first, ii. 66.

  Boerum, Isaac, 235.

  ---- Simon, 201, 204, 207.

  ---- William, 220, 300.

  Boerum house, ii. 41.

  Bogert (Bogaert), Nich., 208.

  ---- Teunis Gysbert, 101.

  Bokee & Clem, ii. 75.

  Boome, Jacob, ii. 25.

  Booth, Samuel, ii. 129, 132, 151.

  Boughton, Samuel, ii. 23.

  Bout, Jan Evertsen, 59, 63, 108.

  Bowen, Henry C., ii. 230.

  ---- H. E., ii. 230.

  ---- James, ii. 116.

  Boyd, Samuel, ii. 32.

  Boys' High School, ii. 202.

  Bradford, Wm., 145.

  Breuckelen, of Holland, 59.

  Brevoort, J. Carson, ii. 152.

  Broadhead, Henry, 190.

  Brodhead (quot.), 24.

  Bronson, Greene C., ii. 86.

  Brooklyn, name, 59;
    first sale ofland in region of, 29-30;
    early days, 53-68;
    beginning of official existence, 66;
    first houses, 73;
    first preacher, 93;
    first schoolmaster, 97;
    leads Long Island towns, 167;
    State Assembly meets in, 188;
    battle of Brooklyn, 247-274;
    first school, 99;
    during Revolution, 211-304;
    after the Revolution, ii. 1-46;
    recognized as a town, 28;
    during war of 1812, 51-56;
    incorporated as a village, 62;
    markets, 65;
    incorporated as a city, 79-81;
    property valuations before 1860, 83;
    receives Bushwick and Williamsburgh, 107;
    during Civil War, 117-131;
    bridge, 149-159;
    "Brooklyn System," ii. 169-171.

  Brooklyn Academy of Music, ii. 116, 226.

  Brooklyn and Long Island Fair, ii. 122-124.

  Brooklyn Art Association, ii. 228.

  Brooklyn Art Club, ii. 228.

  Brooklyn Auxiliary of the U. S. Sanitary Commission, ii. 122.

  Brooklyn Bridge, ii. 94, 149-159, 168, 178-190.

  Brooklyn Choral Society, ii. 228.

  Brooklyn City Hospital, ii. 93.

  Brooklyn City Railroad, ii. 94.

  Brooklyn Club, ii. 226.

  Brooklyn College of Pharmacy, ii. 215.

  Brooklyn Collegiate and Polytechnic Inst., ii. 100, 212.

  "Brooklyn Daily Argus," ii. 230.

  "Brooklyn Daily Citizen," ii. 231.

  "Brooklyn Daily Eagle," ii. 88-91, 128, 229.

  "Brooklyn Daily Standard," ii. 230.

  "Brooklyn Daily Times," ii. 89, 128, 229.

  "Brooklyn Daily Union," ii. 128, 229.

  Brooklyn Entomological Society, ii. 208.

  Brooklyn Eye and Ear Hospital, ii. 223.

  Brooklyn Female Academy, ii. 100.

  Brooklyn Fire Insurance Co., ii. 234.

  "Brooklyn Freie Presse," ii. 128, 229.

  Brooklyn Gaslight Company, ii. 78.

  Brooklyn Heights Seminary, ii. 214.

  Brooklyn Home for Consumptives, ii. 223.

  Brooklyn Homoeopathic Hospital, ii. 223.

  Brooklyn Hospital, ii. 223.

  Brooklyn Hospital for Contagious Diseases, ii. 223.

  Brooklyn Institute, ii. 69, 91, 93, 202-211, 216, 229.

  Brooklyn Latin School, ii. 214.

  Brooklyn Library, ii. 215.

  "Brooklyn Life," ii. 231.

  Brooklyn Lyceum, ii. 91, 93.

  Brooklyn Maennerchor, ii. 228.

  Brooklyn Maternity, ii. 223.

  Brooklyn Microscopical Society, ii. 208.

  Brooklyn Museum, ii. 197.

  "Brooklyn Phalanx," ii. 122.

  Brooklyn Philharmonic Society, ii. 226.

  Brooklyn Saengerbund, ii. 228.

  Brooklyn Select Academy, ii. 31.

  Brooklyn Sunday School Union Society, ii. 64, 110.

  "Brooklyn System," ii. 169-176.

  Brooklyn Theatre, ii. 166, 197.

  Brooklyn Throat Hospital, ii. 223.

  Brooks, Daniel, ii. 32.

  ---- Elbridge S., 142.

  Brower, Abraham, 183.

  ---- Nich., 183.

  ---- Wm., 214.

  Brown, Henry K., ii. 126.

  ---- Laurence, ii. 62.

  Brown's Business College, ii. 214.

  Brush, Conklin, ii. 94.

  Bryant, William C., ii. 107.

  Bryant Literary Society, ii. 229.

  Bryant & Stratton's Business College, ii. 214.

  Buck, Dudley, ii. 228.

  Building Department, ii. 137.

  Bunce, Postmaster, ii. 29.

  Burch, Robert, ii. 230.

  Burge, J. H. Hobart, ii. 32.

  Burnet, Wm., 179.

  Bushwick, land purchase, 99;
    town plot, 100;
    first school, 100;
    first schoolmaster, 101;
    old church, ii. 37-40;
    patriots, 38;
    after Revolution, 38;
    during war of 1812, 55;
    and Williamsburgh, 101, 102;
    consolidate with Brooklyn, 107.

  Bushwick Creek, 100.

  Bushwick Democratic Club, ii. 225.

  Butler, Wm. H., ii. 104.


  Caecilia Ladies Vocal Society, ii. 228.

  Calvary Cemetery, ii. 194.

  Campbell, Douglass, 42, 95.

  ---- Patrick, ii. 161.

  Canaver, Peter, ii. 76.

  Carlyle, Thomas, 17.

  Carnaville, Chas. A., ii. 129.

  Carpenter, Geo., 214.

  Carroll Park, ii. 143.

  Cary Fund, ii. 206.

  Casper, Andrew, 235.

  Catholic Cathedral, ii. 160.

  Catholic Historical Society, ii. 220.

  Cemetery of the Evergreens, ii. 93, 194.

  Central Grammar School, ii. 200.

  Chadbourne, Zebulon, ii. 85.

  Chadwick, Rev. J. W., ii. 165, 221.

  Chardavogne, Wm., 221.

  Charles II., 104, 110.

  Charter of 1872, ii. 162.

  Chester, Mrs., ii. 69.

  Chinese Sunday-schools, ii. 220.

  Chittenden, S. B., ii. 151.

  Christian Commission, ii. 124.

  Church Charity Foundation, ii. 160, 220.

  Churches, first in Kings County, 88;
    Reformed Dutch, 145;
    First Baptist, ii. 75;
    in 1835, 83;
    in 1893, 219.

  City Bible Society, ii. 220.

  City Hall, ii. 71, 84, 96, 99.

  City Park, ii. 143.

  Clarke, Governor, 188, 190.

  Clausen, Hendrick, 162.

  Clinton, Governor, 188.

  ---- Jas., 213.

  ---- Sir Henry, 217, 231.

  Clinton Ave. Congregational Church, ii. 120.

  Clove Road, 278.

  Clubs, ii. 224.

  Cob dock, ii. 2.

  Cobble Hill, 239; ii. 55.

  Cochran, Dr. David Henry, ii. 212.

  Coffee, Peter, ii. 60.

  Colden, Governor, 210.

  Cole, John, ii. 29.

  Collard, Geo. W., 189.

  College of Nineteen, 61.

  Collier, Jurian, 183.

  Colman's Point, 22.

  Columbia College, 198.

  Columbia Theatre, ii. 198.

  Colve, Governor, 113.

  Committee of Sixty, 206.

  Common lands, 158.

  Concordia Maennerchor, ii. 228.

  Coney Island, 55, 122; ii. 33.

  Congregational Church Extension Society, ii. 220.

  Congregational Club, ii. 220.

  Congress of Representatives, 290, 291.

  Conkling, John T., ii. 32, 132.

  Conselyea, Wm., ii. 38.

  Consolidation of Brooklyn and N. Y., ii. 163.

  Continental Congress, 223, 230, 261, 280.

  Cook, Purcell, ii. 32.

  Coombs, John W., ii. 152.

  Coope, Ed., ii. 69.

  Copeland, Edward, ii. 93.

  ---- Ed., 189.

  "Corkscrew Fort," 239.

  Corlaer's Hook Ferry, ii. 42.

  Corlies, E. W., ii. 152.

  Cornbury, Lord, 167-175; ii. 262.

  Cornell, John, ii. 71.

  ---- T. B., ii. 152.

  Cornell House, 257.

  Cornwallis, Earl, 243.

  Cortelyou, Isaac, 185.

  ---- Jacques, 129.

  Cortelyou, Peter, 161.

  Coudrey, Samuel, ii. 16.

  Council of Twelve, 61.

  Courts, 127-131; ii. 30, 72, 73, 75, 95, 98, 99, 111.

  Cowenhoven, 59.

  ---- Captain Peter, ii. 56.

  ---- John, 161.

  ---- Nicholas, 180, 214, 224, 284, 290.

  Cozzens, Issachar, ii. 16.

  Crane, Dr. Jas., ii. 133.

  Craven, A. W., ii. 152.

  Crescent Club, ii. 226.

  Cripplebush, i. 101.

  Crisper, Casper, 285.

  Crist, Abraham, ii. 86.

  Criterion, ii. 198.

  Crittenden, Dr. Alonzo, ii. 211.

  Crombie, John S., ii. 213.

  Crook, Abel, 190.

  Cropsey, Andrew, ii. 38.

  ---- Andrew G., ii. 38.

  ---- Casper, ii. 38.

  ---- Geerte Jans (Kasparse), ii. 38.

  ---- Jerome Ryerson, ii. 38.

  ---- Johannis (Kasparse), ii. 38.

  ---- Joost (Kasparse), ii. 38.

  ---- William, ii. 38.

  Cross, Colonel, ii. 122.

  ---- John A., ii. 85.

  Cullen, Edgar M., 189.

  ---- Henry J., ii. 32.

  Cunningham, 268; ii. 4.

  ---- Robert, ii. 69.

  Cutting, Wm., ii. 61.

  Cuyler, Rev. Theo. L., ii. 218.

  Cypress Hills Cemetery, ii. 93, 194.


  Dana, Prof. James D., ii. 203.

  Dankers, Jasper, 119.

  Darbee, Levi, ii. 106.

  De Bevoice, Charles, 235.

  ---- Johannes, 285.

  De Hart, Simon Aertsen, 121.

  De Heister, General, 243.

  De Lancey, Lieut.-Governor, 189.

  De Launcey, 262.

  De Mille, Richard M., 189.

  De Sille, Nicasius, 100, 118.

  De Witt, Benjamin, ii. 20.

  Dean, Capt. Wm., 56.

  ---- John, 64.

  Debevoise, James, ii. 97.

  ---- Jost, 213.

  Debtors' Prison, ii. 73.

  Declaration of Independence, 230, 232.

  Denice, Denys, 207.

  Denton, Daniel, 10.

  Deutscher Liederkranz, ii. 228.

  Dewyre, Capt. Wm., ii. 56.

  Dickinson, P. P., ii. 152.

  Dircksen, Cornelis, 53.

  ---- Joris, 59.

  Dongan, Governor, 108, 117, 132, 133, 163; ii. 262.

  Dorlant, John Garretse, 162, 163.

  Doughty, John, ii. 24.

  ---- John, ii. 62, 64, 71.

  ---- Rev. Jno., 41.

  Draft Riots, ii. 121.

  Draper, 96.

  Dress among the Dutch, 76.

  Driggs, Daniel D., ii. 161.

  ---- Edmund, ii. 152.

  "Drum Beat," ii. 123.

  Duke of York, 104.

  "Duke's Laws," 108, 131.

  Duness, Count, 243.

  Dunmore, Governor, 205, 206.

  Duryea, Maria, 14.

  Dutch, and American Exploration, 17;
    and Puritans, 42;
    manners and customs, 69-105;
    and education, 94-99;
    and English, 103;
    nomenclature, ii. 258.

  Dwight, Rev. Dr., 189.


  "Eagle and Brooklyn," vi.

  East New York, 274.

  Eastern Dist. Industrial School, ii. 224.

  Edson, Franklin, ii. 179, 181.

  Education under the Dutch, 94, 124.

  Elections in early Brooklyn, 159 (note).

  Ely, Smith, Jr., ii. 151.

  Embargo Act, ii. 50.

  English, and Dutch, 103;
    take New York, 105.

  Enos, De Witt C., ii. 32.

  Episcopalians, at Jamaica, 174;
    in Brooklyn after the Revolution, ii. 24.

  Erie Basin Docks, ii. 134.

  Erskine, Sir Wm., 243.

  Etherington, Sam., 220.

  Euterpe Chorus and Orchestra, ii. 228.

  "Evening Star," ii. 78.

  Everdell, Colonel, ii. 127.

  Everett, Thomas, 220.

  ---- William, 221.

  Everit, Th., ii. 62.

  Excelsior Club, ii. 226.


  Faith Home for Incurables, ii. 223.

  Farmers' and Citizens' Bank, ii. 104.

  Federal Building, ii. 195.

  Ferry, the, 53, 120, 153; ii. 27, 77;
    ferry and river rights, 132; ii. 261.

  Ffilkin, Henry, 155, 158, 162.

  Field, Thos. W., ii. 38.

  Field and Marine Club, ii. 226.

  Fire Department, early organization, ii. 24;
    first legislation relating to, 26;
    fire limits, 139;
    reorganized, 146.

  Fish, Colonel, 257.

  Fiske, John, ii. 48, 169, 171.

  Flatbush, county court, 35;
    Erasmus Hall, 35;
    settled, 55;
    establishes a church, 88;
    population in 1738, 188;
    first mill, ii. 34.

  Flatbush Ave. and Amersfoort Road, 55.

  Flatlands, called New Amersfoort, 29;
    settled, 54;
    new church, ii. 33.

  Fleet estate, ii. 72.

  Fletcher, Benj., 144.

  Floyd, Wm., 230.

  Flushing Bridge and Road Company, ii. 28.

  Fly Market, 221.

  Foord, John, ii. 230.

  Fort Amsterdam, 31, 52.

  Fort Greene, 237; ii. 23, 120.

  Fort Hamilton, 122, 243.

  Fort James, 116.

  Fort Orange, 23.

  "Four Chimneys," 257.

  Fowler, Wm. A., ii. 151.

  Foy, Joseph D., ii. 19.

  Franklin, Benjamin, 229.

  Franklin Literary Society, ii. 229.

  Freeck's Mill, 239; ii. 41.

  Fricke, Geo., ii. 69.

  Froebel Academy, ii. 214.

  Fulton, Robert, ii. 56-58.

  Fulton Ferry, ii. 27, 57, 159.

  Fulton Street, 161.

  Furman, Gabriel, 172, 173; ii. 68, 69.

  ---- William, ii. 69.


  Galbraithe, Robert, 221.

  Gardiner, Lyon, 39.

  Garrison, John, ii. 64, 69, 71.

  Garritsen, Wolfert, 28, 54.

  Garritson, Samuel, 163, 188, 203.

  "Gazette," 146, 186.

  George III., 199.

  Gerbritse, Jan, 162.

  German Hospital, ii. 223.

  German Young Men's Christian Ass'n, ii. 221.

  Germania Club, ii. 225.

  Germania Savings Bank, ii. 166.

  Gibbons, John, ii. 31.

  Girls' High School, ii. 202.

  Golden Hill, battle of, 205.

  Good Hope, prison ship, ii. 5.

  Gowanus Mill, 29, 183.

  Graham, Augustus, ii. 69, 93, 202.

  Grand Opera House, ii. 198.

  Grant, General, 243.

  Gravesend, settled, 55;
    population in 1810, ii. 33.

  Graydon, Colonel, 295.

  Green, Andrew H., ii. 152.

  Greene, General, 229, 233, 237, 240.

  Greenwood, John, ii. 86.

  Greenwood Cemetery, ii. 94.

  Gunnison, Herbert F., ii. 232.

  Guy's picture of Brooklyn in 1820, ii. 68.


  Hagerman, Joseph, 155.

  Hale, Nathan, 267.

  Half Moon, 20.

  Hall, George, ii. 81, 108, 111.

  ---- Rev. Chas. H., ii. 219.

  Hall of Records, ii. 195.

  Hamilton, Alexander, 216.

  ---- Andrew, 188.

  ---- George, ii. 31.

  Hamilton Club, ii. 225.

  Hamilton Literary Association, ii. 91.

  Hammond, Annie A., xiii.

  Hanover Club, ii. 226.

  Hanssen, Jacob, 163.

  Hanssen, Joris, 162, 163.

  ---- Michael, 159.

  Harper, James, ii. 70.

  Harrison, Gabriel, ii. 196.

  Hart, Samuel, ii. 32.

  Hatton, John A., ii. 230.

  Havens, Thomas, ii. 24.

  Hayward, John W., ii. 152.

  Hazard, Thomas, 221.

  Hazzard, Wm. H., ii. 129.

  Hebrew Orphan Asylum, ii. 224.

  Hegeman, Adriaen, 99, 164, 284.

  ---- Joseph, 161.

  Heights, 54, 233.

  Hell Gate, ii. 167.

  Hendrix, Joseph C., ii. 176.

  Henry, James H., ii. 32.

  ---- John F., ii. 172, 230.

  ---- Thomas W., ii. 32.

  Herman, George G., ii. 129.

  Hessians, 255.

  Hester, Col. Wm., ii. 90.

  ---- Wm. Van Auden, ii. 90.

  Hewell, A. S., ii. 179, 182.

  Hicks, Jacob, ii. 69.

  ---- John, 221-223.

  ---- "Milk," ii. 70.

  ---- "Spetler," ii. 70.

  Hildreth, John T., ii. 23.

  Hobart, John Silas, 292.

  Hodgkinson, Worthington, ii. 86.

  Hoffman, John T., 151.

  Hogan, Capt. W. H., ii. 118.

  Holland, and Spain, 17;
    education in, 94-96.

  Holland Society, xii.

  Hooley's Opera House, ii. 197.

  Hopkins, G. G., ii. 32.

  Hotchkiss, Maj. E. O., ii. 127.

  Houston Street Ferry, ii. 101.

  Howard, Henry W. B., vi.

  ---- William, 276-279.

  Howard Colored Orphan Asylum, ii. 224.

  Howell, James, Jr., ii. 168.

  Hubbard, 284.

  Hudde, Andries, 28, 39, 54.

  Hudson, Henry, 17, 19, 22.

  Hudson River, 17.

  Hunt, J. G. T., ii. 32.

  Hunter, John W., ii. 162.

  ---- Robert, 175-178.

  ---- William, Jr., ii. 152, 155.

  Husted, Seymour L., ii. 150, 154.

  Hutchins, A., ii. 32.

  ---- John, 167.

  Hutchinson, Anne, 41.

  ---- Joseph C., ii. 32.

  Huybertsen, Lambert, 39.

  Hyde, Lucius, ii. 32.

  Hyde & Behman's Theatre, ii. 198.


  Indians, Long Island, 11-15;
    and the Dutch, 15, 42-52;
    and Hudson, 20;
    and early settlers, 42-52;
    and Puritans, 42.

  Industrial School Association, ii. 224.

  Inebriates' Home for Kings County, ii. 136.

  Ingersoll, Wm. H., 190.

  "Iphetanga," 54.

  Ireland, Rev. John, ii. 62.


  Jackson, John, ii. 14, 29.

  Jamaica, Pres. Church, 174.

  Janssen, Abraham, 92; ii. 41.

  Janvier, Thomas A., 31; ii. 42.

  Jefferson, Thomas, 229.

  Jenks, G. T., ii. 151, 155.

  Jervis, Arthur N., vi.

  Jewett, Charles, ii. 32.

  Johnson, Barent, 213, 234.

  ---- Barnet, ii. 97.

  ---- David, ii. 103.

  ---- Gen. Jeremiah, ii. 14, 46, 55, 67, 87, 149.

  ---- Hornbeck, 235, 287.

  ---- Samuel E., 187.

  ---- Rev. Dr. S. R., 190.

  ---- William, 284.

  Johnson estate, 214.

  Jong, Lodewyck, 92.

  Joralemon, Teunis, ii. 72.

  Joralemon's Lane, ii. 71.

  Jourdan, Maj.-Gen. Jas., ii. 179.

  "Journal," 186.


  Kalbfleisch, Martin, ii. 117, 122, 129, 148, 151, 154, 160.

  Kemper, Jacob, 221.

  Kennedy, Platt, ii. 31.

  Kenney, James F., 104.

  Kershaw, Martin, 235.

  Kidd, Captain, 148-151.

  Kieft, William, 27.

  "Kiekout," 99.

  King, Gamaliel, ii. 129.

  ---- John S., ii. 52.

  Kings County, settled, 26;
    first church, 88;
    organized, 118;
    during Revolution, 211-304;
    during War of 1812, ii. 51-56;
    during the Civil War, ii. 117-131;
    churches in, 219.

  Kings County Court House, ii. 128-130.

  ---- _See_ Courts.

  Kings County Hospital, ii. 223.

  Kings County Medical Society, ii. 32, 119, 217.

  Kings County Sunday-school Ass'n, ii. 221.

  King's Highway, 161, 179-183.

  Kingsley, Harry S., ii. 90.

  ---- William C., ii. 150, 179, 189.

  Kingsley & Keeney, ii. 155.

  Kinsella, Thomas, ii. 90, 150.

  Kirk, Thomas, ii. 70.

  Kissam, Daniel, 204.

  Kissick's Business College, ii. 214.

  Knowles, Edwin, ii. 198.

  Knyphausen, General, 243.


  Labadists, 119.

  Lafayette, 257.

  Lambertson, Thomas, 129.

  Lamb, Capt. John, 216.

  Lambert, Edward C., ii. 94.

  ---- John, ii. 50, 51.

  Laughlin, Rt. Rev. John, ii. 217.

  Law Library, ii. 217.

  Lawrence, John, 139.

  Lee, General, 217, 227.

  Lefferts, Barent, 213.

  ---- John, 189, 224, 289; ii. 66.

  ---- Leffert, 210, 285; ii. 2, 68, 234.

  Leisler, Jacob, 135-143.

  Leislerian party, 164.

  Leonard, John, ii. 103.

  Levermore, Chas. H., ii. 213.

  Lewis, Francis, 207, 230; ii. 235-257.

  ---- Francis, Jr., ii. 255.

  ---- John W., ii. 155.

  ---- Morgan, ii. 255.

  Lincoln Club, ii. 226.

  Lincoln statue, ii. 126, 195.

  Linden Camera Club, ii. 208.

  Littlejohn, Bishop, ii. 179, 219.

  Livingston, Col. H. B., 294.

  ---- Philip, 205, 207, 230; ii. 71
    Rev. Dr. John H., ii. 36.

  ---- Robert, 165, 229, 230.

  Livingston, Robert R., ii. 57.

  Locke, Richard Adams, ii. 88.

  Lockwood, John, 189.

  ---- John, ii. 213.

  Loisian Academy, ii. 62.

  Long Island, geology, 1-10;
    trees, 10;
    Indians, 11;
    discovery, 16-20;
    land, 37;
    first houses, 73;
    under English rule, 107;
    named Nassau, 146;
    slavery on, 172;
    during Revolution, 211-304;
    travel on, ii. 27;
    first post route, 28.

  "Long Island Anzeiger," ii. 128.

  Long Island Bank, ii. 65, 234.

  Long Island Baptist Ass'n, ii. 221.

  Long Island Business College, ii. 214.

  Long Island College Hospital, ii. 116, 215.

  Long Island Free Library, ii. 216.

  Long Island Historical Society, xii. 119, 217.

  Long Island Insurance Co., ii. 234.

  Long Island Railroad, ii. 190.

  "Long Island Star," ii. 31, 47, 51, 59, 105.

  Long Island Throat and Lung Hospital, ii. 223.

  "Long Island Weekly Intelligencer," ii. 29.

  Lott, Abraham, 188, 201, 203.

  ---- Engelbert, 284.

  ---- Jeremiah, ii. 56.

  ---- Johannis, 188, 284.

  ---- John A., ii. 91, 129.

  ---- Petrus, 285.

  Lovelace, Governor, 109.

  Low, A. A., ii. 122.

  ---- Cornelius, ii. 32.

  ---- Seth, ii. 87, 97.

  ---- Seth, 190; ii. 170, 171-178, 180, 195, 199.

  Lowe, Doctor, ii. 29.

  ---- John, 129.

  Lubbertsen, Frederick, 37, 108.

  Luqueer's mill, ii. 41.

  Lutheran Hospital, ii. 223.


  Macloy, Rev. Dr. Archibald, ii. 54.

  Mahon, John, ii. 31.

  Manhattan Beach R. R., ii. 168.

  Manhattan Island, 23.

  Manning, Captain, 110.

  Manufacturers' National Bank, ii. 104.

  Mapes, General, ii. 53.

  Marriage among the Dutch, 79.

  Marsh, William B., ii. 89.

  Marshall, Wm., ii. 152, 155.

  Martense, Roetiff, 155.

  Martin, Geo. H., 189.

  Martyn, Jan, 92.

  Mason, Theodore L., ii. 32.

  Maspeth, 100.

  Mauje, Jan, 39.

  Maxwell, James H., ii. 44.

  ---- William H., ii. 199, 200.

  McClellan, C. R., ii. 32.

  McCloskey, Henry, ii. 89.

  McCue, Alexander, 189; ii. 150, 151, 154.

  McDonnell, Rt. Rev. Charles E., ii. 219.

  McLaughlin, Hugh, ii. 232.

  McLean, Andrew, ii. 90, 231.

  ---- Samuel, ii. 152, 154.

  McDougall, Alexander, 213.

  McKelway, St. Clair, ii. 90.

  Meeker, Benjamin, ii. 69.

  ---- Rev. Stephen H., 189.

  ---- S. M., ii. 103.

  Megapolensis, Johannes, 88.

  Memorial Hospital for Women and Children, ii. 223.

  Mercerin, Andrew, ii. 64.

  Meserole, Abraham, 101.

  ---- Jean, 99.

  ---- Jeremiah V., 99; ii. 119, 127.

  ---- John A., ii. 38.

  ---- John I., ii. 38.

  Methodist Episcopal Hospital, ii. 223.

  Metropolitan police, ii. 116.

  Metropolitan Sanitary District, ii. 133.

  Meyers, T. Bailey, ii. 151.

  Michaelius, Jonas, 87.

  Middagh, Mrs., ii. 69.

  Midwood Club, ii. 225.

  Midwout, 55.

  Milburne, 138, 143.

  Military, in Civil War, ii. 118-127.

  Military Garden, ii. 71, 197.

  Mill, first on L. I., ii. 34.

  Miller, David, ii. 38.

  ---- Eleazar, 204.

  ---- Peter, 235.

  Mills, E. S., ii. 152.

  Minuit, Peter, 23.

  Miss Rounds's School for Girls, ii. 214.

  Mitchell, Chauncey L., ii. 32, 151.

  Monitor, ii. 121.

  Montauk Club, ii. 225.

  Montgomerie, Governor, 185.

  Moody, Lady Deborah, 56, 57.

  Moore, Thomas, ii. 195.

  Morrell, Th., ii. 44.

  Morris, Lewis, 230.

  Morse, Judge N. B., ii. 131.

  Morton, Brig.-General, ii. 19.

  ---- John, ii. 152.

  Moser, Joseph, ii. 76.

  Mudie, A. E., ii. 136.

  Municipal Building, ii. 195.

  Municipal Union Society, ii. 163.

  Murphy, George I., 189.

  ---- Henry C., 59, 119, 189; ii. 22, 60, 91, 92, 150, 151, 154, 156,
          188, 232, 258.

  ---- Henry C., Jr., 189.

  ---- John G., ii. 60.


  Nagel, Philip, 284.

  Nanfan, Governor, 164-168.

  Nassau ferry-boat, ii. 59.

  Nassau Island, 146, 289.

  Nassau Water Company, ii. 110, 146.

  National Guard, in Civil War, 118-127;
    in 1893, 198.

  Naval Hospital, ii. 194.

  Neilson, Judge, ii. 194.

  Nelson, Chief Justice, ii. 86.

  New Amersfoort, 29.

  New Amsterdam, 71.

  New Netherland, 24, 36.

  New Orange, 112.

  New Utrecht, 122; ii. 36, 37.

  New York, taken by English, 105;
    new charter, 106;
    retaken by Dutch, 112;
    named New Orange, 112;
    restored to English, 116;
    during Revolution, 211-304.

  New York and Brooklyn Ferry Co., ii. 190.

  Newspapers, 191.

  Newtown Creek, 100.

  Nicholas the Frenchman, 92.

  Nicholson, Francis, 133.

  Nicoll, William, 204.

  Nicolls, Governor, 106.

  North Dutch Church, ii. 4.

  Northrup, Daniel W., 190.

  Nostrand, John, 235.

  Noyes, Stephen B., ii. 215.

  Nyack (Najack), 122.

  Nye, James W., ii. 116.


  Ocean Parkway, ii. 145, 167.

  Odeon, ii. 197.

  Old Brooklynites, Society of, xii.; ii. 23, 229.

  Old Jersey, prison ship, ii. 5, 6.

  Olympia, ii. 29.

  Onderdonk, Right Rev. Henry Ustick, 189.

  Osborn, Albert H., ii. 86, 113.

  ---- Sir Danvers, 189.

  ---- William J., 189.

  Osborne, Samuel J., ii. 32.

  Ostrander, Abraham Duryea, ix.

  ---- Geertje, vii.

  ---- George A., ix.

  ---- Hendrick, viii.

  ---- Peter Wilson, ix.

  ---- Pieter, vii.

  ---- Pieter Pieterszen, vii.

  ---- Stephen, viii.

  ---- Stephen M., vii.-xiii.

  ---- Tryutje, vii.

  Otterson, Andrew, ii. 32.

  Oxford Club, ii. 226.


  Packer, Mrs. W. S., ii. 211, 212.

  Packer Collegiate Institute, ii. 100, 211.

  Paine, Colonel, ii. 157.

  Palmer, Lorin, ii. 230.

  Parade Ground, ii. 143, 145.

  Park Theatre, ii. 197.

  Patchen, Jacob, ii. 69.

  Payne, Elijah Freeman, 212.

  ---- John Howard, ii. 195.

  ---- Thomas, 226.

  Penitentiary, ii. 97, 98.

  Percy, Earl, 243.

  Perkins, Albert C., ii. 213.

  Perry, Colonel, ii. 120.

  Peters, Bernard, ii. 106.

  ---- Leffert, 183.

  Pierrepont, H. B., ii. 62, 70, 72.

  ---- H. E., ii. 151.

  Pierrepont Mansion, 257, 304; ii. 71.

  Pierson, Joseph B., ii. 31.

  Pirates, 146.

  Plymouth Church, ii. 119.

  Polhemus, Rev. Johannes Theodoras, 88-93.

  ---- Theodorus, 207, 224, 232, 285.

  Police Department, ii. 160.

  Polytechnic Institute, ii. 212.

  Pope, Thomas, ii. 149.

  Powell, Samuel S., ii. 116.

  ---- Samuel T., ii. 162.

  Powers, George, 221, 222.

  Pratt, Chas., ii. 212, 213.

  Pratt Institute, 213, 214, 216.

  Prentice, John H., ii. 152, 155.

  Presbyterians at Jamaica, 174.

  Prime, Nathaniel S., 1, 10, 12.

  Prince, L. Bradford, 190.

  Prison ships of the Wallabout, ii. 3-23.

  Prospect Park, ii. 143.

  Prout, J. S., ii. 32.

  Provincial Congress, 215, 219, 227, 229, 289.

  Provost, John, ii. 38.

  Public School No. 1, ii. 62.

  Public Schools, ii. 147, 199-202.

  Puritans, 40, 42.

  Putnam, Fort, 237, 254.

  Putnam, General, 229, 237, 266.


  Queens County, organized, 118.


  "Rain-water Doctor," ii. 32.

  Rapalje, Daniel, 235.

  ---- Diana, ii. 69.

  ---- John, 180, 204, 301.

  ---- Joramus, 164.

  ---- Joris Jansen, 30-35, 101.

  ---- Mrs., 259-261.

  ---- Sarah, 33-35.

  Rapelye, Isaac I., 32.

  Raymond, Dr. John H., ii. 212.

  Reade, John, 221.

  Reese, W. W., ii. 32.

  Religion, under the Dutch, 85-87;
    under English, 133, 144.

  Religious societies, ii. 220.

  Remsen, Abraham, ii. 31.

  ---- Col. Jeromus, 290.

  ---- Derick, 284.

  ---- Hendrick, ii. 263.

  ---- Jacob, ii. 27.

  ---- Jan, 126.

  ---- Jeremiah, 224, 285.

  ---- Peter, ii. 71.

  ---- Rem, 164, 221; ii. 41.

  Remsen house, ii. 41.

  Remsen's mill, ii. 41.

  Revolution, 211-304.

  Riding and Driving Club, ii. 225.

  Rising Sun Tavern, 274.

  Roach, John, ii. 151.

  Robertson & Little, ii. 29.

  Roebling, John A., ii. 155, 156, 188.

  ---- Washington A., ii. 155, 157, 188.

  Roehr, Col. Henry E., ii. 128.

  ---- Edward Franz, ii. 128.

  Romaine, Benjamin, ii. 19.

  Roman Catholic Orphan Asylum Society, ii. 224.

  Ruggles, Edward, ii. 151.

  Rushmore, Merwin, 190.

  ---- W. C., ii. 152.

  Rycken, Abraham, 38.

  Ryerse, Adriaen, 126.

  Ryersen, John, 255.


  Sands, Comfort, 208, 300, 301, 303.

  ---- Joshua, 301; ii. 62, 69.

  Sanford, Lewis, ii. 101.

  Schenck, Abraham, 201, 204.

  ---- Gilliam, ii. 129.

  ---- Martin, 213.

  Schenck property, 214.

  Schepens, 63.

  Schoonmaker, Dominie, ii. 53.

  Schouts, 65.

  Schroeder, Frederick A., ii. 165, 230.

  Schuyler, General, 272.

  ---- Peter, 165, 178.

  Scorpion, ii. 5.

  Sea Beach R. R., ii. 168.

  Seaman, Benjamin, 235.

  ---- Henry L., ii. 92.

  ---- John, ii. 64.

  ---- Zebulon, 204.

  Sebring, Isaac, 220.

  ---- Jacob, 220.

  Selyns, Rev. Henricus, 93.

  Seymour, Rt. Rev. George F., 190.

  Sharpe, Jacob, ii. 2.

  Sheltering Arms Nursery, ii. 224.

  Sherman, Roger, 229.

  Sickels, Garret, ii. 19.

  "Single head" bill, ii. 169.

  Skene, A. J. C., ii. 32.

  Skillman, John, ii. 97.

  Skinner, Chas. M., 3; ii. 89.

  Slavery, 84, 170, 171, 177.

  Slocum, Hy. W., ii. 155, 156.

  Sloughter, Henry, 136.

  Sluyter, Peter, 119.

  Smallpox, 188.

  Smith, Abel, ii. 126.

  ---- Capt. John, 20.

  ---- Col. William, 164.

  ---- Cyrus P., ii. 87.

  ---- George, ii. 71.

  ---- Hugh, ii. 155.

  ---- Isaac A., ii. 106.

  ---- Joseph, 221.

  ---- Samuel, ii. 94.

  ---- Selah, ii. 69.

  Snedeker, Isaac, 235.

  Snedicor, John, 88.

  Snow, Dr. Henry Sanger, ii. 212.

  Society for Improving the Condition of the Poor, ii. 135.

  Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, ii. 136.

  Society of St. Vincent de Paul, ii. 222.

  Soldiers' and Sailors' Memorial Arch, ii. 195.

  Sons of Liberty, 280.

  South Brooklyn, 5.

  South Ferry, ii. 78.

  Southampton, 40.

  Southold, 40.

  Spooner, Alden, ii. 62, 69.

  Sprague, Homer B., ii. 213.

  ---- Joseph, ii. 73, 75, 87, 92.

  St. Francis College, ii. 214.

  St. Catherine's Hospital, ii. 223.

  St. Mary's Hospital, ii. 223.

  St. Peter's Hospital, ii. 223.

  St. John's College, ii. 214.

  St. John's Hospital, ii. 223.

  St. Joseph's Institute, ii. 214.

  Staats, John, 163.

  Stagg, Peter, ii. 103.

  Stamp Act, 200, 202.

  Standard Oil Company, ii. 193.

  Stanton, Henry, ii. 24.

  Stearns, John M., ii. 43, 45.

  Stebbins, H. G., ii. 151.

  Steddiford, Brig.-General, ii. 19.

  Stellenwerth, Jacob, 214.

  Stevens, Alfred C., ii. 86.

  Stiles, Henry R., v., 25.

  ---- R. Cresson, ii. 32, 133.

  Stillman, Capt. Francis, ii. 56.

  Stillwell, Nicholaus, 155.

  Stillwell, Rich., 129, 207, 284.

  Stirling, Lord, 219.

  Stoffelsen, Jacob, 59.

  Stoothoof, Abraham, ii. 24.

  ---- Wihls, 285.

  Storrs, Rev. R. S., ii. 123, 125, 126, 129, 179, 184, 218.

  Stowe, Harriet Beecher, ii. 165.

  Stranahan, J. S. T., ii. 116, 143, 150, 154, 156, 179, 189, 195.

  ---- Mrs. J. S. T., ii. 124.

  Stryker, Burdett, ii. 16, 69.

  ---- John, 88.

  Stuyvesant, Peter, 68, 70.

  Sugar Refineries, ii. 192.

  Sullivan, General, 233.

  Suydam, Bernardus, 234, 235.

  ---- Evert, 284.

  ---- Ferdinand, 214.

  ---- Hendrick, 235; ii. 37.

  ---- Jacob, 235, 295.

  ---- Lambert, 234, 235.

  ---- Roger, 235.

  Sweeny, Peter B., ii. 155.

  Swift, General, ii. 149.


  Talbot, Charles A., ii. 129.

  Talmage, Rev. T. DeWitt, ii. 218.

  Tammany Society, ii. 15-17.

  Taylor, Chas. G., ii. 96, 97.

  ---- Stephen G., ii. 213.

  "Tea Party," 206.

  Teckritz, Henry, ii. 129.

  Terhune, Roelof, 235.

  Terry, D. D., 190.

  Thayer, William H., ii. 32.

  Theatres, ii. 196-198.

  Thomasen, William, 53.

  Thompson, George, ii. 104.

  Thoms, Major Richard, 290.

  Thorne, J. Sullivan, ii. 32.

  Tienpont, Adrien Jorissen, 22.

  Tilton, Theodore, ii. 230.

  Titus, Abiel, ii. 69.

  ---- "Charlum," ii. 41.

  ---- Daniel, 221.

  ---- Francis J., ii. 44, 56.

  ---- Johannes, 214.

  ---- John, 234.

  Tonneman, Sheriff, 92.

  Townsend, Charles A., ii. 151.

  ---- Robert, ii. 16.

  Tracy, Benj. F., ii. 230.

  Traphagen, Wm. Janssen, viii.

  Trial for Treason, 154-156.

  Trinity Church, 279.

  Trotter, Jonathan, ii. 82.

  Trumbull, Colonel, 252.

  ---- Governor, 242.

  Tryon, Governor, 206, 286.

  Tweed, Wm. M., 155.

  Twenty-eighth Regiment Armory, ii. 160.


  Union for Christian Work, ii. 216.

  Union Ferry Co., ii. 119.

  Union League Club, ii. 224.

  Union Missionary Training Institute, ii. 220.

  Unitarian Club, ii. 221.

  Universalist Club, ii. 221.

  University of Leyden, 95.

  Usselinx, Wm., 19.

  Utrecht, treaty of, 178.


  Van Auden, Isaac, ii. 88, 150, 152, 154, 161.

  Van Bommel, Elizabeth, viii.

  Van Brunt, Adrian, 234.

  ---- Albert C., ii. 56.

  ---- Rutgert, 214, 224, 235.

  ---- William, 285.

  Van Cott, J., ii. 24, 38.

  Van Corlaer, Jacob, 26.

  Van Eckkellen, Johannes, 126.

  Van Dam, Nicholas, 221.

  ---- Rip, 185.

  Van Naerden, Claes Jansen, 39.

  Van Northwyck, Joostje Willems, viii.

  Van Nostrand, Losee, ii. 76.

  Van Pelt, Petrus, 285.

  Van Ruyven, 100.

  Van Schaick, Alex., 213.

  Van Vaas, Jansen, 37.

  Van Wagner, Henry W., ii. 161.

  Vande Water, Benjamin, 161.

  ---- Jacob, 160, 162.

  Vanderbilt, Jeremiah, 203, 207, 224, 284.

  ---- John, 214, 224, 234, 285.

  ---- J. C., ii. 34.

  Vanderveer, Adrian, ii. 32.

  ---- D., 204.

  ---- John, 234, 235.

  ---- John C., ii. 34.

  Vandervoort, Jacob, ii. 16.

  ---- Peter, 235.

  Vanderwick, Cornelis Baren, 126.

  Vandewenter, Jacobus, 285.

  Vanduyk, Cornelius, 163.

  Vanzuren, Casparus, 126.

  Vecht, Hendrick, 113, 183.

  Voorhies, Abram, 285.

  ---- Adrian, 285.

  ---- Stephen, 284.


  Wade, T. Anderson, ii. 32.

  Waertman, Janse, 19.

  Walden, D. T., ii. 129.

  Waldron, Adolf, 220, 223.

  Wall, Wm., ii. 104.

  Wallabout, 25, 26; ii. 137.

  Wallabout and Brooklyn Toll Bridge Company, ii. 28.

  Wallabout Road, 238.

  Wallace, James P., ii. 126.

  Walloons, 24-26.

  War Fund Committee, ii. 122.

  War of 1812, ii. 51-56.

  Ward, Colonel, 219.

  ---- John Q. A., ii. 165.

  ---- F. A., 190.

  Wartman, homestead, ii. 41.

  Washington, George, 217, 225, 226, 229, 231, 241, 244, 253-260, 264,
          272, 273, 280; ii. 13.

  Washington Engine Co. No. 1, ii. 25.

  Washington Park, 237; ii. 143.

  Water and Sewerage Commissioners, ii. 146.

  Water Rights, ii. 78.

  Water Supply, ii. 146.

  Waterbury, Noah, ii. 46, 101.

  Watson, Benjamin, ii. 16.

  Wendell, Matthew, ii. 32.

  West India Company, 19, 22, 36.

  West Riding, 109.

  Whaley, Alexander, ii. 38.

  "Whig-Hog-Rum Party," ii. 82.

  Whiting, W. Leggett, 190.

  Whitman, Walt, ii. 89.

  Whittaker, Prof. J. B., ii. 213.

  Williams, Colonel, ii. 43.

  ---- Francis, ii. 123.

  ---- Henry, 300.

  Williamsburgh, ii. 43-46, 100-107.

  Williamsburgh City Bank, ii. 104.

  Williamsburgh City Fire Insurance Co., ii. 104.

  "Williamsburgh Democrat," ii. 101.

  "Williamsburgh Gazette," ii. 101.

  Williamsburgh Lyceum, ii. 101.

  Williamsburgh Medical Society, ii. 104.

  "Williamsburgh Morning Post," ii. 106.

  Williamsburgh Savings Bank, ii. 103, 148, 234.

  "Williamsburgh Times," ii. 105-107.

  Williamson, Rem, 234.

  Wilson, Capt. John, ii. 51.

  ---- Margaret T., ix.

  ---- Peter, ix.

  ---- P. L., 190.

  Wit, Peter Janse, 59.

  Wolckertsen, Dirck, 100.

  Wolfertsen, Gerrit, 59.

  Woman's Relief Association, ii. 122.

  Wood, Colonel A. M., ii. 122, 127, 152.

  ---- Silas, 46.

  ---- Wm. W. W., ii. 151.

  Woodford, Stewart L., 189, 230.

  Woodhull, Nathaniel, 119, 215, 227, 233, 262, 263.

  ---- Richard M., ii. 42.

  Woodward, John B., ii. 126.

  ---- Martin, ii. 24.

  Wyckoff, Cornelius, 285.

  ---- Garret, 284.

  ---- Hendrick, 235.

  ---- Nicholas, ii. 38.

  ---- Nicholas, ii. 42, 103.

  ---- Peter, 235.

  ---- Van Brunt, 189.

  Wyckoff farm, ii. 41.


  Yellow fever, 173.

  Yorkton, ii. 45.

  Young Men's Christian Ass'n of Brooklyn, ii. 104, 217.

  Young Men's Christian Ass'n of Williamsburgh, ii. 104.

  Young Women's Christian Ass'n, ii. 217.


  Zabriskie, John B., ii. 32.

  Zenger, Jn. Peter, 186-188.

  Zoellner Maennerchor, ii. 228.




Transcriber's Notes:


Volume I of this eBook is available at Project Gutenberg as eText #41979.

Simple typographical errors were corrected, including some Index
references to Volume I. No attempt was made to ensure the accuracy of
the Index.

Punctuation and spelling were made consistent when a predominant
preference was found in this book; otherwise they were not changed.

The Table of Contents listed the Appendix as beginning on page 264; it
begins on page 235 and is shown that way in this eBook.

Tables on pages 265-269 have been segmented to fit within Project
Gutenberg's width requirements. The first column of the original tables
has been duplicated in each of the segments to make them easier to
read.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A History of the City of Brooklyn and
Kings County Volume II, by Stephen M. Ostrander

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF BROOKLYN, KINGS CNTY, VOL 2 ***

***** This file should be named 42712.txt or 42712.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/7/1/42712/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Charlie Howard, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
