The Project Gutenberg EBook of The New-York Book of Poetry, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The New-York Book of Poetry

Author: Various

Release Date: May 22, 2013 [EBook #42769]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NEW-YORK BOOK OF POETRY ***




Produced by Katherine Ward, Paul Marshall and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)








                        THE
                   NEW-YORK BOOK
                         OF
                       POETRY.

                   _______________

        "Patriae fumus igne alieno luculentior."
                   _______________


                       NEW-YORK.
             GEORGE DEARBORN, PUBLISHER,
                  NO. 38 GOLD STREET.

                        _______

                         1837.


                       NEW-YORK:
           Printed by SCATCHERD & ADAMS,
                   No. 38 Gold Street.




  ADVERTISEMENT.

The work here presented to the Public is compiled from the poetical
writings of natives of the State of New-York. The chief object in making
the collection was to give 'a local habitation and a name' to fugitive
pieces, which, though deemed worthy of being thus preserved, have
hitherto been circulated in the newspapers and periodicals solely. It
was thought well, however, by way of giving completeness to the work, to
embody with the rest specimens of those New-York poets whose writings
have been already collected in another shape. The design of executing
such a work only suggested itself to the Publisher a fortnight before
the last sheet was put to press; and as he was desirous that THE
NEW-YORK BOOK should appear at the season when the annuals and other
similar publications are most in request, those who have aided him in
the compilation have perhaps vainly attempted to make up in industry for
the want of time. Under the most favourable circumstances, however, it
would be idle to attempt making such a collection what it ought to be in
a single volume. The field of our Anthology is wider than any casual
observer could conceive; and even in thus rapidly exploring it, the
sources of so many new specimens have been indicated that it is hoped
the reception of this volume will be such as to warrant the Publisher in
soon following it up by another of the same character.

  _38 Gold Street, Dec. 24, 1836._




      LIST OF WRITERS.
          _______

  Arden Francis

  Bailey, J. I.
  Barker, Robert
  Bleecker, Mrs. Ann E.
  Bleecker, Anthony
  Bloodgood, S. De Witt
  Bogart, A. H.
  Bogart, David S.
  Bogart, W. H. L.
  Bogart, Elizabeth
  Brooks, J. G.
  Brooks, Miss Mary E.
  Blauvelt, A. L.

  Clark, Willis G.
  Clinch, Elizabeth C.
  Crosswell, Rev. William
  Clason, Isaac

  Davidson, Lucretia M.
  Doane, Rt. Rev. G. W.
  Drake, J. R.
  Duer, William

  Ellet, Mrs. E. F.
  Embury, Emma C.

  Fay, Theodore S.
  Faugeres, Margaretta V.

  Hawes, W. P.
  Hoffman, C. F.

  Irving, Washington
  Inman, John

  Low, Samuel
  Lawrence, Jonathan, Jr.
  Leggett, William
  Livingston, William

  Morris, George P.
  Morton, General Jacob
  Murray, Lindley
  Mitchell, Dr. Samuel L.
  Moore, Clement C.

  Nack, James

  Park, Roswell
  Paulding, J. K.

  Sanford, Edward
  Sands, R. C.
  Seymour, D.
  Slidell, Thomas
  Street, A. B.
  Stone, William L.
  Strong, George D.
  Sutermeister, J. R.

  Tucker, T. W.

  Vining, W. H.
  Van Schaick, J. B.
  Verplanck, Gulian




                               CONTENTS.
                                _______


                                                                  PAGE
  Anacreontic,                                                      10
  Anacreontic,                                                     172
  Address to Black Hawk,                                            11
  Address to a Musquito,                                            27
  A Poet's Epistle,                                                 37
  A Roman Chariot Race,                                             59
  Affection wins affection,                                         71
  Ah No! Ah No! To a favourite Child,                              146
  A Health,                                                        147
  A Hymn,                                                          149
  A Song of May,                                                   152
  A Visit from St. Nicholas,                                       217
  Appeal,                                                          229

  Byron,                                                           103
  Bronx,                                                           122
  Ballad,                                                          191

  Chansonette,                                                      50
  Canzonet,                                                        201
  Crossing the Alleghanies,                                        204

  Drink and away,                                                  107
  Despondency,                                                     164
  Death of the First-Born,                                         238

  Elegiac Lines,                                                   151
  Epitaph upon a Dog,                                              182
  Elegy on the Exile and Death of Ovid,                            241

  Fragment,                                                        246
  Fears of Death,                                                   72
  Fragment,                                                        102
  Faded Hours,                                                     134
  Forgetfulness,                                                   192
  From a Father to his Children,                                   215
  From a Husband to his Wife,                                      221

  Greece--1832,                                                     55

  Hope,                                                            116
  He came too late,                                                179

  Inconstancy,                                                      31
  Indian Summer,                                                    54
  Impromptu,                                                        58
  Impromptu,                                                       228

  Joy and Sorrow,                                                  104
  Joshua commanding the Sun and Moon to stand still,               184

  Lines on a Skull dug up by the Plough,                            15
  Lines written on a Bank Note,                                     42
  Lines for Music,                                                  59
  Love and Faith,                                                   66
  Lament,                                                           70
  Lines,                                                            77
  Lake George,                                                      83
  Lines written in an Album,                                        85
  Lines written on the cover of a Prayer Book,                      96
  Look Aloft,                                                      101
  Luetzow's Wild Chase,                                             130
  Lines,                                                           132
  Lament,                                                          136
  Lines written on a pane of glass in the house of a friend,       138
  Life's Guiding Star,                                             164
  Lines for Music,                                                 183
  Lake George--1829,                                               203
  Lines suggested by the perusal of "The Life of Chatterton,"      225
  Lines to a Daughter of the late Governor Clinton,                229
  Love's Remembrancer,                                             247

  Moonlight on the Hudson,                                           7
  Morning Musings among the Hills,                                  21
  Morning,                                                          82
  Midnight Thoughts,                                                94
  Morning Hymn,                                                    121
  Moonlight,                                                       128
  Melody,                                                          173
  My Native Land,                                                  174

  Ode to Jamestown,                                                 97
  On reading Virgil,                                               155
  On Ship-board,                                                   195
  On seeing a beautiful Young Lady whose health was impaired
       by the fever and ague,                                      219

  Proem to Yamoyden,                                                87
  Prophetic,                                                       224
  Portraiture,                                                     231

  Reflections,                                                      75
  Rhyme and Reason,                                                144
  Reminiscences,                                                   150

  Song, (I know thou dost love me),                                 17
  Song, (Nay think not Dear),                                       23
  Song of the Hermit Trout,                                         46
  Song of Spring Time,                                              63
  Song, Rosalie Clare,                                             126
  Song,                                                            129
  Song,                                                            171
  Stanzas,                                                         184
  Song,                                                            186
  Spring is coming,                                                214
  Sonnet to Myra,                                                  236
  Song, (When other friends are round thee),                       238

  Thoughts of a Student,                                             1
  The Settler,                                                       3
  The Worst,                                                         6
  The minisink,                                                     18
  The Dend of 1832,                                                 24
  To a Lady, who declared that the sun prevented her
       from sleeping,                                               27
  The Callicoon in Autumn,                                          32
  The Western Hunter to his Mistress,                               36
  The Delaware Water Gap,                                           43
  To May,                                                           47
  To the Whip-poor will,                                            49
  The Clouds,                                                       50
  The Isle of Rest,                                                 53
  The Shipwreck of Camoens,                                         64
  The Last Song,                                                    68
  To my Wife,                                                       69
  The Bride's Farewell,                                             73
  The Guardian Angel,                                               78
  The Brave,                                                        81
  The Faded One,                                                    86
  The Indian,                                                       91
  To the Evening Star,                                             104
  The Falls of the Passaic,                                        105
  The Hudson,                                                      108
  Trenton Falls,                                                   110
  The Dumb Minstrel,                                               111
  The Green Isle of Lovers,                                        113
  That Silent Moon,                                                114
  To a Cigar,                                                      116
  The Lake of Cayostea,                                            117
  The American Flag,                                               118
  The Storm King,                                                  124
  To a Packet Ship,                                                127
  The Wife's Song,                                                 135
  The Sepulchre of David,                                          139
  The Last Prayer of Mary Queen of Scots,                          156
  The Recollections of the People,                                 159
  The Husband to his Wife, on her birth-day,                       162
  To a Goldfinch,                                                  166
  The Midnight Ball,                                               167
  The Deserted Bride,                                              168
  Thoughts at the Grave of a departed Friend,                      171
  To Themira,                                                      196
  Thanksgiving after escape from Indian perils,                    189
  Thoughts on Parting,                                             199
  The Falls of Niagara,                                            200
  The Pennsylvanian Immigrant,                                     202
  The Clouds,                                                      206
  The Tornado,                                                     208
  To a Lady,                                                       211
  The Mitchella,                                                   217
  The Magic Draught,                                               226
  The Son of Sorrow,                                               230
  The Farewell,                                                    234
  To Cordelia,                                                     236
  To the Dying Year,                                               250

  Weehawken,                                                        40
  White Lake,                                                       61
  What is Solitude,                                                 79
  Woman,                                                           144
  West Point,                                                      187

  Verses to the Memory of Colonel Wood, of the
       United States' Army, who fell at the Sortie of Erie,        163
  Verses written in a Book of Fortunes,                            181

  [Transcriber Note:
         The following page number errors were corrected in the TOC:
              Canzonet       - page 301 corrected to 201
              Fragment       - page   2 corrected to 246
              Rhyme & Reason - page 104 corrected to 144
              The Mitchella  - page 220 corrected to 217      ]


                 POEMS.
                 ______




       THOUGHTS OF A STUDENT.

     BY JONATHAN LAWRENCE, JUN.

       _Ob_: 1833, _aet._ 25.

  Many a sad, sweet thought have I,
    Many a passing, sunny gleam,
  Many a bright tear in mine eye,
    Many a wild and wandering dream,
  Stolen from hours I should have tied
  To musty volumes by my side,
  Given to hours that sweetly wooed
  My heart from its study's solitude.

  Oft when the south wind's dancing free
    Over the earth and in the sky,
  And the flowers peep softly out to see
    The frolic Spring as she wantons by,
  When the breeze and beam like thieves come in,
  To steal me away, I deem it sin
  To slight their voice, and away I'm straying
  Over the hills and vales a Maying.

  Then can I hear the earth rejoice,
    Happier than man may ever be,
  Every fountain hath then a voice
    That sings of its glad festivity;
  For it hath burst the chains, that bound
    Its currents dead in the frozen ground,
  And flashing away in the sun has gone,
  Singing, and singing, and singing on.

  Autumn hath sunset hours, and then
    Many a musing mood I cherish,
  Many a hue of fancy, when
    The hues of earth are about to perish;
  Clouds are there, and brighter, I ween,
  Hath real sunset never seen,
  Sad as the faces of friends that die,
  And beautiful as their memory.

  Love hath its thoughts, we cannot keep,
    Visions the mind may not control,
  Waking as fancy does in sleep
    The secret transports of the soul,
  Faces and forms are strangely mingled,
  Till one by one they're slowly singled,
  To the voice and lip, and eye of her
  I worship like an idolater.

  Many a big, proud tear have I,
    When from my sweet and roaming track
  From the green earth and misty sky,
    And spring and love I hurry back;
  Then what a dismal, dreary gloom
  Settles upon my loathed room,
  Darker to every thought and sense
  Than if they had never travelled thence.

  Yet, I have other thoughts that cheer
    The toilsome day, and lonely night,
  And many a scene and hope appear,
    And almost make me gay and bright.
  Honour and fame that I would win,
  Though every toil that yet hath been
  Were doubly borne, and not an hour
  Were brightly hued by Fancy's power.

  And though I may sometimes sigh to think
    Of earth and heaven, and wind and sea,
  And know that the cup which others drink
    Shall never be brimmed by me;
  That many a joy must be untasted,
  And many a glorious breeze be wasted,
  Yet would not, if I dared, repine,
  That toil and study and care are mine.




          THE SETTLER.

         BY A. B. STREET.

  His echoing axe the settler swung
    Amid the sea-like solitude,
  And rushing, thundering, down were flung
    The Titans of the wood;
  Loud shriek'd the eagle as he dash'd
  From out his mossy nest, which crash'd
    With its supporting bough,
  And the first sunlight, leaping, flash'd
    On the wolf's haunt below.

  Rude was the garb, and strong the frame,
    Of him who plied his ceaseless toil:
  To form that garb, the wild-wood game
    Contributed their spoil;
  The soul, that warm'd that frame, disdain'd
  The tinsel, gaud, and glare, that reign'd
    Where men their crowds collect;
  The simple fur, untrimm'd, unstain'd,
    This forest tamer deck'd.

  The paths which wound 'mid gorgeous trees,
    The stream whose bright lips kiss'd their flowers,
  The winds that swell'd their harmonies
    Through those sun-hiding bowers,
  The temple vast--the green arcade,
  The nestling vale--the grassy glade,
    Dark cave and swampy lair;
  These scenes and sounds majestic, made
    His world, his pleasures, there.

  His roof adorn'd a pleasant spot,
    'Mid the black logs green glow'd the grain,
  And herbs and plants the woods knew not,
    Throve in the sun and rain.
  The smoke-wreath curling o'er the dell,
  The low--the bleat--the tinkling bell,
    All made a landscape strange,
  Which was the living chronicle
    Of deeds that wrought the change.

  The violet sprung at Spring's first tinge,
    The rose of Summer spread its glow,
  The maize hung out its Autumn fringe,
    Rude Winter brought his snow;
  And still the lone one labour'd there,
  His shout and whistle woke the air,
    As cheerily he plied
  His garden spade, or drove his share
    Along the hillock's side.

  He mark'd the fire-storm's blazing flood
    Roaring and crackling on its path,
  And scorching earth, and melting wood,
    Beneath its greedy wrath;
  He mark'd the rapid whirlwind shoot,
  Trampling the pine tree with its foot,
    And darkening thick the day
  With streaming bough and sever'd root,
    Hurl'd whizzing on its way.

  His gaunt hound yell'd, his rifle flash'd,
    The grim bear hush'd his savage growl,
  In blood and foam the panther gnash'd
    His fangs, with dying howl;
  The fleet deer ceas'd its flying bound,
  Its snarling wolf-foe bit the ground,
    And with its moaning cry,
  The beaver sank beneath the wound
    Its pond-built Venice by.

  Humble the lot, yet his the race!
    When Liberty sent forth her cry,
  Who throng'd in Conflict's deadliest place,
    To fight--to bleed--to die.
  Who cumber'd Bunker's height of red,
  By hope, through weary years were led,
    And witness'd York Town's sun
  Blaze on a Nation's banner spread,
    A Nation's freedom won.




            THE WORST.

          BY W. H. VINING.

        _Ob_: 1822, _aet._ 28.

  Oh, I have lived through keenest care,
    And still may live through more,
  We know not what the heart can bear,
    Until the worst be o'er;
  The _worst_ is not when fears assail,
    Before the shaft has sped,
  Nor when we kiss the visage, pale
    And beautiful, though dead.
  Oh, then the heart is nerved to cope
    With danger and distress,
  The very impulse left by hope
    Will make despair seem less;
  Then all is life--acute, intense,
    The thoughts in tumult tost,
  So reels the mind with wildered sense,
    It knows not what is lost.
  But when that shuddering scene is past,
    When earth receives her own,
  And, wrench'd from what it loved, at last
    The heart is left alone;
  When all is gone--our hopes and fears
    All buried in one tomb,
  And we have dried the source of tears,
    There comes a settled gloom.
  Then comes the _worst_, the undying thought
    That broods within the breast,
  Because its loveliest one _is not_,
    And what are all the rest?




         MOONLIGHT ON THE HUDSON.

             BY C. F. HOFFMAN.

          _Written at West Point._

  I'm not romantic, but, upon my word,
    There are some moments when one can't help feeling
  As if his heart's chords were so strongly stirred
    By things around him, that 'tis vain concealing
  A little music in his soul still lingers
  Whene'er its keys are touched by Nature's fingers:

  And even here, upon this settee lying,
    With many a sleepy traveller near me snoozing,
  Thoughts warm and wild are through my bosom flying,
    Like founts when first into the sunshine oozing:
  For who can look on mountain, sky, and river,
  Like these, and then be cold and calm as ever?

  Bright Dian, who, Camilla like, dost skim yon
    Azure fields--Thou who, once earthward bending,
  Didst loose thy virgin zone to young Endymion
    On dewy Latmos to his arms descending--
  Thou whom the world of old on every shore,
  Type of thy sex, _Triformis_, did adore:

  Tell me--where'er thy silver barque be steering,
    By bright Italian or soft Persian lands,
  Or o'er those island-studded seas careering,
    Whose pearl-charged waves dissolve on coral strands--
  Tell if thou visitest, thou heavenly rover,
  A lovelier spot than this the wide world over?

  Doth Acheloeus or Araxes flowing
    Twin-born from Pindus, but ne'er meeting brothers--
  Doth Tagus o'er his golden pavement glowing,
    Or cradle-freighted Ganges, the reproach of mothers,
  The storied Rhine, or far-famed Guadalquiver,
  Match they in beauty my own glorious river?

  What though no turret gray nor ivied column
    Along these cliffs their sombre ruins rear?
  What though no frowning tower nor temple solemn
    Of despots tell and superstition here--
  What though that mouldering fort's fast-crumbling walls
  Did ne'er enclose a baron's bannered halls--

  Its sinking arches once gave back as proud
    An echo to the war-blown clarion's peal,
  As gallant hearts its battlements did crowd
    As ever beat beneath a vest of steel,
  When herald's trump on knighthood's haughtiest day
  Called forth chivalric host to battle fray:

  For here amid these woods did He keep court,
    Before whose mighty soul the common crowd
  Of heroes, who alone for fame have fought,
    Are like the Patriarch's sheaves to Heav'n's chos'n bowed--
  HE who his country's eagle taught to soar,
  And fired those stars which shine o'er every shore.

  And sights and sounds at which the world have wondered,
    Within these wild ravines have had their birth;
  Young Freedom's cannon from these glens have thundered,
    And sent their startling echoes o'er the earth;
  And not a verdant glade nor mountain hoary
  But treasures up within the glorious story.

  And yet not rich in high-souled memories only,
    Is every moon-touched headland round me gleaming,
  Each cavernous glen and leafy valley lonely,
    And silver torrent o'er the bald rock streaming:
  But such soft fancies here may breathe around,
  As make Vaucluse and Clarens hallow'd ground.

  Where, tell me where, pale watcher of the night--
    Thou that to love so oft hast lent its soul,
  Since the lorn Lesbian languished 'neath thy light,
    Or fiery Romeo to his Juliet stole--
  Where dost thou find a fitter place on earth
  To nurse young love in hearts like theirs to birth?

  But now, bright Peri of the skies, descending
    Thy pearly car hangs o'er yon mountain's crest,
  And Night, more nearly now each step attending,
    As if to hide thy envied place of rest,
  Closes at last thy very couch beside,
  A matron curtaining a virgin bride.

  Farewell! Though tears on every leaf are starting,
    While through the shadowy boughs thy glances quiver,
  As of the good when heavenward hence departing,
    Shines thy last smile upon the placid river.
  So--could I fling o'er glory's tide one ray--
  Would I too steal from this dark world away.




           ANACREONTIC.

         BY A. H. BOGART.

       _Ob_: 1826, _aet._ 22.

  The flying joy through life we seek
  For once is ours--the wine we sip
  Blushes like Beauty's glowing cheek,
          To meet our eager lip.

  Round with the ringing glass once more!
  Friends of my youth and of my heart--
  No magic can this hour restore--
          Then crown it ere we part.

  Ye are my friends, my chosen ones--
  Whose blood would flow with fervour true
  For me--and free as this wine runs
          Would mine, by Heaven! for you.

  Yet, mark me! When a few short years
  Have hurried on their journey fleet,
  Not one that now my accents hears
          Will know me when we meet.

  Though now, perhaps, with proud disdain,
  The startling thought ye scarce will brook,
  Yet, trust me, we'll be strangers then
          In heart as well as look.

  Fame's luring voice, and woman's wile,
  Will soon break youthful friendship's chain--
  But shall that cloud to-night's bright smile?
          No--pour the wine again!




            ADDRESS TO BLACK HAWK.

              BY EDWARD SANFORD.

  There's beauty on thy brow, old chief! the high
    And manly beauty of the Roman mould,
  And the keen flashing of thy full dark eye
    Speaks of a heart that years have not made cold;
  Of passions scathed not by the blight of time,
    Ambition, that survives the battle route.
  The man within thee scorns to play the mime
    To gaping crowds that compass thee about.
  Thou walkest, with thy warriors by thy side,
  Wrapped in fierce hate, and high unconquered pride.

  Chief of a hundred warriors! dost thou yet--
    Vanquished and captive--dost thou deem that here--
  The glowing day star of thy glory set--
    Dull night has closed upon thy bright career?
  Old forest lion, caught and caged at last,
    Dost pant to roam again thy native wild?
  To gloat upon the life blood flowing fast
    Of thy crushed victims; and to slay the child,
  To dabble in the gore of wives and mothers,
  And kill, old Turk! thy harmless pale-faced brothers?

  For it was cruel, Black Hawk, thus to flutter
    The dove-cotes of the peaceful pioneers,
  To let thy tribe commit such fierce, and utter
    Slaughter among the folks of the frontiers.
  Though thine be old, hereditary hate,
    Begot in wrongs, and nursed in blood, until
  It had become a madness, 'tis too late
    To crush the hordes who have the power, and will,
  To rob thee of thy hunting grounds, and fountains,
  And drive thee backward to the Rocky Mountains.

  Spite of thy looks of cold indifference,
    There's much thou'st seen that must excite thy wonder,
  Wakes not upon thy quick and startled sense
    The cannon's harsh and pealing voice of thunder?
  Our big canoes, with white and wide-spread wings,
    That sweep the waters, as birds sweep the sky;--
  Our steamboats, with their iron lungs, like things
    Of breathing life, that dash and hurry by?
  Or if thou scorn'st the wonders of the ocean,
  What think'st thou of our railroad locomotion?

  Thou'st seen our Museums, beheld the dummies
    That grin in darkness in their coffin cases;
  What think'st thou of the art of making mummies,
    So that the worms shrink from their dry embraces?
  Thou'st seen the mimic tyrants of the stage
    Strutting, in paint and feathers, for an hour;
  Thou'st heard the bellowing of their tragic rage,
    Seen their eyes glisten, and their dark brows lower.
  Anon, thou'st seen them, when their wrath cool'd down,
  Pass in a moment from a king--to clown.

  Thou see'st these things unmoved, say'st so, old fellow?
    Then tell us, have the white man's glowing daughters
  Set thy cold blood in motion? Has't been mellow
    By a sly cup or so of our fire waters?
  They are thy people's deadliest poison. They
    First make them cowards, and then, white men's slaves,
  And sloth, and penury, and passion's prey,
    And lives of misery, and early graves.
  For by their power, believe me, not a day goes,
  But kills some Foxes, Sacs, and Winnebagoes.

  Say, does thy wandering heart stray far away?
    To the deep bosom of thy forest home,
  The hill side, where thy young pappooses play,
    And ask, amid their sports, when thou wilt come?
  Come not the wailings of thy gentle squaws,
    For their lost warrior, loud upon thine ear,
  Piercing athwart the thunder of huzzas,
    That, yelled at every corner, meet thee here?
  The wife who made that shell-decked wampum belt,
  Thy rugged heart must think of her, and melt.

  Chafes not thy heart, as chafes the panting breast
    Of the caged bird against his prison bars,
  That thou, the crowned warrior of the west,
    The victor of a hundred forest wars,
  Should'st in thy age, become a raree show
    Led, like a walking bear, about the town,
  A new caught monster, who is all the go,
    And stared at gratis, by the gaping clown?
  Boils not thy blood, while thus thou'rt led about,
  The sport and mockery of the rabble rout?

  Whence came thy cold philosophy? whence came,
    Thou tearless, stern, and uncomplaining one,
  The power that taught thee thus to veil the flame
    Of thy fierce passions? Thou despisest fun,
  And thy proud spirit scorns the white men's glee,
    Save thy fierce sport, when at the funeral pile,
  Of a bound warrior in his agony,
    Who meets thy horrid laugh with dying smile.
  Thy face, in length, reminds one of a Quaker's,
  Thy dances, too, are solemn as a Shaker's.

  Proud scion of a noble stem! thy tree
    Is blanched, and bare, and seared, and leafless now.
  I'll not insult its fallen majesty,
    Nor drive with careless hand, the ruthless plough
  Over its roots. Torn from its parent mould,
    Rich, warm and deep, its fresh, free, balmy air,
  No second verdure quickens in our cold
    New, barren earth; no life sustains it there.
  But even though prostrate, 'tis a noble thing,
  Though crownless, powerless, "every inch a king."

  Give us thy hand, old nobleman of nature,
    Proud ruler of the forest aristocracy;
  The best of blood glows in thy every feature,
    And thy curled lip speaks scorn for our democracy,
  Thou wear'st thy titles on that godlike brow;
    Let him who doubts them, meet thine eagle eye,
  He'll quail beneath its glance, and disavow
    All question of thy noble family;
  For thou may'st here become, with strict propriety,
  A leader in our city good society.




       LINES ON A SKULL DUG UP BY THE PLOUGH.

       [_From the German of Friedrich Kind._]

                BY D. SEYMOUR.

  Couldst thou not sleep upon thy mother's breast?
    Was't thou, ere day dawned, wakened from thy slumbers?
  Did earth deny to thee the quiet rest
    She grants to all her children's countless numbers?
  In narrow bed they sleep away the hours
  Beneath the winter's frost, the summer's flowers;
  No shade protects thee from the sun's fierce glow,
  Thy only winding-sheet the pitying snow.

  How naked art thou! Pale is now that face
    Which once, no doubt, was blooming--deeply dinted,
  A gaping wound doth thy broad brow deface;
    Was't by the sword or careless plough imprinted?
  Where are the eyes whose glances once were lightning!
  No soul is in their hollow sockets brightening;
  Yet do they gaze on me, now fierce, now sad,
  As though I power o'er thy destiny had.

  I did not from thy gloomy mansion spurn thee
    To gaze upon the sun that gilds these fields;
  But on my pilgrim staff I lift and turn thee,
    And try if to my spells thy silence yields;
  Wert thou my brother once--and did those glances
  Respond to love's and friendship's soft advances?
  Has then a spirit in this frame-work slept?
  Say, hast thou loved and hated, smiled and wept?

  What, silent still!--wilt thou make no disclosure?
    Is the grave's sleep indeed so cool and still?
  Say, dost thou suffer from this rude exposure?
    Hast thou then lost all thought, emotion, will?
  Or has thy soul, that once within thee centered,
  On a new field of life and duty entered?
  Do flesh and spirit still in thee entwine,
  Dost thou still call this mouldering skull-bone _thine_?

  Who wert thou once? what brought thee to these regions,
    The murderer or the murdered to be?
  Wert thou enrolled in mercenary legions,
    Or didst thou Honour's banner follow free?
  Didst thou desire to be enrolled in story,
  Didst fight for freedom, peace, truth, gold, or glory?
  The sword which here dropped from thy helpless hand,
  Was it the scourge or guardian of the land?

  Even yet, for thee, beyond yon dim blue mountains,
    The tear may tremble in a mother's eye,
  And as approaching death dries up life's fountains,
    Thou to her thoughts and prayers may'st still be nigh;
  Perhaps thy orphans still for thee are crying,
  Perhaps thy friends for thy return are sighing,
  And dream not that upon this little hill
  The dews of night upon thy skull distil.

  Or wert thou one of the accursed banditti
    Who wrought such outrage on fair Germany?
  Who made the field a desert, fired the city,
    Defiled the pure, and captive led the free?
  Didst thou, in disposition fierce and hellish,
  Thy span of life with deeds like these embellish?
  Then--God of righteousness! to thee belongs,
  Not unto us, to judge and right our wrongs.

  The sun already toward the west is tending,
    His rays upon thy hollow temples strike;
  Thou heed'st them not; heed'st not the rains, descending
    On good and bad, just and unjust alike.
  The mild, cool breeze of even is round me playing,
  Sweet perfume from the woods and fields are straying;
  Rich grain now waves where lances bristled then;
  Thus do all things proclaim God's love to men.

  Whoe'er thou wert, who by a fellow-mortal
    Were hurried out of life; we are at peace;
  Thus I return thee to the grave's dark portal,
    Revenge and hatred on this spot should cease.
  Rest where thy mouldering skeleton reposes,
  And may the perfume of the forest roses
  Waft thoughts of peace to every wanderer's breast!
  Thou restless one! return thee to thy rest.




                 SONG.

           BY C. F. HOFFMAN.

  I know thou dost love me--ay! frown as thou wilt,
    And curl that beautiful lip
  Which I never can gaze on without the guilt
    Of burning its dew to sip.
  I know that my heart is reflected in thine,
  And, like flowers that over a brook incline,
    They toward each other dip.

  Though thou lookest so cold in these halls of light,
    'Mid the careless, proud, and gay,
  I will steal like a thief in thy heart at night,
    And pilfer its thoughts away.
  I will come in thy dreams at the midnight hour,
  And thy soul in secret shall own the power
    It dares to mock by day.




          THE MINISINK.

         BY A. B. STREET

  Encircled by the screening shade,
    With scatter'd bush, and bough,
  And grassy slopes, a pleasant glade
    Is spread before me now;
  The wind that shows its forest search
  By the sweet fragrance of the birch
    Is whispering on my brow,
  And the mild sunshine flickers through
  The soft white cloud and summer blue.

  Far to the North, the Delaware
    Flows mountain-curv'd along,
  By forest bank, by summit bare,
    It bends in rippling song;
  Receiving in each eddying nook
  The waters of the vassal brook,
    It sweeps more deep and strong;
  Round yon green island it divides,
  And by this quiet woodland glides.

  The ground bird flutters from the grass
    That hides her tiny nest,
  The startled deer, as by I pass,
    Bounds in the thicket's breast;
  The red-bird rears his crimson wing
  From the long fern of yonder spring,
    A sweet and peaceful rest
  Breathes o'er the scene, where once the sound
  Of battle shook the gory ground.

  Long will the shuddering hunter tell
    How once, in vengeful wrath,
  Red warriors raised their fiercest yell
    And trod their bloodiest path;
  How oft the sire--the babe--the wife
  Shriek'd vain beneath the scalping knife
    'Mid havoc's fiery scathe;
  Until the boldest quail'd to mark,
  Wrapp'd round the woods, Night's mantle dark.

  At length the fisher furl'd his sail
    Within the shelter'd creek,
  The hunter trod his forest trail
    The mustering band to seek;
  The settler cast his axe away,
  And grasp'd his rifle for the fray,
    All came, revenge to wreak--
  With the rude arms that chance supplied,
  And die, or conquer, side by side.

  Behind the footsteps of their foe,
    They rush'd, a gallant throng,
  Burning with haste, to strike a blow
    For each remembered wrong;
  Here on this field of Minisink,
  Fainting they sought the river's brink
    Where cool waves gush'd along;
  No sound within the woods they heard,
  But murmuring wind and warbling bird.

  A shriek!--'tis but the panther's--nought
    Breaks the calm sunshine there,
  A thicket stirs!--a deer has sought
    From sight a closer lair;
  Again upon the grass they droop,
  When burst the well-known whoop on whoop
    Shrill, deafening on the air,
  And bounding from their ambush'd gloom,
  Like wolves the savage warriors come.

  In vain upsprung that gallant band
    And seized their weapons by,
  Fought eye to eye, and hand to hand,
    Alas! 'twas but to die;
  In vain the rifle's skilful flash
  Scorch'd eagle plume and wampum sash;
    The hatchet hiss'd on high,
  And down they fell in crimson heaps,
  Like the ripe corn the sickle reaps.

  In vain they sought the covert dark,
    The red knife gash'd each head,
  Each arrow found unerring mark,
    Till earth was pil'd with dead.
  Oh! long the matron watch'd, to hear
  Some voice and footstep meet her ear,
    Till hope grew faint with dread;
  Long did she search the wood-paths o'er,
  That voice and step she heard no more.

  Years have pass'd by, the merry bee
    Hums round the laurel flowers,
  The mock-bird pours her melody
    Amid the forest bowers;
  A skull is at my feet, though now
  The wild rose wreathes its bony brow,
    Relic of other hours.
  It bids the wandering pilgrim think
  Of those who died at Minisink.




      MORNING MUSINGS AMONG THE HILLS.

         BY JONATHAN LAWRENCE, JUN.

  The morn! the morn, this mountain breeze,
    How pure it seems, from earth how free;
  What sweet and sad moralities
    Breathe from this air that comes to me.

  Look down, my spirit! see below,
    Earth darkly sleeps were shades prevail,
  Or wakes to tears that vainly flow,
    Or dreams of hopes that surely fail.

  Why should'st thou linger there, and burn
    With passions like these fools of time?
  Unfold thy wings, their follies spurn,
    And soar to yon eternal clime.

  Look round, my spirit! to these hills
    The earliest sunlight lends its ray;
  Morning's pure air these far heights fills,
    Here evening holiest steals away.

  Thus when with firm-resolving breast,
    Though bound to earth thou liv'st on high,
  Shalt thou with earlier light be blest,
    More purely live, more calmly die.

  This darkling dawn, doth it not bring
    Visions of former glory back?
  Arouse, my spirit! plume thy wing,
    And soar with me on holier track.

  Canst thou not with unclouded eye,
    And fancy-rapt, the scene survey,
  When darkness bade its shadows fly,
    And earth rose glorious into day?

  Canst thou not see that earth, its Spring
    Unfaded yet by death or crime,
  In freshest green, yet mellowing
    Into the gorgeous Autumn's prime?

  Dost thou not see the eternal choir
    Light on each peak that wooes the sky,
  Fold their broad wings of golden fire,
    And string their seraph minstrelsy?

  Then what sublimest music filled
    Rejoicing heaven and rising earth,
  When angel harps the chorus swelled,
    And stars hymned forth creation's birth.

  See how the sun comes proudly on
    His glorious march! before our sight
  The swathing mists, their errand done,
    Are melting into morning light.

  He tips the peak, its dark clouds fly,
    He walks its sides, and shades retreat;
  He pours his flood of radiancy
    On streams and lowlands at its feet.

  Lord! let thy rays thus pierce, illume
    Each dim recess within my heart;
  From its deep darkness chase all gloom,
    And to its weakness strength impart.

  Thus let thy light upon me rise,
    Here let my home for ever be;
  Far above earth, its toys and ties,
    Yet humbly kneeling, Lord, to thee!




                   SONG.

              BY J. R. DRAKE.

            _Ob: 1820, aet. 25._

  Nay, think not, dear Lais, I feel a regret
    That another awakened thy sigh,
  Or repine that some traces remain of it yet
    In the beam of that eloquent eye.

  Though the light of its smile on a rival had shone
    Ere it taught me the way to adore,
  Shall I scorn the bright gem now I know it my own,
    Because it was polished before?

  And though oft the rich sweets of that lip hath been won,
    It but fits it the better for bliss;
  As fruit, when caressed by the bright glowing sun,
    Grows ripe from the warmth of his kiss.




            THE DEAD OF 1832.

             BY R. C. SANDS.

           _Ob: 1832, aet. 33._

  Oh Time and Death! with certain pace,
    Though still unequal, hurrying on,
  O'erturning, in your awful race,
    The cot, the palace, and the throne!

  Not always in the storm of war,
    Nor by the pestilence that sweeps
  From the plague-smitten realms afar,
    Beyond the old and solemn deeps:

  In crowds the good and mighty go,
    And to those vast dim chambers hie:--
  Where, mingled with the high and low,
    Dead Caesars and dead Shakspeares lie!

  Dread Ministers of God! sometimes
    Ye smite at once, to do His will,
  In all earth's ocean-sever'd climes,
    Those--whose renown ye cannot kill!

  When all the brightest stars that burn
    At once are banished from their spheres,
  Men sadly ask, when shall return
    Such lustre to the coming years?

  For where is he[A]--who lived so long--
    Who raised the modern Titan's ghost,
  And showed his fate, in powerful song,
    Whose soul for learning's sake was lost?

  Where he--who backwards to the birth
    Of Time itself, adventurous trod,
  And in the mingled mass of earth
    Found out the handiwork of God?[B]

  Where he--who in the mortal head,[C]
    Ordained to gaze on heaven, could trace
  The soul's vast features, that shall tread
    The stars, when earth is nothingness?

  Where he--who struck old Albyn's lyre,[D]
    Till round the world its echoes roll,
  And swept, with all a prophet's fire,
    The diapason of the soul?

  Where he--who read the mystic lore,[E]
    Buried, where buried Pharaohs sleep;
  And dared presumptuous to explore
    Secrets four thousand years could keep?

  Where he--who with a poet's eye[F]
    Of truth, on lowly nature gazed,
  And made even sordid Poverty
    Classic, when in HIS numbers glazed?

  Where--that old sage so hale and staid,[G]
    The "greatest good" who sought to find;
  Who in his garden mused, and made
    All forms of rule, for all mankind?

  And thou--whom millions far removed[H]
    Revered--the hierarch meek and wise,
  Thy ashes sleep, adored, beloved,
    Near where thy Wesley's coffin lies.

  He too--the heir of glory--where[I]
    Hath great Napoleon's scion fled?
  Ah! glory goes not to an heir!
    Take him, ye noble, vulgar dead!

  But hark! a nation sighs! for he,[J]
    Last of the brave who perilled all
  To make an infant empire free,
    Obeys the inevitable call!

  They go--and with them is a crowd,
    For human rights who THOUGHT and DID,
  We rear to them no temples proud,
    Each hath his mental pyramid.

  All earth is now their sepulchre,
    The MIND, their monument sublime--
  Young in eternal fame they are--
    Such are YOUR triumphs, Death and Time.




                TO A LADY
   WHO DECLARED THAT THE SUN PREVENTED HER
               FROM SLEEPING.

               BY J. R. DRAKE.

  Why blame old Sol, who, all on fire,
    Prints on your lip the burning kiss;
  Why should he not your charms admire,
    And dip his beam each morn in bliss?

  Were't mine to guide o'er paths of light
    The beam-haired coursers of the sky,
  I'd stay their course the livelong night
    To gaze upon thy sleeping eye.

  Then let the dotard fondly spring,
    Each rising day, to snatch the prize;
  'Twill add new vigour to his wing,
    And speed his journey through the skies.




           ADDRESS TO A MUSQUITO.

              BY EDWARD SANFORD.

  _His_ voice was ever soft, gentle, and low.--_King Lear._

  Thou sweet musician, that around my bed
    Dost nightly come and wind thy little horn,
  By what unseen and secret influence led,
    Feed'st thou my ear with music till 'tis morn?
  The wind harp's tones are not more soft than thine,
    The hum of falling waters not more sweet,
  I own, _indeed_, I own thy song divine.
    And when next year's warm summer nights we meet,
  (Till then, farewell!) I promise thee to be
  A patient listener to thy minstrelsy.

  Thou tiny minstrel, who bid thee discourse
    Such eloquent music? was't thy tuneful sire?
  Some old musician? or did'st take a course
    Of lessons from some master of the lyre?
  Who bid thee twang so sweetly thy small trump?
    Did Norton form thy notes so clear and full?
  Art a phrenologist, and is the bump
    Of song developed on thy little skull?
  At Niblo's hast thou been when crowds stood mute
  Drinking the birdlike tones of Cuddy's flute?

  Tell me the burden of thy ceaseless song,
    Is it thy evening hymn of grateful prayer,
  Or lay of love, thou pipest through the long
    Still night? With song dost drive away dull care?
  Art thou a vieux garcon, a gay deceiver,
    A wandering blade, roaming in search of sweets,
  Pledging thy faith to every fond believer,
    Who thy advance with half-way shyness meets?
  Or art o' the softer sex, and sing'st in glee,
  "In maiden meditation, fancy free?"

  Thou little Syren, when the nymphs of yore
    Charmed with their songs till men forgot to dine,
  And starved, though music-fed, upon their shore,
    Their voices breathed no softer lays than thine,
  They sang but to entice, and thou dost sing
    As if to lull our senses to repose,
  That thou may'st use, unharmed, thy little sting
    The very moment we begin to doze;
  Thou worse than Syren, thirsty, fierce blood-sipper,
  Thou living Vampyre, and thou Gallinipper!

  Nature is full of music, sweetly sings
    The bard, (and thou dost sing most sweetly too,)
  Through the wide circuit of created things,
    Thou art the living proof the bard sings true.
  Nature is full of thee; on every shore,
    'Neath the hot sky of Congo's dusky child,
  From warm Peru to icy Labrador,
    The world's free citizen thou roamest wild.
  Wherever "mountains rise or oceans roll,"
  Thy voice is heard, from "Indus to the Pole."

  The incarnation of Queen Mab art thou,
    "The Fairies' midwife;"--thou dost nightly sip,
  With amorous proboscis bending low,
    The honey dew from many a lady's lip--
  (Though that they "straight on kisses dream," I doubt)
    On smiling faces, and on eyes that weep,
  Thou lightest, and oft with "sympathetic snout"
    "Ticklest men's noses as they lie asleep;"
  And sometimes dwellest, if I rightly scan,
  "On the fore-finger of an alderman."

  Yet thou can'st glory in a noble birth.
    As rose the sea-born Venus from the wave,
  So didst thou rise to life; the teeming earth,
    The living water, and the fresh air gave
  A portion of their elements to create
    Thy little form, though beauty dwells not there.
  So lean and gaunt, that economic fate
    Meant thee to feed on music or on air.
  Our vein's pure juices were not made for thee,
  Thou living, singing, stinging atomy.

  The hues of dying sunset are most fair,
    And twilight's tints just fading into night,
  Most dusky soft, and so thy soft notes are
    By far the sweetest when thou tak'st thy flight.
  The swan's last note is sweetest, so is thine;
    Sweet are the wind harp's tones at distance heard;
  'Tis sweet in distance at the day's decline,
    To hear the opening song of evening's bird.
  But notes of harp or bird at distance float
  Less sweetly on the ear than thy last note.

  The autumn winds are wailing: 'tis thy dirge;
    Its leaves are sear, prophetic of thy doom.
  Soon the cold rain will whelm thee, as the surge
    Whelms the tost mariner in its watery tomb,
  Then soar, and sing thy little life away!
    Albeit thy voice is somewhat husky now.
  'Tis well to end in music life's last day,
    Of one so gleeful and so blithe as thou:
  For thou wilt soon live through its joyous hours,
  And pass away with Autumn's dying flowers.




             INCONSTANCY.

            BY J. R. DRAKE.

  Yes! I swore to be true, I allow,
    And I meant it, but, some how or other,
  The seal of that amorous vow
    Was pressed on the lips of another.

  Yet I did but as all would have done,
    For where is the being, dear cousin,
  Content with the beauties of one
    When he might have the range of a dozen?

  Young Love is a changeable boy,
    And the gem of the sea-rock is like him,
  For he gives back the beams of his joy
    To each sunny eye that may strike him.

  From a kiss of a zephyr and rose
    Love sprang in an exquisite hour,
  And fleeting and sweet, heaven knows,
    Is this child of a sigh and a flower.




      THE CALLICOON IN AUTUMN.

          BY A. B. STREET.

  Far in the forest's heart, unknown,
    Except to sun and breeze,
  Where solitude her dreaming throne
    Has held for centuries;
  Chronicled by the rings and moss
  That tell the flight of years across
    The seamed and columned trees,
  This lovely streamlet glides along
  With tribute of eternal song!

  Now, stealing through its thickets deep
    In which the wood-duck hides,
  Now, picturing in its basin sleep
    Its green pool-hollowed sides,
  Here, through the pebbles slow it creeps,
  There, 'mid some wild abyss it sweeps,
    And foaming, hoarsely chides;
  Then slides so still, its gentle swell
  Scarce ripples round the lily's bell.

  Nature, in her autumnal dress
    Magnificent and gay,
  Displays her mantled gorgeousness
    To hide the near decay,
  Which, borne on Winter's courier breath,
  Warns the old year prepare for death,
    When, tottering, seared, and gray,
  Ice-fettered, it will sink below
  The choking winding-sheet of snow.

  A blaze of splendour is around,
    As wondrous and as bright
  As that, within the fairy ground,
    Which met Aladdin's sight.
  The sky, a sheet of silvery sheen
  With breaks of tenderest blue between,
    As though the summer light
  Was melting through, once more to cast
  A glance of gladness ere it passed.

  The south-west airs of ladened balm
    Come breathing sweetly by,
  And wake amid the forest's calm
    One quick and shivering sigh,
  Shaking, but dimpling not the glass
  Of this smooth streamlet, as they pass--
    They scarcely wheel on high
  The thistle's downy, silver star,
  To waft its pendent seed afar.

  Dream-like the silence, only woke
    By the grasshopper's glee,
  And now and then the lazy stroke
    Of woodcock[K] on the tree:
  And mingling with the insect hum,
  The beatings of the partridge drum,
    With frequently a bee
  Darting its music, and the crow
  Harsh cawing from the swamp below.

  A foliage world of glittering dyes
    Gleams brightly on the air,
  As though a thousand sunset skies,
    With rainbows, blended there;
  Each leaf an opal, and each tree
  A bower of varied brilliancy,
    And all one general glare
  Of glory, that o'erwhelms the sight
  With dazzling and unequalled light.

  Rich gold with gorgeous crimson, here
    The birch and maple twine,
  The beech its orange mingles near
    With emerald of the pine;
  And e'en the humble bush and herb
  Are glowing with those tints superb,
    As though a scattered mine
  Of gems, upon the earth were strewn,
  Flashing with radiance, each its own.

  All steeped in that delicious charm
    Peculiar to our land,
  Glimmering in mist, rich, purple, warm,
    When Indian Summer's hand
  Has filled the valley with its smoke,
  And wrapped the mountain in its cloak,
    While, timidly and bland,
  The sunbeams struggle from the sky,
  And in long lines of silver lie.

  The squirrel chatters merrily,
    The nut falls ripe and brown,
  And gem-like from the jewelled tree
    The leaf comes fluttering down;
  And restless in his plumage gay,
  From bush to bush loud screams the jay,
    While on the hemlock's crown
  The sentry pigeon guards from foes
  The flock that dots the neighbouring boughs.

  See! on this edge of forest lawn,
    Where sleeps the clouded beam,
  A doe has led her spotted fawn
    To gambol by the stream;
  Beside yon mullein's braided stalk
  They hear the gurgling voices talk,
    While, like a wandering gleam,
  The yellow-bird dives here and there,
  A feathered vessel of the air.

  On, through the rampart walls of rock
    The waters pitch in white,
  And high, in mist, the cedars lock
    Their boughs, half lost to sight
  Above the whirling gulf--the dash
  Of frenzied floods, that vainly lash
    Their limits in their flight,
  Whose roar the eagle, from his peak,
  Responds to with his angriest shriek.

  Stream of the age-worn forest! here
    The Indian, free as thou,
  Has bent against thy depths his spear,
    And in thy woods his bow;
  The beaver built his dome; but they,
  The memories of an earlier day,
    Like those dead trunks, that show
  What once were mighty pines--have fled
  With Time's unceasing, rapid tread.




    THE WESTERN HUNTER TO HIS MISTRESS.
            BY C. F. HOFFMAN.

  Wend, love, with me, to the deep woods wend,
    Where, far in the forest, the wild flowers keep,
  Where no watching eye shall over us bend
    Save the blossoms that into thy bower peep.
  Thou shalt gather from buds of the oriole's hue,
    Whose flaming wings round our pathway flit,
  From the safron orchis and lupin blue,
    And those like the foam on my courser's bit.

  One steed and one saddle us both shall bear,
    One hand of each on the bridle meet;
  And beneath the wrist that entwines me there
    An answering pulse from my heart shall beat.
  I will sing thee many a joyous lay,
    As we chase the deer by the blue lake-side,
  While the winds that over the prairie play
    Shall fan the cheek of my woodland bride.

  Our home shall be by the cool bright streams,
    Where the beaver chooses her safe retreat,
  And our hearth shall smile like the sun's warm gleams
    Through the branches around our lodge that meet.
  Then wend with me, to the deep woods wend,
    Where far in the forest the wild flowers keep,
  Where no watching eye shall over us bend,
    Save the blossoms that into thy bower peep.




              A POET'S EPISTLE.

  [_Written in Scotland to Fitz-Greene Halleck, Esq._]

               BY J. R. DRAKE.

  Weel, Fitz, I'm here; the mair's the pity,
  I'll wad ye curse the vera city
  From which I write a braid Scots ditty
              Afore I learn it;
  But gif ye canna mak it suit ye,
              Ye ken ye'll burn it.

  My grunzie's got a twist until it
  Thae damn'd Scotch aighs sae stuff and fill it
  I doubt, wi' a' my doctor skill, it
              'll keep the gait,
  Not e'en my pen can scratch a billet
              And write it straight.

  Ye're aiblins thinking to forgather
  Wi' a hale sheet, of muir and heather
  O' burns, and braes, and sic like blether,
              To you a feast;
  But stop! ye will not light on either
              This time at least.

  Noo stir your bries a wee and ferlie,
  Then drap your lip and glower surly;
  Troth! gif ye do, I'll tell ye fairly,
              Ye'll no be right;
  We've made our jaunt a bit too early
              For sic a sight.

  What it may be when summer deeds
  Muir shaw and brae, wi' bonnie weeds
  Sprinkling the gowan on the meads
              And broomy knowes,
  I dinna ken; but now the meads
              Scarce keep the cows.

  For trees, puir Scotia's sadly scanted,
  A few bit pines and larches planted,
  And thae, wee, knurlie, blastic, stuntit
              As e'er thou sawest;
  Row but a sma' turf fence anent it,
              Hech! there's a forest.

  For streams, ye'll find a puny puddle
  That would na float a shull bairn's coble,
  A cripple stool might near hand hobble
              Dry-baughted ever;
  Some whinstone crags to mak' it bubble,
              And there's a river.

  And then their cauld and reekie skies,
  They luke ower dull to Yankee eyes;
  The sun ye'd ken na if he's rise
              Amaist the day;
  Just a noon blink that hardly dries
              The dewy brae.

  Yet leeze auld Scotland on her women,
  Ilk sonzie lass and noble yeoman,
  For luver's heart or blade of foeman
              O'er baith victorious;
  E'en common sense, that plant uncommon,
              Grows bright and glorious.

  Fecks but my pen has skelp'd alang,
  I've whistled out an unco sang
  'Bout folk I ha' na been amang
              Twa days as yet;
  But, faith, the farther that I gang
              The mair ye'll get.

  Sae sharpen up your lugs, for soon
  I'll tread the hazelly braes o' Doon,
  See Mungo's well, and set my shoon
              Where i' the dark
  Bauld Tammie keek'd, the drunken loon,
              At cutty sark.

  And I shall tread the hallowed bourne
  Where Wallace blew his bugle-horn
  O'er Edward's banner, stained and torn.
              What Yankee bluid
  But feels its free pulse leap and burn
              Where Wallace stood!

  But pouk my pen! I find I'm droppin
  My braw Scots style to English loppin;
  I fear amaist that ye'll be hoppin
              I'd quit it quite:
  If so, I e'en must think o' stopping,
              And sae, gude night.




          WEEHAWKEN.

        BY R. C. SANDS.

  Eve o'er our path is stealing fast;
  Yon quivering splendours are the last
  The sun will fling, to tremble o'er
  The waves that kiss the opposing shore;
  His latest glories fringe the height
  Behind us, with their golden light.

  The mountain's mirror'd outline fades
  Amid the fast extending shades;
  Its shaggy bulk, in sterner pride,
  Towers, as the gloom steals o'er the tide;
  For the great stream a bulwark meet
  That laves its rock-encumbered feet.

  River and Mountain! though to song
  Not yet, perchance, your names belong;
  Those who have loved your evening hues
  Will ask not the recording Muse,
  What antique tales she can relate,
  Your banks and steeps to consecrate.

  Yet should the stranger ask, what lore
  Of by-gone days, this winding shore,
  Yon cliffs and fir-clad steeps could tell,
  If vocal made by Fancy's spell,--
  The varying legend might rehearse
  Fit themes for high, romantic verse.

  O'er yon rough heights and moss-clad sod
  Oft hath the stalworth warrior trod;
  Or peer'd, with hunter's gaze, to mark
  The progress of the glancing bark.
  Spoils, strangely won on distant waves,
  Have lurked in yon obstructed caves.

  When the great strife for Freedom rose
  Here scouted oft her friends and foes,
  Alternate, through the changeful war,
  And beacon-fires flashed bright and far;
  And here, when Freedom's strife was won,
  Fell, in sad feud, her favoured son;--

  Her son,--the second of the band,
  The Romans of the rescued land.
  Where round yon cape the banks ascend,
  Long shall the pilgrim's footsteps bend;
  There, mirthful hearts shall pause to sigh,
  There, tears shall dim the patriot's eye.

  There last he stood. Before his sight
  Flowed the fair river, free and bright;
  The rising Mart, and Isles, and Bay,
  Before him in their glory lay,--
  Scenes of his love and of his fame,--
  The instant ere the death-shot came.




  LINES WRITTEN ON A BANK NOTE.
        BY T. W. TUCKER.

      Thou fragile thing
  That with a breath I could destroy,
  What mighty train of care and joy
      Do ye not bring?

      Emblem of power!
  By thee comes public bane or good;
  The wheels of state, without thee, would
      Stop in an hour.

      Tower, dome, and arch,
  Thou spreadest o'er the desert waste,
  Thou guid'st the path of war, and stay'st
      The army's march.

      The spreading seas
  For thee unnumbered squadrons bear,
  Ruler of earth, and sea, and air--
      When bended knees

      Are bowed in prayer,
  Although to heaven is given each word,
  Thy influence in the heart, unheard,
      Is upmost there!

      Fly! minion, fly!
  Thine errand is unfinished yet--
  The boon I covet,--to forget!
      Thou canst not buy.




        THE DELAWARE WATER-GAP.

          BY MRS. E. F. ELLET.

  Our Western land can boast no lovelier spot.
  The hills which in their ancient grandeur stand,
  Piled to the frowning clouds, the bulwarks seem
  Of this wild scene, resolved that none but Heaven
  Shall look upon its beauty. Round their breast
  A curtained fringe depends, of golden mist,
  Touched by the slanting sunbeams; while below
  The silent river, with majestic sweep,
  Pursues his shadowed way,--his glassy face
  Unbroken, save when stoops the lone wild swan
  To float in pride, or dip his ruffled wing.
  Talk ye of solitude?--It is not here.
  Nor silence.--Low, deep murmurs are abroad.
  Those towering hills hold converse with the sky
  That smiles upon their summits;--and the wind
  Which stirs their wooded sides, whispers of life,
  And bears the burthen sweet from leaf to leaf,
  Bidding the stately forest boughs look bright,
  And nod to greet his coming!--And the brook,
  That with its silvery gleam comes leaping down
  From the hill-side, has, too, a tale to tell;
  The wild bird's music mingles with its chime;--
  And gay young flowers, that blossom in its path,
  Send forth their perfume as an added gift.
  The river utters, too, a solemn voice,
  And tells of deeds long past, in ages gone,
  When not a sound was heard along his shores,
  Save the wild tread of savage feet, or shriek
  Of some expiring captive,--and no bark
  E'er cleft his gloomy waters. Now, his waves
  Are vocal often with the hunter's song;--
  Now visit, in their glad and onward course,
  The abodes of happy men--gardens and fields--
  And cultured plains--still bearing, as they pass,
  Fertility renewed and fresh delights.

    The time has been,--so Indian legends say,--
  When here the mighty Delaware poured not
  His ancient waters through--but turned aside
  Through yonder dell, and washed those shaded vales.
  Then, too, these riven cliffs were one smooth hill,
  Which smiled in the warm sunbeams, and displayed
  The wealth of summer on its graceful slope.
  Thither the hunter chieftains oft repaired
  To light their council fires,--while its dim height,
  For ever veiled in mist, no mortal dared--
  'Tis said--to scale; save one white-haired old man,
  Who there held commune with the Indian's God,
  And thence brought down to men his high commands.
  Years passed away--the gifted seer had lived
  Beyond life's natural term, and bent no more
  His weary limbs to seek the mountain's summit.
  New tribes had filled the land, of fiercer mien,
  Who strove against each other. Blood and death
  Filled those green shades, where all before was peace,
  And the stern warrior scalped his dying captive
  E'en on the precincts of that holy spot
  Where the Great Spirit had been. Some few, who mourned
  The unnatural slaughter, urged the aged priest
  Again to seek the consecrated height,
  Succour from heaven, and mercy to implore.--
  They watched him from afar. He laboured slowly
  High up the steep ascent--and vanished soon
  Behind the folded clouds, which clustered dark
  As the last hues of sunset passed away.
  The night fell heavily--and soon were heard
  Low tones of thunder from the mountain top,
  Muttering, and echoed from the distant hills
  In deep and solemn peal,--while lurid flashes
  Of lightning rent anon the gathering gloom.
  Then wilder and more loud, a fearful crash
  Burst on the startled ear;--the earth, convulsed,
  Groaned from its solid centre--forests shook
  For leagues around,--and by the sudden gleam
  Which flung a fitful radiance on the spot,
  A sight of dread was seen. The mount was rent
  From top to base--and where so late had smiled
  Green boughs and blossoms--yawned a frightful chasm,
  Filled with unnatural darkness.--From afar
  The distant roar of waters then was heard;
  They came--with gathering sweep--o'erwhelming all
  That checked their headlong course;--the rich maize field,--
  The low-roofed hut--its sleeping inmates--all--
  Were swept in speedy, undistinguished ruin.
  Morn looked upon the desolated scene
  Of the Great Spirit's anger--and beheld
  Strange waters passing through the cloven rocks:--
  And men looked on in silence and in fear,
  And far removed their dwellings from the spot,
  Where now no more the hunter chased his prey,
  Or the war-whoop was heard.--Thus years went on:
  Each trace of desolation vanished fast;
  Those bare and blackened cliffs were overspread
  With fresh green foliage, and the swelling earth
  Yielded her stores of flowers to deck their sides.
  The river passed majestically on
  Through his new channel--verdure graced his banks;--
  The wild bird murmured sweetly as before
  In its beloved woods,--and nought remained,--
  Save the wild tales which chieftains told,--
  To mark the change celestial vengeance wrought.




      SONG OF THE HERMIT TROUT.

          BY W. P. HAWES.

            Down in the deep
            Dark holes I keep,
  And there in the noontide I float and sleep,
            By the hemlock log,
            And the springing bog,
  And the arching alders, I lie incog.

            The angler's fly
            Comes dancing by,
  But never a moment it cheats my eye;
            For the hermit trout
            Is not such a lout
  As to be by a wading boy pulled out.

            King of the brook,
            No fisher's hook
  Fills me with dread of the sweaty cook;
            But here I lie,
            And laugh as they try;
  Shall I bite at their bait? No, no; not I!

            But when the streams,
            With moonlight beams,
  Sparkle all silver, and starlight gleams,
            Then, then look out
            For the hermit trout;
  For he springs and dimples the shallows about,
  While the tired angler dreams.




               TO MAY.

       BY JONATHAN LAWRENCE, JUN.

    Come, gentle May!
  Come with thy robe of flowers,
  Come with thy sun and sky, thy clouds and showers;
    Come, and bring forth unto the eye of day,
  From their imprisoning and mysterious night,
  The buds of many hues, the children of thy light.

    Come, wondrous May!
  For at the bidding of thy magic wand,
  Quick from the caverns of the breathing land,
    In all their green and glorious array
  They spring, as spring the Persian maids to hail
  Thy flushing footsteps in Cashmerian vale.

    Come, vocal May!
  Come with thy train, that high
  On some fresh branch pour out their melody;
    Or carolling thy praise the live-long day,
  Sit perched in some lone glen, on echo calling,
  'Mid murmuring woods and musical waters falling.

    Come, sunny May!
  Come with thy laughing beam,
  What time the lazy mist melts on the stream,
    Or seeks the mountain-top to meet thy ray,
  Ere yet the dew-drop on thine own soft flower
  Hath lost its light, or died beneath his power.

    Come, holy May!
  When sunk behind the cold and western hill,
  His light hath ceased to play on leaf and rill,
    And twilight's footsteps hasten his decay;
  Come with thy musings, and my heart shall be
  Like a pure temple consecrate to thee.

    Come, beautiful May!
  Like youth and loveliness,
  Like her I love; Oh, come in thy full dress,
    The drapery of dark winter cast away;
  To the bright eye and the glad heart appear,
  Queen of the Spring and mistress of the year.

    Yet, lovely May!
  Teach her whose eye shall rest upon this rhyme
  To spurn the gilded mockeries of time,
    The heartless pomp that beckons to betray,
  And keep, as thou wilt find, that heart each year,
  Pure as thy dawn, and as thy sunset clear.

    And let me too, sweet May!
  Let thy fond votary see,
  As fade thy beauties, all the vanity
    Of this world's pomp; then teach, that though decay
  In his short winter, bury beauty's frame,
    In fairer worlds the soul shall break his sway,
  Another Spring shall bloom eternal and the same.




      TO THE WHIP-POOR-WILL.

        BY MRS. E. F. ELLET.

  Bird of the lone and joyless night--
    Whence is thy sad and solemn lay?
  Attendant on the pale moon's light,
    Why shun the garish blaze of day?

  When darkness fills the dewy air,
    Nor sounds the song of happier bird,
  Alone amid the silence there
    Thy wild and plaintive note is heard.

  Thyself unseen--thy pensive moan
    Poured in no loving comrade's ear--
  The forest's shaded depths alone
    That mournful melody can hear.

  Beside what still and secret spring,
    In what dark wood, the livelong day,
  Sit'st thou with dusk and folded wing,
    To while the hours of light away.

  Sad minstrel! thou hast learned like me,
    That life's deceitful gleam is vain;
  And well the lesson profits thee,
    Who will not trust its charms again!

  Thou, unbeguiled, thy plaint dost trill,
    To listening night when mirth is o'er:
  I, heedless of the warning, still
    Believe, to be deceived once more!




              CHANSONETTE.

            BY C. F. HOFFMAN.

  They are mockery all, those skies! those skies!
    Their untroubled depths of blue;
  They are mockery all, these eyes! these eyes!
    Which seem so warm and true;
  Each quiet star in the one that lies,
  Each meteor glance that at random flies
    The other's lashes through.
  They are mockery all, these flowers of Spring,
    Which her airs so softly woo;
  And the love to which we would madly cling,
    Ay! it is mockery too.
  For the winds are false which the perfume stir,
    And the lips deceive to which we sue,
  And love but leads to the sepulchre;
    Which flowers spring to strew.




               THE CLOUDS.

         BY JONATHAN LAWRENCE, JUN.

  The clouds have their own language unto me
    They have told many a tale in by-gone days,
  At twilight's hour, when gentle reverie
    Steals o'er the heart, as tread the elfish fays
  With their fleet footsteps on the moonlit grass,
  And leave their storied circles where they pass.

  So, even so, to me the embracing clouds,
    With their pure thoughts leave holy traces here;
  And from the tempest-gathered fold that shrouds
    The darkening earth, unto the blue, and clear,
  And sunny brightness of yon arching sky,
  They have their language and their melody.

  Have you not felt it when the dropping rain
    From the soft showers of Spring hath clothed the earth
  With its unnumbered offspring? felt not when
    The conquering sun hath proudly struggled forth
  In misty radiance, until cloud and spot
  Were blended in one brightness? Can you not

  Look out and love when the departing sun
    Enrobes their peaks in shapes fantastical
  In his last splendour, and reflects upon
    Their skirts his farewell smile ere shadows fall
  Above his burial, like our boyhood's gleams
  Of fading light, or like the "stuff of dreams?"

  Or giving back those tints indefinite,
    Yet brightly blending, there to form that arch
  Whereon the angel-spirits of the light
    Marshalled their joyous and triumphant march,
  When sank the whelming waters, and again
  Left the green islands to the sons of men?

  Oh, then as rose each lofty pile, and threw
    Its growing shadow on the sinking tide,
  How glowed each peak with the resplendent hue,
    As its new lustre told that wrath had died,
  Till the blue waves within their limits curled,
  And that broad bow in beauty spanned the world.

  Gaze yet again, and you may see on high
    The opposing hosts that mutter as they form
  Their stern battalions, ere the artillery
    Bids the destroying angel guide its storm;
  If you have heard on battle's eve the low
  Defiance quickly uttered to the foe,

  When the firm ranks gaze fiercely brow on brow
    And eye on eye, while every heart beats fast
  With hopes and fears, all feel, but none avow,
    Pulsations which perchance may be their last,
  Whom the unhonoured sepulchre shall shroud;
  If you have seen this, gaze upon that cloud.

  How from the bosom of its blackness springs
    The cleaving lightning kindling on its way,
  Flinging such blinding glory from its wings,
    That he who looks grows drunk with its array
  Of power and beauty, till his eye is dim,
  And dazzling darkness overshadows him.

  Oh, God! can he conceive who hath not known
    The wondrous workings of thy firmament,
  Thine untold majesty, around whose throne
    They stand, thy winged messengers, or sent
  In light or darkness on their destined path,
  Bestow thy blessings or direct thy wrath.

  Then here, in this thy lower temple, here
    We kneel to thee in worship; what to these
  Symbols of thine, wherein thou dost appear
    Are painted domes or priestly palaces;
  On this green turf, and gazing on yon sphere,
    We call on thee to commune and to bless,
  And see in holy fancy each pure sigh
  Ascend like incense to thy throne on high.




          THE ISLE OF REST.

         BY MRS. E. F. ELLET.

   _Some of the islands where the fancied paradise
      of the Indians was situated, were believed to be
      in Lake Superior._

    That blessed isle lies far away--
      'Tis many a weary league from land,
    Where billows in their golden play
      Dash on its sparkling sand.
  No tempest's wrath, or stormy waters' roar,
  Disturb the echoes of that peaceful shore.

    There the light breezes lie at rest,
      Soft pillowed on the glassy deep;
    Pale cliffs look on the waters' breast,
      And watch their silent sleep.
  There the wild swan with plumed and glossy wing
  Sits lone and still beside the bubbling spring.

    And far within, in murmurs heard,
      Comes, with the wind's low whispers there,
    The music of the mounting bird,
      Skimming the clear bright air.
  The sportive brook, with free and silvery tide,
  Comes wildly dancing from the green hill side.

    The sun there sheds his noontide beam
      On oak-crowned hill and leafy bowers;
    And gaily by the shaded stream
      Spring forth the forest flowers.
  The fountain flings aloft its showery spray,
  With rainbows decked, that mock the hues of day.

    And when the dewy morning breaks,
      A thousand tones of rapture swell;
    A thrill of life and motion wakes
      Through hill, and plain, and dell.
  The wild bird trills his song--and from the wood
  The red deer bounds to drink beside the flood.

    There, when the sun sets on the sea,
      And gilds the forest's waving crown,
    Strains of immortal harmony
      To those sweet shades come down.
  Bright and mysterious forms that green shore throng,
  And pour in evening's ear their charmed song.

    E'en on this cold and cheerless shore,
      While all is dark and quiet near,
    The huntsman, when his toils are o'er,
      That melody may hear.
  And see, faint gleaming o'er the waters' foam,
  The glories of that isle, his future home.




             INDIAN SUMMER--1828.

               BY C. F. HOFFMAN.

    Light as love's smiles the silvery mist at morn
      Floats in loose flakes along the limpid river;
    The blue-bird's notes upon the soft breeze borne,
      As high in air she carols, faintly quiver;
    The weeping birch, like banners idly waving,
    Bends to the stream, its spicy branches laving;
      Beaded with dew the witch-elm's tassels shiver;
    The timid rabbit from the furze is peeping,
  And from the springy spray the squirrel's gaily leaping.

    I love thee, Autumn, for thy scenery ere
      The blasts of Winter chase the varied dyes
    That gaily deck the slow-declining year;
      I love the splendour of thy sunset skies,
    The gorgeous hues that tinge each failing leaf,
    Lovely as beauty's cheek, as woman's love too, brief;
      I love the note of each wild bird that flies,
    As on the wind she pours her parting lay,
  And wings her loitering flight to summer climes away.

    Oh, Nature! still I fondly turn to thee
      With feelings fresh as e'er my childhood's were;--
    Though wild and passion-tost my youth may be,
      Toward thee I still the same devotion bear;
    To thee--to thee--though health and hope no more
    Life's wasted verdure may to me restore--
      I still can, child-like, come as when in prayer
    I bowed my head upon a mother's knee,
  And deemed the world, like her, all truth and purity.




          GREECE--1832.

         BY J. G. BROOKS.

  Land of the brave! where lie inurned
    The shrouded forms of mortal clay,
  In whom the fire of valour burned,
    And blazed upon the battle's fray:
  Land, where the gallant Spartan few
    Bled at Thermopylae of yore,
  When death his purple garment threw
    On Helle's consecrated shore!

  Land of the Muse! within thy bowers
    Her soul entrancing echoes rung,
  While on their course the rapid hours
    Paused at the melody she sung--
  Till every grove and every hill,
    And every stream that flowed along,
  From morn to night repeated still
    The winning harmony of song.

  Land of dead heroes! living slaves!
    Shall glory gild thy clime no more?
  Her banner float above thy waves
    Where proudly it hath swept before?
  Hath not remembrance then a charm
    To break the fetters and the chain,
  To bid thy children nerve the arm,
    And strike for freedom once again?

  No! coward souls! the light which shone
    On Leuctra's war-empurpled day,
  The light which beamed on Marathon
    Hath lost its splendour, ceased to play;
  And thou art but a shadow now,
    With helmet shattered--spear in rust--
  Thy honour but a dream--and thou
    Despised--degraded in the dust!

  Where sleeps the spirit, that of old
    Dashed down to earth the Persian plume,
  When the loud chant of triumph told
    How fatal was the despot's doom?--
  The bold three hundred--where are they,
    Who died on battle's gory breast?
  Tyrants have trampled on the clay,
    Where death has hushed them into rest.

  Yet, Ida, yet upon thy hill
    A glory shines of ages fled;
  And fame her light is pouring still,
    Not on the living, but the dead!
  But 'tis the dim sepulchral light,
    Which sheds a faint and feeble ray,
  As moon-beams on the brow of night,
    When tempests sweep upon their way.

  Greece! yet awake thee from thy trance,
    Behold thy banner waves afar;
  Behold the glittering weapons glance
    Along the gleaming front of war!
  A gallant chief, of high emprize,
    Is urging foremost in the field,
  Who calls upon thee to arise
    In might--in majesty revealed.

  In vain, in vain the hero calls--
    In vain he sounds the trumpet loud!
  His banner totters--see! it falls
    In ruin, Freedom's battle shroud:
  Thy children have no soul to dare
    Such deeds as glorified their sires;
  Their valour's but a meteor's glare,
    Which gleams a moment, and expires.

  Lost land! where Genius made his reign,
    And reared his golden arch on high;
  Where Science raised her sacred fane,
    Its summits peering to the sky;
  Upon thy clime the midnight deep
    Of ignorance hath brooded long,
  And in the tomb, forgotten, sleep
    The sons of science and of song.

  Thy sun hath set--the evening storm
    Hath passed in giant fury by,
  To blast the beauty of thy form,
    And spread its pall upon the sky!
  Gone is thy glory's diadem,
    And freedom never more shall cease
  To pour her mournful requiem
    O'er blighted, lost, degraded Greece!




     IMPROMPTU TO A LADY BLUSHING.
            BY C. F. HOFFMAN.

  The lilies faintly to the roses yield,
    As on thy lovely cheek they struggling vie,
  (Who would not strive upon so sweet a field
    To win the mastery?)
  And thoughts are in thy speaking eyes revealed,
  Pure as the fount the prophet's rod unsealed.

  I could not wish that in thy bosom aught
    Should e'er one moment's transient pain awaken,
  Yet can't regret that thou--forgive the thought--
    As flowers when shaken
  Will yield their sweetest fragrance to the wind,
  Should, ruffled thus, betray thy heavenly mind.




           A ROMAN CHARIOT RACE.

              BY J. I. BAILEY.

  Hast thou no soul, that thou canst be unmoved
  At glorious sports like these? Even now I see
  Come forth the noble charioteers, arrayed
  In red, white, green, and azure, like the sky,
  The eye of beauty dazzled by their hue!
  And now with eager hopes and proud desires
  Exulting, lo! the youthful, daring band
  Start to the race, and fiercely seize the reins!
  Onward they rush; a thousand voices hail
  The alternate victor as he speeds along;
  Ten thousand eyes pursue the chariot flight,
  And as they gaze, as many thousand souls
  Swell in their bosoms and almost leap out.
  Then comes the glorious moment when the goal
  Is almost reached--they goad the foremost steeds
  Lashing with all their might upon their flanks;
  The golden chariot glitters in the course,
  And swifter than the wind is borne along--
  And now the victor, like a flash of light,
  Bursts on the view, and hails the loud acclaim,
  While lengthening shouts of triumph rend the air!
                   _Waldimar, a Tragedy. Act II., Scene I._




       LINES FOR MUSIC.

       BY G. P. MORRIS.

  O would that she were here,
    These hills and dales among,
  Where vocal groves are gayly mocked
    By echo's airy tongue,--
  Where jocund Nature smiles
    In all her gay attire,
  Amid deep-tangled wiles
    Of hawthorn and sweet-brier.
  O would that she were here,
    That fair and gentle thing,
  Whose words are musical as strains
    Breathed by the wind-harp's string.

  O would that she were here,
    Where the free waters leap,
  Shouting in their joyousness,
    Adown the rocky steep,--
  Where rosy Zephyr lingers
    All the livelong day,
  With health upon his pinions,
    And gladness in his way.
  O would that she were here,
    Sure Eden's garden-plot
  Did not embrace more varied charms
    Than this romantic spot.

  O would that she were here,
    Where frolic by the hours,
  Rife with the song of bee and bird,
    The perfume of the flowers,--
  Where beams of peace and love,
    And radiant beauty's glow,
  Are pictured in the sky above,
    And in the lake below.
  O would that she were here--
    The nymphs of this bright scene,
  With song, and dance, and revelry,
    Would crown BIANCA queen.




            WHITE LAKE.[L]

          BY A. B. STREET.

  Pure as their parent springs! how bright
    The silvery waters stretch away,
  Reposing in the pleasant light
    Of June's most lovely day.

  Curving around the eastern side,
    Rich meadows slope their banks, to meet
  With fringe of grass and fern, the tide
    Which sparkles at their feet.

  Here busy life attests that toil,
    With its quick talisman, has made
  Fields green and waving, from a soil
    Of rude and savage shade.

  While opposite the forests lie
    In giant shadow, black and deep,
  Filling with leaves the circling sky,
    And frowning in their sleep.

  Amid this scene of light and gloom,
    Nature with art links hand in hand,
  Thick woods beside soft rural bloom,
    As by a seer's command.

  Here waves the grain, here curls the smoke,
    The orchard bends; there, wilds, as dark
  As when the hermit waters woke
    Beneath the Indian's bark.

  Oft will the panther's sharp, shrill shriek
    With the herd's quiet lowings swell,
  The wolf's fierce howl terrific break
    Upon the sheepfold's bell.

  The ploughman sees the wind-winged deer
    Dart from his covert to the wave,
  And fearless in its mirror clear
    His branching antlers lave.

  Here, the green headlands seem to meet
    So near, a fairy bridge might cross;
  There, spreads the broad and limpid sheet
    In smooth, unruffled gloss.

  Arched by the thicket's screening leaves,
    A lilied harbour lurks below,
  Where on the sand each ripple weaves
    Its melting wreath of snow.

  Hark! like an organ's tone, the woods
    To the light wind in murmurs wake,
  The voice of the vast solitudes
    Is speaking to the lake.

  The fanning air-breath sweeps across
    On its broad path of sparkles now.
  Bends down the violet to the moss,
    Then melts upon my brow.




    SONG OF SPRING-TIME.
      BY C. F. HOFFMAN.

  Where dost thou loiter, Spring,
    While it behoveth
  Thee to cease wandering
    Where'er thou roveth,
  And to my lady bring
    The flowers she loveth.

  Come with thy melting skies
    Like her cheek blushing,
  Come with thy dewy eyes
    Where founts are gushing;
  Come where the wild bee hies
    When dawn is flushing.

  Lead her where by the brook
    The first blossom keepeth,
  Where, in the sheltered nook,
    The callow bud sleepeth;
  Or with a timid look
    Through its leaves peepeth.

  Lead her where on the spray,
    Blithely carolling,
  First birds their roundelay
    For my lady sing--
  But keep, where'er she stray
    True-love blossoming.




      THE SHIPWRECK OF CAMOENS.

         BY EMMA C. EMBURY.

  Clouds gathered o'er the dark blue sky,
    The sun waxed dim and pale,
  And the music of the waves was changed
    To the plaintive voice of wail;
  And fearfully the lightning flashed
    Around the ship's tall mast,
  While mournfully through the creaking shrouds
    Came the sighing of the blast.

  With pallid cheek the seamen shrank
    Before the deepening gloom;
  For they gazed on the black and boiling sea
    As 'twere a yawning tomb;
  But on the vessel's deck stood one
    With proud and changeless brow;
  Nor pain, nor terror was in the look
    He turned to the gulf below.

  And calmly to his arm he bound
    His casket and his sword;
  Unheeding, though with fiercer strength
    The threatening tempest roared;
  Then stretched his sinewy arms and cried:
    "For me there yet is hope,
  The limbs that have spurned a tyrant's chain
    With the stormy wave may cope.

  "Now let the strife of nature rage,
    Proudly I yet can claim,
  Where'er the waters may bear me on,
    My freedom and my fame."
  The dreaded moment came too soon,
    The sea swept madly on,
  Till the wall of waters closed around,
    And the noble ship was gone.

  Then rose one wild, half-stifled cry;
    The swimmer's bubbling breath
  Was all unheard, while the raging tide
    Wrought well the task of death;
  But 'mid the billows still was seen
    The stranger's struggling form;
  And the meteor flash of his sword might seem
    Like a beacon 'mid the storm.

  For still, while with his strong right arm
    He buffeted the wave,
  The other upheld that treasured prize
    He would give life to save.
  Was then the love of pelf so strong
    That e'en in death's dark hour,
  The base-born passion could awake
    With such resistless power?

  No! all earth's gold were dross to him,
    Compared with what lay hid,
  Through lonely years of changeless woe,
    Beneath that casket's lid;
  For there was all the mind's rich wealth,
    And many a precious gem
  That, in after years, he hoped might form
    A poet's diadem.

  Nobly he struggled till, o'erspent,
    His nerveless limbs no more
  Could bear him on through the waves that rose
    Like barriers to the shore;
  Yet still he held his long prized wealth,
    He saw the wished-for land--
  A moment more, and he was thrown
    Upon the rocky strand.

  Alas! far better to have died
    Where the mighty billows roll,
  Than lived till coldness and neglect
    Bowed down his haughty soul:
  Such was his dreary lot, at once
    His country's pride and shame;
  For on Camoen's humble grave alone
    Was placed his wreath of fame.




       LOVE AND FAITH; A BALLAD.

           BY C. F. HOFFMAN.

  'Twas on one morn, in spring-time weather,
    A rosy, warm, inviting hour,
  That Love and Faith went out together,
    And took the path to Beauty's bower.
  Love laughed and frolicked all the way,
    While sober Faith, as on they rambled,
  Allowed the thoughtless boy to play,
    But watched him, wheresoe'er he gamboled.

  So warm a welcome, Beauty smiled
    Upon the guests whom chance had sent her,
  That Love and Faith were both beguiled
    The grotto of the nymph to enter;
  And when the curtains of the skies
    The drowsy hand of Night was closing,
  Love nestled him in Beauty's eyes,
    While Faith was on her heart reposing.

  Love thought he never saw a pair
    So softly radiant in their beaming;
  Faith deemed that he could meet no where
    So sweet and safe a place to dream in;
  And there, for life in bright content,
    Enchained, they must have still been lying,
  For Love his wings to Faith had lent,
    And Faith he never dream'd of flying.

  But Beauty, though she liked the child,
    With all his winning ways about him,
  Upon his mentor never smiled,
    And thought that Love might do without him;
  Poor Faith abused, soon sighing fled,
    And now one knows not where to find him;
  While mourning Love quick followed
    Upon the wings he left behind him.

  'Tis said, that in his wandering
    Love still around that spot will hover,
  Like bird that on bewildered wing
    Her parted mate pines to discover;
  And true it is that Beauty's door
    Is often by the idler haunted;
  But, since Faith fled, Love owns no more
    The spell that held his wings enchanted.




           THE LAST SONG.

          BY J. G. BROOKS.

  Strike the wild harp yet once again!
    Again its lonely numbers pour;
  Then let the melancholy strain
    Be hushed in death for evermore.
  For evermore, for evermore,
    Creative fancy, be thou still;
  And let oblivious Lethe pour
    Upon my lyre its waters chill.

  Strike the wild harp yet once again!
    Then be its fitful chords unstrung,
  Silent as is the grave's domain,
    And mute as the death-mouldered tongue,
  Let not a thought of memory dwell
    One moment on its former song;
  Forgotten, too, be this farewell,
    Which plays its pensive strings along!

  Strike the wild harp yet once again!
    The saddest and the latest lay;
  Then break at once its strings in twain,
    And they shall sound no more for aye:
  And hang it on the cypress tree,
    The hours of youth and song have passed,
  Have gone, with all their witchery;
    Lost lyre! these numbers are thy last.




        TO MY WIFE.

      BY LINDLEY MURRAY.

  When on thy bosom I recline,
  Enraptur'd still to call thee mine,
    To call thee mine for life,
  I glory in the sacred ties,
  Which modern wits and fools despise,
    Of Husband and of Wife.

  One mutual flame inspires our bliss;
  The tender look, the melting kiss,
    Even years have not destroyed;
  Some sweet sensation, ever new,
  Springs up and proves the maxim true,
    That love can ne'er be cloy'd.

  Have I a wish?--'tis all for thee,
  Hast thou a wish?--'tis all for me,
    So soft our moments move,
  That angels look with ardent gaze,
  Well pleas'd to see our happy days,
    And bid us live--and love.

  If cares arise--and cares will come--
  Thy bosom is my softest home,
    I'll lull me there to rest;
  And is there aught disturbs my fair?
  I'll bid her sigh out every care,
    And lose it in my breast.

  Have I a wish?--'tis all her own;
  All hers and mine are roll'd in one--
    Our hearts are so entwined,
  That, like the ivy round the tree,
  Bound up in closest amity,
    'Tis death to be disjoined.




            LAMENT.

       BY MARY E. BROOKS.

      Oh, weep not for the dead!
  Rather, oh rather give the tear
  To those that darkly linger here,
      When all besides are fled;
  Weep for the spirit withering
  In its cold cheerless sorrowing,
  Weep for the young and lovely one
  That ruin darkly revels on;
      But never be a tear-drop shed
      For them, the pure enfranchised dead.

      Oh, weep not for the dead!
  No more for them the blighting chill,
  The thousand shades of earthly ill,
      The thousand thorns we tread;
  Weep for the life-charm early flown,
  The spirit broken, bleeding, lone;
  Weep for the death pangs of the heart,
  Ere being from the bosom part;
      But never be a tear-drop given
      To those that rest in yon blue heaven.




       "AFFECTION WINS AFFECTION."

            BY EMMA C. EMBURY.

  Mine own beloved, believest thou ought of this?
      Oh! then no more
  My heart, o'er early faded dreams of bliss
      Its wail shall pour.

  Give me this hope, though only from afar
      It sheds its light,
  And, like yon dewy melancholy star,
      With tears is bright--

  Let me but hope a heart with fondness fraught,
      That could not sin
  Against its worshipped idol, e'en in thought,
      Thy love may win:

  Let me but hope the changeless love of years,
      The tender care
  That fain would die to save thine eye from tears,
      Thy heart may share.

  Or let me hope at least that, when no more
      My voice shall meet
  The ear that listens only to think o'er
      Tones far more sweet;

  When the kind shelter of the grave shall hide
      This faded brow,
  This form once gazed upon with pride,
      With coldness now;

  When never more my weary steps of pain
      Around thee move,
  When loosed for ever is life's heavy chain,
      Love will win love.




             FEATS OF DEATH.

         BY LUCRETIA M. DAVIDSON.

            _Ob: 1825, aet. 17._

  I have passed o'er the earth in the darkness of night,
  I have walked the wild winds in the morning's broad light;
  I have paused o'er the bower where the infant lay sleeping,
  And I've left the fond mother in sorrow and weeping.

  My pinion was spread, and the cold dew of night,
  Which withers and moulders the flower in its light,
  Fell silently o'er the warm cheek in its glow,
  And I left it there blighted, and wasted, and low;
  I culled the fair bud as it danced in its mirth,
  And I left it to moulder and fade on the earth.

  I passed o'er the valley, the glad sounds of joy
  Rose soft through the mist, and ascended on high;
  The fairest were there, and I paused in my flight,
  And the deep cry of wailing broke wildly that night.

  I stay not to gather the lone one to earth,
  I spare not the young in their gay dance of mirth,
  But I sweep them all on to their home in the grave,
  I stop not to pity--I stay not to save.

  I paused in my pathway, for beauty was there;
  It was beauty too death-like, too cold, and too fair!
  The deep purple fountain seemed melting away,
  And the faint pulse of life scarce remembered to play;
  She had thought on the tomb, she was waiting for me,
  I gazed, I passed on, and her spirit was free.

  The clear stream rolled gladly, and bounded along,
  With ripple, and murmur, and sparkle, and song;
  The minstrel was tuning his wild harp to love,
  And sweet, and half sad were the numbers he wove.
  I passed, and the harp of the bard was unstrung;
  O'er the stream which rolled deeply, 'twas recklessly hung;
  The minstrel was not! and I passed on alone,
  O'er the newly-raised turf and the rudely-carved stone.




         THE BRIDE'S FAREWELL.

           BY MARY E. BROOKS.

                Farewell to thee,
  To thee, the young home of my heart, farewell!
  How often will thy form in memory
                Renew the spell;
                Each burning tone,
  Far sweeter than the wild bird's melting note;
  Across my spirit like a dream by-gone,
                Their voices float.

                When rose the song,
  The life gush of the bosom, fresh and free,
  There breathed no sorrow as it swept along
                Thy halls of glee;
                Oh, when the gay,
  The merry hearted blend the tide again,
  Then fling to her, the loved one far away,
                One kindly strain.

                The skies are bright
  That canopy thy bowers, my soul's young rest;
  And, like thy fairy visions, robed in light,
                The loveliest:
                The bird among
  Thy deep perfumes pours its rich melody;
  Oh, in the music of that matin song
                Remember me!

                Another now,
  Mother, above thy silvery locks must bend;
  And when the death-shade gathers on thy brow,
                Who then will tend
                Thy fading light?
  Oh, in its gleam all feebly, tremblingly,
  The last gush of thy spirit in its flight,
                Remember me!

                Sister, one sigh
  Upon the midnight's balmy breath did float;
  One love-lit smile beneath the summer sky,
                One echo note:
                Oh, never yet,
  Through love, life, music, feeling, fragrancy,
  Can I the mingling of those hours forget;
                Remember me!

                The chained spell
  Is strong, my own fair home, that bids us sever;
  And bound in loveliness to break, no, never!
                Then fare thee well:
                And perished here,
  As from the rosy leaf the dew that fell,
  I dash from love's young wreath the passing tear;
                My own bright home, farewell!




               REFLECTIONS.

          BY LUCRETIA M. DAVIDSON.

  [_Written in her Fifteenth year, on seeing an
      ancient picture of the Virgin Mary._]

  Roll back, thou tide of time, and tell
  Of book, of rosary, and bell;
  Of cloistered nun, with brow of gloom,
  Immured within her living tomb;
  Of monks, of saints, and vesper-song,
  Borne gently by the breeze along;
  Of deep-toned organ's pealing swell;
  Of _ave maria_, and funeral knell;
  Of midnight taper, dim and small,
  Just glimmering through the high-arched hall;
  Of gloomy cell, of penance lone,
  Which can for darkest deeds atone:
  Roll back, and lift the veil of night,
  For I would view the anchorite.
  Yes, there he sits, so sad, so pale,
  Shuddering at Superstition's tale;
  Crossing his breast with meagre hand,
  While saints and priests, a motley band,
  Arrayed before him, urge their claim
  To heal in the Redeemer's name;
  To mount the saintly ladder, (made
  By every monk, of every grade,
  From portly abbot, fat and fair,
  To yon lean starveling, shivering there,)
  And mounting thus, to usher in
  The soul, thus ransomed from its sin.
  And tell me, hapless bigot! why,
  For what, for whom did Jesus die,
  If pyramids of saints must rise
  To form a passage to the skies?
  And think you man can wipe away
  With fast and penance, day by day,
  One single sin, too dark to fade
  Before a bleeding Saviour's shade?
  O ye of little faith, beware!
  For neither shrift, nor saint, nor prayer,
  Would ought avail ye without Him,
  Beside whom saints themselves grow dim.
  Roll back, thou tide of time, and raise
  The faded forms of other days!
  Yon time-worn picture, darkly grand,
  The work of some forgotten hand,
  Will teach thee half thy mazy way,
  While Fancy's watch-fires dimly play.
  Roll back, thou tide of time, and tell
  Of secret charm, of holy spell,
  Of Superstition's midnight rite,
  Of wild Devotion's seraph flight;
  Of Melancholy's tearful eye,
  Of the sad votaress' frequent sigh,
  That trembling from her bosom rose,
  Divided 'twixt her Saviour's woes
  And some warm image lingering there,
  Which, half-repulsed by midnight prayer,
  Still, like an outcast child, will creep
  Where sweetly it was wont to sleep,
  And mingle its unhallowed sigh
  With cloister-prayer and rosary;
  Then tell the pale, deluded one
  Her vows are breathed to God alone;
  Those vows, which tremulously rise,
  Love's last, love's sweetest sacrifice.




             LINES.

       BY EMMA C. EMBURY.

  When in the shadow of the tomb
    This heart shall rest,
  Oh! lay me where spring flowers bloom
    On earth's bright breast.

  Oh! ne'er in vaulted chambers lay
    My lifeless form;
  Seek not of such mean, worthless prey
    To cheat the worm.

  In this sweet city of the dead
    I fain would sleep,
  Where flowers may deck my narrow bed,
    And night dews weep.

  But raise not the sepulchral stone
    To mark the spot;
  Enough, if by thy heart alone
    'Tis ne'er forgot.




             THE GUARDIAN ANGEL.

           BY LUCRETIA M. DAVIDSON.

  I'm thy guardian angel, sweet maid! and I rest
  In mine own chosen temple, thy innocent breast;
  At midnight I steal from my sacred retreat,
  When the chords of thy heart in soft unison beat.

  When thy bright eye is closed, when thy dark tresses flow
  In beautiful wreaths o'er thy pillow of snow;
  O then I watch o'er thee, all pure as thou art,
  And listen to music which steals from thy heart.

  Thy smile is the sunshine which gladdens my soul,
  My tempest the clouds, which around thee may roll;
  I feast my light form on thy rapture-breathed sighs,
  And drink at the fount of those beautiful eyes.

  The thoughts of thy heart are recorded by me;
  There are some which, half-breathed, half-acknowledged by thee,
  Steal sweetly and silently o'er thy pure breast,
  Just ruffling its calmness, then murm'ring to rest.

  Like a breeze o'er the lake, when it breathlessly lies,
  With its own mimic mountains, and star-spangled skies;
  I stretch my light pinions around thee when sleeping,
  To guard thee from spirits of sorrow and weeping.

  I breathe o'er thy slumbers sweet dreams of delight,
  Till you wake but to sigh for the visions of night;
  Then remember, wherever your pathway may lie,
  Be it clouded with sorrow, or brilliant with joy;

  My spirit shall watch thee, wherever thou art,
  My incense shall rise from the throne of thy heart.
  Farewell! for the shadows of evening are fled,
  And the young rays of morning are wreathed round my head.




      WHAT IS SOLITUDE?

      BY C. F. HOFFMAN.

  Not in the shadowy wood,
    Not in the crag-hung glen,
  Not where the sleeping echoes brood
    In caves untrod by men;
  Not by the sea-swept shore
    Where loitering surges break,
  Not on the mountain hoar,
    Not by the breezeless lake,
  Not in the desert plain
    Where man hath never stood,
  Whether on isle or main--
    Not there is Solitude!

  There are birds in the woodland bowers,
    Voices in lonely dells,
  And streams that talk to the listening hours
    In earth's most secret cells.
  There is life on the foam-flecked sand
    By ocean's curling lip,
  And life on the still lake's strand
    'Mid flowers that o'er it dip;
  There is life in the tossing pines
    That plume the mountain crest,
  And life in the courser's mane that shines
    As he scours the desert's breast.

  But go to the crowded mart,
    'Mid the sordid haunts of men,
  Go there and ask thy heart,
    What answer makes it then?
  Go where the wine-cup's gleaming,
    In hall or festal grot;
  Where love-lit eyes are beaming,
    But Love himself is not!--
  Go--if thou wouldst be lonely--
    Where the phantom Pleasure's wooed,
  And own that there--there only--
    'Mid crowds is Solitude.




            THE BRAVE.

         BY J. G. BROOKS.

  Where have the valiant sunk to rest,
    When their sands of life were numbered?
  On the downy couch? on the gentle breast
    Where their youthful visions slumbered?

  When the mighty passed the gate of death,
    Did love stand by bewailing?
  No! but upon war's fiery breath
    Their blood-dyed flag was sailing!

  Not on the silent feverish bed,
    With weeping friends around them,
  Were the parting prayers of the valiant said,
    When death's dark angel found them.

  But in the stern and stormy strife,
    In the flush of lofty feeling,
  They yielded to honour the boon of life,
    Where battle's bolts were pealing;

  When the hot war-steed, with crimsoned mane
    Trampled on breasts all stained and gory,
  Dashed his red hoof on the reeking plain,
    And shared in the rider's glory.

  Or seek the brave in their ocean grave,
    'Neath the dark and restless water;
  Seek them beneath the whelming wave,
    So oft deep dyed with slaughter.

  There sleep the gallant and the proud,
    The eagle-eyed and the lion-hearted;
  For whom the trump of fame rang loud,
    When the body and soul were parted.

  Or seek them on fields where the grass grows deep,
    Where the vulture and the raven hover;
  There the sons of battle in quiet sleep:
  And widowed love goes there to weep,
    That their bright career is over.




                MORNING.

        BY LUCRETIA M. DAVIDSON.

  I come in the breath of the wakened breeze,
  I kiss the flowers, and I bend the trees;
  And I shake the dew, which hath fallen by night,
  From its throne, on the lily's pure bosom of white.
  Awake thee, when bright from my couch in the sky,
  I beam o'er the mountains, and come from on high;
  When my gay purple banners are waving afar;
  When my herald, gray dawn, hath extinguished each star;
  When I smile on the woodlands, and bend o'er the lake,
  Then awake thee, O maiden, I bid thee awake!
  Thou may'st slumber when all the wide arches of Heaven
  Glitter bright with the beautiful fires of even;
  When the moon walks in glory, and looks from on high,
  O'er the clouds floating far through the clear azure sky,
  Drifting on like the beautiful vessels of Heaven,
  To their far away harbour, all silently driven,
  Bearing on, in their bosoms, the children of light,
  Who have fled from this dark world of sorrow and night;
  When the lake lies in calmness and darkness, save where
  The bright ripple curls, 'neath the smile of a star;
  When all is in silence and solitude here,
  Then sleep, maiden, sleep! without sorrow or fear!
  But when I steal silently over the lake,
  Awake thee then, maiden, awake! Oh, awake!




         LAKE GEORGE.

      BY MRS. E. F. ELLET.

  Not in the bannered castle
    Beside the gilded throne,
  On fields where knightly ranks have strode,
    In feudal halls--alone
  The Spirit of the stately mien,
    Whose presence flings a spell,
  Fadeless on all around her,
    In empire loves to dwell.

  Gray piles and moss-grown cloisters,
    Call up the shadows vast
  That linger in their dim domain,
    Dreams of the visioned past!
  As sweep the gorgeous pageants by
    We watch the pictured train,
  And sigh that aught so glorious
    Should be so brief and vain.

  But here a spell yet deeper
    Breathes from the woods and sky,
  Proudlier these rocks and waters speak
    Of hoar antiquity;
  Here Nature built her ancient realm
    While yet the world was young,
  Her monuments of grandeur
    Unshaken stand, and strong.

  Here shines the sun of Freedom
    For ever o'er the deep,
  Where Freedom's heroes by the shore
    In peaceful glory sleep;
  And deeds of high and proud emprize
    In every breeze are told,
  The everlasting tribute
    To hearts that now are cold.

  Farewell, then, scenes so lovely,
    If sunset gild your rest,
  Or the pale starlight gleam upon
    The water's silvery breast--
  Or morning on these glad, green isles
    In trembling splendour glows--
  A holier spell than beauty
    Hallows your pure repose!




      LINES WRITTEN IN AN ALBUM.

          BY W. H. L. BOGART.

  Like the lone emigrant who seeks a home
    In the wild regions of the far-off west,
  And where, as yet, no foot of man hath come,
    Rears a rude dwelling for his future rest.

  Like him I have sought out a solitude
    Where all around me is unsullied yet,
  And reared a tenement of words as rude
    As the first hut on Indian prairies set.

  O'er his poor house ere thrice the seasons tread
    Their march of storm and sunshine o'er the land,
  Some lofty pile will rear its haughty head,
    And sway the soil with high and proud command.

  And round my verse the better, brighter thought
    Of beauty and of genius will be placed--
  Those gem-like words, with light and music fraught,
    By manly or by fairy fingers traced.

  Our fate's the same--the gentle and the proud
    Will speed their voyage to oblivion's sea,
  And I shall soon be lost amid the crowd
    That seek a place within thy memory.




            THE FADED ONE.

          BY WILLIS G. CLARK.

  Gone to the slumber which may know no waking
    Till the loud requiem of the world shall swell;
  Gone! where no sound thy still repose is breaking,
    In a lone mansion through long years to dwell;
  Where the sweet gales that herald bud and blossom,
    Pour not their music nor their fragrant breath:
  A seal is set upon thy budding bosom,
    A bond of loneliness--a spell of death!

  Yet 'twas but yesterday that all before thee
    Shone in the freshness of life's morning hours;
  Joy's radiant smile was playing briefly o'er thee,
    And thy light feet impressed but vernal flowers.
  The restless spirit charmed thy sweet existence,
    Making all beauteous in youth's pleasant maze,
  While gladsome hope illumed the onward distance,
    And lit with sunbeams thy expectant days.

  How have the garlands of thy childhood withered,
    And hope's false anthem died upon the air!
  Death's cloudy tempests o'er thy way have gathered,
    And his stern bolts have burst in fury there.
  On thy pale forehead sleeps the shade of even,
    Youth's braided wreath lies stained in sprinkled dust,
  Yet looking upward in its grief to Heaven,
    Love should not mourn thee, save in hope and trust.




            PROEM TO YAMOYDEN.

           BY R. C. SANDS.--1820.

    Go forth, sad fragments of a broken strain,
    The last that either bard shall e'er essay!
    The hand can ne'er attempt the chords again,
    That first awoke them, in a happier day:
    Where sweeps the ocean breeze its desert way,
    His requiem murmurs o'er the moaning wave;
    And he who feebly now prolongs the lay
    Shall ne'er the minstrel's hallowed honours crave;
  His harp lies buried deep in that untimely grave!

    Friend of my youth,[M] with thee began the love
    Of sacred song; the wont, in golden dreams,
    'Mid classic realms of splendours past to rove,
    O'er haunted steep, and by immortal streams;
    Where the blue wave, with sparkling bosom gleams
    Round shores, the mind's eternal heritage,
    For ever lit by memory's twilight beams;
    Where the proud dead, that live in storied page,
  Beckon, with awful port, to glory's earlier age.

    There would we linger oft, entranc'd, to hear,
    O'er battle fields the epic thunders roll;
    Or list, where tragic wail upon the ear,
    Through Argive palaces shrill echoing, stole;
    There would we mark, uncurbed by all control,
    In central heaven, the Theban eagle's flight;
    Or hold communion with the musing soul
    Of sage or bard, who sought, 'mid pagan night,
  In lov'd Athenian groves, for truth's eternal light.

    Homeward we turned, to that fair land, but late
    Redeemed from the strong spell that bound it fast,
    Where mystery, brooding o'er the waters, sate
    And kept the key, till three millenniums past;
    When, as creation's noblest work was last,
    Latest, to man it was vouchsafed, to see
    Nature's great wonder, long by clouds o'ercast,
    And veiled in sacred awe, that it might be
  An empire and a home, most worthy for the free.

    And here, forerunners strange and meet were found,
    Of that bless'd freedom, only dreamed before;--
    Dark were the morning mists, that lingered round
    Their birth and story, as the hue they bore.
    "Earth was their mother;"--or they knew no more,
    Or would not that their secret should be told;
    For they were grave and silent; and such lore,
    To stranger ears, they loved not to unfold,
  The long-transmitted tales their sires were taught of old.

    Kind nature's commoners, from her they drew
    Their needful wants, and learn'd not how to hoard;
    And him whom strength and wisdom crowned, they knew,
    But with no servile reverence, as their lord.
    And on their mountain summits they adored
    One great, good Spirit, in his high abode,
    And thence their incense and orisons poured
    To his pervading presence, that abroad
  They felt through all his works,--their Father, King, and God.

    And in the mountain mist, the torrent's spray,
    The quivering forest, or the glassy flood,
    Soft falling showers, or hues of orient day,
    They imaged spirits beautiful and good;
    But when the tempest roared, with voices rude,
    Or fierce, red lightning fired the forest pine,
    Or withering heats untimely seared the wood,
    The angry forms they saw of powers malign;
  These they besought to spare, those blest for aid divine.

    As the fresh sense of life, through every vein,
    With the pure air they drank, inspiring came,
    Comely they grew, patient of toil and pain,
    And as the fleet deer's agile was their frame;
    Of meaner vices scarce they knew the name;
    These simple truths went down from sire to son,--
    To reverence age,--the sluggish hunter's shame,
    And craven warrior's infamy to shun,--
  And still avenge each wrong, to friends or kindred done.

    From forest shades they peered, with awful dread,
    When, uttering flame and thunder from its side,
    The ocean-monster, with broad wings outspread,
    Came ploughing gallantly the virgin tide.
    Few years have pass'd, and all their forests' pride
    From shores and hills has vanished, with the race,
    Their tenants erst, from memory who have died,
    Like airy shapes, which eld was wont to trace,
  In each green thicket's depths, and lone, sequestered place.

    And many a gloomy tale, tradition yet
    Saves from oblivion, of their struggles vain,
    Their prowess and their wrongs, for rhymer meet,
    To people scenes, where still their names remain;
    And so began our young, delighted strain,
    That would evoke the plumed chieftains brave,
    And bid their martial hosts arise again,
    Where Narraganset's tides roll by their grave,
  And Haup's romantic steeps are piled above the wave.

    Friend of my youth! with thee began my song,
    And o'er thy bier its latest accents die;
    Misled in phantom-peopled realms too long,--
    Though not to me the muse averse deny,
    Sometimes, perhaps, her visions to descry,
    Such thriftless pastime should with youth be o'er;
    And he who loved with thee his notes to try,
    But for thy sake, such idlesse would deplore,
  And swears to meditate the thankless muse no more.

    But, no! the freshness of the past shall still
    Sacred to memory's holiest musings be;
    When through the ideal fields of song, at will,
    He roved and gathered chaplets wild with thee;
    When, reckless of the world, alone and free,
    Like two proud barks, we kept our careless way,
    That sail by moonlight o'er the tranquil sea;
    Their white apparel and their streamers gay,
  Bright gleaming o'er the main, beneath the ghostly ray;--

    And downward, far, reflected in the clear
    Blue depths, the eye their fairy tackling sees;
    So buoyant, they do seem to float in air,
    And silently obey the noiseless breeze;
    Till, all too soon, as the rude winds may please,
    They part for distant ports: the gales benign
    Swift wafting, bore, by Heaven's all-wise decrees,
    To its own harbour sure, where each divine
  And joyous vision, seen before in dreams, is thine.

    Muses of Helicon! melodious race
    Of Jove and golden-haired Mnemosyne;
    Whose art from memory blots each sadder trace,
    And drives each scowling form of grief away!
    Who, round the violet fount, your measures gay
    Once trod, and round the altar of great Jove;
    Whence, wrapt in silvery clouds, your nightly way
    Ye held, and ravishing strains of music wove,
  That soothed the Thunderer's soul, and filled his courts above.

    Bright choir! with lips untempted, and with zone
    Sparkling, and unapproached by touch profane;
    Ye, to whose gladsome bosoms ne'er was known
    The blight of sorrow, or the throb of pain;
    Rightly invoked,--if right the elected swain,
    On your own mountain's side ye taught of yore,
    Whose honoured hand took not your gift in vain,
    Worthy the budding laurel-bough it bore,--[N]
  Farewell! a long farewell! I worship you no more.




           THE INDIAN.

     BY JONATHAN LAWRENCE, JUN.

  Away, away to forest shades!
    Fly, fly with me the haunts of men!
  I would not give my sunlit glades,
    My talking stream, and silent glen,
  For all the pageantry of slaves,
  Their fettered lives and trampled graves.

  Away from wealth! our wampum strings
    Ask not the toil, the woes of them
  From whom the lash, the iron wrings
    The golden dross, the tear-soiled gem;
  Yet bind our hearts in the pure tie
  That gold or gems could never buy.

  And power! what is it ye who rule
    The hands without the souls? oh, ye
  Can tell how mean the tinselled fool,
    With all his hollow mockery!
  The slave of slaves who hate, yet bow,
  With serving lip but scorning brow.

  And love, dear love! how can they feel
    The wild desire, the burning flame,
  That thrills each pulse and bids us kneel--
    The power of the adored name;
  The glance that sins in the met eye,
  Yet loved for its idolatry!

  They never knew the perfect bliss,
    To clasp in the entwined bower
  Her trembling form, to steal the kiss
    She would deny but hath not power;
  To list that voice that charms the grove,
  And trembles when it tells of love.

  Nor have they felt the pride, the thrill,
    When bounding for the fated deer;
  O'er rock and sod, o'er vale and hill,
    The hunter flies, nor dreams of fear,
  And brings his maid the evening prey,
  To speak more love than words can say.

  Have they in death the sod, the stones,
    The silence of the shading tree;
  Where glory decks the storied bones
    Of him whose life, whose death, was free;
  And minstrel mourns his arm whose blow
  The foeman cowered and quailed below?

  No; they, confined and fettered, they
    The sons of sires to fame unknown,
  With nerveless hands and souls of clay,
    Half life, half death, loathe, but live on;
  And sink unsung, ignobly lie
  In dark oblivion's apathy.

  Poor fools! the wild and mountain chase
    Would rend their frail and sickly forms;
  But for their God, how would they face,
    Our bands of fire, our sons of storms;
  Breasts that have never recked of fears,
  And eyes that leave to women, tears.

  They tell us of their kings, who gave
    To them our wild, unfettered shore;
  To them! why let them chain the wave,
    And hush its everlasting roar!
  Then may we own their sway, but hark!
  Our warriors never miss their mark.

  Away, away from such as these!
    Free as the wild bird on the wing,
  I see my own, my loved green trees,
    I hear our black-haired maidens sing;
  I fly from such a world as this,
  To rove, to love, to live in bliss!




        MIDNIGHT THOUGHTS.

         BY WILLIAM DUER.

  Fair orb! so peacefully sublime,
    In silence rolling high,
  Know'st thou of passion, or of crime,
    Or earthly vanity?

  In that bright world can lust abide,
    Or murder bare his arm?
  With thee are wars, and kings, and pride,
    And the loud trump's alarm?

  What beings, by what motives led,
    Inhale thy morning breeze?
  Doth man upon thy mountains tread,
    Or float upon thy seas?

  Say, whence are they? and what their fate?
    Whom whirls around thy ball?
  Their present and their future state,
    Their hopes and fears recall?

  Canst thou of a Redeemer tell,
    Or a Betrayer's kiss?
  Their's is a Heaven or a Hell?
    Eternal woe or bliss?

  Can infidelity exist,
    And gaze upon that sky?
  Here would I bid the Atheist
    God's finger to deny.

  What horrid sounds! what horrid sights!
    What wretched blood is spilt!
  While thou, and all the eternal lights,
    Shine conscious on the guilt?

  Thou hear'st red Murder's victims cry;
    Thou mark'st Lust's stealthy pace;
  And Avarice hide his heap and sigh;
    And Rapine's reckless face.

  In thy pale light the Suicide,
    By some deep lonely lake,
  Or from the headlong torrent's side
    Doth the vain world forsake.

  And often, ere thy course is run,
    Thy cold, uncertain light
  Gleams where the culprit's skeleton
    Swings to the winds of night.

  A light cloud hangs upon thy brow,
    (What foul deed would it hide?)
  'Tis gone: thine orb, unshaded now,
    Looks down on human pride.

  And now the midnight hour invites
    Th' accursed witch's vow,
  While to her thrice accursed rites
    Sole witness rollest thou!

  Lo! underneath yon falling tower
    The tottering beldame seeks
  Herbs, of some hidden evil power,
    While muttered charms she speaks.

  Or where some noisome cavern yawns,
    Where vipers get their food,
  Or where the Nile's huge offspring spawns
    Her pestilential brood:

  There--while the bubbling cauldron sings
    Beneath their eldritch glance--
  As wild their fiendish laughter rings,
    The haggard sisters dance.

  Can sin endure thy majesty,
    Nor thy pure presence fly?
  'Tis like the sad severity
    Of a fond father's eye.

  There, where no mortal eye can see,
    No mortal voice can tell,
  Wisdom hath marked thy path to be
    Th' Almighty's sentinel.




   LINES WRITTEN ON THE COVER OF A PRAYER BOOK.

              BY THOMAS SLIDELL.

  There is a tree, whose boughs are clad
    With foliage that never dies;
  Whose fruits perennially thrive,
    And whose tall top salutes the skies.

  There is a flower of loveliest hues,
    No mildews blast its changeless bloom;
  It smiles at the rude tempest's wrath,
    And breathes a still more sweet perfume.

  There is a star, whose constant rays
    Beam brightest in the darkest hour,
  And cheer the weary pilgrim's heart,
    Though storms around his pathway lower.

  That tree, the Tree of Life is called,
    That flower blooms on Virtue's stem,
  That star, whose rays are never veiled,
    Is the bright Star of Bethlehem.




           ODE TO JAMESTOWN.

           BY J. K. PAULDING.

      Old cradle of an infant world,
        In which a nestling empire lay,
      Struggling awhile, ere she unfurl'd,
        Her gallant wing and soar'd away;
  All hail! thou birth-place of the glowing west,
  Thou seem'st the towering eagle's ruin'd nest!

      What solemn recollections throng,
        What touching visions rise,
      As wand'ring these old stones among,
        I backward turn mine eyes,
  And see the shadows of the dead flit round,
  Like spirits, when the last dread trump shall sound.

      The wonders of an age combin'd
        In one short moment memory supplies,
      They throng upon my waken'd mind,
        As time's dark curtains rise.
  The volume of a hundred buried years,
  Condens'd in one bright sheet, appears.

      I hear the angry ocean rave,
        I see the lonely little barque
      Scudding along the crested wave,
        Freighted like old Noah's ark,
  As o'er the drowned earth it whirl'd,
  With the forefathers of another world.

      I see a train of exiles stand,
        Amid the desert, desolate,
      The fathers of my native land,
        The daring pioneers of fate,
  Who brav'd the perils of the sea and earth,
  And gave a boundless empire birth.

      I see the gloomy Indian range
        His woodland empire, free as air;
      I see the gloomy forest change,
        The shadowy earth laid bare;
  And, where the red man chas'd the bounding deer,
  The smiling labours of the white appear.

      I see the haughty warrior gaze
        In wonder or in scorn,
      As the pale faces sweat to raise
        Their scanty fields of corn,
  While he, the monarch of the boundless wood,
  By sport, or hair-brain'd rapine, wins his food.

      A moment, and the pageant's gone;
        The red men are no more;
      The pale fac'd strangers stand alone
        Upon the river's shore;
  And the proud wood king, who their arts disdain'd,
  Finds but a bloody grave where once he reign'd.

      The forest reels beneath the stroke
        Of sturdy woodman's axe;
      The earth receives the white man's yoke,
        And pays her willing tax
  Of fruits, and flowers, and golden harvest fields,
  And all that nature to blithe labour yields.

      Then growing hamlets rear their heads,
        And gathering crowds expand,
      Far as my fancy's vision spreads,
        O'er many a boundless land,
  Till what was once a world of savage strife,
  Teems with the richest gifts of social life.

      Empire to empire swift succeeds,
        Each happy, great, and free;
      One empire still another breeds,
        A giant progeny,
  To war upon the pigmy gods of earth,
  The tyrants, to whom ignorance gave birth.

      Then, as I turn, my thoughts to trace
        The fount whence these rich waters sprung,
      I glance towards this lonely place,
        And find it, these rude stones among.
  Here rest the sires of millions, sleeping sound,
  The Argonauts, the golden fleece that found.

      Their names have been forgotten long;
        The stone, but not a word, remains;
      They cannot live in deathless song,
        Nor breathe in pious strains.
  Yet this sublime obscurity, to me
  More touching is, than poet's rhapsody.

      They live in millions that now breathe;
        They live in millions yet unborn,
      And pious gratitude shall wreathe
        As bright a crown as e'er was worn,
  And hang it on the green leav'd bough,
  That whispers to the nameless dead below.

      No one that inspiration drinks;
        No one that loves his native land;
      No one that reasons, feels, or thinks,
        Can 'mid these lonely ruins stand,
  Without a moisten'd eye, a grateful tear
  Of reverent gratitude to those that moulder here.

      The mighty shade now hovers round--
        Of HIM whose strange, yet bright career,
      Is written on this sacred ground
        In letters that no time shall sere;
  Who in the old world smote the turban'd crew,
  And founded Christian Empires in the new.

      And SHE! the glorious Indian maid,
        The tutelary of this land,
      The angel of the woodland shade,
        The miracle of God's own hand,
  Who join'd man's heart to woman's softest grace,
  And thrice redeem'd the scourgers of her race.

      Sister of charity and love,
        Whose life-blood was soft Pity's tide,
      Dear Goddess of the Sylvan grove.
        Flower of the Forest, nature's pride,
  He is no man who does not bend the knee,
  And she no woman who is not like thee!

      Jamestown, and Plymouth's hallow'd rock,
        To me shall ever sacred be--
      I care not who my themes may mock,
        Or sneer at them and me.
  I envy not the brute who here can stand,
  Without a prayer for his own native land.

      And if the recreant crawl _her_ earth,
        Or breathe Virginia's air,
      Or, in New-England claim his birth,
        From the old Pilgrim's there,
  He is a bastard, if he dare to mock,
  Old Jamestown's shrine, or Plymouth's famous rock.




                LOOK ALOFT.

         BY JONATHAN LAWRENCE, JUN.

   [The following lines were suggested by an anecdote said to have
  been related by the late Dr. Godman, of the ship-boy who was about
  to fall from the rigging, and was only saved by the mate's
  characteristic exclamation, "Look aloft, you lubber."]

  In the tempest of life, when the wave and the gale
  Are around and above, if thy footing should fail--
  If thine eye should grow dim and thy caution depart--
  "Look aloft" and be firm, and be fearless of heart.

  If the friend, who embraced in prosperity's glow
  With a smile for each joy and a tear for each woe,
  Should betray thee when sorrow like clouds are arrayed,
  "Look aloft" to the friendship which never shall fade.

  Should the visions which hope spreads in light to thine eye,
  Like the tints of the rainbow, but brighten to fly,
  Then turn, and through tears of repentant regret,
  "Look aloft" to the sun that is never to set.

  Should they who are dearest, the son of thy heart--
  The wife of thy bosom--in sorrow depart,
  "Look aloft," from the darkness and dust of the tomb,
  To that soil where "affection is ever in bloom."

  And oh! when death comes in terrors, to cast,
  His fears on the future, his pall on the past,
  In that moment of darkness, with hope in thy heart,
  And a smile in thine eye, "look aloft" and depart!




               FRAGMENT.

       BY WILLIAM LIVINGSTON.--1747.

    Father of Light! exhaustless source of good!
  Supreme, eternal, self-existent God!
  Before the beamy sun dispensed a ray,
  Flamed in the azure vault, and gave the day;
  Before the glimmering moon with borrow'd light
  Shone queen amid the silver host of night,
  High in the heavens, thou reign'dst superior Lord,
  By suppliant angels worshipp'd and adored.
  With the celestial choir then let me join
  In cheerful praises to the power divine.
  To sing thy praise, do thou, O God! inspire
  A mortal breast with more than mortal fire.
  In dreadful majesty thou sitt'st enthroned,
  With light encircled, and with glory crown'd:
  Through all infinitude extends thy reign,
  For thee, nor heaven, nor heaven of heavens contain;
  But though thy throne is fix'd above the sky
  Thy omnipresence fills immensity.




                BYRON.

       BY LUCRETIA M. DAVIDSON.

  His faults were great, his virtues less,
    His mind a burning lamp of Heaven;
  His talents were bestowed to bless,
    But were as vainly lost as given.

  His was a harp of heavenly sound,
    The numbers wild, and bold, and clear;
  But ah! some demon, hovering round,
    Tuned its sweet chords to Sin and Fear.

  His was a mind of giant mould,
    Which grasped at all beneath the skies;
  And his, a heart, so icy cold,
    That virtue in its recess dies.




          JOY AND SORROW.

          BY J. G. BROOKS.

  Joy kneels at morning's rosy prime,
    In worship to the rising sun;
  But Sorrow loves the calmer time,
    When the day-god his course hath run;
  When night is on her shadowy car,
    Pale Sorrow wakes while Joy doth sleep;
  And guided by the evening star,
    She wanders forth to muse and weep.

  Joy loves to cull the summer flower,
    And wreath it round his happy brow;
  But when the dark autumnal hour
    Hath laid the leaf and blossoms low;
  When the frail bud hath lost its worth,
    And Joy hath dashed it from his crest;
  Then Sorrow takes it from the earth,
    To wither on her withered breast.




       TO THE EVENING STAR.

     BY LUCRETIA M. DAVIDSON.

  Thou brightly-glittering star of even,
  Thou gem upon the brow of Heaven,
  Oh! were this fluttering spirit free,
  How quick 'twould spread its wings to thee.

  How calmly, brightly dost thou shine,
  Like the pure lamp in Virtue's shrine!
  Sure the fair world which thou may'st boast
  Was never ransomed, never lost.

  There, beings pure as Heaven's own air,
  Their hopes, their joys together share;
  While hovering angels touch the string,
  And seraphs spread the sheltering wing.

  There cloudless days and brilliant nights,
  Illumed by Heaven's refulgent lights;
  There seasons, years, unnoticed roll,
  And unregretted by the soul.

  Thou little sparkling star of even,
  Thou gem upon an azure Heaven,
  How swiftly will I soar to thee
  When this imprisoned soul is free.




        THE FALLS OF THE PASSAIC.

          BY WASHINGTON IRVING.

  In a wild, tranquil vale, fringed with forests of green,
  Where nature had fashion'd a soft, sylvan scene,
  The retreat of the ring-dove, the haunt of the deer,
  Passaic in silence roll'd gentle and clear.

  No grandeur of prospect astonish'd the sight,
  No abruptness sublime mingled awe with delight;
  Here the wild flow'ret blossom'd, the elm proudly waved,
  And pure was the current the green bank that laved.

  But the spirit that ruled o'er the thick tangled wood,
  And deep in its gloom fix'd his murky abode,
  Who loved the wild scene that the whirlwinds deform,
  And gloried in thunder, and lightning and storm;

  All flush'd from the tumult of battle he came,
  Where the red men encounter'd the children of flame,
  While the noise of the war-whoop still rang in his ears,
  And the fresh bleeding scalp as a trophy he bears:

  With a glance of disgust he the landscape survey'd,
  With its fragrant wild flowers, its wide-waving shade;--
  Where Passaic meanders through margins of green,
  So transparent its waters, its surface serene.

  He rived the green hills, the wild woods he laid low;
  He taught the pure stream in rough channels to flow;
  He rent the rude rock, the steep precipice gave,
  And hurl'd down the chasm the thundering wave.

  Countless moons have since rolled in the long lapse of time--
  Cultivation has softened those features sublime;
  The axe of the white man has lighten'd the shade,
  And dispell'd the deep gloom of the thicketed glade.

  But the stranger still gazes with wondering eye,
  On the rocks rudely torn, and groves mounted on high;
  Still loves on the cliff's dizzy borders to roam,
  Where the torrent leaps headlong embosom'd in foam.




           DRINK AND AWAY.

       BY THE REV. WILLIAM CROSWELL.

   [There is a beautiful rill in Barbary received
  into a large basin, which bears name signifying
  "Drink and Away," from the great danger of
  meeting with gues and assassins.--DR. SHAW.]

  Up! pilgrim and rover,
    Redouble thy haste!
  Nor rest thee till over
    Life's wearisome waste.
  Ere the wild forest ranger
    Thy footsteps betray
  To trouble and danger,--
    Oh, drink and away!

  Here lurks the dark savage
    By night and by day,
  To rob and to ravage,
    Nor scruples to slay.
  He waits for the slaughter:
    The blood of his prey
  Shall stain the still water,--
    Then drink and away!

  With toil though thou languish,
    The mandate obey,
  Spur on, though in anguish,
    There's death in delay!
  No blood-hound, want-wasted,
    Is fiercer than they:--
  Pass by it untested--
    Or drink and away!

  Though sore be the trial,
    Thy God is thy stay,
  Though deep the denial,
    Yield not in dismay,
  But, wrapt in high vision,
    Look on to the day
  When the fountains Elysian
    Thy thirst shall allay.

  There shalt thou for ever
    Enjoy thy repose
  Where life's gentle river
    Eternally flows,
  Yea, there shalt thou rest thee
    For ever and aye,
  With none to molest thee--
    Then, drink and away.




              THE HUDSON.

      BY MARGARETTA V. FAUGERES, 1793.

  Through many a blooming wild and woodland green
    The Hudson's sleeping waters winding stray;
  Now 'mongst the hills its silvery waves are seen,
    And now through arching willows steal away:
  Now more majestic rolls the ample tide,
    Tall waving elms its clovery borders shade,
  And many a stately dome, in ancient pride,
    And hoary grandeur, there exalts its head.

  There trace the marks of culture's sunburnt hand,
    The honeyed buck-wheat's clustering blossoms view,
  Dripping rich odours, mark the beard-grain bland,
    The loaded orchard, and the flax field blue;
  The grassy hill, the quivering poplar grove,
    The copse of hazel, and the tufted bank,
  The long green valley where the white flocks rove,
    The jutting rock, o'erhung with ivy dank;
  The tall pines waving on the mountain's brow,
    Whose lofty spires catch day's last lingering beam;
    The bending willow weeping o'er the stream,
  The brook's soft gurglings, and the garden's glow.

  Low sunk between the Alleganian hills,
    For many a league the sullen waters glide,
    And the deep murmur of the crowded tide,
  With pleasing awe the wondering voyager fills.
  On the green summit of yon lofty clift
    A peaceful runnel gurgles clear and slow,
  Then down the craggy steep-side dashing swift,
    Tremendous falls in the white surge below.
  Here spreads a clovery lawn its verdure far,
    Around it mountains vast their forests rear,
  And long ere day hath left its burnish'd car,
    The dews of night have shed their odours there.
  There hangs a louering rock across the deep;
    Hoarse roar the waves its broken base around;
  Through its dark caverns noisy whirlwinds sweep,
    While Horror startles at the fearful sound.
  The shivering sails that cut the fluttering breeze,
    Glide through these winding rocks with airy sweep:
  Beneath the cooling glooms of waving trees,
    And sloping pastures speck'd with fleecy sheep.




    TRENTON FALLS, NEAR UTICA.

       BY ANTHONY BLEECKER.

           _Ob: 1827._

  Ye hills, who have for ages stood
  Sublimely in your solitude,
    Listening the wild water's roar,
  As thundering down, from steep to steep,
  Along your wave-worn sides they sweep,
    Dashing their foam from shore to shore.

  Wild birds, that loved the deep recess,
  Fell beast that roved the wilderness,
    And savage men once hover'd round:
  But startled at your bellowing waves,
  Your frowning cliffs, and echoing caves,
    Affrighted fled the enchanted ground.

  How changed the scene!--your lofty trees,
  Which bent but to the mountain breeze,
    Have sunk beneath the woodman's blade;
  New sun-light through your forest pours,
  Paths wind along your sides and shores,
    And footsteps all your haunts invade.

  Now boor, and beau, and lady fair,
  In gay costume each day repair,
    Where thy proud rocks exposed stand,
  While echo, from her old retreats,
  With babbling tongue strange words repeats,
    From babblers on your stony strand.

  And see--the torrent's rocky floor,
  With names and dates all scribbled o'er,
    Vile blurs on nature's heraldry;
  O bid your river in its race,
  These mean memorials soon efface,
    And keep your own proud album free.

  Languid thy tides, and quell'd thy powers,
  But soon Autumnus with his showers,
    Shall all thy wasted strength restore;
  Then will these ramblers down thy steep,
  With terror pale their distance keep,
    Nor dare to touch thy trembling shore.

  But spare, Oh! river, in thy rage,
  One name upon thy stony page;
    'Tis hers--the fairest of the fair;
  And when she comes these scenes to scan,
  Then tell her, Echo, if you can,
    His humble name who wrote it there.




        THE DUMB MINSTREL.

          BY JAMES NACK.

  And am I doom'd to be denied for ever
    The blessings that to all around are given?
  And shall those links be re-united ever,
    That bound me to mankind till they were riven
  In childhood's day? Alas! how soon to sever
    From social intercourse, the doom of heaven
  Was pass'd upon me! And the hope how vain,
  That the decree may be recall'd again.

  Amid a throng in deep attention bound,
    To catch the accents that from others fall,
  The flow of eloquence the heavenly sound
    Breathed from the soul of melody, while all
  Instructed or delighted list around,
    Vacant unconsciousness must _me_ enthrall!
  I can but watch each animated face,
  And there attempt th' inspiring theme to trace.

  Unheard, unheeded are the lips by _me_,
    To others that unfold some heaven-born art,
  And melody--Oh, dearest melody!
    How had thine accents, thrilling to my heart,
  Awaken'd all its strings to sympathy,
    Bidding the spirit at thy magic start!
  How had my heart responsive to the strain,
  Throbb'd in love's wild delight or soothing pain.

  In vain--alas, in vain! thy numbers roll--
    Within my heart no echo they inspire;
  Though form'd by nature in thy sweet control,
    To melt with tenderness, or glow with fire,
  Misfortune closed the portals of the soul;
    And till an Orpheus rise to sweep the lyre,
  That can to animation kindle stone,
  To me thy thrilling power must be unknown.




      THE GREEN ISLE OF LOVERS.

          BY R. C. SANDS.

  They say that afar in the land of the west,
  Where the bright golden sun sinks in glory to rest,
  'Mid fens where the hunter ne'er ventured to tread,
  A fair lake unruffled and sparkling is spread;
  Where, lost in his course, the rapt Indian discovers,
  In distance seen dimly, the green isle of lovers.

  There verdure fades never; immortal in bloom,
  Soft waves the magnolia its groves of perfume;
  And low bends the branch with rich fruitage depress'd,
  All glowing like gems in the crowns of the east;
  There the bright eye of nature, in mild glory hovers:
  'Tis the land of the sunbeam,--the green isle of lovers!

  Sweet strains wildly float on the breezes that kiss
  The calm-flowing lake round that region of bliss;
  Where, wreathing their garlands of amaranth, fair choirs
  Glad measures still weave to the sound that inspires
  The dance and the revel, 'mid forests that cover
  On high with their shade the green isle of the lover.

  But fierce as the snake with his eyeballs of fire,
  When his scales are all brilliant and glowing with ire,
  Are the warriors to all, save the maids of their isle,
  Whose law is their will, whose life is their smile;
  From beauty there valour and strength are not rovers,
  And peace reigns supreme in the green isle of lovers.

  And he who has sought to set foot on its shore,
  In mazes perplex'd, has beheld it no more;
  It fleets on the vision, deluding the view,
  Its banks still retire as the hunters pursue;
  O! who in this vain world of wo shall discover,
  The home undisturb'd, the green isle of the lover!




          THAT SILENT MOON.

      BY THE RT. REV. G. W. DOANE.

  That silent moon, that silent moon,
    Careering now through cloudless sky,
  Oh! who shall tell what varied scenes
    Have pass'd beneath her placid eye,
  Since first, to light this wayward earth,
  She walked in tranquil beauty forth.

  How oft has guilt's unhallow'd hand,
    And superstition's senseless rite,
  And loud, licentious revelry,
    Profaned her pure and holy light:
  Small sympathy is hers, I ween,
  With sights like these, that virgin queen.

  But dear to her, in summer eve,
    By rippling wave, or tufted grove,
  When hand in hand is purely clasp'd,
    And heart meets heart in holy love,
  To smile, in quiet loneliness,
  And hear each whisper'd vow and bless.

  Dispersed along the world's wide way,
    When friends are far, and fond ones rove,
  How powerful she to wake the thought,
    And start the tear for those we love!
  Who watch, with us, at night's pale noon,
  And gaze upon that silent moon.

  How powerful, too, to hearts that mourn,
    The magic of that moonlight sky,
  To bring again the vanish'd scenes,
    The happy eves of days gone by;
  Again to bring, 'mid bursting tears,
  The loved, the lost of other years.

  And oft she looks, that silent moon,
    On lonely eyes that wake to weep,
  In dungeon dark, or sacred cell,
    Or couch, whence pain has banish'd sleep:
  Oh! softly beams that gentle eye,
  On those who mourn, and those who die.

  But beam on whomsoe'er she will,
    And fall where'er her splendour may,
  There's pureness in her chasten'd light,
    There's comfort in her tranquil ray:
  What power is hers to soothe the heart--
  What power, the trembling tear to start!

  The dewy morn let others love,
    Or bask them in the noontide ray;
  There's not an hour but has its charm,
    From dawning light to dying day:--
  But oh! be mine a fairer boon--
  That silent moon, that silent moon!




               TO A CIGAR.

          BY SAMUEL LOW.--1800.

    Sweet antidote to sorrow, toil, and strife,
  Charm against discontent and wrinkled care.
  Who knows thy power can never know despair;
    Who knows thee not, one solace lacks of life:
  When cares oppress, or when the busy day
    Gives place to tranquil eve, a single puff
  Can drive even want and lassitude away,
    And give a mourner happiness enough.
  From thee when curling clouds of incense rise,
  They hide each evil that in prospect lies;
  But when in evanescence fades thy smoke,
    Ah! what, dear sedative, my cares shall smother?
  If thou evaporate, the charm is broke,
    Till I, departing taper, light another.




                HOPE.

            BY J. R. DRAKE.

  See through yon cloud that rolls in wrath,
    One little star benignant peep,
  To light along their trackless path
    The wanderers of the stormy deep.

  And thus, oh Hope! thy lovely form
    In sorrow's gloomy night shall be
  The sun that looks through cloud and storm
    Upon a dark and moonless sea.

  When heaven is all serene and fair,
    Full many a brighter gem we meet;
  'Tis when the tempest hovers there,
    Thy beam is most divinely sweet.

  The rainbow, when the sun declines,
    Like faithless friend will disappear;
  Thy light, dear star! more brightly shines
    When all is wail and weeping here.

  And though Aurora's stealing beam
    May wake a morning of delight,
  'Tis only thy consoling gleam
    Will smile amid affliction's night.




      THE LAKE OF CAYOSTEA.

         BY ROBERT BARKER.

        _Ob: 1831, aet. 27._

  Thy wave has ne'er by gondolier
    Been dash'd aside with flashing oar,
  Nor festive train to music's strain
    Performed the dance upon thy shore.
  But there, at night, beneath the light
    Of silent moon and twinkling ray,
  The Indian's boat is seen to float,
    And track its lonely way.

  The Indian maid, in forest glade,
    Of flowers that earliest grow,
  And fragrant leaves, a garland weaves
    To deck her warrior's brow.
  And when away, at break of day,
    She hies her to her shieling dear,
  She sings so gay a roundelay,
    That echo stops to hear.

  Would it were mine to join with thine,
    And dwell for ever here,
  In forest wild with nature's child,
    By the silent Cayost[=e]a.
  My joy with thee would ever be
    Along these banks to roam;
  And fortune take beside the lake,
    Whose clime is freedom's home.




         THE AMERICAN FLAG.

           BY J. R. DRAKE.

  When Freedom from her mountain height
    Unfurled her standard to the air,
  She tore the azure robe of night,
    And set the stars of glory there.
  She mingled with its gorgeous dyes
  The milky baldric of the skies,
  And striped its pure celestial white,
  With streakings of the morning light;
  Then from his mansion in the sun
  She called her eagle bearer down,
  And gave into his mighty hand
    The symbol of her chosen land.

  Majestic monarch of the cloud,
    Who rear'st aloft thy regal form,
  To hear the tempest trumpings loud
    And see the lightning lances driven,
  When strive the warriors of the storm,
    And rolls the thunder-drum of heaven,
  Child of the sun! to thee 'tis given
    To guard the banner of the free,
  To hover in the sulphur smoke,
  To ward away the battle stroke,
  And bid its blendings shine afar,
  Like rainbows on the cloud of war,
    The harbingers of victory!

  Flag of the brave! thy folds shall fly,
    The sign of hope and triumph high,
  When speaks the signal trumpet tone,
    And the long line comes gleaming on.
  Ere yet the life-blood, warm and wet,
    Has dimm'd the glistening bayonet,
  Each soldier eye shall brightly turn
    To where thy sky-born glories burn;
  And as his springing steps advance,
    Catch war and vengeance from the glance.
  And when the cannon-mouthings loud
    Heave in wild wreaths the battle shroud,
  And gory sabres rise and fall
  Like shoots of flame on midnight's pall;
    Then shall thy meteor glances glow,
  And cowering foes shall shrink beneath
    Each gallant arm that strikes below
  That lovely messenger of death.

  Flag of the seas! on ocean wave
    Thy stars shall glitter o'er the brave;
  When death, careering on the gale,
    Sweeps darkly round the bellied sail,
  And frighted waves rush wildly back
    Before the broadside's reeling rack,
  Each dying wanderer of the sea
    Shall look at once to heaven and thee,
  And smile to see thy splendours fly
  In triumph o'er his closing eye.

  Flag of the free heart's hope and home!
    By angel hands to valour given;
  Thy stars have lit the welkin dome,
    And all thy hues were born in heaven.
  For ever float that standard sheet!
    Where breathes the foe but falls before us,
  With Freedom's soil beneath our feet,
    And Freedom's banner streaming o'er us?




             MORNING HYMN.

            _Genesis_ i. 3.

            BY C. F. HOFFMAN.

  "Let there be light!" The Eternal spoke,
    And from the abyss where darkness rode
  The earliest dawn of nature broke,
    And light around creation flow'd.
  The glad earth smiled to see the day,
    The first-born day came blushing in;
  The young day smiled to shed its ray
    Upon a world untouched by sin.

  "Let there be light!" O'er heaven and earth,
    The God who first the day-beam pour'd,
  Whispered again his fiat forth,
    And shed the Gospel's light abroad.
  And, like the dawn, its cheering rays
    On rich and poor were meant to fall,
  Inspiring their Redeemer's praise
    In lonely cot and lordly hall.

  Then come, when in the Orient first
    Flushes the signal light for prayer;
  Come with the earliest beams that burst
    From God's bright throne of glory there.
  Come kneel to Him who through the night
    Hath watched above thy sleeping soul,
  To Him whose mercies, like his light,
    Are shed abroad from pole to pole.




                BRONX.

            BY J. R. DRAKE.

  I sat me down upon a green bank-side,
    Skirting the smooth edge of a gentle river,
  Whose waters seemed unwillingly to glide,
    Like parting friends who linger while they sever;
  Enforced to go, yet seeming still unready,
  Backward they wind their way in many a wistful eddy.

  Gray o'er my head the yellow-vested willow
    Ruffled its hoary top in the fresh breezes,
  Glancing in light, like spray on a green billow,
    Or the fine frost-work which young winter freezes;
  When first his power in infant pastime trying,
  Congeals sad autumn's tears on the dead branches lying.

  From rocks around hung the loose ivy dangling,
    And in the clefts sumach of liveliest green,
  Bright ising-stars the little beach was spangling,
    The gold-cup sorrel from his gauzy screen
  Shone like a fairy crown, enchased and beaded,
  Left on some morn, when light flashed in their eyes unheeded.

  The hum-bird shook his sun-touched wings around,
    The bluefinch caroll'd in the still retreat;
  The antic squirrel capered on the ground
    Where lichens made a carpet for his feet:
  Through the transparent waves, the ruddy minkle
  Shot up in glimmering sparks his red fin's tiny twinkle.

  There were dark cedars with loose mossy tresses
    White powdered dog-trees, and stiff hollies flaunting
  Gaudy as rustics in their May-day dresses,
    Blue pelloret from purple leaves upslanting
  A modest gaze, like eyes of a young maiden
  Shining beneath dropt lids the evening of her wedding.

  The breeze fresh springing from the lips of morn,
    Kissing the leaves, and sighing so to lose 'em,
  The winding of the merry locust's horn,
    The glad spring gushing from the rock's bare bosom:
  Sweet sights, sweet sounds, all sights, all sounds excelling,
  Oh! 'twas a ravishing spot formed for a poet's dwelling.

  And did I leave thy loveliness, to stand
    Again in the dull world of earthly blindness?
  Pained with the pressure of unfriendly hands,
    Sick of smooth looks, agued with icy kindness?
  Left I for this thy shades, where none intrude,
  To prison wandering thought and mar sweet solitude?

  Yet I will look upon thy face again,
    My own romantic Bronx, and it will be
  A face more pleasant than the face of men.
    Thy waves are old companions, I shall see
  A well-remembered form in each old tree,
  And hear a voice long loved in thy wild minstrelsy.




          THE STORM-KING.

          BY ROSWELL PARK.

  The mist descended from the snow
    That whiten'd o'er the cliff;
  The clouds were gather'd round its brow,
  And solemn darkness reign'd below
    The peak of Teneriffe.

  For on that rocky peak and high,
    Magnificent and lone,
  The awful _Storm-King_ of the sky,
  Beyond the reach of mortal eye,
    Had rear'd his cloudy throne.

  By him the raging winds unfurl'd,
    Swept o'er the prostrate land;
  And thence, above the affrighted world,
  The flashing thunderbolts were hurl'd
    Forth from his red right hand.--

  Uprising from his cave of jet,
    While mists obscured his form,
  With streaming locks and vesture wet,
  The _Spirit_ of the ocean met
    The _Spirit_ of the storm.

  "And why so madly dost thou dare,
    Proud Spirit of the sea,
  To tempt the monarch of the air,
  With the whirlwind's rage and the lightning's glare?
    What seekest thou of me?"

  "I have risen afar from my coral caves,
    Where the pearls are sparkling bright,
  To roam o'er the isles I have girt with my waves;
  And I hurl defiance at thee and thy slaves,
    And I challenge thee here to the fight!"

  "Take this in return!" and the thunderbolt rush'd
    From the midst of a cloud of fire;
  The tempest forth from his nostrils gush'd,
  And the island forest his footsteps crush'd,
    In the burning of his ire.

  Now fierce o'er the waters mad hurricanes boom,
    And the depths of the ocean uprend;
  Now the waves lash the skies with their torrents of foam,
  And whirlwinds and billows in furious gloom,
    Meet, mingle, and fiercely contend.

  But the monarch of ocean spurns his thrall,
    And evades his fierce controul;--
  Away in his ice-clad crystal hall,
  He still reigns absolute monarch of all
    That surrounds his frozen pole.

  The day breaks forth, and the storm is past,--
    Again are the elements free;
  But many a vessel is still sinking fast,
  And many a mariner rests at last,
    In the bosom of the sea!




           SONG--ROSALIE CLARE.

             BY C. F. HOFFMAN.

  Who owns not she's peerless--who calls her not fair--
  Who questions the beauty of Rosalie Clare?
  Let him saddle his courser and spur to the field,
  And though coated in proof, he must perish or yield;
  For no gallant can splinter--no charger can dare
  The lance that is couched for young Rosalie Clare.

  When goblets are flowing, and wit at the board
  Sparkles high, while the blood of the red grape is poured,
  And fond wishes for fair ones around offered up
  From each lip that is wet with the dew of the cup,--
  What name on the brimmer floats oftener there,
  Or is whispered more warmly, than Rosalie Clare?

  They may talk of the land of the olive and vine--
  Of the maids of the Ebro, the Arno, or Rhine;--
  Of the Houris that gladden the East with their smiles,
  Where the sea's studded over with green summer isles;
  But what flower of far away clime can compare
  With the blossom of ours--bright Rosalie Clare?

  Who owns not she's peerless--who calls her not fair?
  Let him meet but the glances of Rosalie Clare!
  Let him list to her voice--let him gaze on her form--
  And if, hearing and seeing, his soul do not warm,
  Let him go breathe it out in some less happy air
  Than that which is blessed by sweet Rosalie Clare.




             TO A PACKET SHIP.

              BY ROSWELL PARK.

  Speed, gallant bark! to thy home o'er the wave!
  The clouds gather dark, and the mad billows rave;--
  The tempest blows o'er thee, and scatters the spray
  That lies in thy wake, as thou wingest thy way.

  Speed, gallant bark! to the land of the free,
  The home of the happy, beyond the wide sea!
  Dear friends and near kindred, the lovely and fair,
  Are waiting, impatient, to welcome thee there!

  Speed, gallant bark! there's a seat at the board,
  Which the dame and the damsel reserve for their lord;
  And the fond-hearted maiden is sighing in vain,
  To welcome her long-absent lover again.

  Speed, gallant bark! richer cargo is thine,
  Than Brazilian gem, or Peruvian mine;
  And the treasures thou bearest, thy destiny wait;
  For they, if thou perish, must share in thy fate.

  Speed, gallant bark! though the land is afar,
  And the storm-clouds above thee have veil'd every star;
  The needle shall guide thee, the helm shall direct,
  And the God of the tempest thy pathway protect!

  Speed, gallant bark! though the lightning may flash;
  And over thy deck the huge surges may dash;--
  Thy sails are all reef'd, and thy streamers are high;
  Unheeded and harmless the billows roll by!

  Speed, gallant bark! the tornado is past;
  Staunch and secure thou hast weather'd the blast;
  Now spread thy full sails to the wings of the morn,
  And soon the glad harbour shall greet thy return!




             MOONLIGHT.

          BY ROBERT BARKER.

  How dear to love the moonlight hour,
    Beneath the calm transparent ether,
  It seems as if by magic power
    They breathe in unison together.
  When forest glen and fountain bright
  Are tinged with shades of mellow light,
  And every earthly sound is still
  Save murmur of the mountain rill;
  'Tis then to lull the breast's commotion,
  And waken every soft emotion,
  To charm from sorrow's cheek her tears,
    And place the smiles of rapture there,
  "Celestial music of the spheres"
    Comes floating on the evening air.
  'Tis then that fancy wings her flight
    Beyond the bounds to mortals given;
  To regions where the lamps of night
    Illume the path which leads to heaven.
  'Tis then she holds communion sweet
    With seraphs round the eternal throne,
  Where long-departed spirits meet,
    To worship him who sits thereon.
  'Tis then man dreams of Paradise,
  If aught he dreams of place like this,
  'Tis then he breathes the crystal air,
  Which Peris breathe who wander there,
  And sips the fount of Native Love
  Found no where but in heaven above.




               SONG.

          BY J. R. DRAKE.

  'Tis not the beam of her bright blue eye,
  Nor the smile of her lip of rosy dye,
  Nor the dark brown wreaths of her glossy hair,
  Nor her changing cheek, so rich and rare.
  Oh! these are the sweets of a fairy dream,
    The changing hues of an April sky;
  They fade like dew in the morning beam,
    Or the passing zephyr's odour'd sigh.

  'Tis a dearer spell that bids me kneel,
  'Tis the heart to love, and the soul to feel:
  'Tis the mind of light, and the spirit free,
  And the bosom that heaves alone for me.
  Oh! these are the sweets that kindly stay
    From youth's gay morning to age's night;
  When beauty's rainbow tints decay,
    Love's torch still burns with a holy light.

  Soon will the bloom of the fairest fade,
  And love will droop in the cheerless shade,
  Or if tears should fall on his wing of joy,
  It will hasten the flight of the laughing boy.
  But oh! the light of the constant soul
    Nor time can darken nor sorrow dim;
  Though we may weep in life's mingled bowl,
    Love still shall hover around its brim.




             LUeTZOW'S WILD CHASE.

     [_Translated from the German of Koerner._]

                BY ROSWELL PARK.

  What gleams from yon wood in the splendour of day?
    Hark! hear its wild din rushing nearer!
  It hither approaches in gloomy array,
  While loud sounding horns peal their blast on its way,
    The soul overwhelming with terror!
  Those swart companions you view in the race,--
  Those are Luetzow's roving, wild, venturous chase!

  What swiftly moves on through yon dark forest glade,
    From mountain to mountain deploying?
  They place themselves nightly in ambuscade,
  They shout the hurrah, and they draw the keen blade,
    The French usurpers destroying!
  Those swart Yagers bounding from place to place,--
  Those are Luetzow's roving, wild, venturous chase!

  Where, midst glowing vines, as the Rhine murmurs by,
    The tyrant securely is sleeping;--
  They swiftly approach, 'neath the storm-glaring sky;
  With vigorous arms o'er the waters they ply;
    Soon safe on his island-shore leaping!
  Those swarthy swimmers whose wake you trace,
  Those are Luetzow's roving, wild, venturous chase!

  Whence sweeps from yon valley the battle's loud roar,
    Where swords in thick carnage are clashing?
  Fierce horsemen encounter, 'mid lightnings and gore;
  The spark of true freedom is kindled once more,
    From war's bloody altars out-flashing!
  Those horsemen swart who the combat face,
  Those are Luetzow's roving, wild, venturous chase!

  Who smile their adieu to the light of the sun,
    'Mid fallen foes moaning their bravery?
  Death creeps o'er their visage,--their labours are done;--
  Their valiant hearts tremble not;--victory's won;
    Their father-land rescued from slavery!
  Those swart warriors fallen in death's embrace,
  Those were Luetzow's roving, wild, venturous chase!

  The wild German Yagers,--their glorious careers
    Dealt death to the tyrant oppressor!
  Then weep not, dear friends, for the true volunteers,
  When the morn of our father-land's freedom appears;
    Since we alone died to redress her.
  Our mem'ry transmitted, no time shall erase;--
  Those were Luetzow's roving, wild, venturous chase!




             STANZAS.

          BY JAMES NACK.

  I know that thou art far away,
    Yet in my own despite
  My still expectant glances stray
    Inquiring for thy sight.
  Though all too sure that thy sweet face
    Can bless no glance of mine,
  At every turn, in every place,
    My eyes are seeking thine.

  I hope--how vain the hope, I know--
    That some propitious chance
  May bring thee here again to throw
    Thy sweetness on my glance.
  But, loveliest one, where'er thou art,
    Whate'er be my despair,
  Mine eyes will seek thee, and my heart
    Will love thee every where.




                LINES.

          BY WILLIAM LEGGETT.

 [_Written beneath a dilapidated tower, yet
   standing among the ruins of Carthage._]

  Thou mouldering pile, that hath withstood
    The silent lapse of many ages,
  The earthquake's shock, the storm, the flood,
    Around whose base the ocean rages;
  Who reared thy walls that proudly brave
  The tempest, battle, and the wave?

  Was it beneath thy ample dome
    That Marius rested, and from thee,
  When he had lost imperial Rome,
    Learned high resolve and constancy?
  Thou seem'st to mock the power of fate,
  And well might'st teach the lesson great.

  Perhaps thy vaulted arch hath rung
    Of yore, with laughter's merry shout,
  While beauty round her glances flung
    To cheer some monarch's wassail rout;
  But mirth and beauty long have fled
  From this lone City of the Dead.

  Where busy thousands oft have trod
    Beneath thy mouldering marble brow,
  Wild moss-grown fragments press the sod,
    Around thee all is silence now.
  And thus the breath of foul decay
  Shall melt at last thy form away.

  Thou desolate, deserted pile,
    Lone vestage of departed glory,
  Sadly in ruin thou seem'st to smile,
    While baffled time flies frowning o'er thee,
  As if resolved the tale to tell
  Where Carthage stood, and how it fell.

  Midst ruined walls thou stand'st alone,
    Around thee strewn may yet be seen
  The broken column, sculptured stone,
    And relics sad of what hath been.
  But thou alone survivest the fall,
  Defying Time, dread leveller of all.




            FADED HOURS.

        BY J. R. SUTERMINSTER.

          _Ob. 1836: aet. 23._

  Oh! for my bright and faded hours
    When life was like a summer stream,
  On whose gay banks the virgin flowers
    Blush'd in the morning's rosy beam;
  Or danced upon the breeze that bare
    Its store of rich perfume along,
  While the wood-robin pour'd on air
    The ravishing delights of song.

  The sun look'd from his lofty cloud,
    While flow'd its sparkling waters fair--
  And went upon his pathway proud,
    And threw a brighter lustre there;
  And smiled upon the golden heaven,
    And on the earth's sweet loveliness,
  Where light, and joy, and song were given,
    The glad and fairy scene to bless!

  Ah! these were bright and joyous hours,
    When youth awoke from boyhood's dream,
  To see life's Eden dress'd in flowers,
    While young hope bask'd in morning's beam!
  And proffer'd thanks to heaven above,
    While glow'd his fond and grateful breast,
  Who spread for him that scene of love
    And made him, so supremely blest!

  That scene of love!--where hath it gone?
    Where have its charms and beauty sped?
  My hours of youth, that o'er me shone--
    Where have their light and splendour fled?
  Into the silent lapse of years--
    And I am left on earth to mourn:
  And I am left to drop my tears
    O'er memory's lone and icy urn!

  Yet why pour forth the voice of wail
    O'er feeling's blighted coronal?
  Ere many gorgeous suns shall fail,
    I shall be gather'd in my pall;
  Oh, my dark hours on earth are few--
    My hopes are crush'd, my heart is riven;--
  And I shall soon bid life adieu,
    To seek enduring joys in heaven!




       THE WIFE'S SONG.

      BY WILLIAM LEGGETT.

  As the tears of the even,
    Illumined at day
  By the sweet light of heaven,
    Seem gems on each spray;
  So gladness to-morrow
    Shall shine on thy brow,
  The more bright for the sorrow
    That darkens it now.

  Yet if fortune, believe me,
    Have evil in store,
  Though each other deceive thee,
    I'll love thee the more.
  As ivy leaves cluster
    More greenly and fair,
  When winter winds bluster
    Round trees that are bare.




                LAMENT.

          BY WILLIS G. CLARK.

  There is a voice, I shall hear no more--
  There are tones, whose music for me is o'er;
  Sweet as the odours of spring were they,--
  Precious and rich--but they died away;
  They came like peace to my heart and ear--
  Never again will they murmur here;
  They have gone like the blush of a summer morn,
  Like a crimson cloud through the sunset borne.

  There were eyes that late were lit up for me,
  Whose kindly glance was a joy to see;
  They revealed the thoughts of a trusting heart,
  Untouched by sorrow, untaught by art;
  Whose affections were fresh as a stream of spring
  When birds in the vernal branches sing;
  They were filled with love, that hath passed with them,
  And my lyre is breathing their requiem.

  I remember a brow, whose serene repose
  Seemed to lend a beauty to cheeks of rose:
  And lips, I remember, whose dewy smile,
  As I mused on their eloquent power the while,
  Sent a thrill to my bosom, and bless'd my brain
  With raptures, that never may dawn again;
  Amidst musical accents those smiles were shed--
  Alas! for the doom of the early dead!

  Alas! for the clod that is resting now
  On those slumbering eyes--on that faded brow;
  Wo for the cheek that hath ceased to bloom--
  For the lips that are dumb, in the noisome tomb;
  Their melody broken, their fragrance gone,
  Their aspect cold as the Parian stone;
  Alas for the hopes that with thee have died--
  Oh loved one!--would I were by thy side!

  Yet the joy of grief it is mine to bear;
  I hear thy voice in the twilight air;
  Thy smile, of sweetness untold, I see
  When the visions of evening are borne to me;
  Thy kiss on my dreaming lip is warm--
  My arm embraceth thy graceful form;
  I wake in a world that is sad and drear,
  To feel in my bosom--thou art not here.

  Oh! once the summer with thee was bright;
  The day, like thine eyes, wore a holy light.
  There was bliss in existence when thou wert nigh,
  There was balm in the evening's rosy sigh;
  Then earth was an Eden, and thou its guest--
  A Sabbath of blessings was in my breast;
  My heart was full of a sense of love,
  Likest of all things to heaven above.

  Now, thou art gone to that voiceless hall
  Where my budding raptures have perished all;
  To that tranquil and solemn place of rest,
  Where the earth lies damp on the sinless breast;
  Thy bright locks all in the vault are hid--
  Thy brow is concealed by the coffin lid;--
  All that was lovely to me is there,
  Mournful is life, and a load to bear!




                    LINES

  [_Written on a pane of glass in the house of a friend._]

               BY WILLIAM LEGGETT.

  As playful boys by ocean's side
    Upon its margin trace,
  Some frail memorial which the tide
    Returning must efface;
  Thus I upon this brittle glass
    These tuneless verses scrawl,
  That they, when I away shall pass,
    May thought of me recall.

  The waves that beat upon the strand
    Wash out the schoolboy's line,
  As soon some rude or careless hand
    May shiver those of mine.
  But though what I have written here
    In thousand fragments part,
  I trust my name will still be dear,
    And treasured in the heart.




      THE SEPULCHRE OF DAVID.

        BY WILLIAM L. STONE.

    "As for Herod, he had spent vast sums about the
  cities, both without and within his own kingdom:
  and as he had before heard that Hyrcanus, who had
  been king before him, had opened David's
  sepulchre, and taken out of it three thousand
  talents of silver, and that there was a greater
  number left behind, and indeed enough to suffice
  all his wants, he had a great while an intention
  to make the attempt; and at this time he opened
  that sepulchre by night and went into it, and
  endeavoured that it should not be at all known in
  the city, but he took only his most faithful
  friends with him. As for any money, he found
  none, as Hyrcanus had done, but that furniture of
  gold, and those precious goods that were laid up
  there, all which he took away. However, he had a
  great desire to make diligent search, and to go
  farther in, even as far as the very bodies of
  David and Solomon; where two of his guards were
  slain by a flame that burst out upon those that
  went in, as the report was. So he was severely
  affrighted, and went out and built a propitiatory
  monument of that fright he had been in, and this
  of white stone, at the mouth of the sepulchre,
  and that at a great expense also."--_Josephus._

  High on his throne of state,
    A form of noblest mould,
  The Hebrew monarch sate,
    All glorious to behold.

  With purest gold inwrought,
    Full many a sparkling gem,
  From distant India brought,
    Enriched his diadem.

  A crystal mirror bright,
    Beneath the canopy,
  Shot back in silvery light
    The monarch's panoply!

  All round the lofty halls,
    Rich tapestries of gold
  Hung from the glittering walls,
    In many an ample fold.

  And breathing sculptures there
    In living beauty stood,
  Borne by the monarch's care
    From o'er the AEgean flood.

  Dipt in the rainbow's dyes,
    Apelles's magic hand,
  To please the wondering eyes
    Of Judah's haughty land,

  In liquid colours bright,
    And traced with matchless care,
  Had left, in glorious light,
    Its richest beauties there!

  The silver lamps by day,
    Hung massive, rich, and bright;
  And from the galleries gay
    Shone brilliantly by night.

  And by the monarch's side,
    His guards, a noble band,
  Arrayed in regal pride,
    In burnished armour stand.

  Proud chiefs and ladies fair,
    Swept the broad courts along:--
  In pleasures mingled there,--
    A gay and gallant throng!

  Apollo's tuneful choir,
    And Korah's sons of song,
  With psaltery, harp, and lyre,
    Were mingled in the throng.[O]

  And from each trembling string,
    Sweet sounds of music stole;
  Gentle as Zephyr's wing,
    The tuneful numbers roll.

  Beyond the portals wide,
    Beneath the sylvan bower,
  Cool founts, in sparkling pride,
    Send forth their silvery shower.

  The flowerets gay and wild,
    In beauty bloomed not less,
  Than erst when Eden smiled,
    In pristine loveliness.

  And through the gorgeous halls
    Rich odours filled the air,
  Sweet as the dew that falls
    On Araby the fair!

  All that could foster pride,
    All that could banish care,
  Was gathered by his side,
    And richly lavished there.

  Lost to the splendid show,
    The monarch's restless mind
  Darkened an anxious brow,
    Which furrows deep had lined.

  He rose and left the hall,
    The night was drear and wild--
  Above the embattled wall
    Tempestuous clouds were piled.

  Deep in the deeper gloom,
    He held his sullen way--
  To David's hallowed tomb
    To where his ashes lay.

  The haughty monarch came,--
    Earth trembled at his tread--
  With sacrilegious aim
    To rob the royal dead.

  No treasures found he there,
    Nor precious gems, nor gold--
  The walls were damp and bare--
    The region drear and cold.

  He cast his anxious eye
    Where slept great _David's_ son,
  Where _Wisdom's_ ashes lie,
    The peerless _Solomon_!

  He raised his ruthless arm
    Against the low-arched wall--
  While wild and dread alarm
    Rang through the vaulted hall.

  Loud on the monarch's ear
    Broke the hoarse thunder's crash--
  And blazed around the bier
    The vivid lightning's flash.

  Death came upon the blast;
    As by the lurid light
  They saw that he had passed,
    And triumphed in his might:

  For on the chilly ground,
    Inanimate as clay,
  The troubled monarch found
    His favourite captains lay.

  Aghast and pale he fled,--
    And shook through every limb--
  Cold drops rolled down his head,
    Lest death should follow him!

  He raised a marble fane
    Upon the hallowed spot,
  But ne'er, O ne'er again
    Could that night be forgot!

  And oft in after years
    He woke in wild affright,
  And wailed, with scalding tears,
    The deed of that dread night!




               WOMAN.

        BY WILLIAM LEGGETT.

  No star in yonder sky that shines
    Can light like woman's eye impart,
  The earth holds not in all its mines
    A gem so rich as woman's heart.
  Her voice is like the music sweet
    Poured out from airy harp alone,
  Like that when storms more loudly beat,
    It yields a clearer--richer tone.

  And woman's love's a holy light
    That brighter burns for aye,
  Years cannot dim its radiance bright,
    Nor even falsehood quench its ray.
  But like the star of Bethlehem
    Of old, to Israel's shepherds given,
  It marshals with its steady flame
    The erring soul of man to heaven.




        RHYME AND REASON.

           AN APOLOGUE.

         BY G. P. MORRIS.

  Two children, "once upon a time,"
    In the summer season,
  Woke to life--the one was Rhyme,
    The other's name was Reason.
  Sweet Poesy enraptured prest
  The blooming infants to her breast.

  Reason's face and form to see
    Made her heart rejoice;
  Yet there was more of melody
    In Rhyme's delicious voice;
  But both were beautiful and fair,
  And pure as mountain stream and air.

  As the boys together grew,
    Happy fled their hours--
  Grief or care they never knew
    In the Paphian bowers.
  See them roaming, hand in hand,
  The pride of all the choral band.

  Music with harp of golden strings,
    Love with bow and quiver,
  Airy sprites on radiant wings,
    Nymphs of wood and river,
  Joined the Muses' constant song
  As Rhyme and Reason pass'd along.

  But the scene was changed--the boys
    Left their native soil--
  Rhyme's pursuit was idle joys,
    Reason's manly toil.
  Soon Rhyme was starving in a ditch,
  While Reason grew exceeding rich.

  Since that dark and fatal hour
    When the brothers parted,
  Reason has had wealth and power--
    Rhyme's poor and broken-hearted.
  And now, on bright or stormy weather,
  They twain are seldom seen together.




           AH NO! AH NO!

      _To a Favourite Child._

           BY JAMES NACK.

  In life, perhaps, thou hast only trod
    As yet in a path as soft and sweet
  As the flowerets wreathed on a verdant sod,
    Which bend to the pressure of delicate feet.
  In the path thou hast only begun to tread,
    Perhaps no thorn has betrayed its sting;
  And the clouds that brood there too oft have fled,
    By innocence chased on her snow-white wing:
  For often a paradise seems to attend
    Our earliest steps in this world below;
  But ah! will that paradise bloom to the end?
    Stern destiny answers, "Ah No! Ah No!"

  The tree with verdure adorns the shore
    While the laving spray at its foot is thrown;
  But the waves roll on to return no more,
    And the tree stands withering all alone.
  Each friend of our early years is a wave
    In the sea of joy we are flourishing by;
  But they roll away to the gulf of the grave,
    And our hearts in loneliness withering sigh.
  And such is the doom I must bear--for now,
    While yet in my boyhood I find it so--
  But never, dear cherub, may heaven allow
    Such doom to await thee, Ah No! Ah No!




             A HEALTH.

     BY MISS ELIZABETH C. CLINCH.

         _Ob. 1832: aet. 17._

  Fill high the cup!--the young and gay
    Are met with bounding hearts to-night;
  And sunny smiles around us play,
    And eyes are sparkling bright:
  Let wit and song the hours beguile,
    But yet, amid this festal cheer,
  Oh, let us pause to think awhile
    Of him who is not here.

  Fill high the cup!--yet ere its brim
    One young and smiling lip has pressed,
  Oh, pledge each sparkling drop to him
    Now far o'er ocean's breast!
  The cordial wish each lip repeats,
    By every heart is echoed here;
  For none within this circle beats,
    To whom he is not dear.

  A sudden pause in festive glee--
    What thought hath hushed the thought of mirth,
  Hath checked each heart's hilarity,
    And given to sadness birth?
  O! read it in the shades that steal
    Across each animated brow;
  The wish none utters, yet all feel,
    "Would he were with us now!"

  Yet chase away each vain regret,
    And let each heart be gay;
  Trust me, the meeting hour shall yet
    Each anxious thought repay.
  Is not his spirit with us now?
    Yes! wheresoe'er his footsteps roam,
  The wanderer's yearning heart can know
    No resting-place--but home!

  Then smile again, and let the song
    Pour forth its music sweet and clear--
  What magic to those notes belong
    Which thus chain every ear!
  Soft eyes are filled with tears--what spell
    So suddenly hath called them there?
  That strain--ah, yes! we know it well;
    It is his favourite air.

  With every note how forcibly
    Return the thoughts of other days!
  The shaded brow, the drooping eye,
    Are present to our gaze.
  With all around his looks are blent;
    His form, is it not gliding there?
  And was it not _his_ voice which sent
    That echo on the air?

  One wish, with cordial feeling fraught,
    Breathe we for him ere yet we part,
  That for each high and generous thought
    That animates his heart,
  That Power which gives us happiness,
    A blessing on his head would pour!
  Oh! could affection wish him less?
    Yet, could we ask for more?




             A HYMN.

      BY DAVID S. BOGART.--1791.

  Almighty King, who reign'st above,
  Thou art the source of purest love;
  The splendid heavens thy glories show,
  Thy wisdom shines in all below;
  Seraphs before thee humbly fall,
  Acknowledge thee supreme o'er all;
  And, wrapt in high transporting joy,
  Thy attributes their thoughts employ.
  Shall mortals, then, refuse to join
  In works so heavenly and divine,
  Mortals who live and move in thee,
  And thy continual goodness see;
  Thou God of Grace, make it my choice
  In praising thee, to lend my voice;
  Implant thy fear, infuse thy balm,
  And make my troubled soul all calm;
  Teach me the duty of my life,
  Preserve me from unhappy strife,
  Conduct me safe through all my days,
  And keep me in thy peaceful ways.
  When time is done, and death draws nigh,
  Then leave me not alone to sigh;
  Afford thy grace, and cheer my heart,
  And, sure of heaven, let me depart.




          REMINISCENCES.

       BY GEORGE D. STRONG.

  Oh, who would flee the melody
    Of woodland, grove, and stream--
  The hoar cliff pencill'd on the sky
    By morning's virgin beam;
  To wander 'mid the busy throng
    That threads each city's street,
  Where cank'ring care and folly's glare
    In unblest union meet?

  Emilia! o'er the fleeting hours
    Thy smile once bathed in light,
  Fond memory hovers pensively,
    And joins them in their flight;
  And lovelier far than sunset's glow,
    By rainbow beauties spann'd,
  Comes o'er my soul the joys we stole
    When first I press'd thy hand.

  The south wind, on its joyous way,
    Came fraught with balmier breath,
  And frolic life, in thousand forms,
    Laugh'd at the conqueror Death!
  Sweet Echo, from the sparry caves,
    Re-tuned the shepherd's song;
  And bird and bee, in reckless glee,
    Pour'd melody along.

  The wind-stirr'd grove still prints its shade
    Upon the streamlet's breast,
  The red bird, on the chesnut bough,
    Re-builds its fairy nest;
  But through the thicket's leafy screen
    Fancy alone can trace
  The sparkling eye--the vermeil dye
    That mantled o'er thy face.

  Though since that hour, upon my path
    Are graven hopes and fears,
  And transient smiles, like April beams,
    Have gilded sorrow's tears;
  From those flushed hopes and feverish joys,
    My soul with rapture flies
  To the sweet grove, where faith and love
    Beamed from Emilia's eyes!

  Then woo me not to sculptured halls,
    Where pride and beauty throng;
  Far lovelier is my mountain-home,
    The wild-wood paths among;
  And though the hopes by boyhood nursed
    Have vanish'd like the dew,
  In Memory's light they bless my sight
    With charms for ever new.




             ELEGIAC LINES.

       BY THE LATE GEN. J. MORTON.

  While you, my friend, with tearful eye,
    These soft elegiac lines read o'er,
  And while you heave the tender sigh
    For lov'd Amanda now no more.

  This lesson from her tear-dew'd urn,
    Where conscious worth, where virtue bleeds,
  This lesson from Amanda learn,--
    That death, nor worth, nor virtue heeds.

  That he alike his ruthless reign
    Does o'er each age, each sex, extend,
  That he ne'er heeds the lover's pain,
    Ne'er heeds the anguish of a friend.

  But in the height of Beauty's bloom,
    Each dear connexion of the heart,
  He points them to the gloomy tomb,
    He bids them--and they must depart.




                  A SONG OF MAY.

                  BY W. G. CLARK.

  The Spring's scented buds all around me are swelling--
    There are songs in the stream--there is health in the gale;
  A sense of delight in each bosom is dwelling,
    As float the pure day-dreams o'er mountain and vale;
  The desolate reign of old winter is broken--
    The verdure is fresh upon every tree;
  Of Nature's revival the charm,--and a token
    Of love, oh thou Spirit of Beauty! to thee.

  The sun looketh forth from the halls of the morning,
    And flushes the clouds that begirt his career;
  He welcomes the gladness and glory, returning
    To rest on the promise and hope of the year.
  He fills with rich light all the balm-breathing flowers--
    He mounts to the zenith and laughs on the wave;
  He wakes into music the green forest-bowers,
    And gilds the gay plains which the broad rivers lave.

  The young bird is out on his delicate pinion--
    He timidly sails in the infinite sky;
  A greeting to May, and her fairy dominion,
    He pours, on the west-wind's fragrant sigh:
  Around, above, there are peace and pleasure--
    The woodlands are singing--the heaven is bright;
  The fields are unfolding their emerald treasure,
    And man's genial spirit is soaring in light.

  Alas, for my weary and care-haunted bosom!--
    The spells of the spring-time arouse it no more;
  The song in the wild-wood--the sheen of the blossom--
    The fresh-welling fountain,--their magic is o'er!
  When I list to the streams--when I look on the flowers,
    They tell of the past with so mournful a tone,
  That I call up the throngs of my long-vanished hours,
    And sigh that their transports are over and gone.

  From the wide-spreading earth--from the limitless heaven,
    There have vanished an eloquent glory and gleam;
  To my veil'd mind no more is the influence given,
    Which coloureth life with the hues of a dream:
  The bloom-purpled landscape its loveliness keepeth--
    I deem that a light as of old gilds the wave;--
  But the eye of my spirit in heaviness sleepeth,
    Or sees but my youth, and the visions it gave.

  Yet it is not that age on my years hath descended--
    'Tis not that its snow-wreaths encircle my brow;
  But the _newness_ and sweetness of Being are ended--
    I feel not their love-kindling witchery now:
  The shadows of death o'er my path have been sweeping--
    There are those who have loved me, debarred from the day;
  The green turf is bright where in peace they are sleeping,
    And on wings of remembrance my soul is away.

  It is shut to the glow of this present existence--
    It hears, from the past, a funereal strain;
  And it eagerly turns to the high-seeming distance,
    Where the last blooms of earth will be garnered again;
  Where no mildew the soft, damask-rose cheek shall nourish--
    Where Grief bears no longer the poisonous sting;
  Where pitiless Death no dark sceptre can flourish,
    Or stain with his blight the luxuriant spring.

  It is thus, that the hopes, which to others are given,
    Fall cold on my heart in this rich month of May;
  I hear the clear anthems that ring through the heaven--
    I drink the bland airs that enliven the day;
  And if gentle Nature, her festival keeping,
    Delights not my bosom, ah! do not condemn;--
  O'er the lost and the lovely my spirit is weeping,
    For my heart's fondest raptures are buried with them.




          ON READING VIRGIL.

        BY MRS. ANN E. BLEECKER.

           _Written in 1778._

  Now, cease these tears, lay gentle Virgil by,
  Let recent sorrows dim thy pausing eye;
  Shall AEneas for lost Creusa mourn,
  And tears be wanting on Abella's urn?
  Like him, I lost my fair one in my flight
  From cruel foes, and in the dead of night.
  Shall he lament the fall of Ilion's tow'rs,
  And we not mourn the sudden ruin of ours?
  See York on fire--while, borne by winds, each flame
  Projects its glowing sheet o'er half the main,
  The affrighted savage, yelling with amaze,
  From Allegany sees the rolling blaze.
  Far from these scenes of horror, in the shade
  I saw my aged parent safe conveyed;
  Then sadly followed to the friendly land
  With my surviving infant by the hand:
  No cumbrous household gods had I, indeed,
  To load my shoulders and my flight impede;
  Protection from such impotence who'd claim?
  My Gods took care of me--not I of them.
  The Trojan saw Anchises breathe his last
  When all domestic dangers he had passed;
  So my lov'd parent, after she had fled,
  Lamented, perish'd on a stranger's bed:
  --He held his way o'er the Cerulian main,
  But I returned to hostile fields again.




       THE LAST PRAYER OF MARY, QUEEN OF SCOTS.
                  BY W. G. CLARK.

          "O Domini Deus speravi in te,
           O caru mi Jesu nunc libera me:
            In dura catena, in misera pena,
                            Desidera te--
           Languendo, gemando, et genuflectendo,
           Adoro, imploro, ut liberas me!"[P]

  It was the holy twilight hour, when clouds of crimson glide
  Along the calm blue firmament, hushed in the evening tide;
  When the peasant's cheerful song was hushed, by every hill and glen,
  When the city's voice stole faintly out, and died the hum of men;
  And as Night's sombre shade came down o'er Day's resplendant eye,
  A faded face, from prison cell, gazed out upon the sky;
  For to that face the glad, bright sun of earth for aye had set,
  And the last time had come, to mark eve's starry coronet.

  Oh, who can paint the bitter thoughts that o'er her spirit stole,
  As her pale lips gave utterance to feeling's deep controul--
  When shadowed from life's vista back, throng'd 'mid her
      bursting tears,
  The phantasies of early hope--dreams of departed years;
  When Pleasure's light was sprinkled, and silver voices flung
  Their rich and echoing cadences her virgin hours among--
  When there came no shadow o'er her brow, no tear to dim her eye,
  When there frown'd no cloud of sorrow in her being's festal sky.

  Perchance at that lone hour the thought of early visions came,
  Of the trance that touched her lip with song at Love's
      mysterious flame;
  When she listened to the low-breathed tones of him the idol one,
  Who shone in her mind's imagings first ray of pleasure's sun;
  Perchance the walk in evening's hour, the impassion'd kiss and vow--
  The warm tear kindling on the cheek, the smile upon the brow:
  But they came like flowers that wither, and the light of all had fled,
  Like a hue from April's pinion o'er earth's budding bosom shed.

  And thus as star came after star into the boundless heaven,
  Were her free thoughts and eloquent in pensive numbers given;
  They were the offerings of a heart where grief had long held sway,
  And now the night, the hour had come, to give her feelings way;
  It was the last dim night of life--the sun had sunk to rest,
  And the blue twilight haze had crept on the far mountain's breast;
  And thus, as in her saddened heart the tide of love grew strong,
  Poured her meek, quiet spirit forth this flood of mournful song:

  "The shades of evening gather now o'er the mysterious earth,
  The viewless winds are whispering their strains of breezy mirth;
  The yellow moon hath come to shed a flood of glory round
  On the silence of this calm repose, the beauty of the ground;
  And in the free, sweet, gales that sweep along my prison bar,
  Seem borne the soft, deep harmonies of every kindly star;
  I see the blue streams dancing in the mild and chastened light,
  And the gem-lit fleecy clouds that steal along the brow of night.

  "Oh, must I leave existence now, while life is in its spring--
  While Joy should cheer my pilgrimage with gladness from his wing?
  Are the songs of Hope for ever flown?--the syren voice which flung
  The chant of Youth's warm happiness from the beguiler's tongue?
  Shall I drink no more the melody of babbling stream or bird,
  Or the scented gales of Summer, when the leaves of June are stirred?
  Shall the pulse of love wax fainter; and the spirit shrink from death,
  As the bud-like thoughts which lit my heart fade in its
      chilling breath?

  "I have passed the dreams of childhood, and my loves and hopes
      are gone,
  And I turn to Thee, Redeemer, oh, thou blest and holy one!
  Though the rose of health has vanished, and the mandate hath
      been spoken,
  And one by one the golden links of life's fond chain are broken,
  Yet can my spirit turn to thee, thou chastener, and can bend
  In humble suppliance at thy feet, my Father and my Friend!
  Thou who hast crowned my youth with hope, my early days with glee,
  Give me the eagle's fearless wing--the dove's to mount to thee!

  "I lose my foolish hold on life, its passions and its tears--
  How brief the golden ecstacies of its young, careless years!
  I give my heart to earth no more--the grave may clasp me now--
  The winds, whose tones I loved, may play in the dim cypress bough;
  The birds, the streams are eloquent, yet I shall pass away,
  And in the light of heaven shake off this cumbrous load of clay;
  I shall join the lost and loved of earth, and meet each
      kindred breast,
  'Where the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest.'"




    THE RECOLLECTIONS OF THE PEOPLE.

    [_From the French of Beranger._]

          BY THEODORE S. FAY.

  They'll talk of him, and of his glory,
    The cottage hearth, at eve, around;
  Fifty years hence no other story
    Shall 'neath the lowly thatch resound.
  Then shall the villagers repair
    To some gray ancient dame,
  And bid her long-past times declare,
    And tell his deeds, his fame.
  "Ah, though it cost us life and limb,"
    They'll say, "our love is still the same,
    And still the people love his name;
  Good mother, tell of him!"

  My children, through this very region
    He journey'd with a train of kings,
  Followed by many a gallant legion!
    (How many thoughts to me it brings,
  That tell of days so long gone by!)
    He climbed on foot the very hill
  Where, seated on the bank, was I
    To see him pass. I see him still;
  The small, three-coloured hat he wore,
    And the surtout of gray.
  I trembled at his sight all o'er!--
    Cheerful he said, "My dear, good day!"
    "Mother, he spoke to you, you say?"
  "Ay, said 'good day' once more."

  Next year at Paris, too, one morning,
    Myself, I saw him with his court,
  Princes and queens his _suite_ adorning,
    To Notre Dame he did resort;
  And every body blest the day
    And prayed for him and his;
  How happily he took his way,
    And smiled in all a father's bliss,
  For heaven a son bestowed!
    "A happy day for you was this,
  Good mother!" then they say:
    "When thus you saw him on the road,
  In Notre Dame to kneel and pray,
    A good heart sure it showed."

  "Alas! ere long, invading strangers
    Brought death and ruin in our land!
  (Alone he stood and braved all dangers,
    The sword in his unconquer'd hand.)
  One night, (it seems but yesterday,)
    I heard a knocking at the door--
  It was himself upon his way,
    A few true followers, no more,
  Stood worn and weary at his side.
    Where I am sitting now he sat--
  'Oh what a war is this!' he cried.
    Oh what a war!'" "Mother, how's that?
  Did he, then, sit in that same chair?"
  "My children, yes!--he rested there!"

  "I'm hungry," then he said, "and gladly
    I brought him country wine and bread;
  The gray surtout was dripping sadly;
    He dried it by this fire. His head,
  He leaned against this wall, and slept--
    While, as for me, I sat and wept.
  He waked and cried, 'Be of good cheer!
    I go to Paris, France to free,
  And better times, be sure, are near!'
    He went, and I have ever kept
  The cup he drank from--children, see!
  My greatest treasure!" "Show it me,"
  "And me!"--"and me!" the listeners cry--
  "Good mother, keep it carefully!"

  "Ah, it is safe! but where is he?
    Crowned by the pope, our father good,
  In a lone island of the sea
    The hero died. Long time we stood
  Firm in belief he was not dead,
    And some by sea, and some by land--
  But all, that he was coming, said.
  And when, at length, all hope was o'er,
  Than I, were few that sorrowed more!"
    "Ah, mother, well we understand!
  Our blessings on you; we too weep,
  We will pray for you ere we sleep!"




           THE HUSBAND TO HIS WIFE,
               ON HER BIRTH-DAY.

                 BY JOHN INMAN.

  Nay, ask me not, my dearest! why silent I remain--
  Not often will my feelings speak in smooth and measured strain.
  The joy that fills my heart, in the love I bear to thee,
  Too deeply in that heart is shrined, by words expressed to be;
  And thousand thoughts of tenderness, that in my bosom throng,
  Are all too bright and blessed to be manacled in song.
  This is thy birth-day, dearest--the fairest of the year--
  To many giving gladness, but to me of all most dear;
  The birth-day of my happiness, which sprang to life with thee,
  As hope springs in the captive's breast with the hour that
       sets him free.
  I hail its happy dawning, with a love like that which fills
  My heart for thee, my pure one, when thy kind voice in it thrills.
  I bless it and its memories, and the blessing which I give,
  Is fervent as the dying man's to him who bids him live--
  But the joy I have in thee, dear love, speaks not in echoes loud,
  Nor will its tranquil flowing be revealed before a crowd.




                         VERSES




  TO THE MEMORY OF COL. WOOD OF THE UNITED STATES' ARMY,
                WHO FELL AT THE SORTIE OF ERIE.

                  BY THE LATE GEN. J. MORTON.

  What though on foeman's land he fell,
  No stone the sacred spot to tell,
  Yet where the noble Hudson's waves
  Its shores of lofty granite laves,
  The loved associates of his youth,
  Who knew his worth--his spotless truth,
  Have bade the marble column rise,
  To bid the world that worth to prize;
  To teach the youth like him aspire,
  And never-fading fame acquire;
  Like him on Glory's wings to rise,
  To reach, to pierce the azure skies.
  And oft the Patriot _there_ will sigh,
  And Sorrow oft cloud Beauty's eye,
  Whene'er fond memory brings again
  The Youth who sleeps on Erie's plain.




        LIFE'S GUIDING STAR.

         BY WILLIAM LEGGETT.

  The youth whose bark is guided o'er
    A summer stream by zephyr's breath,
  With idle gaze delights to pore
    On imaged skies that glow beneath.
  But should a fleeting storm arise
    To shade awhile the watery way,
  Quick lifts to heaven his anxious eyes,
    And speeds to reach some sheltering bay.

  'Tis thus down time's eventful tide,
    While prosperous breezes gently blow,
  In life's frail bark we gaily glide
    Our hopes, our thoughts all fixed below.
  But let one cloud the prospect dim,
    The wind its quiet stillness mar,
  At once we raise our prayer to Him
    Whose light is life's best guiding star.




                     DESPONDENCY.

  WRITTEN IN DEJECTION AND SORROW FOR LOST TIME.

                   BY JOHN INMAN.

  Whence come, my soul, these gloomy dreams,
    That darken thus my waking hours?
  And whence this blighting cloud, that seems
    To wither all thy better powers?
  What is this cankering worm that clings
    Around my heart with deadly strain,
  That o'er my thoughts its mildew flings,
    And makes my life one age of pain?

  I find no joy in home or friends--
    E'en music's voice has lost its spell--
  To me the rose no perfume lends,
    And mirth and I have said farewell.
  I dare not think upon the past,
    Where dwells remembrance, fraught with pain;
  Of youth's pure joys that could not last,
    And hopes I ne'er shall know again.

  I dare not ask the coming years
    What gifts their onward flight shall bring;
  For what but grief, and shame, and tears,
    From wasted time and powers can spring?
  Yet I can deck my cheek with smiles,
    And teach my heart to seem to glow,
  Though colder than those Northern isles
    Of ice and everlasting snow.

  Upon the frozen surface there,
    With tenfold light the sunbeams play--
  But false the dazzling gleam as fair--
    No verdure springs beneath the ray.
  And falser yet the laughing eye--
    The cheek that wears a seeming smile--
  The heart that hides its misery,
    And breaks beneath its load the while.




       TO A GOLDFINCH.

       BY ROSWELL PARK.

  Bird of the gentle wing,
    Songster of air,
  Home, from thy wandering,
    Dost thou repair?
  Art thou deserted then,
    Wilder'd and lone?
  Come to my breast again,
    Beautiful one.

  Here in the rosy beds
    Hover anew;
  Eating the garden seeds,
    Sipping the dew:
  Then in my bower
    The fragrance inhale
  Of each lovely flower
    That waves in the gale.

  When the bright morning star,
    Rising on high,
  Day's early harbinger,
    Shines in the sky,
  Then shall thy numbers,
    So lively and gay,
  Rouse me from slumbers,
    To welcome the day.

  When the still evening comes,
    Tranquil and clear;
  When the dull beetle roams,
    Drumming the air;
  Then, on the willow-trees
    Shading the door,
  Sing me thy melodies
    Over once more.

  Thus shall the moments fly
    Sweetly along,
  Tuned to thy minstrelsy,
    Cheered by thy song;
  Till as the light declines
    Far in the west,
  Thou, 'mid the trellis'd vines,
    Hush thee to rest.




         THE MIDNIGHT BALL.

      BY MISS ELIZABETH BOGART.

  She's bid adieu to the midnight ball,
      And cast the gems aside,
  Which glittered in the lighted hall:
      Her tears she cannot hide.
  She weeps not that the dance is o'er,
      The music and the song;
  She weeps not that her steps no more
      Are follow'd by the throng.

  Her memory seeks one form alone
      Within that crowded hall;
  Her truant thoughts but dwell on one
      At that gay midnight ball.
  And thence her tears unbidden flow--
      She's bid adieu to him;
  The light of love is darken'd now--
      All other lights are dim.

  She throws the worthless wreath away
      That deck'd her shining hair;
  She tears apart the bright bouquet
      Of flowrets rich and rare.
  The leaves lie scattered at her feet,
      She heeds not where they fall;
  She sees in them an emblem meet
      To mark the midnight-ball.




                  THE DESERTED BRIDE.

  [_Suggested by a Scene in the Play of the Hunchback._]

                    BY G. P. MORRIS.

  "Love me!--No--he never loved me!"
      Else he'd sooner die than stain
  One so fond as he has proved me
      With the hollow world's disdain.
  False one, go--my doom is spoken,
  And the spell that bound me broken!

  Wed him!--Never.--He has lost me!--
      Tears!--Well, let them flow!--His bride?--
  No.--The struggle life may cost me!
      But he'll find that I have pride!
  Love is not an idle flower,
  Blooms and dies the self-same hour.

  Titles, lands, and broad dominion,
      With himself to me he gave;
  Stoop'd to earth his spirit's pinion,
      And became my willing slave!
  Knelt and pray'd until he won me--
  Looks he coldly now upon me?

  Ingrate!--Never sure was maiden
      Wronged so foul as I. With grief
  My true breast is overladen--
      Tears afford me no relief.--
  Every nerve is strained and aching,
  And my very heart is breaking!

  Love I him?--Thus scorned and slighted--
      Thrown, like worthless weed, apart--
  Hopes and feelings sear'd and blighted--
      Love him?--Yes, with all my heart!
  With a passion superhuman--
  Constancy, "thy name is woman."

  Love nor time, nor mood, can fashion--
      Love?--Idolatry's the word
  To speak the broadest, deepest passion,
      Ever woman's heart hath stirr'd!
  Vain to still the mind's desires,
  Which consume like hidden fires!

  Wreck'd and wretched, lost and lonely,
      Crush'd by grief's oppressive weight,
  With a prayer for Clifford only,
      I resign me to my fate.
  Chains that bind the soul I've proven
  Strong as they were iron-woven.

  Deep the wo that fast is sending
      From my cheek its healthful bloom;
  Sad my thoughts, as willows bending
      O'er the borders of the tomb.
  Without Clifford not a blessing
  In the world is worth possessing.

  Wealth!--a straw within the balance,
      Opposed to love 'twill kick the beam:
  Kindred--friendship--beauty--talents?--
      All to love as nothing seem;
  Weigh love against all else together,
  As solid gold against a feather.

  Hope is flown--away disguises--
      Nought but death relief can give--
  For the love he little prizes
      Cannot cease and Julia live!
  Soon my thread of life will sever--
  Clifford, fare thee well--for ever!




     THOUGHTS AT THE GRAVE OF A DEPARTED FRIEND.

                   BY JOHN INMAN.

  Loved, lost one, fare thee well--too harsh the doom
    That called thee thus in opening life away;
  Tears fall for thee; and at thy early tomb
    I come at each return of this blest day,
  When evening hovers near, with solemn gloom,
    The pious debt of sorrowing thought to pay,
  For thee, blest spirit, whose loved form alone
  Here mouldering sleeps, beneath this simple stone.

  But memory claims thee still; and slumber brings
    Thy form before me as in life it came;
  Affection conquers death, and fondly clings
    Unto the past, and thee, and thy loved name;
  And hours glide swiftly by on noiseless wings,
    While sad discourses of thy loss I frame,
  With her the friend of thy most tranquil years,
  Who mourns for thee with grief too deep for tears.
                                     _Sunday Evening._




                SONG.

         BY THEODORE S. FAY.

  A careless, simple bird, one day
    Flutt'ring in Flora's bowers,
  Fell in a cruel trap, which lay
    All hid among the flowers,
        Forsooth, the pretty, harmless flowers.

  The spring was closed; poor, silly soul,
    He knew not what to do,
  Till, squeezing through a tiny hole,
    At length away he flew,
        Unhurt--at length away he flew.

  And now from every fond regret
    And idle anguish free,
  He, singing, says, "You need not set
    Another trap for me,
        False girl! another trap for me."




            ANACREONTIC.

          BY C. F. HOFFMAN.

  Blame not the Bowl--the fruitful Bowl!
    Whence wit, and mirth, and music spring,
  And amber drops elysian roll,
    To bathe young Love's delighted wing.
  What like the grape Osiris gave
    Makes rigid age so lithe of limb?
  Illumines Memory's tearful wave,
    And teaches drowning Hope to swim?
  Did Ocean from his radiant arms
    To earth another Venus give,
  He ne'er could match the mellow charms
    That in the breathing beaker live.

  Like burning thoughts which lovers hoard
    In characters that mock the sight,
  Till some kind liquid, o'er them poured,
    Brings all their hidden warmth to light--
  Are feelings bright, which, in the cup,
    Though graven deep, appear but dim,
  Till filled with glowing Bacchus up,
    They sparkle on the foaming brim.
  Each drop upon the first you pour
    Brings some new tender thought to life,
  And as you fill it more and more,
    The last with fervid soul is rife.

  The island fount, that kept of old
    Its fabled path beneath the sea,
  And fresh, as first from earth it rolled,
    From earth again rose joyously;
  Bore not beneath the bitter brine,
    Each flower upon its limpid tide,
  More faithfully than in the wine,
    Our hearts will toward each other glide.
  Then drain the cup, and let thy soul
    Learn, as the draught delicious flies,
  Like pearls in the Egyptian's bowl,
    Truth beaming at the bottom lies.




                MELODY.

          BY WILLIAM LEGGETT.

  If yon bright stars, which gem the night,
    Be each a blissful dwelling sphere,
  Where kindred spirits re-unite
    Whom death has torn asunder here,
  How sweet it were at once to die,
    And leave this blighted orb afar,
  Mixt soul and soul to cleave the sky,
    And soar away from star to star.

  But oh, how dark, how drear and lone,
    Would seem the brightest world of bliss,
  If wandering through each radiant one
    We failed to find the loved of this;
  If there no more the ties shall twine
    That death's cold hand alone could sever;
  Ah! then these stars in mockery shine,
    More hateful as they shine for ever.

  It cannot be each hope, each fear,
    That lights the eye or clouds the brow,
  Proclaims there is a happier sphere
    Than this bleak world that holds us now.
  There is a voice which sorrow hears,
    When heaviest weighs life's galling chain;
  'Tis heaven that whispers--Dry thy tears,
    The pure in heart shall meet again.




                MY NATIVE LAND.

              BY THEODORE S. FAY.

    Columbia, was thy continent stretched wild,
      In later ages, the huge seas above?
    And art thou Nature's youngest, fairest child,
      Most favoured by thy gentle mother's love?
    Where now we stand, did ocean monsters rove,
      Tumbling uncouth, in those dim, vanish'd years,
    When, through the Red Sea, Pharaoh's thousands drove,
      When struggling Joseph dropped fraternal tears,
  When God came down from heaven, and mortal men were seers?

    Or, have thy forests waved, thy rivers run,
      Elysian solitudes, untrod by man,
    Silent and lonely, since, around the sun,
      Her ever-wheeling circle, earth began?
    Thy unseen flowers, did here the breezes fan?
      With wasted perfume ever on them flung?
    And o'er thy show'rs, neglected rainbows span,
      When Alexander fought, when Homer sung,
  And the old populous world with thundering battle rung?

    Yet what to me, or when, or how thy birth,
      No musty tomes are here to tell of thee;
    None know, if cast when nature first the earth
      Shaped round, and clothed with grass, and flower, and tree,
    Or, whether since, by changes, silently,
      Of sand and shell, and wave, thy wonders grew;
    Or if, before man's little memory,
      Some shock stupendous rent the globe in two,
  And thee, a fragment, far in western oceans threw.

    I know but that I love thee. On my heart,
      Like a dear friend's, are stamped thy features now;
    Though there, the Roman, or the Grecian art
      Hath lent, to deck thy plain and mountain brow,
    No broken temples, fain at length to bow,
      Moss-grown and crumbling with the weight of time.
    Not these, o'er thee, their mystic splendours throw;
      Themes eloquent for pencil or for rhyme,
  As many a soul can tell that pours its thoughts sublime.

    But thou art sternly artless, wildly free:
      We worship thee for beauties all thine own.
    Like damsel, young and sweet, and sure to be
      Admired, but only for herself alone.
    With richer foliage ne'er was land o'ergrown.
      No mightier rivers run, nor mountains rise;
    Nor ever lakes with lovelier graces shone,
      Nor wealthier harvests waved in human eyes,
  Nor lay more liquid stars along more heavenly skies.

    I dream of thee, fairest of fairy streams.
      Sweet Hudson! Float we on thy summer breast.
    Who views thy enchanted windings ever deems
      Thy banks, of mortal shores, the loveliest!
    Hail to thy shelving slopes, with verdure dress'd,
      Bright break thy waves the varied beach upon;
    Soft rise thy hills, by amorous clouds caress'd;
      Clear flow thy waters, laughing in the sun--
  Would through such peaceful scenes my life might gently run!

    And lo! the Catskills print the distant sky;
      And o'er their airy tops the faint clouds driven,
    So softly blending, that the cheated eye
      Forgets, or which is earth or which is heaven--
    Sometimes, like thunder clouds, they shade the even,
      Till, as you nearer draw, each wooded height
    Puts off the azure hues by distance given;
      And slowly break, upon the enamour'd sight,
  Ravine, crag, field and wood, in colours true and bright.

    Mount to the cloud-kissed summit. Far below
      Spreads the vast Champaign like a shoreless sea.
    Mark yonder narrow streamlet feebly flow,
      Like idle brook that creeps ingloriously;
    Can that the lovely, lordly Hudson be,
      Stealing by town and mountain? Who beholds,
    At break of day, this scene, when, silently,
      Its map of field, wood, hamlet is unroll'd,
  While, in the east, the sun uprears his locks of gold,

    Till earth receive him never can forget.
      Even when returned amid the city's roar,
    The fairy vision haunts his memory yet,
      As in the sailor's fancy shines the shore.
    Imagination cons the moment o'er,
      When first discover'd, awe-struck and amazed.
    Scarce loftier, Jove--whom men and gods adore--
      On the extended earth beneath him gazed,
  Temple, and tower, and town, by human insect raised.

    Blow, scented gale--the snowy canvass swell,
      And flow, thou silver, eddying current on.
    Grieve we to bid each lovely point farewell,
      That, ere its graces half are seen, is gone.
    By woody bluff we steal, by leaning lawn,
      By palace, village, cot, a sweet surprise,
    At every turn, the vision breaks upon,
      Till to our wondering and uplifted eyes
  The Highland rocks and hills in solemn grandeur rise,

    Nor clouds in heaven, nor billows in the deep,
      More graceful shapes did ever heave or roll,
    Nor came such pictures to a painter's sleep,
      Nor beamed such visions on a poet's soul!
    The pent-up flood, impatient of control,
      In ages past, here broke its granite bound;
    Then to the sea, in broad meanders, stole;
      While ponderous ruins strewed the broken ground,
  And these gigantic hills for ever closed around.

    And ever-wakeful echo here doth dwell,
      The nymph of sportive mockery, that still
    Hides behind every rock, in every dell,
      And softly glides, unseen, from hill to hill.
    No sound doth rise, but mimic it she will,
      The sturgeon's splash repeating from the shore,
    Aping the boy's voice with a voice as shrill,
      The bird's low warble, and the thunder's roar,
  Always she watches there, each murmur telling o'er.

    Awake my lyre, with other themes inspired.
      Where yon bold point repels the crystal tide,
    The Briton youth, lamented and admired,
      His country's hope, her ornament and pride,
    A traitor's death, ingloriously died,
      On freedom's altar offered; in the sight
    Of God, by men who will their act abide,
      On the great day, and hold their deed aright,
  To stop the breath would quench young Freedom's holy light.

    But see! the broadening river deeper flows,
      Its tribute floods intent to reach the sea,
    While, from the west, the fading sunlight throws
      Its softening hues on stream, and field and tree;
    All silent nature bathing, wondrously,
      In charms that soothe the heart with sweet desires,
    And thoughts of friends we ne'er again may see,
      Till lo! ahead, Manhatta's bristling spires,
  Above her thousand roofs red with day's dying fires.

    May greet the wanderer of Columbia's shore,
      Proud Venice of the west! no lovelier scene.
    Of thy vast throngs, now faintly comes the roar,
      Though late like beating-ocean surf I ween--
    And every where thy various barks are seen,
      Cleaving the limpid floods that round thee flow,
    Encircled by thy banks of sunny green--
      The panting steamer plying to and fro,
  Or the tall sea-bound ship abroad on wings of snow.

    And radiantly upon the glittering mass,
      The God of day his parting glances sends,
    As some warm soul, from earth about to pass,
      Back on its fading scenes and mourning friends,
    Deep words of love and looks of rapture bends,
      More bright and bright, as near their end they be.
    On, on, great orb! to earth's remotest ends,
      Each land irradiate, and every sea--
  But oh, my native land, not one, not one like thee!




          HE CAME TOO LATE!

       BY MISS ELIZABETH BOGART.

  He came too late!--Neglect had tried
    Her constancy too long;
  Her love had yielded to her pride,
    And the deep sense of wrong.
  She scorned the offering of a heart
    Which, lingered on its way,
  Till it could no delight impart,
    Nor spread one cheering ray.

  He came too late!--At once he felt
    That all his power was o'er!
  Indifference in her calm smile dwelt,
    She thought of him no more.
  Anger and grief had passed away,
    Her heart and thoughts were free;
  She met him, and her words were gay,
    No spell had memory.

  He came too late!--The subtle chords
    Of love were all unbound,
  Not by offence of spoken words,
    But by the slights that wound.
  She knew that life held nothing now
    That could the past repay,
  Yet she disdained his tardy vow,
    And coldly turned away.

  He came too late!--Her countless dreams
    Of hope had long since flown;
  No charms dwelt in his chosen themes,
    Nor in his whispered tone.
  And when, with word and smile, he tried
    Affection still to prove,
  She nerved her heart with woman's pride,
    And spurned his fickle love.




                 VERSES,
   WRITTEN IN A BOOK OF FORTUNES, 1787.

         BY THE LATE GEN. MORTON.

  As through the garden's sweet domain
    The bee from leaf to leaf will rove,
  Will cull its sweets with anxious pain,
    Then bear its treasures to his love;
  So from those leaves which bring to view
    Things hid by fate in Time's dark reign,
  With care I'd cull, dear girl, for you,
    The richest blessings they contain;
  But fortune here our power restrains,
    Nor leaves her blessings in our hand:
  To _wish_, alone to _us_ remains,
    The _Gift_ is still at _her_ command.

  Take, then, sweet maid, this wish sincere,
    Which in a friendly heart doth glow--
  A heart which will thy worth revere
    Till life's rich streams shall cease to flow:
  On the fair morning of thy life
    May love beam forth his brightest ray,--
  May friendship's joys, unvexed by strife,
    Glad the meridian of thy day;
  And when life's solemn eve shall come,
    And time to you shall ever cease,
  May then religion cheer the gloom,
    And light thy path to endless peace.




         EPITAPH UPON A DOG.

           BY C. F. HOFFMAN.

  An ear that caught my slightest tone
    In kindness or in anger spoken;
  An eye that ever watch'd my own
    In vigils death alone has broken;
  Its changeless, ceaseless, and unbought
    Affection to the last revealing;
  Beaming almost with human thought,
    And more than human feeling!

  Can such in endless sleep be chilled,
    And mortal pride disdain to sorrow,
  Because the pulse that here was stilled
    May wake to no immortal morrow?
  Can faith, devotedness, and love,
    That seem to humbler creatures given
  To tell us what we owe above!
    The types of what is due to Heaven?

  Can these be with the things that _were_,
    Things cherished--but no more returning;
  And leave behind no trace of care,
    No shade that speaks a moment's mourning?
  Alas! my friend, of all of worth,
    That years have stol'n or years yet leave me,
  I've never known so much on earth,
    But that the loss of thine must grieve me.




                LINES FOR MUSIC.

               BY THEODORE S. FAY.

  Over forest and meadow the night breeze is stealing,
    The blush of the sunset is glowing no more--
  And the stream which we love, harmless fires revealing,
    With ripples of silver is kissing the shore.
  I have watched from the beach which your presence enchanted,
    In the star-lighted heaven each beautiful gem,
  And I sighed as I thought, ere the break of the morning,
    From the gaze of my eyes you must vanish like them.
  Then stay where the night breeze o'er flowers is stealing,
    And raise your young voices in music once more;
  Let them blend with the stream, its soft murmurs revealing
    In the ripples of silver which roll to the shore.

  But when summer has fled, and yon flowers have faded,
    And the fields and the forests are withered and sere--
  When the friends now together, by distance are parted,
    Leaving nothing but winter and loneliness here;
  Will you think of the hour, when in friendship united,
    I lingered at evening to bid you adieu;
  When I paused by the stream, with the stars so delighted,
    And wished I might linger for ever with you?
  Oh, forget not the time when that night breeze was stealing,
    Though desolate oceans between us may roar,
  The beach--and the stars--and the waters revealing
    Thoughts bright as the ripples which break on the shore.




                        STANZAS.

                     BY JOHN INMAN.

      L'amour ne suffit pas au bonheur; les richesses
    y font aussi beaucoup de cas, et parfois sans les
    richesses, l'amour ne produit que la misere.
    C'est grand dommage, mais c'est vrai.--_Madame de Beaumarchais._

  Alas! alas, that poverty's cold hand
    Should come to wither young affection's flowers--
  Marring the fairy pictures hope has planned
    Of love and joy in future happy hours--
    Alas, that all the blessings fancy showers
  O'er the young heart, should turn to grief and tears,
  Poisoning the cup of life through all our after-years!

  A moment's pleasure and an age of pain--
    One hour of sunshine, and the rest all gloom--
  And this, oh Love, is what from thee we gain--
    Of all who bow before thee, this the doom--
    And in thy footsteps, like the dread Zamoom,
  Pale sorrow comes, a longer-dwelling guest,
  To curse the wasted heart that once by thee was blest.




  JOSHUA COMMANDING THE SUN AND MOON TO STAND STILL.

               BY J. B. VANSCHAICK.

  The day rose clear on Gibeon. Her high towers
  Flash'd the red sun-beams gloriously back,
  And the wind-driven banners, and the steel
  Of her ten thousand spears caught dazzlingly
  The sun, and on the fortresses of rock
  Play'd a soft glow, that as a mockery seem'd
  To the stern men who girded by its light.
  Beth-Horon in the distance slept, and breath
  Was pleasant in the vale of Ajalon,
  Where armed heels trod carelessly the sweet
  Wild spices, and the trees of gum were shook
  By the rude armour on their branches hung.
  Suddenly in the camp without the walls
  Rose a deep murmur, and the men of war
  Gather'd around their kings, and "Joshua!
  From Gilgal, Joshua!" was whisper'd low,
  As with a secret fear, and then, at once,
  With the abruptness of a dream, he stood
  Upon the rock before them. Calmly then
  Raised he his helm, and with his temples bare
  And hands uplifted to the sky, he pray'd;--
  "God of this people, hear! and let the sun
  Stand upon Gibeon, still; and let the moon
  Rest in the vale of Ajalon!" He ceased--
  And lo! the moon sits motionless, and earth
  Stands on her axis indolent. The sun
  Pours the unmoving column of his rays
  In undiminish'd heat; the hours stand still;
  The shade hath stopp'd upon the dial's face;
  The clouds and vapours that at night are wont
  To gather and enshroud the lower earth,
  Are struggling with strange rays, breaking them up,
  Scattering the misty phalanx like a wand,
  Glancing o'er mountain tops, and shining down
  In broken masses on the astonish'd plains.
  The fever'd cattle group in wondering herds;
  The weary birds go to their leafy nests,
  But find no darkness there, and wander forth
  On feeble, fluttering wing, to find a rest;
  The parch'd, baked earth, undamp'd by usual dews,
  Has gaped and crack'd, and heat, dry, mid-day heat,
  Comes like a drunkard's breath upon the heart.
  On with thy armies, Joshua! The Lord
  God of Sabaoth is the avenger now!
  His voice is in the thunder, and his wrath
  Poureth the beams of the retarded sun,
  With the keen strength of arrows, on their sight.
  The unwearied sun rides in the zenith sky;
  Nature, obedient to her Maker's voice,
  Stops in full course all her mysterious wheels.
  On! till avenging swords have drunk the blood
  Of all Jehovah's enemies, and till
  Thy banners in returning triumph wave;
  Then yonder orb shall set 'mid golden clouds,
  And, while a dewy rain falls soft on earth,
  Show in the heavens the glorious bow of God,
  Shining, the rainbow banner of the skies.




                 SONG.

          BY WILLIAM LEGGETT.

  I trust the frown thy features wear
    Ere long into a smile will turn;
  I would not that a face so fair
    As thine, beloved, should look so stern.
  The chain of ice that winter twines,
    Holds not for aye the sparkling rill,
  It melts away when summer shines,
    And leaves the waters sparkling still.
  Thus let thy cheek resume the smile
    That shed such sunny light before;
  And though I left thee for a while,
    I'll swear to leave thee, love, no more.

  As he who, doomed o'er waves to roam,
    Or wander on a foreign strand,
  Will sigh whene'er he thinks of home,
    And better love his native land;
  So I, though lured a time away,
    Like bees by varied sweets, to rove,
  Return, like bees, by close of day,
    And leave them all for thee, my love.
  Then let thy cheek resume the smile
    That shed such sunny light before,
  And though I left thee for a while,
    I'll swear to leave thee, love, no more.




              WEST POINT.

  [_Suggested by the attendance on Public Worship
       of the Cadets.--June, 1833._]

           BY GEORGE D. STRONG.

        Bugles upon the wind!
        Hushed voices in the air,
  And the solemn roll of the stirring drum,
        Proclaim the hour of prayer;
  While, with measured tread and downcast eye
  The martial train sweep silent by!

        Away with the nodding plume,
        And the glittering bayonet now,
  For unmeet it were, with bannered pomp,
        To record the sacred vow.
  To earth-born strife let display be given,
  But the heart's meek homage alone to heaven.

        The organ's mellow notes
        Come swelling on the breeze,
  And, echoing forth from arch to dome,
        Float richest symphonies!
  While youthful forms, a sunny throng,
  With their voices deep the strains prolong!

        Deserted now the aisles--
        Devotion's rites are past;
  And again the bugle's cheering peals
        Are ringing on the blast!
  Come forth, ye brave, for your country now,
  With your flashing eyes and your lofty brow!

        A voice from the glorious dead!
        Awake to the call of fame!
  By yon gorgeous banner's spangled folds,
        And by Kosciusko's name!
  And on Putnam's fort by the light that falls
  On its ivied moat and its ruined walls,

        The wave-worn cavern sends
        Hoarse echoes from the deep,
  And the patriot call is heard afar
        From every giant steep!
  And the young hearts glow with the sacred fires
  That burned in the breasts of their gallant sires.

        The glittering pageant's past,
        But martial forms are seen,
  With bounding step and eagle glance,
        Careering o'er the green;
  And lovely woman by their side,
  With her blushing cheek and her eye of pride.

        Sunset upon the wave,
        Its burnished splendours pour,
  And the bird-like bark with its pinions sweeps
        Like an arrow from the shore!
  There are golden locks in the sunbeam, fanned
  On the mirrored stream by the breezes bland.

        They have passed like shadows by
        That fade in the morning beam,
  And the sylph-like form, and the laughing eye,
        Are remembered like a dream;
  But memory's sun shall set in night
  Ere my soul forget those forms of light.




            THANKSGIVING
    AFTER ESCAPE FROM INDIAN PERILS.

    BY MRS. ANNE E. BLEECKER.--1778.

  Alas! my fond inquiring soul,
    Doomed in suspense to mourn,
  Now let thy moments calmly roll,
    Now let thy peace return.
  Why should'st thou let a doubt disturb
    Thy hopes which daily rise,
  And urge thee on to trust his word,
    Who built and rules the skies?

  When Murder sent her hopeless cries,
    More dreadful through the gloom,
  And kindling flames did round thee rise,
    Deep harvests to consume.
  Who was it led thee through the wood,
    And o'er the ensanguined plain,
  Unseen by ambushed sons of blood,
    Who track'd thy steps in vain.

  'Twas pitying Heaven that check'd my tears,
    And bade my infants play,
  To give an opiate to my fears
    And cheer the lonely way.
  And in the doubly dreadful night,
    When my Abella died,
  When horror-struck--detesting light,
    I sunk down by her side;

  When winged for flight my spirit stood,
    With this fond thought beguiled,
  To lead my charmer to her God,
    And there to claim my child.
  Again his mercy o'er my breast
    Effus'd the breath of peace,
  Subsiding passion sunk to rest,
    He bade the tempest cease.

  Oh, let me ever, ever praise
    Such undeserved care,
  Though languid may appear my lays,
    At least they are sincere.
  It is my joy that thou art God,
    Eternal and supreme;
  Rise, Nature--hail the power aloud,
    From whom Creation came.




                BALLAD.
        BY MRS. EMMA C. EMBURY.

  "La rose cueillie et le coeur gagne ne plaisent qu'un jour."

  The maiden sat at her busy wheel,
    Her heart was light and free,
  And ever in cheerful song broke forth
    Her bosom's harmless glee.
  Her song was in mockery of love,
    And oft I heard her say,
  "The gathered rose, and the stolen heart,
    Can charm but for a day."

  I looked on the maiden's rosy cheek,
    And her lip so full and bright,
  And I sighed to think that the traitor love,
    Should conquer a heart so light:
  But she thought not of future days of wo,
    While she carroled in tones so gay;
  "The gathered rose, and the stolen heart,
    Can charm but for a day."

  A year passed on, and again I stood
    By the humble cottage-door;
  The maid sat at her busy wheel,
    But her look was blithe no more:
  The big tear stood in her downcast eye,
    And with sighs I heard her say,
  "The gathered rose, and the stolen heart,
    Can charm but for a day."

  Oh! well I knew what had dimmed her eye,
    And made her cheek so pale;
  The maid had forgotten her early song,
    While she listened to love's soft tale.
  She had tasted the sweets of his poisoned cup,
    It had wasted her life away:
  And the stolen heart, like the gathered rose,
    Had charmed but for a day.




           FORGETFULNESS.

      BY MISS ELIZABETH S. BOGART.

  We parted--friendship's dream had cast
    Deep interest o'er the brief farewell,
  And left upon the shadowy past
    Full many a thought on which to dwell.
  Such thoughts as come in early youth,
    And live in fellowship with hope;
  Robed in the brilliant hues of truth,
    Unfitted with the world to cope.

  We parted--he went o'er the sea,
    And deeper solitude was mine;
  Yet there remained in memory,
    For feeling, still a sacred shrine.
  And thought and hope were offered up
    Till their ethereal essence fled,
  And disappointment, from the cup,
    Its dark libations poured, instead.

  We parted--'twas an idle dream
    That _thus_ we e'er should meet again;
  For who that knew man's heart, would deem
    That it could long unchanged remain.
  He sought a foreign clime, and learned
    Another language, which expressed
  To strangers the rich thoughts that burned
    With unquenched power within his breast.

  And soon he better loved to speak
    In those new accents than his own;
  His native tongue seemed cold and weak,
    To breathe the wakened passions' tone.
  He wandered far, and lingered long,
    And drank so deep of Lethe's stream,
  That each new feeling grew more strong,
    And all the past was like a dream.

  We met--a few glad words were spoken,
    A few kind glances were exchanged;
  But friendship's first romance was broken,
    His had been from me estranged.
  I felt it all--we met no more--
    My heart was true, but it was proud;
  Life's early confidence was o'er,
    And hope had set beneath a cloud.

  We met no more--for neither sought
    To reunite the severed chain
  Of social intercourse; for nought
    Could join its parted links again.
  Too much of the wide world had been
    Between us for too long a time;
  And he had looked on many a scene,
    The beautiful and the sublime.

  And he had themes on which to dwell,
    And memories that were not mine,
  Which formed a separating spell,
    And drew a mystic boundary line.
  His thoughts were wanderers--and the things
    Which brought back friendship's joys to me,
  To him were but the spirit's wings
    Which bore him o'er the distant sea.

  For he had seen the evening star
    Glancing its rays o'er ocean's waves,
  And marked the moonbeams from afar,
    Lighting the Grecian heroes' graves.
  And he had gazed on trees and flowers
    Beneath Italia's sunny skies,
  And listened, in fair ladies' bowers,
    To genius' words, and beauty's sighs.

  His steps had echoed through the halls
    Of grandeur, long left desolate;
  And he had climbed the crumbling walls,
    Or op'd perforce the hingeless gate;
  And mused o'er many an ancient pile,
    In ruin still magnificent,
  Whose histories could the hours beguile
    With dreams, before to fancy lent.

  Such recollections come to him,
    With moon, and stars, and summer flowers;
  To me they bring the shadows dim
    Of earlier and of happier hours.
  I would those shadows darker fell--
    For life, with its best powers to bless,
  Has but few memories loved as well,
    Or welcome as _forgetfulness_.




           ON SHIP-BOARD.

         BY THEODORE S. FAY.

  Now freshening breezes swell the sail,
  Now leans the vessel to the gale;
  So slant her deck, you have to cling
  A moment to the nearest thing;
  So far she bends into the deep,
  Across her deck the white waves sweep;
  Bursts through the flood the pointed prow,
  That loves the startled foam to throw,
  And thunders on before the wind,
  Long breaks of whirl and froth behind;
  And when the seas the bows o'erwhelm,
  The captain mutters, "mind your helm!"
  At night, when stormy shadows fall,
  "All hands on deck," the captain's call.
  Darkness around, save when below
  Dim light the bursting billows throw--
  And heave the waves, and beats the rain--
  The labouring vessel groans with pain;
  Strains--lurches--thunders--rocks and rolls,
  We smile--but tremble in our souls!
  Fierce howls the blast through sail and shroud,
  And rings the tempest long and loud;
  But sweet the change, when tranquilly
  In sunshine sleep the air and sea.
  Pen may not paint each magic dye
  On the soft wave and sunny sky,
  When comes the charming silent eve,
  And gentle billows idly heave.
  The liquid floor bends smooth and bright,
  Like molten silver to the light;
  Till, as the western clouds enfold
  The fiery sun, it turns to gold,
  And then a thousand colours, straying
  From heaven to earth, and sweetly playing
  Upon the ocean's giant breast,
  Compose his savage soul to rest.
  And thus, within the human mind,
  When waves are hushed and still the wind,
  When passion's storm has passed away,
  And vice no more obscures the day,
  The beams of virtue and of love
  Break softly, falling from above,
  O'er half-breathed wordly wishes shine,
  And calm them with a power divine.




            TO THEMIRA.

        BY WILLIAM LEGGETT.

  [_Written with French chalk[Q] on a pane
    of glass in the home of a friend._]

  On this frail glass, to others' view,
    No written words appear;
  They see the prospect smiling through,
    Nor deem what secret's here.
  But shouldst thou on the tablet bright
    A single breath bestow,
  At once the record starts to sight
    Which only thou must know.

  Thus, like this glass, to stranger's gaze
    My heart seemed unimpress'd;
  In vain did beauty round me blaze,
    It could not warm my breast.
  But as one breath of thine can make
    These letters plain to see,
  So in my heart did love awake
    When breath'd upon by thee.




                  EVENING.

         [_From the Backwoodsman._]

            BY JAMES K. PAULDING.

    'Twas sunset's hallow'd time--and such an eve
  Might almost tempt an angel heaven to leave.
  Never did brighter glories greet the eye,
  Low in the warm and ruddy western sky:
  Nor the light clouds at summer eve unfold
  More varied tints of purple, red, and gold.
  Some in the pure, translucent, liquid breast
  Of crystal lake, fast anchor'd seem'd to rest,
  Like golden islets scatter'd far and wide,
  By elfin skill in fancy's fabled tide,
  Were, as wild eastern legends idly feign,
  Fairy, or genii, hold despotic reign.
  Others, like vessels gilt with burnish'd gold,
  Their flitting, airy way are seen to hold,
  All gallantly equipp'd with streamers gay,
  While hands unseen, or chance directs their way;
  Around, athwart, the pure ethereal tide,
  With swelling purple sail, they rapid glide,
  Gay as the bark where Egypt's wanton queen
  Reclining on the shaded deck was seen,
  At which as gazed the uxorious Roman fool,
  The subject world slipt from his dotard rule.
  Anon, the gorgeous scene begins to fade,
  And deeper hues the ruddy skied invade;
  The haze of gathering twilight nature shrouds,
  And pale, and paler, wax the changeful clouds.
  Then sunk the breeze into a breathless calm,
  The silent dews of evening dropt like balm;
  The hungry night-hawk from his lone haunt hies,
  To chase the viewless insect through the skies;
  The bat began his lantern-loving flight,
  The lonely whip-poor-will, our bird of night,
  Ever unseen, yet ever seeming near,
  His shrill note quaver'd in the startled ear;
  The buzzing beetle forth did gaily hie,
  With idle hum, and careless blundering eye;
  The little trusty watchman of pale night,
  The firefly trimm'd anew his lamp so bright,
  And took his merry airy circuit round
  The sparkling meadow's green and fragrant bound,
  Where blossom'd clover, bathed in balmy dew,
  In fair luxuriance, sweetly blushing grew.




              THOUGHTS ON PARTING.

                  BY JOHN INMAN.

  Yes! I will hope, though fortune's stern decree
    From all I love commands me soon to part;
  Nor doubt, though absent, that a thought of me
    Shall sometimes find a place in every heart,
  Where feeling glows, unchilled by time or art--
    Why should I doubt, when doubt is wretchedness,
  Such as to feel bids bitter tears to start
    From eyes that seldom weep, though tears, perhaps, might bless?

  It cannot be that love like that which fills
    My soul for them, should be bestowed in vain,
  When but the fear that they forget me, chills
    Each pulse and feeling--as the wintry rain
  Chills earth and air, which yet may glow again
    In summer's beams--but what can joy restore
  To bosoms upon which that blight has lain?
    From such e'en hope departs, and can return no more.

  For them I would have done--but let me not
    Such thoughts recall--could service e'er repay
  The blessings their companionship has wrought?--
    With them too swiftly passed the time away,
  On pleasure's wings--weeks dwindled to a day,
    And days to moments--such the charm they cast
  O'er every scene, and such their gentle sway,
    Making each glad hour seem still brighter than the last.

  To them I turned, as Iran's tameless race
    Toward their refulgent God looked till the last,
  And died still gazing on his radiant face;--
    Alas! the spring-time of my year is past--
  From them afar my line of life is cast,
    And I must wander now like one that's lost--
  A helmless bark, blown wide by every blast,
    And without hope or joy, on life's rude surges toss'd.

  Oh no, it cannot be that grief like this
    Should be reserved to blight my coming years--
  That moments of such almost perfect bliss
    Should be succeeded by an age of tears--
  Revive, then, hope, and put to flight my fears;
    I'll meet the future with undaunted eye,
  Trusting thy light, that now my pathway cheers,
    Gilding its onward course, as sunset gilds the sky.




         THE FALLS OF NIAGARA.

    [_Translated from the Italian._[R]]

       BY SAMUEL L. MITCHELL.--1796.

  Borne to the rocky bed's extremest brow,
    The flood leaps headlong, nor a moment waits;--
  To join the whirlpool deep and vast below,
    The saltless ocean hurries through the straits.

  Hoarse roars the broken wave; and upward driv'n,
    Dashes in air;--dissolving vapours press'd
  Confound the troubled elements with heav'n:--
    Earth quakes beneath;--heart trembles in the breast.

  With steps uncertain, to a jutting rock,
    To gaze upon the immense abyss I hie;
  And all my senses feel a horrid shock
    As down the steep I turn my dizzy eye.

  On cloudy steams I take a flight sublime,
    Leaving the world and nature's works behind;
  And as the pure empyreal heights I climb,
    Reflect with rapture on the Immortal Mind.




        CANZONET.

    BY J. B. VANSCHAICK.

  When motes, that dancing
    In golden wine,
  To the eyes' glancing
    Speak while they shine--
  Then, the draught pouring,
    Love's fountain free,
  Mute, but adoring,
    I drink to thee.

  When sleep enchaineth,
    Sense steals away--
  Dream, o'er mind reigneth
    With dark strange sway--
  One sweet face floateth
    Sleep's misty sea,
  Th' unconscious heart doateth
    On thee--on thee.




         THE PENNSYLVANIAN IMMIGRANT.

          [_From the Backwoodsman._]

              BY J. K. PAULDING.

    Now all through Pennsylvania's pleasant land,
  Unheeded pass'd our little roving band,
  --For every soul had something here to do,
  Nor turn'd aside our cavalcade to view--
  By Bethlehem, where Moravian exiles 'bide,
  In rural paradise, on Lehigh's side,
  And York and Lancaster--whose rival rose
  In this good land, no bloody discord knows.
  Not such their fate!--the ever grateful soil
  Rewards the blue-eyed German's patient toil;
  Richer and rounder every year he grows,
  Nor other ills his stagnant bosom knows
  Than caitiff grub, or cursed Hessian fly,
  Mildews, and smuts, a dry or humid sky;
  Before he sells, the market's sudden fall,
  Or sudden rise, when sold--still worse than all!
  Calmly he lives--the tempest of the mind,
  That marks its course by many a wreck behind;
  The purpose high that great ambition feels,
  Sometimes perchance upon his vision steals,
  But never in his sober waking thought
  One stirring, active impulse ever wrought.
  Calmly he lives--as free from good as blame,
  His home, his dress, his equipage the same;
  And when he dies, in sooth, 'tis soon forgot
  What once he was, or what he once was not--
  An honest man, perhaps,--'tis somewhat odd
  That such should be the noblest work of God!
    So have I seen, in garden rich and gay,
  A stately cabbage waxing fat each day;
  Unlike the lively foliage of the trees,
  Its stubborn leaves ne'er wave in summer breeze,
  Nor flower, like those that prank the walks around,
  Upon its clumsy stem is ever found;
  It heeds not noontide heats, nor evening's balm,
  And stands unmoved in one eternal calm.
  At last, when all the garden's pride is lost
  It ripens in drear autumn's killing frost,
  And in a savoury sourkrout finds its end,
  From which detested dish, me heaven defend!




    LAKE GEORGE.--1829.

  BY S. DE WITT BLOODGOOD.

  I stood upon the shore,
    And looked upon the wave,
  While I thought me o'er and o'er
    HERE SLEEP THE BRAVE!

  The shadow of the hills,
    The azure of the flood,
  The murmuring of the rills
    Recall a scene of blood.

  When the war-cry filled the breeze,
    And the rifle and the bow
  Were like leaves upon the trees,
    But did not daunt Munro!

  'Mid the thunders of the train,
    And the fires that flashed alarm!
  And the shouts that rent the plain,
    To battle rush'd Montcalm!

  But the red cross floats no more
    Upon the ruin'd walls,
  And the wind sighs on the shore,
    Like the noise of waterfalls.

  And the spirit of the hour
    Is as peaceful as yon wave,
  While pleasure builds its bower
    O'ER THE ASHES OF THE BRAVE.




       CROSSING THE ALLEGHANIES.

      [_From the Backwoodsman._]

          BY J. K. PAULDING.

  Our Basil beat the lazy sun next day,
  And bright and early had been on his way.
  But that the world he saw e'en yesternight,
  Seem'd faded like a vision from his sight.
  One endless chaos spread before his eyes,
  No vestige left of earth or azure skies,
  A boundless nothingness reign'd everywhere,
  Hid the green fields and silent all the air.
  As look'd the traveller for the world below,
  The lively morning breeze began to blow,
  The magic curtain roll'd in mists away,
  And a gay landscape laugh'd upon the day.
  As light the fleeting vapours upward glide,
  Like sheeted spectres on the mountain side,
  New objects open to his wondering view
  Of various form, and combinations new.
  A rocky precipice, a waving wood,
  Deep winding dell, and foaming mountain flood,
  Each after each, with coy and sweet delay,
  Broke on his sight, as at young dawn of day,
  Bounded afar by peak aspiring bold,
  Like giant capt with helm of burnish'd gold.
  So when the wandering grandsire of our race
  On Ararat had found a resting place,
  At first a shoreless ocean met his eye,
  Mingling on every side with one blue sky;
  But as the waters, every passing day,
  Sunk in the earth or roll'd in mists away,
  Gradual, the lofty hills, like islands, peep
  From the rough bosom of the boundless deep,
  Then the round hillocks, and the meadows green,
  Each after each, in freshen'd bloom are seen,
  Till, at the last, a fair and finish'd whole
  Combined to win the gazing patriarch's soul.
  Yet oft he look'd, I ween, with anxious eye,
  In lingering hope somewhere, perchance, to spy,
  Within the silent world, some living thing,
  Crawling on earth, or moving on the wing,
  Or man, or beast--alas! was neither there,
  Nothing that breathed of life in earth or air;
  'Twas a vast silent mansion rich and gay,
  Whose occupant was drown'd the other day;
  A church-yard, where the gayest flowers oft bloom
  Amid the melancholy of the tomb;
  A charnel house, where all the human race
  Had piled their bones in one wide resting place;
  Sadly he turn'd from such a sight of wo,
  And sadly sought the lifeless world below.




              THE CLOUDS.

          BY GEORGE D. STRONG.

  How beauteous o'er the blue expanse
    Pencilling their shadows on the evening sky,
  The gathering clouds with gauze-wings unfold
        Their heaven wove tapestry:
  Veiling in mist the dim and wearied sun,
  Ere yet the drapery of his couch is won!

  Behold! behold them now!
    Tossing their gold-edged tresses on the breeze!
  Gliding like angels o'er the star-gemmed floor
        To heavenly symphonies!
  While distant seen, like hope to faith's clear view,
  Sleeps in calm splendour the cerulean blue!

  Ere yet imagination's wand
    Has traced the vision on the teeming brain,
  The fleeting pageant floats in mist, away
        Beyond the billowy main:
  But forms more beauteous wing again their flight,
  While eve reposes on the lap of night.

  Yon castellated tower
    As proudly cuts its turrets on the sky,
  As if the portals of its airy halls
        Blazoned with heraldry!
  And who shall say, but in its chambers glide
  Pale courtier's shadows--disembodied pride?

  The mimic ship unfolds
    Her swelling canvass on the airy main;
  And horsemen sweep in graceful circles o'er
        Th' etherial plain:
  While forms of light unknown to mortals here,
  People in myriads the celestial sphere!

  And many-coloured flowers,
    Changing their hues with every passing breeze,
  Crown the far summits of the mountain steeps;
        The shadowy trees
  Fling their gigantic branches wide and far,
  Dimming the lustre of full many a star.

  How oft in childhood's hour
    I've watched the cloudlets pale the evening beam,
  While the bright day-god quenched his waning fires
        In ocean, pool, and stream.
  Oh, then the clouds were ministers of joy
  To the rapt spirit of the dreamy boy!

  Mother and sister! Ye
    Have passed from earth like suns untimely set!
  Do ye not look from yonder throne of clouds
        Upon me yet,
  Beckoning me now, with eager glance to come
  To the bright portals of your heavenly home?

  Skeptic! whose chilling creed
    Would chain the spirit to life's bounded span,
  Learn from the clouds that _upward_ poise their wing,
        To value _man_!
  Nor deem the soul divested of its shroud--
  Less glorious in its essence than a _cloud_!




               THE TORNADO.

        [_From the Backwoodsman._]

            BY J. K. PAULDING.

    Now down the mountain's rugged western side,
  Descending slow, our lonely travellers hied,
  Deep in a narrow glen, within whose breast
  The rolling fragments of the mountain rest;
  Rocks tumbled on each other by rude chance,
  Crown'd with grey fern, and mosses, met the glance,
  Through which a brawling river braved its way,
  Dashing among the rocks in foamy spray.
  Here, 'mid the fragments of a broken world,
  In wild and rough confusion, idly hurl'd,
  Where ne'er was heard the woodman's echoing stroke,
  Rose a huge forest of gigantic oak;
  With heads that tower'd half up the mountain's side,
  And arms extending round them far and wide,
  They look'd coeval with old mother earth,
  And seem'd to claim with her an equal birth.
  There, by a lofty rock's moss-mantled base,
  Our tired adventurers found a resting place;
  Beneath its dark, o'erhanging, sullen brow,
  The little bevy nestled snug below,
  And with right sturdy appetite, and strong,
  Devour'd the rustic meal they brought along.
    The squirrel eyed them from his lofty tree,
  And chirp'd as wont, with merry morning glee;
  The woodcock crow'd as if alone he were,
  Or heeded not the strange intruders there,
  Sure sign they little knew of man's proud race
  In that sequester'd mountain 'biding place;
  For wheresoe'er his wandering footsteps tend,
  Man never makes the rural train his friend;
  Acquaintance that brings other beings near,
  Produces nothing but distrust or fear:
  Beasts flee from man the more his heart they know,
  And fears, at last, to fix'd aversion grow,
  As thus in blithe serenity they sat,
  Beguiling resting time with lively chat,
  A distant, half heard murmur caught the ear,
  Each moment waxing louder and more near,
  A dark obscurity spread all around,
  And more than twilight seem'd to veil the ground,
  While not a leaf e'en of the aspen stirr'd,
  And not a sound but that low moan was heard.
  There is a moment when the boldest heart
  That would not stoop an inch to 'scape death's dart,
  That never shrunk from certain danger here,
  Will quail and shiver with an aguish fear;
  'Tis when some unknown mischief hovers nigh,
  And heaven itself seems threatening from on high.
    Brave was our Basil, as became a man,
  Yet still his blood a little cooler ran,
  'Twixt fear and wonder, at that murmur drear,
  That every moment wax'd more loud and near.
  The riddle soon was read--at last it came,
  And nature trembled to her inmost frame;
  The forest roar'd, the everlasting oak,
  In writhing agonies the storm bespoke,
  The live leaves scatter'd wildly everywhere,
  Whirl'd round in maddening circles in the air;
  The stoutest limbs were scatter'd all around,
  The stoutest trees a stouter master found,
  Crackling, and crashing, down they thundering go,
  And seem to crush the shrinking rocks below:
  Then the thick rain in gathering torrents pour'd,
  Higher the river rose, and louder roar'd,
  And on its dark, quick eddying surface bore
  The gather'd spoils of earth along its shore,
  While trees that not an hour before had stood
  The lofty monarchs of the stately wood,
  Now whirling round and round with furious force,
  Dash 'gainst the rocks that breast the torrent's force,
  And shiver like a reed by urchin broke
  Through idle mischief, or with heedless stroke;
  A hundred cataracts, unknown before,
  Rush down the mountain's side with fearful roar,
  And as with foaming fury down they go,
  Loose the firm rocks and thunder them below;
  Blue lightnings from the dark cloud's bosom sprung,
  Like serpents, menacing with forked tongue,
  While many a sturdy oak that stiffly braved
  The threatening hurricane that round it raved,
  Shiver'd beneath its bright, resistless flash,
  Came tumbling down amain with fearful crash.
  Air, earth, and skies, seem'd now to try their power,
  And struggle for the mastery of the hour;
  Higher the waters rose, and blacker still,
  And threaten'd soon the narrow vale to fill.




            TO A LADY.

    BY CLEMENT C. MOORE.--1804.

  Thy dimpled girls and rosy boys
  Rekindle in thy heart the joys
    That bless'd thy tender years:
  Unheeded fleet the hours away;
  For, while thy cherubs round thee play,
    New life thy bosom cheers.

  Once more, thou tell'st me, I may taste,
  Ere envious time this frame shall waste,
    My infant pleasures flown.
  Ah! there's a ray of lustre mild,
  Illumes the bosom of a child,
    To age, alas! scarce known.

  Not for my infant pleasures past
  I mourn; those joys which flew so fast,
    They, too, had many a stain;
  But for the mind, so pure and light,
  Which made those joys so fair, so bright,
    I sigh, and sigh in vain.

  Well I remember you, bless'd hours!
  Your sunbeams bright, your transient showers!
    Thoughtless I saw you fly;
  For distant ills then caus'd no dread;
  Nor cared I for the moments fled,
    For memory call'd no sigh.

  Fond parents swayed my every thought;
  No blame I feared, no praise I sought,
    But what their love bestowed.
  Full soon I learn'd each meaning look,
  Nor e'er the angry glance mistook
    For that where rapture glowed.

  Whene'er night's shadows called to rest,
  I sought my father, to request
    His benediction mild.
  A mother's love more loud would speak;
  With kiss on kiss she'd print my cheek,
    And bless her darling child.

  Thy lightest mists and clouds, sweet sleep!
  Thy purest opiates thou dost keep,
    On infancy to shed.
  No guilt there checks thy soft embrace,
  And not e'en tears and sobs can chase
    Thee from an infant's bed.

  The trickling tears which flow'd at night,
  Oft hast thou stay'd, till morning light
    Dispell'd my little woes.
  So fly before the sunbeam's power
  The remnants of the evening shower
    Which wet the early rose.

  Farewell, bless'd hours! full fast ye flew;
  And that which made your bliss so true
    Ye would not leave behind.
  The glow of youth ye could not leave;
  But why, why cruelly bereave
    Me of my artless mind?

  Fond mother! hope thy bosom warms,
  That on the prattler in thy arms
    Heaven's choicest gifts may flow.
  Thus let thy prayer incessant rise
  To Him, who, thron'd above the skies,
    Can feel for man below.

  "Oh! Thou, whose view is ne'er estrang'd
  From innocence, preserve unchang'd
    Through life my darling's mind;
  Unchang'd in truth and purity,
  Still fearless of futurity,
    Still artless, though refin'd.

  "As oft his anxious nurse hath caught
  And sav'd his little hand that sought
    The bright, but treacherous blaze;
  So, let fair Wisdom keep him sure
  From glittering vices which allure,
    Through life's delusive maze.

  "Oh! may the ills which man enshroud,
  As shadows of a transient cloud,
    But shade, not stain my boy.
  Then may he gently drop to rest,
  Calm as a child by sleep oppress'd,
    And wake to endless joy."




        SPRING IS COMING.

          BY JAMES NACK.

  Spring is coming, spring is coming,
  Birds are chirping, insects humming;
  Flowers are peeping from their sleeping,
  Streams escaped from winter's keeping.
  In delighted freedom rushing,
  Dance along in music gushing,
  Scenes of late in deadness saddened,
  Smile in animation gladdened;
  All is beauty, all is mirth,
  All is glory upon earth.
  Shout we then with Nature's voice,
  Welcome Spring! rejoice! rejoice!

  Spring is coming, come, my brother,
  Let us rove with one another,
  To our well-remembered wild wood,
  Flourishing in nature's childhood;
  Where a thousand flowers are springing,
  And a thousand birds are singing;
  Where the golden sunbeams quiver
  On the verdure-girdled river;
  Let our youth of feeling out,
  To the youth of nature shout,
  While the waves repeat our voice,
  Welcome Spring! rejoice! rejoice!




         FROM A FATHER TO HIS CHILDREN,
  AFTER HAVING HAD HIS PORTRAIT TAKEN FOR THEM.

                BY C. C. MOORE.

  This semblance of your parent's time-worn face
    Is but a sad bequest, my children dear:
  Its youth and freshness gone, and in their place
    The lines of care, the tracks of many a tear!

  Amid life's wreck, we struggle to secure
    Some floating fragment from oblivion's wave:
  We pant for somewhat that may still endure,
    And snatch at least a shadow from the grave.

  Poor, weak, and transient mortals! why so vain
    Of manly vigour or of beauty's bloom?
  An empty shade for ages may remain
    When we have mouldered in the silent tomb.

  But no! it is not _we_ who moulder there;
    We, of essential light that ever burns,
  We take our way through untried fields of air,
    When to the earth this earth-born frame returns.

  And 'tis the glory of the master's art
    Some radiance of this inward light to find;
  Some touch that to his canvass may impart
    A breath, a sparkle of the immortal mind.

  Alas! the pencil's noblest power can show
    But some faint shadow of a transient thought,
  Some waken'd feeling's momentary glow,
    Some swift impression in its passage caught.

  Oh! that the artist's pencil could pourtray
    A father's inward bosom to your eyes;
  What hopes, and fears, and doubts perplex his way,
    What aspirations for your welfare rise.

  Then might this unsubstantial image prove,
    When I am gone, a guardian of your youth,
  A friend for ever urging you to move
    In paths of honour, holiness, and truth.

  Let fond imagination's power supply
    The void that baffles all the painter's art;
  And when those mimic features meet your eye,
    Then fancy that they speak a parent's heart.

  Think that you still can trace within those eyes
    The kindling of affection's fervid beam,
  The searching glance that every fault espies,
    The fond anticipation's pleasing dream.

  Fancy those lips still utter sounds of praise,
    Or kind reproof that checks each wayward will,
  The warning voice, or precepts that may raise
    Your thoughts above this treach'rous world of ill.

  And thus shall Art attain her loftiest power;
    To noblest purpose shall her efforts tend:
  Not the companion of an idle hour,
    But Virtue's handmaid and Religion's friend.




                THE MITCHELLA.

              BY S. L. MITCHELL.

    [The Mitchella is a very delicate flower, a native of our
  woods, and although originally named from another botanist
  called Mitchell, was always a great favourite of Dr. S. L. Mitchell.
  The "double nature" alluded to in the poem refers to the fact of the
  flowers uniformly growing in pairs.]

  Sequestered safe beneath the sylvan bow'rs,
  Lo! fair Mitchella spends her joyous hours.
  The double nature on her form bestow'd
  Displays a winning and peculiar mode.
  With lilac wreath her beauteous front is grac'd,
  A crimson zone surrounds her slender waist;
  A robe of green trails sweeping o'er the ground,
  And scents ambrosial fill the air around--
  Thus Proserpine o'er Enna's precincts stray'd
  Till gloomy Dis surpris'd the unthinking maid.
  From Earth to Tartarus transferr'd, in vain
  She intercedes her native home to gain.
  Jove grants in part her pray'r: above to know
  One half the year, the rest to pass below:
  And Ceres sees her daughter's two-fold mien,
  On Earth a nymph, in Pluto's realms a queen.




            A VISIT FROM ST. NICHOLAS.

               BY CLEMENT C. MOORE.

  'Twas the night before Christmas, when all through the house
  Not a creature was stirring, not even a mouse;
  The stockings were hung by the chimney with care,
  In hopes that St. Nicholas soon would be there;
  The children were nestled all snug in their beds,
  While visions of sugar-plums danced through their heads;
  And mamma in her 'kerchief, and I in my cap,
  Had just settled our brains for a long winter's nap--
  When out on the lawn there arose such a clatter,
  I sprang from the bed to see what was the matter:
  Away to the window I flew like a flash,
  Tore open the shutters and threw up the sash.
  The moon, on the breast of the new-fallen snow,
  Gave the lustre of mid-day to objects below.
  When, what to my wondering eyes should appear,
  But a miniature sleigh and eight tiny rein-deer,
  With a little old driver, so lively and quick,
  I knew in a moment it must be St. Nick.
  More rapid than eagles his coursers they came,
  And he whistled, and shouted, and called them by name;
  "Now, Dasher! now, Dancer! now, Prancer! now, Vixen!
  On! Comet, on! Cupid, on! Donder and Blixen--
  To the top of the porch! to the top of the wall!
  Now, dash away, dash away, dash away all!"
  As leaves that before the wild hurricane fly,
  When they meet with an obstacle, mount to the sky,
  So, up to the house-top the coursers they flew,
  With the sleigh full of toys--and St. Nicholas too.
  And then in a twinkling I heard on the roof
  The prancing and pawing of each little hoof.
  As I drew in my head, and was turning around,
  Down the chimney St. Nicholas came with a bound.
  He was dressed all in fur, from his head to his foot,
  And his clothes were all tarnish'd with ashes and soot;
  A bundle of toys he had flung on his back,
  And he look'd like a pedlar just opening his pack.
  His eyes--how they twinkled! his dimples, how merry!
  His cheeks were like roses, his nose like a cherry;
  His droll little mouth was drawn up like a bow,
  And the beard on his chin was as white as the snow.
  The stump of a pipe he held tight in his teeth,
  And the smoke, it encircled his head like a wreath.
  He had a broad face and a little round belly
  That shook, when he laugh'd, like a bowl full of jelly.
  He was chubby and plump; a right jolly old elf;
  And I laughed when I saw him, in spite of myself.
  A wink of his eye, and a twist of his head,
  Soon gave me to know I had nothing to dread.
  He spoke not a word, but went straight to his work,
  And filled all the stockings; then turned with a jirk,
  And laying his finger aside of his nose,
  And giving a nod, up the chimney he rose.
  He sprang to his sleigh, to his team gave a whistle,
  And away they all flew like the down of a thistle;
  But I heard him exclaim ere he drove out of sight,
  "Happy Christmas to all, and to all a good night!"




       ON SEEING A BEAUTIFUL YOUNG LADY
  WHOSE HEALTH WAS IMPAIRED BY THE AGUE AND FEVER.

           BY A. L. BLAUVELT.--1805.

  Dark minister of many woes,
    That lov'st the sad vicissitude of pain,
  Now shivering 'mid Antarctic snows,
    Now a faint pilgrim on Medina's plain.
  Say, can no form less fair thy vein engage?
  Must feeble loveliness exhaust thy rage?
  Oh, mark the faltering step, the languid eye,
  And all the anguish of her burning sigh:
  See the faintly struggling smile,
  See resignation's tear the while;
  So to the axe the martyr bends his form,
  So bends the lovely lily to the storm.
  Still though, sweet maid, thy yielding bloom decays,
  And faint the waning tide of rapture strays,
  Oh, may'st thou 'scape griefs more envenom'd smart,
  Nor ever know the ague of the heart.
  For rising from the sun bright plain,
  The _bended_ lily blooms again;
  But ah! what life imparting power
  Can e'er revive the _broken_ flower?




         THE GIFTS OF PROVIDENCE.

       BY WILLIAM LIVINGSTON.--1747.

  Oft on the vilest riches are bestow'd,
  To show their meanness in the sight of God.
  High from a dunghill see a Dives rise,
  And, Titan-like, insult the avenging skies:
  The crowd in adulation calls him lord,
  By thousands courted, flatter'd, and adored:
  In riot plunged, and drunk with earthly joys,
  No higher thought his grovelling soul employs;
  The poor he scourges with an iron rod,
  And from his bosom banishes his God.
  But oft, in height of wealth and beauty's bloom,
  Deluded man is fated to the tomb!
  For lo, he sickens, swift his colour flies,
  And rising mists obscure his swimming eyes:
  Around his bed his weeping friends bemoan,
  Extort the unwilling tear, and wish him gone;
  His sorrowing heir augments the tender shower,
  Deplores his death--yet hails the dying hour.
  Ah, bitter comfort! sad relief to die!
  Though sunk in down, beneath a canopy!
  His eyes no more shall see the cheerful light,
  Weigh'd down by death in everlasting night:
  And now the great, the rich, the proud, the gay,
  Lies breathless, cold--unanimated clay!
  He that just now, was flatter'd by the crowd
  With high applause and acclamation loud;
  That steel'd his bosom to the orphan's cries,
  And drew down torrents from the widow's eyes;
  Whom, like a God, the rabble did adore--
  Regard him now--and lo! he is no more.




     FROM A HUSBAND TO HIS WIFE.

           BY C. C. MOORE.

  The dreams of Hope that round us play,
    And lead along our early youth,
  How soon, alas! they fade away
    Before the sober rays of Truth.

  And yet there are some joys in life
    That Fancy's pencil never drew;
  For Fancy's self, my own dear wife,
    Ne'er dreamt the bliss I owe to you.

  You have awaken'd in my breast
    Some chords I ne'er before had known;
  And you've imparted to the rest
    A stronger pulse, a deeper tone.

  And e'en the troubles that we find
    Our peace oft threat'ning to o'erwhelm,
  Like foreign foes, but serve to bind
    More close in love our little realm.

  I've not forgot the magic hour
    When youthful passion first I knew;
  When early love was in its flower,
    And bright with ev'ry rainbow hue.

  Then, fairy visions lightly moved,
    And waken'd rapture as they pass'd;
  But faith and love, like yours approved,
    Give joys that shall for ever last.

  A spotless wife's enduring love,
    A darling infant's balmy kiss,
  Breathe of the happiness above;
    Too perfect for a world like this.

  These heaven-sent pleasures seem too pure
    To take a taint from mortal breath;
  For, still unfading, they endure
    'Mid sorrow, sickness, pain, and death.

  When cruel Palsy's withering blow
    Had left my father weak, forlorn,
  He yet could weep for joy, to know
    I had a wish'd-for infant born.

  And, as he lay in death's embrace,
    You saw when last on earth he smil'd;
  You saw the ray that lit his face
    When he beheld our darling child.--

  Strange, mingled scene of bliss and pain!
    That, like a dream, before us flies;
  Where, 'midst illusions false and vain,
    Substantial joys are seen to rise.--

  When to your heart our babes you fold,
    With all a mother's joy elate,
  I fondly think that I behold
    A vision of our future state.

  Hope comes, with balmy influence fraught,
    To heal the wound that rends my heart,
  Whene'er it meets the dreadful thought
    That all our earthly ties must part.

  Bless'd hope, beyond earth's narrow space,
    Within high Heaven's eternal bound,
  Again to see your angel face,
    With all your cherubs clustering round.

  Oh! yes, there are some beams of light
    That break upon this world below,
  So pure, so steady, and so bright,
    They seem from better worlds to flow.

  Reflected images are seen
    Upon this transient stream of Time,
  Through mists and shades that intervene,
    Of things eternal and sublime.

  Then let us rightly learn to know
    These heavenly messengers of love:
  They teach us whence true pleasures flow,
    And win our thoughts to joys above.

  And e'en when clouds roll o'er our head,
    Still let us turn our longing eyes
  To where Eternal Love has spread
    The changeless azure of the skies.




                 PROPHETIC.

    [Lines written on the window-glass of an Inn in England
  during the author's travels through Europe in 1774-5.]

             BY GULIAN VERPLANCK.

  Hail happy Britain, Freedom's blest retreat;
  Great is thy power, thy wealth, thy glory great,
  But wealth and power have no immortal day,
  For all things ripen only to decay.
  And when that time arrives, the lot of all,
  When Britain's glory, power, and wealth shall fall;
  Then shall thy sons by Fate's unchang'd decree
  In other worlds another Britain see,
  And what thou art, America shall be.




                       LINES

  [_Suggested by a Perusal of "The Life of Chatterton."_]

                 BY A. L. BLAUVELT.

  And yet there are, who, borne on fortune's tide,
  Down the smooth vale of time unconscious glide;
  Ne'er dream of wretchedness when they repose,
  Nor wake to other cares, to other woes.
  And when the north wind rages through the sky,
  Withhold from bleeding poverty a sigh;
  Leave those to weep, who, torn from all held dear,
  In want and silence shed the frequent tear;
  Who, reared 'mid fortune's noon, ill brook the shade,
  And feel with tenfold sense its damps invade;
  Feel more than chilling frost neglects control,
  And all the horrors of a wintry soul;
  For ah; how oft from penury's cold grave,
  Nor worth nor all the power of mind can save?
  Condemned through life a ceaseless war to wage
  With all the pride and dulness of the age;
  Still vain each wish o'erwhelm'd, each hope elate,
  Oft Genius sinks desponding to her fate,
  Or moves the indignant pensioner of pride,
  Her triumphs blazon, nor her spoils divide;
  And, wrapt in chilling gloom, ne'er feels the day,
  Taught by her hand round happier wealth to play.
    Ah, stern decree! that minds whom Heaven inspires
  With more than angel thought, than angel fires;
  Whose virtues vibrate to the tenderest tone,
  And wake to wo ere half her woes be known;
  From the high boon a sterner fate derive,
  And suffer most, to suffering most alive.




              THE MAGIC DRAUGHT.

    [_Addressed to a young Lady who gave him
      Seltzer water to drink._]

             BY DR. S. L. MITCHELL.

  Brisk sparkled the liquid, most lively and fine,
    Transparent as amber, than crystal more pure,
  Appearing those qualities rare to combine,
    Adapted exactly his health to secure.

  Pursuant to order, he drank in a trice,
    Full confidence in his physician he placed;
  For who that is favour'd with lady's advice
    Can ever refuse their prescriptions to taste?

  Unconscious what mischief within it might lurk,
    He swallowed the doses again and again,
  Till he fancied within him a manifold work,
    Disturbing his heart and distracting his brain.

  Suspecting, at last, from his feelings unus'd,
    A trick on his faith had been wantonly play'd,
  "Some philter or potion" he swore "was infused,
    Some magic or poison instilled by the maid."

  "Not this a Nepenthe the mind to compose,
    Which Helen at Sparta employ'd in her feasts,
  But a draught such as Circe, the sorceress, chose,
    Transforming the drinkers to four-footed beasts."

  "Not a worse composition did Shakspeare behold,
    Prepared in their cauldron by witches obscene,
  Nor were drugs more detested, as Hayley has told,
    Commix'd by the fiends when they conjur'd up Spleen."

  Thus railing and raving, awhile he went on,
    Bethinking he soon must his testament make,
  When lo! all the terrible symptoms were gone,
    And his woful conjecture turn'd out a mistake.

  No water from Seltzer the vessel contain'd,
    Nor has Pyrmont or Spa such a remedy known;
  For she candidly, since the prescription, explain'd,
    Prepar'd by a process entirely her own.

  The tears which at church on Good Friday she shed,
    After Easter was over, had fairly been dry'd,
  But the 'kerchief on which she supported her head
    Was laid with the precious effusion aside.

  This 'kerchief, to bleech in the sunshine was plac'd,
    And expos'd to the weather by night and by day;
  With snow-flakes of April was often incas'd,
    And moisten'd as often by dew-drops of May.

  In ether's high region, where thunders prevail,
    Those drops by explosion's electric were form'd,
  Had once in descending been frozen to hail,
    And twice in the rainbow's refraction been warm'd.

  Collecting these drops on their fall from above,
    With myrtle's quintessence she tinctur'd the mass;
  Then breath'd in the mixture the spirit of love,
    And blessing, enclos'd it securely in glass.

  This potent elixir, he plainly observes,
    Of his head and his heart has pervaded the whole;
  Excites every fibre, and quickens the nerves,
    With sweet agitation delighting the soul.

  Yet he fears its effects on his temper and health
    Will make him his toilsome exertions disclaim;
  No more be devoted to projects of wealth,
    Nor seek to be crown'd with the laurels of Fame.

  Nay--an antidote sovereign he long has possess'd,
    His affections from spells and enchantments to free;
  No foreign intruder can enter a breast,
    Pre-occupied, heart winning S----h by thee.




               IMPROMPTU.

  [_On Miss ----'s paying the tribute of a
      tear to a scene of distress._]

          BY JACOB MORTON.--1790.

  Soft as the dews of evening skies
    Which on the flow'ret's bosom fall,
  Were those sweet tears in Anna's eyes
    Which wak'd at pity's gentle call.

  Ah! may that tender, feeling heart,
    Where thus sweet sympathy doth glow,
  Ne'er feel the pang of sorrow's dart,
    Nor sigh--but for _another's_ wo.




                  APPEAL

  TO A CERTAIN GREAT MAN, WHO HAS QUESTIONED
           CERTAIN REVEALED TRUTHS.

          BY A. L. BLAUVELT.--1805.

  Thou talk'st of _Reason's_ unassisted eye:
  Lift then thy darling Reason to the sky,--
  Paint, if thou wilt, the unincumber'd mind,
  Vast in its powers, and in its views refin'd;
  To truth aspiring on the wings of day,
  And spanning systems with a godlike sway.
  The portrait you have formed you dread to own,
  And Guilt's deep blushes o'er its shades are thrown:
  For has the Almighty thus inform'd the race,
  His _truth_ to question and his laws deface?
  Bestow'd a mind the Eternal's mind to blame,
  And _Reason's_ deathless force, His reason to defame?
  As well might Jove's imperial bird defy
  The Power that made him soar, because he soars so high.




                  LINES

  TO A DAUGHTER OF THE LATE GOVERNOR CLINTON.

         BY J. B. VAN SCHAICK.--1829.

                And thou, fair flower of hope!
  Like a sweet violet, delicate and frail,
  Hast reared thy tender stem beneath an oak,
  Whose noble limbs o'ershadowed thee. The damp
  Cold dews of the unhealthy world fell not
  On thee; the gaudy sunshine of its pomp
  Came tempered to thine eye in milder beams.
  The train of life's inevitable ills
  Fell like the April rain upon the flowers,
  But thou wert shielded--no rude pelting storms
  Came down unbroken by thy sheltering tree.

                          Fallen is the oak,
  The monarch of a forest sleeps. Around,
  The withered ivy and the broken branch
  Are silent evidence of greatness past,
  And his sweet, cherished violet has drunk
  The bitter dews until its cup was full.
  And now strange trees wave o'er it, and the shade
  Of weeping-willows and down-swaying boughs
  Stretch toward it with melancholy sorrow--
  All sympathizing with the drooping flower.
  And years shall pass ere living trees forget
  That stately oak, and what a fame he shed
  O'er all the forest, and how each was proud
  That he could call himself a kindred thing.

  Long may the beauty of that violet
  Grow in the soil of hearts; till, delicate,
  Yet ripened into summer loveliness,
  A thousand branches all shall contending cast
  Their friendly shadows in protection there!




           THE SON OF SORROW.

                TO MYRA.

          BY A. L. BLAUVELT.

  When deep despondence gathers into shade,
  And grief unfeign'd calls fiction to her aid--
  Paints through the vista of expected years,
  Hours clad with wo and visions dim with tears--
  The past and future one large waste of gloom--
  Here mem'ry's madness, there oblivion's tomb;
  No ear to list, no voice to soothe despair,
  And even death is deaf to sorrow's prayer.
  Oh! say, sweet minstrel, (for thy sighs I know
  Are wont to mingle with the sighs of wo,)
  Where shall the hope-deserted pilgrim fly
  To live too wretched, and too weak to die?
  Perhaps, e'en now, impassion'd and sincere,
  The sigh of beauty steals upon his ear--
  Soft as the sky-wove theme of viewless lyres,
  That soothe his spirit when the saint expires:
  And oh! perhaps, ere quite dissolv'd in air,
  That sigh may breathe oblivion to despair;
  Melt o'er the throbbing string in Myra's lay,
  Till wo, enraptur'd, bears herself away.




              PORTRAITURE.

    [_From "Vice, a Satire," 1774._]

         BY GULIAN VERPLANCK.

              _Ob_: 1799.

  Go, learn thou this: From regulated Sense
  Is all our bliss--from sober Temperance.
  How much, Oh Temperance! to thee we owe,
  What joys sincere from thy pure fountains flow;
  Life's most protracted date derives from thee
  A calm old age, and death from anguish free.
  Doth Death affright thee with his dread parade,
  The hearse slow moving, and the cavalcade?
  Go, early learn its terrors to despise,
  Read virtue's lesson, and in time be wise.
  Enough of crimes on these Heav'n's vengeance wait,
  Let Satire aim at faults of humbler state.
    Whoe'er observes, will find in human race
  More difference of character than face;
  Some nice, odd turns, in all th' observer strike,
  Each his peculiar has, nor find we two alike.
  Blest with each art that soothes the ills of life,
  A quiet mind, not made for noise and strife;
  In whose fixed calm no jarring powers contend,
  Design'd to act as husband, father, friend;
  Had Philo been content with what was given,
  And, truly wise, enjoy'd on earth his heav'n:
  Philo had lived--but lived unknown to fame;
  Had died content,--but died without a name.
  No, Philo cried, be glorious praise my care,
  Nor let this name be mix'd with common air;
  For this he wastes the weary hours of night,
  Leaves peace to fools, and banishes delight;
  Nature in vain throws in her honest bars,
  The wretch runs counter to himself and stars;
  In vain--for lost no character he seems,
  And Philo does not live, but only dreams.
    Others there are, who to the shade retire,
  Who'd shine if nature would the clods inspire,
  And, as she gave them parts, would give them fire;
  But languid bodies, scarce informed with soul,
  In one dull round their vacant moments roll;
  Heavy and motionless as summer seas,
  They yawn out life in most laborious ease;
  Passions, half formed, in their cold bosoms lie,
  And all the man is sluggish anarchy.
  Yet wits, and wise, when some small shocks awake,
  As when the surface of some stagnant lake,
  Urged by the action of the busy air,
  Breaks its thick scum, and shows the bottom clear.
  Who knows not Florio? sweet, enraptured elf!
  Florio is known to all men but himself.
  Him folly owned the instant of his birth,
  And turned his soul to nonsense and to mirth;
  Nor boasts a son, in all her dancing crowd,
  So pert, so prim, so petulant, and proud.
  Mixture absurd and strange! we find in him
  Dulness with wit, sobriety with whim;
  A soul that sickens at each rising art
  With the mean malice of a coward's heart.
  So milky soft, so pretty, and so neat,
  With air so gentle, and with voice so sweet;
  What dog-star's rage, what maggot of the brain,
  Could make a fop so impudently vain,
  To throw all modesty aside, and sit
  The mighty censor of the works of wit?
  Say, wretch! what pride could prompt thee to bestow
  Abuse on power, the greatest power below;
  The Muse's power? That power thyself shall know:
  Her pen shall add thee to the long, long roll
  That holds the name of every brother fool.
  Of various passions that divide the breast,
  Pride reigns supreme and governs all the rest;
  Its form is varied, but to all supplied
  In equal shares, however modified.
  Blest source of action, whose perpetual strife
  With sluggish nature, warms us into life;
  Thou great first mover, 'tis alone from thee
  That life derives its sweet diversity.
  Yet hapless he, whose ill-directed pride
  With soft seduction draws his steps aside
  From life's low vale, where humbler joys invite;
  With bold, rash tread, to gain distinction's height.
  Him peace forsakes, and endless toils oppose,
  A friend's defection, and the spleen of foes.
  Black calumny invents her thousand lies,
  And sickly envy blasts him if he rise--
  He, wretch accursed, tied down to servile rules,
  Must think and act no more like other fools:
  For him no more that social ease remains
  Which sweetens life, and softens all its pains;
  Each jealous eye betrays a critic's pen,
  To search for faults it spares in other men.
  How shall he wish in vain, once more his own,
  That hour when free, and to the world unknown,
  Its praise he had not, nor could fear its frown.




             THE FAREWELL.

           BY JOHN I. BAILEY.

  Oh! leave me still thy tender heart,
    Though love's delirious reign is over;
  I, too, will act the traitor's part--
    Cordelia-like, become a rover.
  No more I'll gaze on smiles of thine,
    That beam as sweetly on another,
  Save with the feelings pure that twine
    Around the bosom of a brother.

  Loved smiles! that once around me shone,
    And waked to feelings of devotion;
  Thy sway is past, thy charm is gone--
    Thou art resigned without emotion.
  No more to charm my wildered dream,
    Or hope's delusive joys to heighten;
  O'er my lone heart thy cheerless beam
    Falls, but has lost the power to brighten.

  The auburn ringlets of thy hair
    May twine as graceful still, and let them--
  Those locks were once as loved as fair,
    Yet lost to me, I'll ne'er regret them.
  Yes! I could view those curls entwine
    Around another's hand that wreath'd them;
  Unmoved, recall those tones divine,
    Once sweet as were the lips that breath'd them!

  Thy form no longer wears the spell,
    As when a lover's dreams it haunted;
  Nor can affection fondly dwell
    On every grace that once enchanted.
  Then fare thee well! thou'st broke the chain;
    Go! yield thy charms to bless another;
  I would not seek their wiles again,
    I only ask--to be thy brother.




             SONNET TO MYRA.

            BY A. L. BLAUVELT.

  How sad the exile from his native skies
    Doom'd on the shade of parted bliss to dwell--
  No ear to catch his penitential sighs,
    No voice to soothe him in his last farewell.
  Anxious he treads th' inhospitable shore,
    And gazes anxious on the main
    Where ling'ring fancy loves to feign
  Till day's last lustre bids her wake no more;
  Then horror climbs the dusky wave,
  And beckons madness to her grave,
  Where, cradled by the surge to rest,
  Low sighs the passing gale, "Despair is blest."
  Ah! sadder far an exile from thy charms;
  Friends, Country, Freedom, smile in Myra's arms.




              TO CORDELIA.

           BY JOHN J. BAILEY.

  Smile not, sweet girl, 'tis even so--
    Cordelia, smile not unbelieving;
  My words, though not so sweet, I know,
    As thine, were never _so_ deceiving.

  And if I _must_ be sworn to prove
    That I have said sincerely, thereby,
  I'd choose thy brow, so formed for love,
    To be the book I'd kissing swear by.

  Nay, look not angry thus, 'tis vain--
    I value not thy frowns a feather--
  'Tis not thy nature to retain
    An unkind thought for hours together.

  I envy not thy lover's joys,
    Nor flattering smiles that so endear them;
  Thy brittle chains caprice destroys;
    Oh! who on earth would wish to wear them?

  Yes! I could give thee many a name
    Of those who've waked thy tender bosom;
  A flame succeeding still to flame,
    Yet thou wert e'er content to lose 'em.

  Content to wound that bosom too,
    That had for years, unchanged, ador'd thee;
  Oh! when thou held'st a heart so true,
    What joy could ranging thus afford thee?

  I trust an angel's form thou'lt wear
    E'er I ascend to yonder Heaven;
  Or I a tale could give in there,
    Would leave thee lost and unforgiven.




    SONG.--WHEN OTHER FRIENDS ARE
              ROUND THEE.

            BY G. P. MORRIS.

  When other friends are round thee,
    And other hearts are thine;
  When other bays have crowned thee,
    More fresh and green than mine.
  Then think how sad and lonely
    This wretched heart will be;
  Which, while it beats--beats only,
    Beloved one! for thee.

  Yet do not think I doubt thee;
    I know thy truth remains,
  I would not live without thee
    For all the world contains.
  Thou art the star that guides me
    Along life's troubled sea,
  And whatever fate betides me,
    This heart still turns to thee.




         DEATH OF THE FIRST-BORN.

           BY WILLIS G. CLARK.

      Young mother, he is gone,
  His dimpled cheek no more will touch thy breast,
      No more the music tone
  Float from his lips to thine all fondly prest;
  His smile and happy laugh are lost to thee,
  Earth must his mother and his pillow be.

      His was the morning hour,
  And he hath passed in beauty from the day,
      A bud not yet a flower;
  Torn in its sweetness from the parent spray,
  The death wind swept him to his soft repose,
  As frost in spring-time blights the early rose.

      Never on earth again
  Will his rich accents charm thy listening ear,
      Like some AEolian strain,
  Breathing at even-tide serene and clear;
  His voice is choked in dust, and on his eyes
  The unbroken seal of peace and silence lies.

      And from thy yearning heart,
  Whose inmost core was warm with love for him,
      A gladness must depart,
  And those kind eyes with many tears be dim;
  While lonely memories, an unceasing train,
  Will turn the raptures of the past to pain.

      Yet, mourner, while the day
  Rolls like the darkness of a funeral by,
      And hope forbids one ray
  To stream athwart the grief-discoloured sky,
  There breaks upon thy sorrow's evening gloom
  A trembling lustre from beyond the tomb.

      'Tis from the better land:
  There, bathed in radiance that around them springs,
      Thy lov'd one's wings expand,
  As with the quoiring cherubim he sings;
  And all the glory of that God can see,
  Who said on earth to children, "Come to me."

      Mother! thy child is blest;
  And though his presence may be lost to thee,
      And vacant leave thy breast,
  And missed a sweet load from thy parent knee--
  Though tones familiar from thine ear have passed,
  Thou'lt meet thy first-born with his Lord at last.




          ELEGY ON THE EXILE AND DEATH OF OVID.

  [_Translated from the Latin of Angelus Politianus._]

               BY FRANCIS ARDEN.--1821.

  A Roman Bard lies on the Euxine's side,
    Barbarian earth a Roman poet holds,
  Barbarian earth, wash'd by cold Isther's tide,
    The poet of the tender loves infolds.

  Excites not this, O Rome! a blush in thee,
    That to so great a nursling, harsh of mood,
  Reserv'st a bosom steel'd in cruelty,
    Surpassing the inhuman Getic brood?

  Had Scythian fields, ye muses, one to chase,
    His weary minutes of disease away,
  His frigid limbs upon the couch to place,
    Or with sweet converse to beguile the day.

  One who would mark the throbbing of his veins,
    The lotion's aid with ready hand apply,
  Would close his eyes 'midst dissolution's pains,
    Or with fond lips inhale his latest sigh.

  None could be found, not one, for warlike Rome,
    From Pontus far detains his early friends,
  Far stands his wife's and young descendants' home,
    Nor on her exil'd sire his daughter tends.

  But the wild Bessi of enormous limb,
    And the Coralli yellow hair'd, are there;
  Or, clad in skins, the Getic people grim,
    Whose bosoms hearts of flint within them bear.

  Yes, the Sarmatian boor, with aspect dread,
    His savage succours on the bard bestow'd;
  The fierce Sarmatian, from debauch oft led,
    Borne to his horse's back a reeling load.

  The fierce Sarmatian boor, with piercing eye
    Deep prison'd in his rugged forehead's bound,
  Whose temples, shiv'ring 'neath th' inclement sky,
    With clatt'rings of his frost-wrapp'd hair resound.

  Yes; for the bard immers'd in death's long sleep,
    The Bessic plund'rers bid their tears to flow,
  The rough Coralli and Sarmatian weep,
    And cruel Getic strikes his face the blow.

  Hills, woods, and savage beasts his death deplore,
    And Ister wails amid his waters' bed,
  And Pontus, chill'd with ice incrusted o'er,
    Warms with the tears the sorrowing Nereids shed.

  There with the Paphian mother in swift haste,
    The light-winged Doves through airy regions came,
  With pious care the blazing torches plac'd
    Beneath the pyre prepar'd to feed the flame.

  Soon as the rapid fires with wasteful sway
    Consum'd whate'er their greedy rage could burn,
  His cherish'd relics they collect, and lay
    In decent order in the cover'd urn.

  With this short verse the stone they next impress:
    (The treasur'd dust placed to denote above,)
  "He who sepulchred lies in this recess,
    Was teacher of the tender art of love."

  Here Cytherea's self, with snow-white hand,
    Sheds sacred dews in seven free sprinklings round,
  And for the Bard remov'd, the Muse's band
    Pour strains my lays may not attempt to sound.




                NAPOLEON.

          BY ISAAC CLASON.--1825.

  I love no land so well as that of France--
    Land of Napoleon and Charlemagne,
  Renowned for valour, women, wit, and dance,
    For racy Burgundy and bright Champagne,
  Whose only word in battle was advance;
    While that Grand Genius, who seemed born to reign,
  Greater than Ammon's son, who boasted birth
  From heaven, and spurn'd all sons of earth,

  Greater than he who wore his buskins high,
    A Venus armed impressed upon his seal;
  Who smiled at poor Calphurnia's prophecy,
    Nor feared the stroke he soon was doomed to feel.
  Who on the Ides of March breathed his last sigh
    As Brutus pluck'd away his "cursed steel,"
  Exclaiming, as he expired "Et tu, Brute,"
  But Brutus thought he only did his duty.

  Greater than he, who, at nine years of age,
    On Carthage' altar swore eternal hate;
  Who with a rancour time could ne'er assuage,
    With feelings no reverse could moderate;
  With talents such as few would dare engage,
    With hopes that no misfortune could abate--
  Died like his rival--both with broken hearts;
  Such was their fate, and such was Bonaparte's.

  Napoleon Bonaparte! thy name shall live
    Till time's last echo shall have ceased to sound;
  And if Eternity's confines can give
    To space reverberation round and round
  The spheres of Heaven, the long, deep cry of "Vive
    Napoleon," in thunders shall rebound;
  The lightning's flash shall blaze thy name on high,
  Monarch of earth, now meteor of the sky!

  What though on St. Helena's rocky shore
    Thy head be pillow'd, and thy form entomb'd,
  Perhaps that son, the child thou did'st adore,
    Fired with a father's fame, may yet be doom'd
  To crush the bigot Bourbon, and restore
    Thy mouldering ashes ere they be consum'd;
  Perhaps may run the course thyself did'st run,
  And light the world as comets light the sun.

  'Tis better thou art gone, 'twere sad to see
    Beneath an "imbecile's impotant reign"
  Thine own unvanquished legions doomed to be
    Cursed instruments of vengeance on poor Spain;
  That land so glorious once in chivalry,
    Now sunk in slavery and in shame again;
  To see th' imperial guard, thy dauntless band,
  Made tools for such a wretch as _Ferdinand_.

  Farewell, Napoleon! thine hour is past;
    No more earth trembles at thy dreaded name;
  But France, unhappy France shall long contrast
    Thy deeds with those of worthless _D'Angouleme_.
  Ye gods! how long shall Slavery's thraldom last?
    Will France alone remain for ever tame?
  Say, will no Wallace, will no Washington,
  Scourge from thy soil the infamous Bourbon?

  Is Freedom dead? is Nero's reign restored?
    Frenchmen! remember Jena, Austerlitz;
  The first, which made thy emperor the lord
    Of Prussia, and which almost threw in fits
  _Great_ Frederick William; he, who, at the board
    Took all the Prussian uniform to bits;
  Frederick, the King of regimental tailors,
  As _Hudson Lowe_, the very prince of jailors.

  Farewell, Napoleon! had'st thou have died
    The coward scorpion's death, afraid, asham'd
  To meet Adversity's advancing tide,
    The weak had praised thee, but the wiser had blam'd;
  But no! though torn from country, child, and bride,
    With spirit unsubdued, with soul untam'd,
  Great in misfortune as in glory high,
  Thou daredst to live through life's worst agony.

  Pity, for thee shall weep her fountains dry;
    Mercy, for thee shall bankrupt all her store;
  Valour shall pluck a garland from on high,
    And Honour twine the wreath thy temples o'er;
  Beauty shall beckon to thee from the sky,
    And smiling seraphs open wide Heav'n's door;
  Around thy head the brightest stars shall meet,
  And rolling suns play sportive at thy feet.

  Farewell, Napoleon! a long farewell,
    A stranger's tongue, alas! must hymn thy worth;
  No craven Gaul dare wake his harp to tell,
    Or sound in song the spot that gave thee birth.
  No more thy name, that with its magic spell
    Arous'd the slumb'ring nations of the earth,
  Echoes around thy land; 'tis past--at length
  France sinks beneath the sway of Charles the Tenth.




                 THE BUTTERFLY.

                 BY R. C. SANDS.

       [_From the French of De la Martine._]

  Born with the spring, and with the roses dying,
    Through the clear sky on Zephyr's pinion sailing,
  On the young flowret's opening bosom lying,
    Perfume and light and the blue air inhaling,
  Shaking the thin dust from its wings, and fleeing,
    And fading like a breath in boundless heaven,--
  Such is the butterfly's enchanted being;
    How like desire, to which no rest is given,
  Which still uneasy, rifling every treasure,
  Returns at last above to seek for purer pleasure.




                 FRAGMENT.

          BY ISAAC CLASON.--1825.

  He who has seen the red-forked lightnings flash
    From out some bleak and tempest-gathered cloud,
  And heard the thunder's simultaneous crash
    Bursting in peals terrifically loud;
  He who has marked the maddened ocean dash
    (Rob'd in its snow-white foam as in a shroud,)
  Its giant billows on the groaning shore,
    While death seem'd echoed in the deaf'ning roar;

  He who has seen the wild tornado sweep
    (Its path destruction, and its progress death,)
  The silent bosom of the smiling deep
    With the black besom of its boisterous breath,
  Waking to strife the slumbering waves that leap
    In battling surges from their beds beneath,
  Yawning and swelling from their liquid caves
    Like buried giants from their restless graves:--

  He who has gazed on sights and scenes like these,
    Hath look'd on nature in her maddest mood.
  But Nature's warfare passes by degrees;
    The thunder's voice is hush'd, however rude.
  The dying winds unclasp the raging seas,
    The scowling sky throws by her cloud-capt hood,
  The infant lightnings to their cradle creep,
    And the gaunt earthquake rocks herself to sleep.

  But there are storms whose lightnings ever glare,
    Tempests whose thunders never cease to roll--
  The storms of love when madden'd to despair,
    The furious tempests of the jealous soul,
  That kamsin of the heart which few can bear,
    Which owns no limit and which knows no goal,
  Whose blast leaves joy a tomb, and hope a speck,
    Reason a blank, and happiness a wreck.




       LOVE'S REMEMBRANCER.

        BY WILLIAM LEGGETT.

  And is this all remains of thee,
    Beloved in youth so well?
  Of all the charms that threw o'er me
    Affection's sweetest spell--
  The eye that beamed with light of mind,
  The heart so warm and so refined,
    This only left to tell?
  Yet well does it recall again
  The form beloved--alas! in vain.

  Sad relic! but few months are fled
    Since thou didst grace the brow
  Of her, who in death's marble bed
    Is coldly sleeping now!
  And when I leave my native home
  O'er ocean's pathless waste to roam,
    With many a whispered vow
  Did she this raven tress confer,
  And called thee, Love's Remembrancer.

  I placed thee next my throbbing heart,
    Where soon I hoped to fold
  The maid of whom alone thou art
    All I can e'er behold!
  And often, on the moonlight sea,
  I've stolen a glance of love at thee,
    While pleasure's tear-drop rolled
  To think I should soon cross the main,
  And meet my love--no, ne'er again!

  At last our bark return'd once more
    O'er ocean's heaving breast;
  And lightly on my native shore
    My thrilling footsteps pressed:
  With breathless haste I sought the form
  That, day and night, through calm and storm,
    Had been my bosom's guest--
  I sought--but ah! the grave had closed
  Above that form, in death reposed!

  Dear gift! when now thou meet'st my gaze,
    What burning thoughts arise!
  O, how the soul of other days
    Comes gushing from mine eyes!
  I do not weep o'er pleasures fled;
  Nor mourn I that the loved one's dead:
    But when remembrance flies
  Back o'er the scenes of early years,
  In vain would I suppress my tears!

  I weep--yet scarce know why I weep--
    For I would not recall
  That being from her dreamless sleep--
    I would not lift the pall
  That shrouds her cold and pulseless breast--
  No! if a word could break her rest,
    And give back life, love, all
  That once made life so bright, so dear,
  I could not--could not--wish her here!

  Now let the tempest pour its wrath
    On my devoted head!
  The clouds that lower upon my path
    Cannot disturb the dead:
  And oh! 'tis something still to know,
  Howe'er mine eyes with anguish flow,
    No tears can e'er be shed
  By her, who, snatched in loveliest bloom,
  Lies mouldering in an early tomb.

  Life's burden I have learned to bear,
    But I would bear alone,
  Nor have one other heart to share
    The pangs that rend my own!
  Yes, yes, loved pledge! where now nay view
  Is fixed upon the raven hue,
    It softens sorrow's moan
  To know--whate'er 'tis mine to brave--
  Affliction cannot pierce the grave!




       TO THE DYING YEAR.

        BY J. G. BROOKS.

  Thou desolate and dying year!
    Emblem of transitory man,
  Whose wearisome and wild career
    Like thine is bounded to a span;
  It seems but as a little day
    Since nature smiled upon thy birth,
  And Spring came forth in fair array,
    To dance upon the joyous earth.

  Sad alteration! now how lone,
    How verdureless is nature's breast,
  Where ruin makes his empire known,
    In Autumn's yellow vesture drest;
  The sprightly bird, whose carol sweet
    Broke on the breath of early day,
  The summer flowers she loved to greet;
    The bird, the flowers, Oh! where are they?

  Thou desolate and dying year!
    Yet lovely in thy lifelessness
  As beauty stretched upon the bier,
    In death's clay cold, and dark caress;
  There's loveliness in thy decay,
    Which breathes, which lingers on thee still,
  Like memory's mild and cheering ray
    Beaming upon the night of ill.

  Yet, yet, the radiance is not gone,
    Which shed a richness o'er the scene,
  Which smiled upon the golden dawn,
    When skies were brilliant and serene;
  Oh! still a melancholy smile
    Gleams upon Nature's aspect fair,
  To charm the eye a little while,
    Ere ruin spreads his mantle there!

  Thou desolate and dying year!
    Since time entwined thy vernal wreath,
  How often love hath shed the tear,
    And knelt beside the bed of death;
  How many hearts that lightly sprung
    When joy was blooming but to die,
  Their finest chords by death unstrung,
    Have yielded life's expiring sigh,

  And pillowed low beneath the clay,
    Have ceased to melt, to breathe, to burn;
  The proud, the gentle, and the gay,
    Gathered unto the mouldering urn;
  While freshly flowed the frequent tear
    For love bereft, affection fled;
  For all that were our blessings here,
    The loved, the lost, the sainted dead!

  Thou desolate and dying year!
    The musing spirit finds in thee
  Lessons, impressive and serene,
    Of deep and stern morality;
  Thou teachest how the germ of youth,
    Which blooms in being's dawning day,
  Planted by nature, reared by truth,
    Withers like thee in dark decay.

  Promise of youth! fair as the form
    Of Heaven's benign and golden bow,
  Thy smiling arch begirds the storm,
    And sheds a light on every wo;
  Hope wakes for thee, and to her tongue,
    A tone of melody is given,
  As if her magic voice were strung
    With the empyreal fire of Heaven.

  And love which never can expire,
    Whose origin is from on high,
  Throws o'er thy morn a ray of fire,
    From the pure fountains of the sky;
  That ray which glows and brightens still
    Unchanged, eternal and divine;
  Where seraphs own its holy thrill,
    And bow before its gleaming shrine.

  Thou desolate and dying year!
    Prophetic of our final fall;
  Thy buds are gone, thy leaves are sear,
    Thy beauties shrouded in the pall;
  And all the garniture that shed,
    A brilliancy upon thy prime,
  Hath like a morning vision fled
    Unto the expanded grave of time.

  Time! Time! in thy triumphal flight,
    How all life's phantoms fleet away;
  The smile of hope, and young delight,
    Fame's meteor beam, and Fancy's ray:
  They fade; and on the heaving tide,
    Rolling its stormy waves afar,
  Are borne the wreck of human pride,
    The broken wreck of Fortune's war.

  There in disorder, dark and wild,
    Are seen the fabrics once so high;
  Which mortal vanity had piled
    As emblems of eternity!
  And deemed the stately piles, whose forms
    Frowned in their majesty sublime,
  Would stand unshaken by the storms
    That gathered round the brow of Time.

  Thou desolate and dying year!
    Earth's brightest pleasures fade like thine;
  Like evening shadows disappear,
    And leave the spirit to repine.
  The stream of life that used to pour
    Its fresh and sparkling waters on,
  While Fate stood watching on the shore,
    And numbered all the moments gone:--

  Where hath the morning splendour flown,
    Which danced upon that crystal stream?
  Where are the joys to childhood known,
    When life was an enchanted dream?
  Enveloped in the starless night,
    Which destiny hath overspread;
  Enroll'd upon that trackless flight
    Where the death wing of time hath sped!

  Oh! thus hath life its even-tide
    Of sorrow, loneliness, and grief;
  And thus divested of its pride,
    It withers like the yellow leaf:
  Oh! such is life's autumnal bower,
    When plundered of its summer bloom;
  And such is life's autumnal hour,
    Which heralds man unto the tomb!




                  NEW-YORK:
        Printed by SCATCHERD & ADAMS,
             No. 38 Gold Street.




                   FOOTNOTES:
                  ____________


  [A] Goethe and his Faust.
  [B] Cuvier.
  [C] Spurzheim.
  [D] Scott.
  [E] Champollion.
  [F] Crabbe.
  [G] Jeremy Bentham.
  [H] Adam Clarke.
  [I] The Duke of Reichstadt.
  [J] Charles Carroll.
  [K] Not the sportsman's favourite (_scolopax minor_) of our Atlantic
       shores, but the large crested woodpecker, so called in the
       western counties.
  [L] Or "Lake Kau-na-ong-ga," meaning literally "_two wings_." White
       Lake, which is the unmeaning modern epithet of this beautiful
       sheet of water, is situated in the town of Bethel, Sullivan
       County, N. Y. It is in the form of a pair of huge wings expanded.
  [M] The Rev. James W. Eastburn, by whom, in conjunction with
       Mr. Sands, the poem of Yamoyden was written,
       in separate portions.
  [N] _Hesiod. Theog._ 1. 1. 60. 30.
  [O] It may perhaps, to some, appear incongruous thus to mingle Heathen
       musicians among the Hebrews; but it is believed the incongruity
       will disappear on a moment's reflection upon the history and
       character of Herod the Great. His expeditions to Rome, Greece,
       and Syria, &c., were frequent, and he was not scrupulous in the
       introduction of games, sports, and gorgeous customs of the
       oriental nations, to heighten the effect of his own pageants.
       He built and rebuilt divers Heathen temples, and among them the
       Temple of Apollo, in Greece. Some historians deny that he was a
       Jew; but say that he was originally the guardian of the Temple
       of Apollo at Askalon, who, having been taken prisoner among the
       Idumeans, afterwards turned Jew.
  [P] These lines, so musical in the original, and susceptible of
       equally melodious translation, were penned by the unfortunate
       Mary a few hours before her execution.
  [Q] The substance usually called French chalk has this singular
       property, that what is written on glass, though easily rubbed
       out again so that no trace remains visible, by being breathed
       on becomes immediately distinctly legible.
  [R] The above lines were translated by Dr. Mitchell, in October 1796,
       from the Italian of Dr. Gian Baptista Scandella, an accomplished
       gentleman, who afterwards, in September 1798, fell a victim to
       the yellow fever in the city of New York, just as he had finished
       his American tour, and was on the eve of embarking for Europe.


           _____________________________________________________________





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The New-York Book of Poetry, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NEW-YORK BOOK OF POETRY ***

***** This file should be named 42769.txt or 42769.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/7/6/42769/

Produced by Katherine Ward, Paul Marshall and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
