The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Number 170, January 29,
1853, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Notes and Queries, Number 170, January 29, 1853
       A Medium of Inter-communication for Literary Men, Artists,
       Antiquaries, Genealogists, etc

Author: Various

Editor: George Bell

Release Date: May 24, 2013 [EBook #42785]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram, Keith Edkins
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian
Libraries)





Transcriber's note: A few typographical errors have been corrected: they
are indicated by footnotes to the relevant item.

       *       *       *       *       *


{101}

NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES,
GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *


No. 170.]
SATURDAY, JANUARY 29. 1853
[Price Fourpence. Stamped Edition 5d.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONTENTS.

  NOTES:--                                                    Page

  Robertson's "Index of Charters"                              101

  Cowper or Cooper, by George Daniel                           102

  Yankee, its Origin and Meaning, by Dr. William Bell          103

  Shakspeare's Bedside, or the Doctors enumerated: a new
    Ballad, by James Cornish                                   104

  FOLK LORE:--Cures for the Hooping Cough: Rubus fruticosus,
    Gryphea incurva, Donkey                                    104

  MINOR NOTES:--Epitaphs--Nostradamus on the Gold-diggings--
    Whimsical Bequest--The Orkneys in Pawn--Lord Duff's Toast  105

  QUERIES:--

  The Meteoric Stone of the Thracian Chersonesus, by
    W. S. Gibson                                               105

  Banbury Cakes and Zeal                                       106

  MINOR QUERIES:--Richardson or Murphy--Legend attached to
    Creeper in the Samoan Isles--Shearman Family--American
    Fisheries--Grindle--A Gentleman executed for whipping a
    Slave to Death--Brydone--"Clear the Decks for Bognie's
    Carriage"--London Queries--Scarf worn by Clergyman--Life
    of Queen Anne--Erasmus Smith--Croxton or Crostin of
    Lancashire--Grub Street Journal--Chaplain to the
    Princess Elizabeth--"The Snow-flake"                       107

  MINOR QUERIES WITH ANSWERS:--Leamhuil or Lahoel--Orte's
    Maps, Edition of 1570--Prayer for the Recovery of
    George III.                                                108

  REPLIES:--

  Mrs. Mackey's Poems                                          109

  Map of Ceylon, by Sir J. Emerson Tennent                     110

  "Am, have, and will be:" Henry VIII., Act III. Sc. 2.        111

  Sir Henry Wotton's Letter to Milton                          111

  Skull-caps _versus_ Skull-cups, by Thomas Lawrence           112

  Inedited Poem by Pope                                        113

  Cibber's "Lives of the Poets," by W. L. Nichols              113

  English Comedians in the Netherlands                         114

  La Bruyere, by J. Sansom                                     114

  Southey's Criticism upon St. Mathias' Day in Leap-year       115

  PHOTOGRAPHIC NOTES AND QUERIES:--Portable Camera for
    Travellers--The Albumen Process--Black Tints of French
    Photographers--Originator of the Collodion Process--
    Developing Paper Pictures with Pyrogallic Acid             116

  REPLIES TO MINOR QUERIES:--Waterloo--Irish Peerages--
    Martha Blount--Quotations wanted--Pepys's Morena--
    Goldsmiths' Year-marks--Turner's View of Lambeth
    Palace--"For God will be your King to-day"--Jennings
    Family--The Furze or Gorse in Scandinavia--Mistletoe--
    Inscription on a Dagger--Steevens--"Life is like a
    Game of Tables," &c.                                       117

  MISCELLANEOUS:--

  Notes on Books, &c.                                          120

  Books and Odd Volumes wanted                                 120

  Notices to Correspondents                                    121

  Advertisements                                               121

       *       *       *       *       *


Notes.

ROBERTSON'S "INDEX OF CHARTERS."

This work, so often quoted, is familiar to every antiquary; but as the name
of the intelligent and laborious editor does not appear in any of our
biographical dictionaries, a short sketch may not be unacceptable to our
readers.

William Robertson was born at Fordyce, in the county of Banff, in the year
1740. Having gone through the usual course of elementary instruction in
reading and writing, he entered the Latin class at the grammar school of
his native parish; a seminary then, as now, of great celebrity in the North
of Scotland. Among his schoolfellows he contracted a particular intimacy
with Mr. George Chalmers, afterwards Secretary of the Board of Trade; so
well known by many elaborate and valuable commercial, historical, and
biographical publications. The connexion between the schoolboys,
originating in a similarity of taste and pursuits, was strengthened at a
subsequent period of their lives by the contributions of the intelligent
Deputy Keeper of the Records of Scotland to the local and historical
information of the author of _Caledonia_, so honourably recorded in that
national work. He completed his academical studies at King's College,
Aberdeen, where he was particularly distinguished by his proficiency in the
Greek language, under Professor Leslie. He was then apprenticed to Mr.
Turner of Turnerhall, advocate in Aberdeen; but had been little more than a
year in that situation, when Mr. Burnett of Monboddo applied to Professor
Leslie to recommend to him as his second clerk a young man who had a
competent knowledge of the Greek language, and properly qualified to aid
him in his literary pursuits. The Professor immediately mentioned young
Robertson; and Mr. Turner, in the most handsome manner, cancelled his
articles of apprenticeship. During his connexion with Mr. Burnett, he
accompanied him in several visits to France, on taking evidence as one of
the counsel in the great Douglas cause. On his first visit there, he went
with him to see the savage girl, who, at that time, was creating a great
sensation in Paris; and, at his request, made a translation {102} of M.
Condamines' account of her, to which Mr. Burnett wrote a preface. In the
year 1766 he was appointed Chamberlain to James, Earl of Findlater and
Seafield, on the recommendation of Lord Monboddo. In 1768 he published, at
Edinburgh, _The History of Greece, from the Earliest Times till it became a
Roman Province_, being a concise and particular account of the civil
government, religion, literature, and military affairs of the states of
Greece, for the use of seminaries of education, and the general reader, in
1 vol. 12mo. At this period, having caught a portion of the jealous
nationality of the multitude, he published a political _jeu d'esprit_
entitled _A North Briton Extraordinary_, by a young Scotsman in the
Corsican service, 4to., 1769: designed to repel the illiberal invectives of
Mr. Wilkes against the people of Scotland. Some of the popular objections
to the Union reiterated by the young Scotsman having been found in the
characteristic discussion between Lieutenant Lesmahagon and Matthew Bramble
on the same subject, in _The Expedition of Humphrey Clinker_, the
authorship was on that account erroneously attributed to Dr. Smollet, who
had then discontinued an unsuccessful opposition to Mr. Wilkes in the _The
Briton_.

In 1773 Mr. Robertson married Miss Donald, only child of Captain Alexander
Donald, of the 89th, or Gordon Highlanders. In the year 1777 he received
his commission from Lord Frederick Campbell, the Lord Clerk Register of
Scotland, as colleague of his brother, Mr. Alexander Robertson, who had
been appointed one of the Deputy Keepers of the Records of Scotland some
years before. He was now in a situation completely suited to his wishes,
and entered on the duties of his office with the utmost enthusiasm. It very
early occurred to him, that many ancient records of Scotland, which had
been removed by Edward I., might still be recovered; and he suggested to
Lord Frederick Campbell, who was as enthusiastic as himself in everything
tending to throw light on the early history of Scotland, that searches
ought to be made in the State Paper Office in London for the purpose of
ascertaining whether some of the earlier records might yet be found. Lord
Frederick Campbell entered warmly into his views, and the success with
which the search was made may be ascertained by consulting the Preface to
the _Index of Charters_.

The Reports to the Parliamentary Commissioners appointed to inquire into
the state of the records, with the suggestions made by him, and which have
been so ably followed up since his death by the late Thomas Thomson, Esq.,
Deputy Clerk Register, were considered of such importance as to merit a
vote of thanks of the Select Committee, which was transmitted to him along
with a very friendly letter from Mr. Abbot, then Speaker of the House of
Commons, afterwards Lord Colchester. He commenced the laborious work of
printing _The Records of the Parliament of Scotland_, in which he made
considerable progress, having, previous to his death, completed one very
large folio volume.

Between the years 1780 and 1790, in consequence of a strict investigation
into the validity of the claims of several persons to peerages in Scotland,
Mr. Robertson was much employed in inquiring into the state of the peerage,
both by those who made and those who rejected such claims. This
circumstance naturally led him to a minute acquaintance with the subject;
and induced him to publish, in 1794, a quarto volume, entitled _Proceedings
relative to the Peerage of Scotland from 16th January, 1707, to 20th April,
1788_: a work which has been found of the greatest service in conducting
the elections of the representative peers of Scotland.

In 1798, at the request of Lord Frederick Campbell, he published an--

    "Index, drawn up in the Year 1629, of many Records of Charters granted
    by the different Sovereigns of Scotland, between 1309 and 1413 (which
    had been discovered by Mr. Astle in the British Museum), most of which
    Records have been long missing; with an Introduction, giving a State,
    founded upon Authentic Documents still preserved, of the Ancient
    Records of Scotland, which were in that Kingdom in 1292."

The object of this publication was to endeavour to recover many ancient
records, which there was much reason to believe were still in existence.
The labour which he underwent in preparing this volume for the press, and
in transcribing a very ancient quarto manuscript, written on vellum, which
was found in the State Paper Office, was very great. Every word of this
ancient vellum MS. he copied with his own hand, and it is printed along
with the volume of the _Records of the Parliament of Scotland_. The
preface, introduction, notes, and appendix to the _Index of Charters_,
show, not only the great labour which this work required from him, but the
extensive information also, on the subject of the ancient history of
Scotland, which he possessed.

At a general meeting of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, held Jan. 28, 1799,
he was elected a member, and placed in the literary class of the Society.
He died March 4, 1803, at his house, St. Andrew's Square, Edinburgh, in the
sixty-third year of his age.

ELGINENSIS.

       *       *       *       *       *

COWPER, OR COOPER.

In the midsummer holidays of 1799, being on a visit to an old and opulent
family of the name of Deverell, in Dereham, Norfolk, I was taken to the
house of an ancient lady (a member of the aforesaid family), to pay my
respects to her, and to drink {103} tea. Two visitors were _particularly_
expected. They soon arrived. The first, if I remember rightly (for my whole
attention was singularly riveted to the _second_), was a pleasant-looking,
lively young man--very talkative and entertaining; his companion was above
the middle height, broadly made, but not stout, and advanced in years. His
countenance had a peculiar charm, that I could not resist. It alternately
exhibited a deep sadness, a thoughtful repose, a fearful and an
intellectual fire, that surprised and held me captive. His manner was
embarrassed and reserved. He spoke but little. Yet _once_ he was roused to
animation; then his voice was full and clear. I have a faint recollection
that I saw his face lighted up with a momentary smile. His hostess kindly
welcomed him as "Mr. Cooper." After tea, we walked for a while in the
garden. I kept close to his side, and once he addressed me as "My little
master." I returned to school; but that variable, expressive, and
interesting countenance I did not forget. In after years, standing, as was
my wont, before the shop windows of the London booksellers (I have not
_quite_ left off this old habit!), reading the title-pages of tomes that I
intensely longed, but had not then the money, to purchase, I recognised at
a shop in St. Paul's Churchyard that well-remembered face, prefixed to a
volume of poems, "written by William Cowper, of the Inner Temple, Esq." The
_cap_ (for when I saw "Mr. Cooper" he wore a wig, or his hair, for his age,
was unusually luxuriant) was the only thing that puzzled me. To make
"assurance doubly sure," I hastened to the house of a near relation hard
by, and I soon learnt that "Mr. Cooper" was William Cowper. The welcome
present of a few shillings put me in _immediate_ possession of the coveted
volumes. I will only just add, that I read, and re-read them; that the man
whom, in my early boyhood, I had so mysteriously reverenced, in my youth I
deeply and devotedly admired and loved! Many, many years have since passed
away: but that reverence, that admiration, and that love have experienced
neither diminution nor change.

It was something, said Washington Irving, to have seen even the _dust_ of
Shakspeare. It is something too, good Mr. Editor, to have beheld the face
and to have heard the voice of Cowper.

GEORGE DANIEL.

       *       *       *       *       *

YANKEE, ITS ORIGIN AND MEANING.

The meaning of the term _Yankee_, which our transatlantic brethren now
willingly adopt as their collective name, has acquired more notoriety than
it deserved from the unlucky and far-fetched derivations which it has
received in so many different publications. The term is of Anglo-Saxon
origin, and of home-growth. We all know, from the veritable Diedricht
Knickerbocker's _History of New York_, that its earliest settlers were
exclusively Dutchmen, who naturally named it, though from anything but
similarity in local situation, New Amsterdam. We may, of course, suppose
that in the multitude of these Dutch settlers the names they carried over
would be pretty nearly in the same proportion as at home. Both then and now
the Dutch _Jan_ (the _a_ sounded very broad and long), abbreviated from the
German _Johann_, our _John_, was the prevailing Christian appellative; and
it even furnished, in _Jansen_, &c. (like our _Johnson_), frequent
patronymics, particularly with the favourite diminutive _cke_, _Jancke_:
and so common does it still remain as such, that it would be difficult to
open the Directory of any decent-sized Dutch or Northern German town
without finding numerous instances, as _Jancke_, _Jaancke_, _Jahncke_, &c.,
according as custom has settled the orthography in each family. It is
scarcely necessary to say that the soft _J_ is frequently rendered by _Y_
in our English reading and speaking foreign words (as the Scandinavian and
German _Jule_ becomes our _Yule_), to show how easily and naturally the
above names were transformed into _Yahnkee_. So much for the name as an
appellative; now for its appropriation as a generic. The prominent names of
individuals are frequently seized upon by the vulgar as a designation of
the people or party in which it most prevails. We have _Paddies_ for
Irishmen, _Taffies_ for Welshmen, and _Sawnies_ (abbreviated _Alexander_)
for our Scotch brethren: so, therefore, when English interests gained the
upper hand, and the name of _New Amsterdam_ succumbed to that of _New
York_, the fresh comers, the English settlers, seized upon the most
prominent name by which to designate its former masters, which extended to
the whole of North America, as far as Canada: and the addition of _doodle_,
twin brother to _noodle_, was intended to mark more strongly the contempt
and mockery by the dominant party; just as a _Sawney_ is, in most of the
northern counties, a term next door to a fool. It is, however, to the
credit of our transatlantic brethren, and the best sign of their practical
good sense, that they have turned the tables on the innuendo, and by
adopting, carried the term into repute by sheer resolution and determinate
perseverance.

The term _slave_ is only the misappropriation, by malevolent neighbours, of
the Slavonic term _slaus_ or _laus_, so frequent in the proper names of
that people; _Ladislaus_, _Stanislaus_, _Wratislaus_, &c., meaning, in
their vernacular tongue, glory or praise, like the Latin _laus_, with which
it is no doubt cognate: and so _servi_ and _servants_ is but a derivative
from the _Serbs_, _Sorbs_, or _Servians_, whose glorious feats in arms
against their Turkish oppressors have proved that there is nothing
_servile_ in their character.

WILLIAM BELL, Phil. Dr.

17. Gower Place, Euston Square.

{104}

       *       *       *       *       *

SHAKSPEARE'S BEDSIDE, OR THE DOCTORS ENUMERATED.--A NEW BALLAD.

On looking over a collection of MSS. which has lain untouched for many
years, I have lighted on the accompanying ballad. Of its source I know
nothing; nor do I recollect how it fell into my hands. I have never seen it
in print. The author, fancifully enough, imagines the various editions of
Shakspeare brought in succession to the sick-bed of the immortal bard, and
has curiously detailed the result of their several prescriptions.

If you do me the favour of giving it insertion in your valuable "N. & Q." I
shall feel obliged; and I think that your numerous Shakspeare
correspondents, to some of whom it may be unknown, will not be displeased
at seeing it in the columns of your interesting journal. The editorial
period to which the ballad is brought down will tolerably fix its date:

  Old Shakspeare was sick--for a doctor he sent--
    But 'twas long before any one came;
  Yet at length his assistance Nic Row did present;
    Sure all men have heard of his name.

  As he found that the poet had tumbled his bed;
    He smooth'd it as well as he could;
  He gave him an anodyne, comb'd out his head,
    But did his complaint little good.

  Doctor Pope to incision at once did proceed,
    And the Bard for the simples he cut;
  For his regular practice was always to bleed,
    Ere the fees in his pocket he put.

  Next Theobald advanced, who at best was a quack,
    And dealt but in old women's stuff;
  Yet he caused the physician of Twick'nam to pack,
    And the patient grew cheerful enough.

  Next Hanmer, who fees ne'er descended to crave,
    In gloves lily-white did advance;
  To the Poet the gentlest of purges he gave,
    And, for exercise, taught him to dance.

  One Warburton, then, tho' allied to the Church,
    Produced his alterative stores;
  But his med'cines the case so oft left in the lurch
    That Edwards[1] kick'd him out of doors.

  Next Johnson arrived to the patient's relief,
    And ten years he had him in hand;
  But, tired of his task, 'tis the gen'ral belief,
    He left him before he could stand.

  Now Capel drew near, not a Quaker more prim,
    And number'd each hair in his pate;
  By styptics, call'd stops, he contracted each limb,
    And crippled for ever his gait.

  From Gopsal then strutted a formal old goose,
    And he'd cure him by inches, he swore;
  But when the poor Poet had taken one dose,
    He vow'd he would swallow no more.

  But Johnson, determined to save him or kill,
    A second prescription display'd;
  And, that none might find fault with his drop or his pill,
    Fresh doctors he call'd to his aid.

  First, Steevens came loaded with black-letter books,
    Of fame more desirous than pelf;
  Such reading, observers might read in his looks,
    As no one e'er read but himself.

  Then Warner, by Plautus and Glossary known,
    And Hawkins, historian of sound[2];
  Then Warton and Collins together came on,
    For Greek and potatoes renown'd.

  With songs on his pontificalibus pinn'd,
    Next, Percy the Great did appear;
  And Farmer, who twice in a pamphlet had sinn'd,
    Brought up the empirical rear.

 "The cooks the more num'rous the worse is the broth,"
    Says a proverb I well can believe;
  And yet to condemn them untried I am loth,
    So at present shall laugh in my sleeve.
                          RIGDUM FUNNIDOS.

JAMES CORNISH.

Falmouth.

[Footnote 1: One Edwards, an apothecary, who seems to have known [more] of
the poet's case than some of the regular physicians who undertook to cure
him.]

[Footnote 2: From the abilities and application of Sir J. Hawkins, the
publick is now furnished with a compleat history of the science of musick.]

    [This ballad originally appeared in the _Gentleman's Mag._ for 1797, p.
    912.; and at p. 1108. of the same volume will be found the following
    reply:

    "ANSWER TO SHAKSPEARE'S BED-SIDE; OR, THE DOCTORS ENUMERATED.

      How could you assert, when the Poet was sick,
        None hit off a method of cure;
      When Montagu's pen, like a magical stick,
        His health did for ever ensure?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

FOLK LORE.

_Cures for the Hooping Cough (Rubus fruticosus)._--The following is said to
prevail in the counties of Warwick, Worcester, and Stafford, as a remedy
for this harrowing disorder in children: that if a child is put to walk
beneath a common bramble (_Rubus fruticosus_), having rooted in the ground
at both extremities (which may be very commonly met with where they grow
luxuriantly), a certain number of times, a perfect cure would be the
result.

{105}

_Gryphea incurva._--In the course of conversation with an old man in the
county of Warwick, relative to ancient customs, he related to me as a fact
within his own knowledge, that the pretty round stone shell, as he termed
it (picking one up at the same time), a specimen of the _Gryphea incurva_,
or Devil's Thumb, as it is frequently called, which is found in
considerable quantities in the gravel beds of that county, when prepared in
a certain manner--calcined, I believe--is a certain specific for this
complaint in its most obstinate form. Indeed, he related to me some very
extraordinary cures which he had himself witnessed.

_Donkey._--A certain number of hairs taken from the black cross on the
shoulders of a donkey, and put into a small bag made of black silk, and
worn round a child's neck afflicted with the complaint, is a never-failing
remedy.

T. B. WHITBORNE.

       *       *       *       *       *


Minor Notes.

_Epitaph_ in Tynemouth churchyard:

 "Wha lies here?
  Pate Watt, gin ye speer.
  Poor Pate! is that thou?
  Ay, by my soul, is't;
  But I's dead now."

J. MN.

_Epitaph_ composed by an old gardener at Ilderton, Northumberland, for his
own tombstone:

 "Under this stone lies Bobbity John,
  Who, when alive, to the world was a wonder;
  And would have been so yet, had not Death in a fit
  Cut his soul and his body asunder."

J. MN.

_Nostradamus on the Gold-diggings._--Nostradamus (physician to Henry II. of
France) has the following among his prophecies (p. 33.):

 "Las, qu'on verra grand peuple tourmente
    Et la loy sainte en totale ruine,
  Par autres Loix toute la Christianite,
    Quand d'or, d'argent trouve nouvelle mine."

Garencieres translates thus:

 "Alas! how a great people shall be tormented,
  And the holy law in an utter ruin;
  By other laws all christendom be troubled,
  When new mines of gold and silver shall be found."

AGRICOLA DE MONTE.

_Whimsical Bequest._--Is the following cutting from the _Ipswich Journal_
of January 8th, 1853, worth preserving in your pages?

    WHIMSICAL BEQUEST.--On Saturday last, the unmarried of whatever age and
    sex, numbering between 800 and 900 residents in the parish of St.
    Leonard's, Colchester, received their new year's gift in the shape of
    'a penny roll,' bequeathed to them in days of yore, under the following
    singular circumstances:--Many years ago, a piece of waste land, called
    'Knave's Acre,' in the parish of St. Leonard's, was used as a
    playground by the boys of this and the adjacent parish of St. Mary
    Magdalen; but one day, the young gentlemen falling out, the affair
    ended in a regular 'fight;' and the result was that the boys of St.
    Leonard's vanquished their opponents, and ever after remained victors
    of the field. The ground was subsequently let for gardening purposes;
    but the owner, in perpetual remembrance of the juvenile victory,
    whimsically bequeathed its annual rent of 4l. to be appropriated in the
    manner above mentioned."

J. B. COLMAN.

_The Orkneys in Pawn._--Dr. Clarke mentions a curious circumstance, which
was related to him in Norway, by Bernard Auker, of Christiana. He stated
that Great Britain had the Orkney Islands only in pawn. Looking over some
old deeds and records, belonging to the Danish crown, at Copenhagen, Mr.
Auker found that these islands were consigned to England, in lieu of a
dowry for a Danish princess, married to one of our English kings, upon
condition that these islands should be restored to Denmark whenever the
debt for which they were pledged should be discharged. Therefore, as the
price of land, and the value of money, have undergone such considerable
alteration since this period, it is in the power of Denmark, for a very
small sum, to claim possession of the Orkneys.

KIRKWALLENSIS.

_Lord Duff's Toast._--Having made a considerable collection of old Scots
almanacks, I find occasionally on the waste papers at the beginnings and
ends some curious notes: they, however, chiefly refer to the weather,
crops, fairs, and prices of corn, starting-hours of coaches, &c. I find the
following toast noted on the _New Scots Almanack_ for 1802: I send it to
"N. & Q.," not knowing if it ever has been in print:

 "LORD DUFF'S TOAST A.D. '45.

  A. B. C.     A Blessed Change.
  D. E. F.     Down Every Foreigner.
  G. H. J.     God Help James.
  K. L. M.     Keep Lord Marr.
  N. O. P.     Noble Ormond Preserve.
  Q. R. S.     Quickly Restore[3] Stewart.
  T. U. V. W.  Truss Up Vile Whigs.
  X. Y. Z.     'Xert Your Zeal."

S. WMSON.

[Footnote 3: "Restore" corrected from "Resolve" by erratum in Issue
174.--Transcriber.]

       *       *       *       *       *


Queries.

THE METEORIC STONE OF THE THRACIAN CHERSONESUS.

In the _Quarterly Review_ just published, the reviewer, in the course of an
interesting article on "Meteors, Aerolites, and Shooting Stars," makes a
suggestion which, if admitted into "N. & Q.," may {106} meet the eye of
some English resident or traveller in the East, who will give to it the
attention it deserves.

A great degree of interest is attached to the recorded fall of aerolites in
times past, and the most remarkable and authentic record of antiquity on
this subject is that of the massive stone which fell in the 78th Olympiad
(about the time of the birth of Socrates), at Aegospotamos (the goat's
river), on the Hellespont,--the place soon afterwards the scene of that
naval victory of Lysander, in the last year of the Peloponnesian war, which
subjected Athens and Greece for a time to the Spartan power. The fall of
this stone, says the reviewer, is expressly mentioned by Aristotle; by the
author of the Parian Chronicle; by Diogenes of Apollonia; and most fully by
Plutarch and Pliny, both of whom distinctly state it to be shown in their
time--the sixth century after its fall. Pliny's description is well marked.
"Qui lapis etiam nunc ostenditur, magnitudine vehis, colore adusto;" and he
adds the fact that a burning comet (meteor) accompanied its descent.
Plutarch explicitly states that it was still held in much veneration by the
inhabitants of the Chersonesus. He also speaks of its vast size. If the
mass remained visible, and of such magnitude as described, down to Pliny's
time, it is far from impossible (remarks the reviewer) that it may even now
be re-discovered, with the aid, perchance, of some stray tradition attached
to the place, surviving, as often happens, the lapse of ages, the changes
of human dominion, and even the change of race itself, upon the spot. The
locality, indeed, is not further indicated than by the statement of its
fall at Aegospotamos; but the invariable manner in which it is thus
described defines tolerably well the district to be examined. We learn (he
adds) from the old geographers, that there was a town called Aegospotami on
the Thracian side of the Hellespont, and we may infer a stream from which
its name was derived. The description of the naval fight, and the situation
relatively to Lampsacus (the modern Lamsaki), further define the locality
within certain limits. The reviewer then adds some practical suggestions of
importance. The traveller devoting himself to this research should make his
head-quarters at various places near the spot in question. He should render
himself previously familiar with the aspect of meteoric stones, as now seen
in European cabinets, and should study the character of rocks and
fragmentary masses in the vicinity, to appreciate the differences of
aspect. A small part only of the mass may now appear above the surface, and
may even be wholly concealed by alluvial deposits, in which case the
research would, of course, be in vain, unless happily aided by local
tradition, which at the outset should be sedulously sought for. The
research, if successful, would be of interest enough, both for history and
science, to perpetuate a man's name. In the hope that some of the
correspondents of "N. & Q.," now sojourning in, or likely to visit the
locality, may be tempted to undertake it, I send you these suggestions,
extracted from an article of no small scientific interest and value; and I
will conclude with the Query, whether the "sacred black stone," which is
mentioned by Colonel Williams (the British Commissioner for the settlement
of the Turkish boundary question) to be regarded by the Seids inhabiting
Despool as their palladium, has any legend of meteoric origin connected
with its history?

WM. SIDNEY GIBSON.

Newcastle on Tyne.

       *       *       *       *       *

BANBURY CAKES AND ZEAL.

_The Tatler_, No. 220., in describing his "Ecclesiastical Thermometer"
which gave indication of the changes and revolutions in the Church, and of
the different degrees of heat in religion throughout the country, says:

    "To complete the experiment, I prevailed upon a friend of mine, who
    works under me in the occult sciences, to make a progress with my glass
    through the whole island of Great Britain; and after his return, to
    present me with a register of his observations. I guessed beforehand at
    the temper of several places be passed through by the characters they
    have had time out of mind. Thus that facetious divine, Dr. Fuller,
    speaking of the town of Banbury near a hundred years ago, tells us, it
    was a place famous for cakes and zeal, which I find by my glass is true
    to this day as to the latter part of this description; though I must
    confess it is not in the same reputation for cakes that it was in the
    time of that learned author."

In Gough's _Camden_, vol. i. p. 298., there is rather an amusing account of
the manner in which the town of Banbury gained a proverbial reputation for
zeal; and the following note by Mr. Camden, in his MS. supplement to the
_Britannia_, is added:

    "Put out the word _zeale_ in Banbury, where some think it a disgrace,
    when as _zeale_ with knowledge is the greater grace among good
    Christians; for it was first foysted in by some compositor or pressman,
    neither is it in my Latin copie, which I desire the reader to hold as
    authentic."

And Ray gives as a proverbial saying:

 "Banbury veal, cheese, and cakes."

and refers to the mistake in Camden.[4] Now it is {107} possible, that Dr.
Fuller derived his estimation of the town of Banbury from Camden; still, as
we know that Banbury in the seventeenth century had a character for
Puritanism, he may have intended by the word _zeal_ to refer to the
sectarian spirit of the inhabitants. But what I would ask is, whether any
events occurred in Banbury in the eighteenth century, which justify _The
Tatler_ in classing it among those places which were hot in the cause of
the Church; and giving to the words of the "facetious divine," whom he
quotes, a signification entirely different to that which must have been
intended?

Also, where is the first mention of Banbury cakes? Did their reputation
decline in the eighteenth century, and revive again afterwards; or had they
a celebrity in early days to which the present age can present no parallel?
The Banbury people would hardly assent to _The Tatler's_ disparaging
remark.

ERICA.

Warwick.

[Footnote 4: [The following note respecting this misprint is given in
Gibson's _Camden_, vol. i. p. 296., edit. 1772:--"There is a credible
story, that while Philemon Holland was carrying on his English edition of
the _Britannia_, Mr. Camden came accidentally to the press, when this sheet
was working off; and looking on, he found, that to his own observation of
Banbury being famous for cheese, the translator had added cakes and ale.
But Mr. Camden, thinking it too light an expression, changed the word _ale_
into _zeal_; and so it passed, to the great indignation of the Puritans,
who abounded in this town."--ED.]]

       *       *       *       *       *


Minor Queries.

_Richardson or Murphy._--I have in my collection a portrait, purporting to
be that of "Joseph Richardson, Esq., Barrister, and Member for Newport in
Cornwall," engraved in line by W. J. Newton, from a picture by the late
president, M. A. Shee, Esq., R.A.; and another impression, from the _same_
plate, inscribed "James Murphy, Esq., Architect." Will any of your readers
be good enough to inform me which of those gentlemen was the real _Simon
Pure_, and what induced the alteration of name, &c.?

I could cite numerous instances of the same kind of trick having been
practised, and may trouble you with further inquiries on a future occasion.
At present I am anxious to ascertain whether I have got a genuine or
spurious portrait in my portfolio of artists.

J. BURTON.

38. Avenham Lane, Preston.

_Legend attached to Creeper in the Samoan Isles._--Walpole, in his _Four
Years in the Pacific_, mentions a creeper of most singular toughness, to
which the natives attach a legend, which makes it the material employed by
some fabulous ancestor to bind the sun, and which they term _facehere_, or
_Itu's cord_, affirming that it cannot be broken "even by the white man,
clever as he is." Mr. Walpole certainly failed in his attempts to clear a
way through it. Will any of your botanical readers give me the proper name
of the plant? and also of the "Giant Arum," which the same people call the
king or chief of plants?

SELEUCUS.

_Shearman Family._--Is there a family named either Shearman or Spearman in
Yorkshire or in Wales? What are their arms? Is there any record of a member
of this family settling in Ireland, county of Kilkenny, about the middle of
the seventeenth century; his name, &c.? Are there any genealogical records
concerning them?

JAMES GRAVES.

Kilkenny.

_American Fisheries._--Almost from the first settlement of the colony of
Massachusetts Bay, this has been a troublesome question; and now that it is
under the consideration of the English and American governments, it is to
be hoped that it may be finally settled.

In June, 1623, a vessel arrived at Plymouth, Cape Cod, commanded by Admiral
West, who had been sent from England for the sole purpose of preventing all
persons, whether subjects of Great Britain or foreigners, from fishing on
the coast, unless they had previously obtained permission for that purpose
from the Council of New England. The admiral meeting with much opposition,
and finding he could not settle the question in an amicable manner, left
Plymouth in disgust, and sailed for southern Virginia. The colonists then
appealed to Parliament, and an act was passed that the fisheries _should be
free_.

Query, In what year was this act passed, and has the permission then
granted ever been annulled?

W. W.

Malta.

_Grindle._--What is the true meaning of this word, and are any other parts
of the kingdom called thus? The one I allude to is still called "The
Grindle," close adjoining the town of Bury St. Edmund's; and consists of an
encampment and earthworks, very similar to several mentioned before in "N.
& Q." under the articles "Grimsdyke" (Vol. iv., pp. 152. 331. 454.; Vol.
v., p. 43. &c.). A local guide to the town (Gillingwater, p. 5.) gives the
word _Grim_, a fortress=_Grinneal_, depths in the ground.

Can any reader of your valuable Notes give any further explanation of the
word, or of its origin at Bury?

C. G.

_A Gentleman executed for whipping a Slave to Death._--In the first volume
of _Eastern Europe_, published in London by T. C. Newby, in 1846, it is
thus recorded:

    "During the administration of Spencer Perceval, on the 8th of May,
    1811, the Honourable A. W. Hodge, a member of his Britannic Majesty's
    council at Tortola, was executed for the murder of one of his negroes
    by excessive flogging."

{108}

Might I ask if there is any other instance known of a gentleman's having
suffered similar punishment for the same crime, during the period the West
India islands were held as slave colonies of England?

W. W.

Malta.

_Brydone._--A. J. C. would be glad to be informed of the birthplace of Mr.
Brydone, the tourist and author. The biographies state that he was the son
of a clergyman, and born in Scotland; but do not give the exact _locus in
quo_.

"_Clear the Decks for Bognie's Carriage._"--The announcement, in _Punch_,
that the Lords of the Admiralty had ordered a large supply of arm-chairs
(of course on castors) for the use of our veteran commanders, has recalled
to my recollection the above, which used to pass current in Banffshire, as
a call for a clear stage. Can any of your readers tell us who was "Bognie;"
what was his "carriage," and what the connexion between it and "decks?"

FROM THE NEIGHBOURHOOD OF BOGNIE BRAE.

_London Queries._--Answers to the following Queries would very much oblige
me.

The date when chains and bars were first erected for levying toll into the
City of London.

The date of the erection of the first Temple Bar, its architect's name, and
when pulled down or destroyed, and if burnt during the Great Fire.

The authority for the present gate having been built after designs of Sir
Christopher Wren.

J. N. G. G.

_Scarf worn by Clergymen._--By what authority do clergymen, who are neither
chaplains to any member of the royal family, or to any peer or peeress, or
have not taken the degree of D.D., wear a _scarf_ either over the surplice
or the black gown?

C-- J. T. P.

W---- Rectory.

_Life of Queen Anne._--Who is the author of

    "The History of the Life and Reign of her late Majesty Queen Anne:
    wherein all the Transactions of that Memorable Reign are faithfully
    compiled from the best authorities, and impartially related.
    Illustrated with a regular Series of all the Medals that were struck to
    commemorate the great Events of this Reign; with a Variety of other
    useful and ornamental Plates. London, printed and sold by the
    Booksellers in Town and Country. 1740."

The size is small folio.

E. S. JACKSON.

_Erasmus Smith._--The undersigned is much interested in learning something
of the life and history of Erasmus Smith, the founder of the numerous
schools in Ireland that still go under his name, and are governed by a
chartered incorporation. If it was a great act to found and endow so many
schools, assuredly Erasmus Smith gives additional authority to the dictum,
that "The world knows nothing of its greatest men."

D. C. L.

_Croxton or Crostin of Lancashire._--Can any of the readers of "N. & Q."
furnish me with any particulars of this family; whether they bore arms, and
what they were? They are, I believe, of Lancashire origin,--the name
frequently occurring in the history of that county. Where is also the
ancient (and formerly very extensive) parish of Crostin?

W. H. COLLES.

_Grub Street Journal._--Can any of your readers give me information as to
the parties by whom this journal was conducted; or who formed the Grub
Street Society, shortly before, and for a few years after 1730; or what
this society was: or refer me to the best sources of information on the
subject? My reason for asking the question is, that I have lately found a
manuscript book--a common thickish square account-book in a vellum
back--containing at one end, as it seems, the minutes of the meetings of
the Grub Street Society, signed by the members at each meeting: at the
other end, the accounts of the funds of the association. If it should prove
that the entries are genuine, and they should prove to be of any interest,
I should send you some extracts from the book.

REGINENSIS.

_Chaplain to the Princess Elizabeth._--What was the surname of the person
who officiated as chaplain to the Princess Elizabeth during her
imprisonment at Woodstock in 1554? His Christian name was William.

C. R. M.

"_The Snow-flake._"--In a comparatively obscure poem, _The Snow-flake_, not
very long published, occurs the line:

 "When Kola's mild blue eyes shall weep."

Pray, to what is allusion made?

A. S. T.

       *       *       *       *       *


Minor Queries with Answers.

_Leamhuil or Lahoel._--Can you, or any of your readers, give me a
description of the place, abbey, or other ancient building, called
_Leamhuil_ or _Lahoel_, or refer me to some work where I may find the
history of the same? In Lewis's _Topographical Dictionary_ it is said to be
somewhere in Queen's County, Ireland. Also, inform me whether there has
been any family of that name?

FREDERICK KENNETH.

Clonea.

    [Leamchuill is in the barony of Portnehinch, Queen's County. Archdale,
    in his _Monasticon Hibernicum_, p. 595., states, that "St.
    Fintan-Chorach was abbot here towards the close of the sixth century.
    By some writers he is said to have been interred here; and from {109}
    others we learn that Cluainednach, or Clonfert Brendan, was the place
    of his sepulture. St. Mochonna was abbot or bishop here, but at what
    period is unknown." Stevens, however, says this abbey was in Leinster.
    "St. Fintan, otherwise called St. Munnu, in the sixth century, founded
    the abbey of Cluian Aednach; those of Achad-Arglass, Achad-Finglass,
    and _Lanchoil_ in _Leinster_, and those of Dumbleske and Ross-Coerach
    in Munster." (_Monasticon Hibernicum_, p. 377., edit. 1722.) Consult
    also the authorities quoted in Butler's _Lives of the Saints_, art. St.
    Fintan, October 22nd.]

_Orte's Maps, Edition of 1570._--I have in my possession a quarto volume of
fifty-three coloured maps, by Abraham Orte, and printed at Antwerp in 1570.

Almost all the maps are ornamented with some miniature paintings,
representing the ships or galleys used in the country which the map
describes. On many of these there are also the figures of whales and
flat-fish. On the map of Russia, in one part, there are three large tents,
with three men, clothed in coloured garments, at the entrance of them; and
near by some camels are grazing. In another part is seen a cluster of
trees, and seated in the branches of the first and largest there is the
figure of a saint, to whom it would appear five men, or priests, are
kneeling and praying, with their heads uplifted and hands outstretched. On
the branches of the trees in the background several persons are hanging.

On the twenty-eighth map there is a large town represented at the foot of a
hill, and above it these words: "Urbis Salis Burgensis genuina Descriptio."
Can any of your correspondents inform me if there is another copy of this
work known to be extant; and, if so, whether the maps are like those I have
briefly described? In a catalogue of rare books, I have seen no mention
made of this edition of 1570, though reference is made to one of twenty
years a later date.

W. W.

Malta.

    [This edition is in the British Museum, and agrees in every respect
    with the one possessed by our correspondent, except that it is in
    folio. It appears extremely rare.]

_Prayer for the Recovery of George III._--In 1815, when I first went to
school, one of my schoolfellows had (I think in manuscript in the fly-leaf
of his Prayer-Book) a prayer for the king's recovery, of which I remember
only two detached portions:--"Restore, we implore Thee, our beloved
sovereign to his family and his people"--"and whether it shall seem fit to
Thine unerring wisdom, presently to remove from us this great calamity, or
still to suspend it over us, dispose us, under every dispensation of Thy
Providence, patiently to adore Thine inscrutable goodness." The rest I
forget. Can any of your correspondents supply the remainder of the prayer;
or tell me where it is to be found, or who was the author?

LAICUS.

    [This prayer was composed by Dr. Sutton, Archbishop of Canterbury, and
    will be found in the _Gentleman's Magazine_ of November 1810, p. 484.]

       *       *       *       *       *


Replies.

MRS. MACKEY'S POEMS.

(Vol. vi., p. 578.)

Mrs. Mary Mackey was "a real person," and the widow of a conveyancer in
good practice. Of him she says (_Scraps of Nature_, p. 362.):

    "The husband of poor Nature was a gentleman and an honest man, made a
    fortune and spent it nearly, in which his wife had no share, for that
    he governed and ruled the roast is well known to many: he had a noble
    and generous soul, but always kept poor Nature's talents under a
    bushel, where they shall never go again. He was old enough to be her
    father, and ever treated her like a child."

He left only enough to purchase for her a small annuity. She was
uneducated, as she says, p. 274.:

 "I never learned to write or spell,
  Although I read and write so well;"

but laboured under the illusion that she was a poetess. She sought an
interview with Hewson Clarke by inviting him to meet a lady who admired his
writings in White Conduit Fields. He went, and was somewhat mortified to
find a matron of about forty-five, who placed her MS. in his hand, and
requested his candid opinion on a future day. She was lady-like and
sensible upon all matters except her own poems. Of course his opinion was
easily formed; but he assured her that, though the poems were very good,
they would not suit the public taste, and that she would be rash in
publishing. She took his advice, but unfortunately happened to know Peter
Pindar, who had been one of her husband's friends. She devotes a "scrap" to
a kiss which he gave her (p. 215.). He was blind, but on hearing some of
her poems read, he exclaimed, "Oh, my God, madam, there is nothing like
this in Shakspeare!" Such a compliment turned her head; she sold her
annuity to publish her book, and was reduced to extreme distress and
misery. This is stated in a notice of the book in _The British Stage_,
Sept. 1817, p. 210. The article, which is signed K., was written by the
editor, Mr. Jones Broughton of the India House, a friend of Hewson Clarke,
and once editor of _The Theatrical Inquisitor_.

I agree with G. C. that the "scraps" are _niaiseries_; as literature
nothing can be worse; but they are curious and, I think, deeply interesting
as genuine expressions of feeling. Mary Mackey was vain and weak, but
true-hearted, {110} generous, and affectionate; she conceals nothing, and
lays bare her poverty and her wish to marry again. She advertises herself
under the form of a pony for sale:

 "For since she has been free by the death of her
  Late owner, the poor thing has been a scamperer,
  _And has often known the want of a good meal;_
  _For she was highly fed in her old master's lifetime._
  But he, alas! sleeps in peace, and peace be to his soul.
  He was a good master and a real gentleman,
  And left his little trotter to a merciless world:
  She is gentle by Nature; _but the poor thing's heart_
  _Is now breaking_; yet by kind treatment she might
  Be made one of the most valuable and amusing
  Things in Nature. She is a little foundered, but not to hurt
  Or retard her movements; she is of some mettle and
  High spirit, notwithstanding her hard fate,
  She will even kick if roughly handled,
  Nor would she suffer a dirty hand to touch her."--P. 105.

Again, she says:

 "I wish I had an only friend,
    To shield me from the winter's blast,
  For should I live to see another,
    He may cut keener than the last;
  And I shall never wish to feel
    A keener winter than the past."--P. 288.

She complains of a refusal from one to whom she wrote "to beg or solicit
some bacon," and says:

 "To him she has given, _she never did lend_,
  For her plan is to give to the foe or the friend."--P. 180.

Some one, probably Clarke, wrote an anonymous letter to dissuade her from
publishing. This she answers indignantly in prose, concluding:

    "Should he be tempted to write again, let him sign his name, or where a
    letter may find the kind-hearted creature, who has such a love for
    Nature. His stinging advice was to run down the widow's soul's delight,
    her dear scraps, which not a block in Nature can suppress"--P. 366.

Throughout the silliness run veins of feeling, respect for her husband,
gratitude for the smallest acts of kindness, and cheerfulness under want.
In some lines to a cat, apparently written during her husband's sickness,
she says:

 "Now Grimalkin each day on her throne takes a seat,
  With a smile on her face when her master can eat;
  _But, alas! he eats little._"--P. 309.

Truly Mary Mackey must have been a good wife and friend, and I hope I may
claim some credit for extracting evidence thereof from perhaps the weakest
verses ever written. Her own opinion was different, and is thus expressed
in her

    "PREFACE OR NO PREFACE.--No preface can be to the Scraps of Nature, for
    God gave none when He formed creation, nor was there ever a book sent
    into the world like the volume of Nature, since the creation of the
    world, nor ever so bold an undertaking. It has never been seen by any
    eye, nor corrected by any hand, but the eye and hand of the writer. No
    volume has more humour," &c.

G. C.'s copy is defective. Mine has a portrait of Mrs. Mary Mackey, which
indicates considerable beauty, despite of very poor drawing and engraving,
and the execrable thin curls and short waist of 1809. The "falling tear is
visible;" but, had not the authoress told us what it was, it might be taken
for a mole or a wart. As the face is perfectly cheerful, and the "scrap" is
headed "Compliment to the Engraver," I hazard the conjecture that he was
instructed to add the tear to a miniature painted before she had been
compelled to shed tears on her own account.

H. B. C.

U. U. Club.

       *       *       *       *       *

MAP OF CEYLON.

(Vol. vii., p. 65.)

Your correspondent AJAX asks information of me as to the best, or even a
tolerable, map of Ceylon. I am not surprised at the inquiry, as no
satisfactory map of that island exists to my knowledge. It may illustrate
this assertion to mention, that in 1849 I travelled through the vast and
interesting district of Neura Kalawa, to the north of the Kandyan range;
and I carried with me the map of "India and Ceylon," then published, and
since reprinted in 1852, by the Society for the Diffusion of Useful
Knowledge. In that map the country I was passing through appears as a large
blank, with the words "Unknown mountainous region." But I found it
abounding in prosperous villages, and tracts of land cultivated both for
rice and dry grain. So far from being "unknown," its forests have a
numerous though scattered population; and as to its being "mountainous,"
there is scarcely a hill in the entire "region." There is a meagre map of
Ceylon, drawn by George Atkinson, who was civil engineer and
surveyor-general of the colony, and published by Wylde in 1836. It is more
correct than others, but sadly deficient in information.

Mr. Arrowsmith, of Soho Square, published in 1845 an admirable map of what
is called the Kandy Zone, being the central province of the island,
prepared by the Deputy Quarter-Master-General, Colonel Frazer; assisted by
Captain Gallwey and Major Skinner, of the Ceylon Civil Service. Col. Frazer
has since placed in Mr. Arrowsmith's hands a map of the entire island: it
has not yet appeared; but when published it will be found to be as nearly
perfect in its details as any map can be.

In reply to the inquiry of AJAX as to the publication of my own work on the
history and {111} topography of Ceylon, it is still in hand; but the
pressure of official and parliamentary duties has sadly retarded its
preparation for the press.

J. EMERSON TENNENT.

66. Warwick Square, Belgravia.

       *       *       *       *       *

"AM, HAVE, AND WILL BE:" HENRY VIII., ACT III. SC. 2.

(Vol. vii., p.5.)

Independently of the obvious probability that Shakspeare, in these three
words, intended to embody the present, the past, and the future, there is
another reason why we can by no means part with _have_, or suffer it to be
changed into any other word; and that is, because it is open to one of
those parallel analogies which I have so often upheld as sure guides to the
true reading. Only a few lines before, in a previous speech of Wolsey's, he
makes use of a precisely similar elliptical coupling together of the verbs
_have_ and _be_:

                         "My loyalty,
  Which ever _has_, and ever _shall be_, growing."

Here we have, in "has and shall be," the identical combination which, in
the case of "have and will be," has given rise to so much doubt; so that we
have only to understand the one phrase as we do the other, and make the
slight addition of the personal pronoun I (not before, but after _am_), to
render Wolsey's exclamation not only intelligible, but full of emphasis and
meaning.

But in the first place the King's speech to Wolsey might be more
intelligibly pointed if the words "your bond of duty" were made a
parenthetical explanation of _that_. The "bond of duty" is the mere
matter-of-course duty to be expected from every subject; but the King says
that, over and above _that_, Wolsey ought, "as 'twere in loves particular,"
to be _more_! Thereupon Wolsey exclaims--

                         "I do profess
  That for your highness' good I ever labour'd
  More than mine own."

Here he pauses, and then immediately continues his protestation in the fine
passage, the meaning of which has been so much disputed; suddenly reverting
to what the King had just said he _ought_ to be, he exclaims:

                 "_That_, am I, have, and will be,
  Though all the world should crack their duty to you,
  and throw it from their soul," &c.

Still less can it be permitted to change "crack their duty" into "lack
their duty." Setting aside all consideration of the comparative force of
the two words, and the circumstance that _crack_ is frequently used by
Shakspeare in the sense of _sever by violence_--the adoption of _lack_
would be to attribute to Shakspeare an absolute blunder, for how could "all
the world" _throw from their soul_ that which they _lacked_?

With reference to another alteration ("capable" into "palpable," in _As You
Like It_, Act III. Sc. 5.), notwithstanding that it seems so obvious, and
has been declared so self-evident, "_as to be lauded needs but to be
seen_," I, for one, enter my protest against it, being of opinion that the
conservation of _capable_ is absolutely essential to the context.

_Capable_ may be, and has been, defended upon various grounds; but there is
one consideration which, with me, is all-sufficient, viz., it is necessary
for the explanation and defence of the accompanying word "_cicatrice_."
_Capable_ is _concave_, and has reference to the _lipped_ shape of the
impression, and _cicatrice_ is a _lipped_ scar; therefore one word supports
and explains the other. And it is not a little singular that _cicatrice_
should, in its turn, have been condemned as an improper expression by the
very critic (Dr. Johnson) who, without perceiving this very cogent reason
for so doing, nevertheless explains "capable impressure" as _a hollow
mark_.

A. E. B.

Leeds.

       *       *       *       *       *

SIR HENRY WOTTON'S LETTER TO MILTON.

(Vol. vi., p. 5.; Vol. vii., p. 7.)

I desire to speak with the greatest deference to MR. BOLTON CORNEY'S
superior judgment, but still I cannot help saying that Thomas Warton's
remarks upon "our common friend Mr. R." and "the late R.'s poems" do not
seem to be supported by the facts. Randolph's poems were printed at Oxford
in 1638, but in which month we are not told. The first question then is
this, Were they printed before or after the 13th of April, when Wotton's
letter was written? If _after_ the 13th, or even the 6th of April, when
Milton's presentation copy of _Comus_ was forwarded, of course the matter
is decided. But, allowing for the present that they were printed _before_
the 13th of April in the year 1638, I must ask, in the second place, Could
Sir H. Wotton predicate of any volume printed in that year before that date
(or rather of _Comus_ stitched up with that volume), that he had viewed it
_some long time before_ with singular delight? I certainly think not, but
shall be very happy to have my objections overruled.

Then, again, if we admit MR. BOLTON CORNEY'S "novel conjecture" (which I
freely allow to be a great improvement upon that of Thomas Warton), how
comes it the Sir H. Wotton knew nothing of "the true artificer" of _Comus_
until he was let into the secret by Milton himself? If Robert Randolph was
the "common friend" of Wotton and Milton, was he not likely to have {112}
known something of the authorship of _Comus_, and to have enlightened Sir
Henry thereon? My principal objection remains. Thomas Randolph was far too
popular a poet to have been contemptuously alluded to by Wotton or any one
else in that age, and, making all due allowance for laudation and
compliment, Wotton does disparage the poems to which Milton's _Masque_ was
appended.

I think that quaint old Winstanley gives the general opinion of Randolph.
He says:

    "He was one of such a pregnant wit that the Muses may seem not only to
    have smiled, but to have been tickled at his nativity, such the
    festivity of his poems of all sorts."--_Lives of English Poets_, p.
    142., Lond. 1687.

We must therefore, perhaps, look out for some more obscure and worthless
poet, whose "principal" Milton's "accessory" was to "help out."

When writing on this subject before, I said that Samuel Hartlib had not
settled in England at the time of Sir H. Wotton's letter to Milton (Vol.
vi., p. 5.). I am indebted to Warton for that mistake. He fixes the date of
his coming hither to "about the year 1640." (_Illustrations of Milton's
Minor Poems_, p. 596.: Lond. 1775.)

Samuel Hartlib figures amongst the correspondents of Joseph Mede in March,
1634, and even then dated from London. (Mede's _Works_, vol. ii. lib. iv.
p. 1058.: Lond. 1664, fol.)

Amongst the _Letters and Despatches_ of Lord Strafforde are two letters
from Sir Henry Wotton, which do not appear in the _Reliquiae_ (vide vol. i.
pp. 45-48.: Dublin, 1740, fol.), though some sentences in the former of the
two may be found at p. 373. of said work. I often find it a pleasant
employment to fill up the gaps and trace out the allusions in Wotton's
correspondence.

May I give a short specimen of one of his letters filled up? It was
written, I suppose, to Nicholas Pey:

     "My dear Nic,

    "More than a voluntary motion doth now carry me towards Suffolk,
    especially that I may confer by the way with an excellent physician at
    B., whom I brought myself from Venice."--_Reliquiae_, p. 359.

By "B." is meant St. Edmund's Bury, and by the "excellent physician" no
less than _Gaspero Despotine_, who, together with Mark Anthony de Dominis,
accompanied Sir H. Wotton and his chaplain Bedell from Italy.

However, he was very unlike the archbishop of whom Dr. Crakanthorp used to
say, that he was well called "De Dominis in the plural, for he could serve
two masters, or twenty if they would all pay him wages." (Hacket's _Life of
Williams_, part i. p. 103.: Lond. 1693, fol.) Despotine left Italy that he
might at the same time leave the communion of the Church of Rome, and when
Bedell was appointed to the living of St. Edmund's Bury, he accompanied him
thither. One of Wotton's very interesting letters announces the event.
(_Reliquiae_, p. 400.) Under the fostering care of the saintly Bedell,
Despotine rose to eminence in his profession at St. Edmund's Bury, and kept
up a kind correspondence with his guide and patron after his promotion to
the Provostship of Trinity College, Dublin, and the sees of Ardagh and
Kilmore. (Burnet's _Life of Bishop Bedell_, ad init.)

In another letter (_Reliquiae_, p. 356.) Wotton speaks of having given also
to Michael Brainthwaite and the young Lord Scudamore the advice of Alberto
Scipioni to himself, to "keep his eyes open and his mouth shut," which
Milton sadly disregarded.

RT.

Warmington.

       *       *       *       *       *

SKULL-CAPS VERSUS SKULL-CUPS.

(Vol. vi., pp. 441. 565.)

Your correspondent JAMES GRAVES seems to consider cooking in a skull
impossible. I certainly have never tried it, nor do I wish to express an
opinion as to the taste of the Irish or their invaders, A.D. 1315, though
methinks those who relished the "flesh" need not have demurred to the pot.
But as to the possibility, in Ewbank on _Hydraulic Machines_, book i. cap.
3., I find the following mention of

    "PRIMITIVE BOILERS.--The gourd is probably the original vessel for
    heating water, &c. &c., its exterior being kept moistened by water
    while on the fire, as still practised by some people, while others
    apply a coating of clay to protect it from the effects of flame."

He then quotes Kotzebue as finding "the Radack Islanders boiling something
in cocoa-shells." A primitive Sumatran vessel for boiling rice is the
bamboo, which is still used; by the time the rice is dressed the vessel is
nearly destroyed by the fire. This destructibility needs hardly to be
considered an objection to the "starving fugitives," as plenty of the same
kind must have been at hand, and even an Irishman's skull is probably as
little inflammable as gourds, cocoa-sells, or bamboos.

J. P. O.

Should the following extract not be considered as bearing on the question,
we must admit that it is a remarkable bit of folk lore.

The quotation is second-hand, being taken from the Chronicles of London
Bridge, _Family Library_, p. 436.; the authority is, however, there given.
The passage refers to some parties engaged to refine the coinage, and who
were taken ill, affected probably by the fumes of arsenic.

    "---- the mooste of them in meltinge fell sycke to deathe, w^{th} the
    sauoure, so as they were advised to drynke in a dead man's skull for
    theyre recure. {113}

    "Whereupon he w^{th} others who had thovergyght of that worke, procured
    a warrant from the Counsaile to take of the heades vppon London Bridge
    and make cuppes thereof, whereof they dranke and founde some reliefe,
    althoughe the moost of them dyed."

This is supposed to have been about 1560 or 1561.

THOMAS LAWRENCE.

Ashby-de-la-Zouch.

       *       *       *       *       *

INEDITED POEM BY POPE.

(Vol. vii., p. 57.)

This, which is headed "Note," ought to have been headed _Query_: and it
affords an instance of ignorance on the part of some of our correspondents;
and of, I fear I must add, inattention on that of our worthy Editor, which
I think it right to notice as a warning to all parties for the future: and
I appeal to the candour of our Editor himself to give my protest a place.

The first step in this curious affair is to be found in "N. & Q.," Vol.
ii., p. 7., where "_the Editor of Bishop Warburton's Literary Remains_"
produced, as attributed to Mr. Charles Yorke, a kind of epitaph of sixteen
lines, beginning--

 "Stript to the naked soul, escaped from clay."

That the "editor of Bishop Warburton's _Literary Remains_," and his friend
"an eminent critic," should have been at a loss to know where these
well-known verses were to be found, and should have countenanced their
having been Charles Yorke's, seems the more wonderful: for the verses are
given in _Warburton's own letters_ as _Pope's_, and were printed near a
hundred years ago in Ruffhead's _Life of Pope_, _as Pope's_; and in the MS.
copy furnished by Mr. Yorke, they are marked as "Mr. Pope's."

The next error is, that this mention of Mr. Yorke's name--though his MS.
bore the name of _Pope_--seems to have given rise to the idea that _he_ was
the author, which Lord Campbell has so fully adopted as to have reprinted,
in his _Lives of the Chancellors_ (vol. v. p. 428.), the verses as the
composition of _Charles Yorke_.

We next find in "N. & Q.," Vol. iii., p. 43., a reply of W. S. to the Query
of Warburton's editor, stating "that the verses were by _Pope_," and
_lately_ republished in a miscellany by James Tayler, with a statement that
they _were not inserted in any edition of Pope's works_. The fact being,
that they have been inserted in Warton's edition, 1797; and in Bowles', and
in all subsequent editions that I have seen: and it seems strange that W.
S. did not take the trouble of verifying, by a reference to _any_ edition
of Pope, the statement that he quoted.

Next we have, in the same (3rd) volume of "N. & Q.," a communication from
MR. CROSSLEY, which states correctly all the foregoing circumstances, with
the addition, that the verses appeared as _Aaron Hill's_ in an edition of
his works as early as 1753. Thence arises another discussion; were they
Pope's or Hill's? Roscoe thought they were Hill's; MR. CROSSLEY thinks they
were Pope's. I think, both from external and internal evidence, that they
were not Pope's. But that has little to do with my present object, which is
to show how often the matter has been already discussed in "N. & Q." I must
observe, however, that MR. CROSSLEY has fallen into a slight anachronism.
He says that the verses were "transferred from Ruffhead into _Bowles'_
edition;" whereas they, as I have stated, were transferred into _Warton's_
many years earlier.

After all this disquisition comes a recent Number of "N. & Q.," of which a
_column and a quarter_ is wasted by a correspondent A. T. W., who confesses
that he (or she) has _not a modern edition of Pope within reach_, and begs
to know whether these verses (repeated _in extenso_) "have been yet
introduced to the public?"

Surely "N. & Q." should beware of correspondents that write to inquire
about Pope, without having an edition of his works; and I cannot but wonder
that this _crambe_, which had been served up thrice before, and so fully by
MR. CROSSLEY, should have been _recocta_, and introduced as a new theme,
entitled to a special attention.

C.

       *       *       *       *       *

CIBBER'S "LIVES OF THE POETS."

(Vol. v., p. 161.)

Allow me to draw your attention to a _curious letter_ which I transcribe,
with reference to the above. It appears to have escaped the notice of MR.
CROKER, although it corroborates his statements. It was written by the
bookseller himself who published the _Lives_, and would seem to set the
matter as to their authorship completely at rest. Griffiths appears to have
been also the editor of the _Monthly Review_; and Cartwright, the inventor
of the power-loom, to whom the letter is addressed, to have been one of his
contributors.

    "MR. GRIFFITH to MR. CARTWRIGHT.

    "Turnham Green, 16th June [1781?].

     "Dear Sir,

    "I have sent you a _feast_! Johnson's _new_ volumes of the _Lives of
    the Poets_. You will observe that Savage's _Life_ is one of the
    volumes. I suppose it is the same which he published about thirty years
    ago, and therefore you will not be obliged to notice it otherwise than
    in the course of enumeration. In the account of Hammond, my good friend
    Samuel has stumbled on a material circumstance in the publication of
    Cibber's _Lives of the Poets_. He intimates that Cibber never saw the
    work. This is a reflection on the bookseller, your humble servant. The
    bookseller {114} has now in his possession Theophilus Cibber's receipt
    for twenty guineas (Johnson says ten), in consideration of which he
    engaged to 'revise, correct, and improve the work, and also to affix
    his name in the title-page.' Mr. Cibber did accordingly very punctually
    revise every sheet; he made numerous corrections, and added many
    improvements: particularly in those lives which came down to his own
    times, and brought him within the circle of his own and his father's
    literary acquaintance, especially in the dramatic line. To the best of
    my recollection, he gave some entire lives, besides inserting abundance
    of paragraphs, of notes, anecdotes, and remarks, in those which were
    compiled by Shiells and other writers. I say _other_, because many of
    the best pieces of biography in that collection were not written by
    Shiells, but by superior hands. In short, the engagement of Cibber, or
    some other _Englishman_, to superintend what Shiells in particular
    should offer, was a measure absolutely necessary, not only to guard
    against his Scotticisms, and other defects of expression, but his
    virulent Jacobitism, which inclined him to abuse every Whig character
    that came in his way. This, indeed, he would have done; but Cibber (a
    stanch Williamite) opposed and prevented him, insomuch that a violent
    quarrel arose on the subject. By the way, it seems to me, that Shiell's
    Jacobitism has been the only circumstance that has procured him the
    regard of Mr. Johnson, and the favourable mention that he has made of
    Shiell's 'virtuous life and pious end'--expressions that must draw a
    smile from every one who knows, as I did, the real character of Robert
    Shiells. And now, what think you of noticing this matter in regard to
    truth, and the fair fame of the honest bookseller?"--_Memoir of the
    Life, Writings, and Mechanical Inventions of Edmund Cartwright, D.D.,
    F.R.S._: Saunders & Otley.

W. L. NICHOLS.

Lansdown Place, Bath.

       *       *       *       *       *

ENGLISH COMEDIANS IN THE NETHERLANDS.

(Vol. ii., pp. 184. 459.; Vol. iii., p. 21.)

From the following extract from the _Thes. Rek._ (Treasury Accounts) of
Utrecht, it appears that English actors performed there:

    "Schenkelwyn, 31 July, 1597. Sekere Engelsche Comedianten, voor hore
    speelen op ten Stadhuyse, 8 q. Fransche wyns."--(To certain English
    Comedians, for their playing at the town-hall, eight quarts of French
    wine.)

In the _Gerechtsdagboecken_ (Minutes of the Council) of Leyden appear
several requests of English comedians to perform there in 1614; these I
hope soon to have in hand. I can now give the decision of the Council on
the request of the Englishman W. Pedel:

    "Op te Requeste daerby den voorn. Willem Pedel, versochte aen die van
    de Gerechte der stadt Leyden omme te mogen speelen verscheyde fraeye
    ende eerlicke spelen mettet lichaem, sonder eenige woorden te
    gebruycken, stont geappostileert: Die van de Gerechte deser stadt
    Leyden hebben voor zoe veel in hem es, den thoonder toegelaten ende
    geconsenteert, laten toe ende consenteren mits desen binnen dezer stede
    inde Kercke vant Bagynhoff te mogen spelen voor de gemeente ende syne
    speelen verthoonen, mits dat hy hem daervan zalt onthouden geduyrende
    tdoen van de predicatien van Gods woorts, en dat de arme Weesen alhier
    zullen genieten de gerechte helfte van de incomende proffyten, en dat
    zulex int geheel zullen werden ontfangen en gecollecteert by een
    persoon daertoe bij M^{ren} van de Arme Weesen te stellen ende
    committeeren.

     "Aldus gedaen op ten xviij Nov. 1608."

    (_Translation._)

    On the request by which the aforesaid W. Pedel petitioned the
    authorities of the city of Leyden to allow him to exhibit various
    beautiful and chaste performances with his body, without using any
    words, was determined: The authorities of this city of Leyden have
    consented and allowed the exhibitor to perform in the church of the
    Bagynhoff within this city, provided he cease during the preaching of
    God's word, and that the poor orphans here have half the profits, and
    that they be received and collected by a person appointed by the
    masters of the poor orphans.

      Done on the 18th November, 1608.

In 1656 English comedians came to Dordrecht, but were soon obliged to
withdraw. About 1600 some appeared in Germany, who considerably diminished
the taste for biblical and moral pieces. See Dr. Schotel, _Blik in de
Gesch. v.h. tooneel._; Gervinus, _Neuere Geschichte der poetischen
Nationalliteratur der Deutschen_, vol. iii. pp. 96-100.--_From the
Navorscher._

W. D. V.

       *       *       *       *       *

LA BRUYERE.

(Vol. vii., p. 38.)

I am unable to reply to URSULA'S questions; but I would ask permission to
solicit from such of your better-informed correspondents as may become
votaries to URSULA, that they would extend the range of their genealogical
pilgrimage so far as to pay a visit to the ruins of Tor Abbey. I should be
glad to learn whether either William Lord _Briewere_ or William de la
_Bruere_ (both of whom were connected with the foundation of that religious
house) were of the same family as Thibault de la _Bruyere_, the Crusader,
who is one of the subjects of URSULA'S inquiry. Dr. Oliver (_Monast.
Exon._, note at p. 179.) thinks that these two William Brewers may have
represented families originally distinct from each other:

    "There is some doubt," he says, "whether the family _De Brueria_ or
    _Bruera_, which was settled in Devon at the time of the Domesday, and
    then held some of the lands afterwards given by W. _Briwere_ to Torr
    Abbey, was the same as that of the founder. In this cartulary the two
    names are spelt differently, and Briwere seems {115} to have been a
    purchaser of De Bruera. See, upon this subject, Dugdale's _Baronage_,
    vol. i. p. 700., and Lysons' _Devonshire_, vol. i. p. 106. The names of
    Brieguerre and De Bruera existed contemporaneously in Normandy. See
    _Rot. Scacc. Norm. Indices_."

Whether these two William Brewers represented distinct families or not, it
appears that they became closely allied by marriage. At fol. 81. of an
"Abstract of the Tor Cartulary, at Trinity College, Dublin," given by
Oliver, p. 187., the following grants occur; viz.:

    "Grant from William Briewere to William de la Brueria, of four librates
    of land in Wodeberi, with Engelesia his sister, _in liberum
    maritagium_, &c.

    "Grant from said William de la Bruera, with the assent of Engelesia his
    wife, of all their land in Grendle to William Briewere, brother of the
    said Engelesia, &c.

    "Confirmation thereof by said Engelesia."

Both families appear to have given the name of _Brewer_ to their places of
residence.

    "The tything of _Teign Grace_," says Risdon, "anciently _Teign Brewer_,
    was in the time of King Henry the Second the land of Anthony de la
    Brewer, whom divers knights of that race succeeded. Sir William de la
    Brewer, the last of the male line, left this inheritance among
    co-heirs, Eva, wife of Thomas le _Grace_, and Isabel, &c.... Concerning
    which lands these lines I found in the leger-book of the Abbey of Torr:
    '_Galfridus de Breweria dominus de Teigne pro salut. animae Will. de
    Breweria & Argalesia uxor ejus conc. abbat. de Torr liberum transitum
    in Teigne._'"--P. 135.

_Buckland Brewer_, on the other hand, derived its name (according to the
same authority) from the family of which William Lord Brewer was the
representative.

The Brewers appear to have founded other religious houses, and to have held
possessions in other parts of England. It was from Welbeck Abbey, in
Nottinghamshire, that William Lord Briwere obtained subjects for his abbey
at Tor; and Bruern, or Temple Bruer, in Lincolnshire, belonging to the
Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem, Clerkenwell (see Dugdale's _Monast._,
new edition, vol. vi. par. ii. p. 801.), would seem to owe its name to some
connexion with the Brewer family, as did also, perhaps, Bruera in Chester,
&c.

Mention is made of a William de la Bruera in the _History of
Northamptonshire_ (edit. Oxon., 1791, tom. i. p. 233.), in connexion with
the township of Grafton, to which manor Joane, his wife, and her sister
Bruna, appear to have been co-heirs, as daughters of Ralph de S. Samson,
temp. Henry III.

William Brewer, Bishop of Exeter (_brother_ of the William Lord Briewere
already mentioned), was "put in trust" by King Henry III. "to conduct his
sister, the Lady Isabella, into Germany, to her intended marriage with the
Emperor Frederic." See Jenkins's _History of Exeter_, 1806, p. 252.

    "This Bishop Brewer also went into the Holy Land (_transfretavit, cruce
    signat._) the eleventh of Henry the Third."--Risdon, edit. Lond., 1811,
    p. 137.

There was another William Brewer, a _son_ of William Lord Brewer; but he
died without male issue.

I fear these few notices bear no very precise relation to URSULA'S
inquiries. Still I send them, in the hope of discovering, by the kindness
of some of your erudite contributors, what is the difference (if any)
between the names _La Bruyere_, _De la Bruere_, and _Briewere_; and also
whether, _originally_, these names belonged to _two_ or _three_ distinct
families, or only to so many different branches of the same family.

J. SANSOM.

P.S.--The name _Bruere_ is probably not yet extinct, either in France or in
England. In the Bodleian Library there is a letter, addressed by _John
Bruere_ to the clergy of the diocese of Oxford, written within the last
century, and bearing date "May 19, 1793," "Odington, near Islip," of which
place the author was probably the rector. And in the British Museum
_Catalogue_, under the name of (_M. de la_) _Bruere_, is mentioned
_Histoire du Regne de Charlemagne_, 2 tom. 12^o; Paris, 1745.

       *       *       *       *       *

SOUTHEY'S CRITICISM UPON ST. MATHIAS' DAY IN LEAP-YEAR.

(Vol. vii., p. 58.)

MR. YARRUM'S _expose_ of Southey's singular blunder is perfectly just; but
it does not include _the whole_ truth, a consideration of which renders the
lapsus even more notable and unaccountable than if it arose _only_ from a
want of acquaintance with the distribution of Roman Catholic Feriae.

The allegation of error against the historians, because they had "fixed the
appointed day on the eve of Mathias," would seem to imply that they might
have fixed upon some other feast-day with more correctness; whereas there
is no other in the calendar which could by any possibility be affected by
leap-year: but the most extraordinary part of the mistake is, the ignorance
it displays (scarcely credible in Southey) of the origin and etymology of
the bissextile institution--the very subject he was criticising.

Because the name "bissextile," as every body knows, arose from the
repetition in leap-year of the identical day in question: the sixth of the
kalends of March; the 24th of February; the feast of the Regifugium amongst
the Romans; and of its substitute, that of St. Mathias, amongst the
Christians.

It is clear, that since the Regifugium was held upon the sixth day before
the 1st of March (both inclusive), that day must, according to our {116}
reckoning, be the 24th of February in common years, and the 25th in
leap-years: therefore, the supernumerary or superfluous day, added on
account of leap-year, was considered to be the 24th of February, and not
the 25th; which latter, in those years, became the true "Sixth before the
Kalends." Indeed, it is highly probable, although it cannot be supported by
direct evidence, that the first day of the double sextile was distinguished
from its name-fellow of the following day by having the word "bis" prefixed
to _sextum_; so that, in leap-years, the 24th of February would be
expressed as follows: "Ante diem _bis_-VI Calend. Martias;" while the
following day, or the 25th of February (being considered the real Simon
Pure), would retain the usual designation of "A.D. VI Calend. Mar." Such an
hypothesis offers a reasonable explanation of the seeming reversal in terms
of calling the day which _first_ arrived _posterior_, and that which
succeeded it _prior_.

Although the Church of England Calendar now places the feast of Saint
Mathias invariably on the 24th of February in all years, yet the earlier
copies of the Book of Common Prayer allocated it to "The Sixth of the
Kalends of March," without any direction as to which of the two days,
bearing that name in leap-years, it should be appropriated. The modern
Reformed Church Calendar therefore repudiates the usage of the Romans
themselves, rather than that of the Roman Catholics.

A. E. B.

Leeds.

       *       *       *       *       *

PHOTOGRAPHIC NOTES AND QUERIES.

_Portable Camera for Travellers._--Your correspondent E. S. asks for a
clear description of a camera that will supersede the necessity of a dark
room. Mr. Stokes has invented one; and in the early part of the
photographic exhibition at the Society of Arts it was exhibited. The weight
of the camera is only nine pounds, including focussing-glass, lens,
shutter, &c. The shutter is so arranged that it will contain from twelve to
twenty pieces of prepared paper, each piece between separate sheets of
blotting-paper. Light and air are completely excluded, by the paper being
pressed by the front portion of the shutter. When required for use, the
first piece of paper is placed at the back of the glass. By the assistance
of a small hood, the impression is then taken; and, by removing the
millboard, the paper will fall back into its place. At the same time
another piece can be brought forward, ready for a second picture, before
focussing, and so on to the end. The hood is made of India rubber cloth,
and answers the purpose of a focussing cloth, without the trouble of
removing it from the camera throughout the day. The size of the pictures
that can be taken by it is 9-1/2 by 12 inches. It has been tried during the
latter part of the last year, and proved most successful.

PHILIP H. DELAMOTTE.

Bayswater.

_The Albumen Process._--I shall be greatly obliged to DR. DIAMOND, or any
other photographer, by their kindly communicating through your medium their
experience with albumenized glass. I have Thornthwaite's _Guide to
Photography_.

I should like answers to the following Queries:

Must the albumen be poured off from the plate after it is spread over the
surface, in the same manner as collodion?

Is the plate (while roasting, according to the process of Messrs. Thompson
and Ross) nearly perpendicular in the process?

Will the iodized albumen, for giving the film, keep; and how long?

How long will the plate retain its sensitiveness after exciting?

May the same sensitive bath be used for a number of plates without
renewing, in the same way as silver bath for collodion?

In conclusion, what is the average time with single achromatic lens, six or
seven inch focus, to allow to get a good picture?

Will photographers who are chemists turn their attention to obtain
sensitive dry glass plates? for I think there can scarcely be any doubt of
the advantage of glass over paper for _small_ pictures (weight, expense,
&c., are perhaps drawbacks for pictures larger than 5 x 4 inches); but the
desideratum is a sensitiveness nearly equal to collodion, and a plate that
can be used dry.

THOS. LAWRENCE.

Ashby-de-la-Zouch.

_Black Tints of French Photographers._--Can you inform me, through the
medium of your valuable periodical, how those beautiful black tints, so
much prized in the French prints from photographic negatives, are obtained?
By so doing you will give great pleasure to several excellent amateur
photographers, and especially your constant reader,

PHILOPHOTOG.

_Originator of the Collodion Process._--As some think the credit of the
invention of the collodion process a matter of dispute, will you allow me
to remind your correspondents that the truth will be much easier to
discover if they will confine themselves to actual facts?

In No. 167., p. 47., G. C. first recklessly accuses MR. ARCHER of untruth,
and then tests his own claim to truth by quoting from Le Gray's edition of
1852, to prove Le Gray's edition of 1850. Why did he not go back at once to
the 1850 edition; and if that contains anything like an intelligible
process, why is it altogether omitted from Le Gray's edition of 1851, which
was the one MR. ARCHER spoke of, and correctly? {117}

The history of collodion is (as far as I know) this. In September, 1850,
DR. DIAMOND invited me to meet MR. ARCHER at his house, and for the first
time MR. ARCHER produced some prepared collodion, a portion of which
identical sample DR. DIAMOND now has in his possession.

MR. ARCHER had then been trying it some five or six weeks. His experiments
then went on, and in March, 1851, he published it in the _Chemist_. Let any
of your readers procure that Number, and compare MR. ARCHER'S claim with Le
Gray's, who, in 1852, states that he published it in 1850, and gave "the
best method that has been discovered up to the present time;" and yet,
singularly enough, in his edition of 1851, leaves out _this best method_
entirely.

W. BROWN.

Ewell.

_Developing Paper Pictures with Pyrogallic Acid, &c._--Have any of your
photographic correspondents tried developing their paper negatives with
pyrogallic acid? If so, perhaps he would favour the readers of "N. & Q."
with the result of his experiments.

In DR. DIAMOND'S process for paper negatives, he says the paper, after the
iodizing solution has been applied, must be dried before soaking in water.
I wish to ask whether it may be dried quickly by the fire, or must it be
dried spontaneously by suspension, &c.? Again, how long must the paper
remain on the sensitive mixture: must it be placed on the sensitive
solution, and _immediately_ taken off and blotted, or placed on the
sensitive solution, and _after some time_ (what time?) taken off and
_immediately_ blotted?

Have any of your readers substituted iodide of ammonium for iodide of
potassium, in preparing paper, collodion, &c., and with what success? And
have they substituted nitrate of zinc for glacial acetic acid, as
recommended in a French work, with any success?

R. J. F.

       *       *       *       *       *


Replies to Minor Queries.

_Waterloo_ (Vol. vii., p. 82.).--P. C. S. S. conceives that it may be
interesting to PHILOBIBLION to learn that the greatest man in the world was
not ignorant of the passage in Strada regarding _Waterloo_, to which
PHILOBIBLION refers. From a diary kept for some years, it appears that on
Saturday, the 30th of October, 1843, P. C. S. S., who was then on a visit
at Walmer Castle, had the pleasure of directing the Duke of Wellington's
attention to the passage in question, as translated by Du Ryer (Paris,
1665). He well remembers that the Duke seemed to be greatly struck with it;
that he more than once referred to it, in subsequent conversations; and
that on the following day he requested P. C. S. S. to furnish him with a
transcript, which he doubts not might still be found among the Duke's
papers.

P. C. S. S.

Your correspondent PHILOBIBLION has been led into a double error by a
similarity of name. The _pagus Waterloeus_ mentioned by Strada is the
French village of Wattrelo, in the modern Departement du Nord, about six
miles to the northeast of Lille.

J. S.

Norwich.

_Irish Peerages_ (Vol. vi., p. 604.).--The book alluded to by D. X. as
professing to give pedigrees of ennobled Irish families, may be the
contemptible _Letters to George IV._, by Captain Rock, a miserable attempt
at a continuation of Moore's _Memoirs_ of that mystic personage. Some half
of the former book contains libellous notices of the "low origin" of the
Irish nobility. Can your correspondent refer me to the play in which there
is some sneer that "the housemaid is cousin to an Irish peer?"

H.

_Martha Blount_ (Vol. vii., p. 38.).--An engraving of this lady, from "an
original picture, in the collection of Michael Blount, Esq., at
Maple-Darham," is prefixed to the tenth volume of Pope's _Works_ by Bowles,
1806.

W. A.

In reply to MR. A. F. WESTMACOTT (Vol. vii., p. 38.), I have, in my
collection of engraved portraits, one of the subject of his inquiry,
"Martha Blount." It is in _stipple_, by Picart, after a picture by Gardner.
I have no idea the portrait is rare, and think your correspondent may
easily procure it among the printsellers in London.

J. BURTON.

_Quotations wanted_ (Vol. vii., p. 40.).--Bacon, in his Essay "Of Studies,"
has this sentence:

    "And if he read little, he had need have much cunning, to seem to know
    that he doth not."

which is perhaps the reference Miss Edgeworth intended.

"A world without a sun," is from Campbell's _Pleasures of Hope_, Part II.
line 24.:

 "And say, without our hopes, without our fears,
  Without the home that plighted love endears,
  Without the smile from partial beauty won,
  Oh! what were man?--a world without a sun."

I beg to add a parallel from Burns:

 "What is life, when wanting love?
    Night without a morning:
  Love's the cloudless summer sun,
    Nature gay adorning."

See the song beginning:

 "Thine am I, my faithful fair."

ARTHUR H. BATHER.

East Sheen, Surrey.

{118}

_Pepys's Morena_ (Vol. vi., pp. 342. 373.).--In the note on this word in
the last edition of the _Diary_, it is stated that it may be read either
"Morma" or "Morena." There is little doubt but the latter is the correct
reading. "Morena" is good Portuguese for a brunette, and may have been used
by Pepys as a term of endearment for Miss Dickens, like the "Colleen dhas
dhun" of the Irish, which has much the same meaning. The marriage of the
king to Catherine of Braganza in the previous year would have caused her
language to be more studied at this time, especially by persons about the
court. Morma has no meaning whatever.

J. S. WARDEN.

_Goldsmiths' Year-marks_ (Vol. vi., p. 604.; Vol. vii., p. 90.).--I observe
that, a few weeks ago, in the "N. & Q.," one of your correspondents made
inquiries respecting the publication of my paper on plate-marks, which was
read at the Bristol meeting of the Archaeological Institute.

In reply, I beg to inform him that he will find, in the last two Numbers of
the Journal of the Institute, the first and second parts of the paper, and
that the concluding portion of it, and I hope also the table of annual
letters, will appear in the forthcoming Number. Should it not be possible
to get the table in a fit state for printing in that Number, it will appear
in the next; and the whole subject of the assay marks of British plate will
then be complete.

OCTAVIUS MORGAN.

The Friars.

_Turner's View of Lambeth Palace_ (Vol. vii., pp. 15. 89.).--In reply to
your correspondent L. E. X., respecting Mr. Turner's picture of Lambeth
Palace (which is in _water-colours_), I beg leave to say that it is in the
possession of a lady residing in Bristol, to whose father _it_ was given by
the artist after its exhibition at Somerset House, and it has never been in
any other hands. The same lady has also a small portrait of Mr. Turner,
done by _himself_ when visiting her family about the year 1791 or 1792:
further particulars respecting these pictures (if desired) may be known by
a line addressed to Miss N----, 8. St. James' Square, Bristol.

ANON.

J. H. A., after referring to the exhibition at the Royal Academy in 1791,
by Mr. Turner, of "King John's Palace, Eltham" (No. 494.), and "Sweakley,
near Uxbridge" (No. 560.), adds:

    "In the horizon of art (strange to say, and yet to be explained!) this
    luminary glows no more till 1808, when he had 'on the line' (?) several
    views of Fonthill, as well as 'The Tenth Plague of Egypt.'"

A reference to the catalogues of the Royal Academy exhibitions will prove
that Mr. Turner's name appears as an exhibitor there every year between
1790 and 1850, excepting the years 1821, 1824, and 1848. Several views of
Fonthill Abbey, and "The Fifth (not the Tenth) Plague of Egypt," were
exhibited in 1800, and "The Tenth Plague of Egypt" in 1802.

G. B.

"_For God will be your King to-day_" (Vol. vii., p. 67.).--In reply to your
querist H. A. S. with respect to the above line, I believe that it belongs
not to Somersetshire, but to Ireland; not to Monmouth's rebellion, but to
the civil wars of 1690.

It is the closing couplet of a stanza in the popular ballad on the "Battle
of the Boyne."

A very perfect copy of this ballad will be found in Wilde's _Beauties of
the Boyne_, p. 271., beginning with--

 "July the first, of a morning clear,
    One thousand six hundred and ninety,
  King William did his men prepare--
    Of thousands he had thirty,--
  To fight King James and all his host,
    Encamp'd near the Boyne water," &c.

The passage from which the lines in question are taken is as follows:

 "When that King William he observed,
    The brave Duke Schomberg falling,
  He rein'd his horse with a heavy heart,
    On the Enniskilleners calling.

 "'What will you do for me, brave boys?
    See yonder men retreating;
  Our enemies encouraged are,
    And English drums are beating.'

 "He says, 'My boys feel no dismay,
    At the losing of one commander,
  _For God shall be our King this day,_
    _And I'll be general under_.'"

W. W. E. T.

66. Warwick Square, Belgravia.

The lines here referred to occur in the old ballad of _Boyne Water_, some
fragments of which are given in Duffy's _Ballad Poetry of Ireland_, 5th
edition, p. 248. They are supposed to have been spoken by William III. on
the death of the Duke Schomberg.

 "Both horse and foot they marched on, intending them to batter,
  But the brave Duke Schomberg he was shot, as he crossed over the water.
  When that King William he observed the brave Duke Schomberg falling,
  He rein'd his horse, with a heavy heart, on the Enniskilleners calling:
 'What will you do for me, brave boys? See yonder men retreating;
  Our enemies encouraged are, and English drums are beating.'
  He says, 'My boys, feel no dismay at the losing of one commander,
  For God shall be our King this day, and I'll be general under.'"

{119}

The lines quoted by your correspondent also occur in the more modern song
of _The Battle of the Boyne_, which may be found at p. 144 of Mr. Duffy's
work.

THOMPSON COOPER.

Cambridge.

    [We are indebted to many other correspondents for similar Replies to
    this Query.]

_Jennings Family_ (Vol. vii., p. 95.).--I am much obliged to PERCURIOSUS
for his reply to my Query. The William Jennings, who was Sheriff of
Cornwall in 1678, an admiral, and knighted by King James II. (see Le Neve's
_Knights_, Harleian MS. 5801.), was most probably descended from the
Yorkshire family of that name, his escutcheon being the same. The Francis
who married Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Spoure of Trebartha, was descended
from the Shropshire family, whose arms were--Ermine, a lion rampant, gules
quartered with those of Jay, as recorded in the Visitation by Henry, the
son of Francis. This Francis died about 1610-11. His will (the executor
being Henry Spoure) was proved at Doctors' Commons in 1611. But what I
particularly wanted to ascertain was, whether Rowland, who is the first
that occurs in the Cornish Visitation, was the first who settled in
Cornwall. I have inquired at the Heralds' College, but can gain no further
information than that to be found in the Visitations of Salop and Cornwall
in the British Museum. PERCURIOSUS would gratify my curiosity, if he would
kindly inform me where the Spoure MSS. are to be seen. They are not to be
found in the British Museum. I have always thought that they were in the
hands of some member of the Rodd family, whose ancestor (a Life Guardsman)
was about to be married to the heiress of all the Spoures, but she, dying
before the marriage, left him all her estates, Trebartha among the rest
which is in the possession of the family to this day.

S. JENNINGS-G.

P. S.--I inclose my card, in order that PERCURIOSUS (who evidently knows
something of the family) may communicate personally or by letter. I think
that I might possibly be able to give him some information in return for
his kindness.

_The Furze or Gorse in Scandinavia_ (Vol. vi., pp. 127. 377.).--Henfrey, in
his _Vegetation of Europe_, states that the furze (_Ulex Europaeus_)
occurs, but not abundantly, in the south-western parts of the Scandinavian
peninsula. It is well known that in Central Germany it is a greenhouse
plant.

SELEUCUS.

_Mistletoe_ (Vol. ii., p. 418.; Vol. iii., pp. 192. 226. 396. 462.).--There
is in the parish of Staveley, Derbyshire, a solitary mansion called the
Hagg, erected by Sir Peter Frescheville, in what was at that time a park of
considerable extent, for a hunting lodge, when age and infirmity prevented
him from otherwise enjoying the pleasures of the chase. In one of
Colepeper's MSS. at the British Museum, there is the following curious
notice of this house:

    "This is the Parke House which Sir Peter Frescheville, in his will,
    16th March, 1632, calls my new Lodge in Staveley Parke. Heare my Lord
    Frescheville did live, and heare growes _the famous mistleto tree, the
    only oake in England that bears mistleto_, which florished at my deare
    Wife's birth, who was born heare."

I presume it is the same which is referred to in the following letter
addressed by the Countess of Danby to Mrs. Colepeper; it is without date,
but was written between 1663 and 1682:

    "Dear Cosen.--Pray if you have any of the miselto of yo^r father's oke,
    oblidge me so far as to send sum of it to

      Yo^r most affectionat servant, BRIDGET DANBY."

The oak tree still exists, and in 1803 it contained mistletoe, but there is
none to be seen now. About a quarter of a mile from this locality I
observed the mistletoe in a large crab-tree, and I recently found it in a
venerable yew of many centuries' growth near Sheffield.

W. S. (Sheffield.)

_Inscription on a Dagger_ (Vol. vii., p. 40.).--These lines form a Dutch
proverb, and, if thus written, rhyme:

 "Die een peninck wint ende behovt
  Die macht verteren als hi wort owt.
  Had ick dat bedocht in min ionge dagen
  Dorst ick het in min ovtheit niel beklagen."

Which being interpreted inform us that, He who gains a penny, and saves it,
may live on it when he becomes old. Had I minded this in my youthful days,
I should not have to complain in my old age.

J. S.

Norwich.

_Steevens_ (Vol. ii., p. 476.; Vol. iii., p. 230.; Vol. vi., pp. 412.
531.).--Steevens's will contains no mention of any portrait of himself, nor
any other except his picture of "Mr. Garrick and Mrs. Cibber, in the
characters of Jaffier and Belvidera, painted by Zottanij," which he
bequeaths to George Keate, Esq. He gives to Miss Charlotte Collins of
Graffham, near Midhurst, daughter of the late Christopher and Margaret
Collins of Midhurst, 500l. To his cousin Mary Collinson (late Mary
Steevens), wife of William Collinson of Narrow Street, Ratcliffe Cross,
Middlesex, 300l. for a ring (so in my copy). The residue of his property he
gives to his dearest cousin Elizabeth Steevens of Poplar, spinster, and
appoints her sole executrix of his will. A copy of the will can be met with
in the ninth volume of the _Monthly Mirror_ for 1800.

W. S. (Sheffield.)

{120}

_"Life is like a Game of Tables," &c._ (Vol. vii., p. 40.).--The sentiment
is very possibly "_from_ Jeremy Taylor," but it is not his own. It occurs
in Terence's _Adelphi_ and Plato's _Commonwealth_.

A. A. D.

       *       *       *       *       *


Miscellaneous.

NOTES ON BOOKS, ETC.

The issue by the Shakspeare Society of an edition of the _Notes and
Emendations to the Text of Shakspeare's Plays from early MS. Corrections in
a Copy of the Folio 1632, in the Possession of J. Payne Collier, Esq._,
affords an opportunity, of which we gladly avail ourselves, to recall
attention to a volume which is unquestionably the most important
contribution to Shakspearian literature which has issued from the press for
many years. Although we have no evidence of the authority upon which these
_Notes and Emendations_ were made, an examination of them must, we think,
convince even the most sceptical, that they were made upon _authority_, and
are not the result of clever criticism and happy conjecture. The readers of
"N. & Q." know well what discussions have been raised upon such phrases as
"Prenzie Angelo," "Whose mother was her painting," "Ribaudred nag," "Most
busy, least when I do it," &c. The writer of the _Notes and Emendations_,
now first published, has given in these, and hundreds of other difficult
and disputed passages, corrections which are consistent with Shakspeare's
character as the poet of common sense. He converts the "_prenzie_ Angelo"
into the "priestly," and the "_prenzie guards_" into "_priestly garb_." So
that the passage now reads--

   "_Claud._  The priestly Angelo.

    _Isab._  O, 'tis the cunning livery of hell,
  The damned'st body to invest and cover
  In priestly garb."

In the passages to which we have referred above, "whose mother was her
painting," is changed into "who smothers her with painting;" "ribraudred
nag" into "ribald hag;" and the passage from _The Tempest_ is made plain--

 "Most busy blest when I do it."

We think these examples are sufficient to make all lovers of Shakspeare
anxious not only to examine the present volume, but to see the promised new
edition of his works, in which Mr. Collier proposes to give the text as
corrected by this great, although unknown authority.

The meeting for the establishment of the Photographic Society, held on
Thursday week at the Society of Arts, was most numerously attended. The
Society was formed, Sir Charles Eastlake elected president for the first
year, Mr. Fenton honorary secretary, and Mr. Roslyn treasurer. The
subscription was fixed at one guinea, with an admission fee of the same
amount.

At a recent meeting of the _Surtees Society_, it was announced that the
works in progress for this year are the _Pontifical of Egbert_, Archbishop
of York (to be edited by the Rev. W. Greenwell), and a volume of _Wills and
Inventories from the Registry at Richmond_, by Mr. Raine, Jun. The books
for 1854 are to be the Northumbro-Saxon translation of _The Gospel of St.
Matthew_, to be edited by the Rev. Joseph Stevenson, and the _Inventories
and Account Rolls of the Monasteries of Monkwearmouth and Jarrow_ until the
Dissolution, which will appear under the editorship of the Rev. James
Raine.

The Corporation of London Library is being thrown open to all literary men;
the tickets of admission being accompanied by letters expressive of a wish
that the holders should make frequent use of them. This is an act of
becoming liberality, worthy of imitation in other quarters.

BOOKS RECEIVED.--_History of England from the Peace of Utrecht to the Peace
of Versailles, 1713-1783_, by Lord Mahon, vol. i. This is the first volume
of a new and revised edition of this history of a most important period in
our national annals, by the noble President of the Society of
Antiquaries.--_The Ethnology of the British Islands_, by R. G. Latham, M.D.
The value of all Dr. Latham's researches, whether into the history of our
language, or of the races by which these islands have been successively
inhabited, is so fully recognised, that we may content ourselves by merely
calling attention to the publication of this able little volume.--_On the
Lessons in Proverbs: Five Lectures, &c._, by the Rev. R. C. Trench. Those
who know the value of Mr. Trench's admirable lectures _On the Study of
Words_, will find in this companion volume, in which he attempts to sound
the depths and measure the real significance of National Proverbs, a book
which will give them a pleasant hour's reading, and subjects for many
pleasant hours' meditation.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

FREE THOUGHTS ON THE BRUTE CREATION, by the REV. JOHN HILDROP. Lond. 1751.

DE LA CROIX'S CONNUBIA FLORUM. Bathoniae, 1791. 8vo.

REID'S HISTORICAL BOTANY. Windsor, 1826. 3 vols. 12mo.

ANTHOLOGIA BOREALIS ET AUSTRALIS.

FLORILEGIUM SANCT. ASPIRAT.

LADERCHII ANNALES ECCLESIASTICI, 3 tom. fol. Romae, 1728-1737.

TOWNSEND'S PARISIAN COSTUMES. 3 Vols. 4to. 1831-1839.

THE BOOK OF ADAM.

THE TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS, THE SONS OF JACOB.

MASSINGER'S PLAYS, by GIFFORD. Vol. IV. 8vo. Second Edition. 1813.

SPECTATOR. Vols. V. and VII. 12mo. London, 1753.

COSTERUS (FRANCOIS) CINQUANTE MEDITATIONS DE TOUTE L'HISTOIRE DE LA PASSION
DE NOSTRE SEIGNEUR. 8vo. Anvers, Christ. Plantin.; or any of the works of
Costerus in any language.

THE WORLD WITHOUT A SUN.

GUARDIAN. 12mo.

WHAT THE CHARTISTS ARE. A Letter to English Working Men, by a
Fellow-Labourer. 12mo. London, 1848.

LETTER OF CHURCH RATES, by RALPH BARNES. 8vo. London, 1837.

COLMAN'S TRANSLATION OF HORACE DE ARTE POETICA. 4to. 1783.

CASAUBON'S TREATISE ON GREEK AND ROMAN SATIRE.

BOSCAWEN'S TREATISE ON SATIRE. London, 1797.

JOHNSON'S LIVES (Walker's Classics). Vol. I.

TITMARSH'S PARIS SKETCH-BOOK. Post 8vo. Vol. I. Macrone, 1840.

FIELDING'S WORKS. Vol. XI. (being second of "Amelia.") 12mo. 1808.

HOLCROFT'S LAVATER. Vol. I. 8vo. 1789.

{121} OTWAY. Vols. I. and II. 8vo. 1768.

EDMONDSON'S HERALDRY. Vol. II. Folio, 1780.

SERMONS AND TRACTS, by W. ADAMS, D.D.

THE GENTLEMAN'S MAGAZINE for January 1851.

BEN JONSON'S WORKS. (London, 1716. 6 Vols.) Vol. II. wanted.

RAPIN'S HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 8vo. Vols. I., III. and V. of the CONTINUATION
by TINDAL. 1744.

*** _Correspondents sending Lists of Books Wanted are requested to send
their names._

*** Letters, stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_, to be
sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Notices to Correspondents.

DICK THE TREBLE _will find the Gloucestershire Ballad_ George Ridler's Oven
_in our_ 4th Volume, p. 311.

HOGMANAY. _Our Correspondent_ J. BD., _who inquires the etymology of this
word, is referred to Jamieson's_ Scottish Dictionary _and Brand's_ Popular
Antiquities (ed. Bohn. 1849), vol. i. p. 460., _for the very numerous and
contradictory derivations which the learned have given of it_.

W. W. (Stilton.) _The stone of which our Correspondent has forwarded an
impression appears to be one of those gems called_ Abraxas, _used by the
Gnostic and Basilidian heretics. On it is a double serpent, and the seven
vowels of the Greek alphabet_, [Greek: A E E I O U O], _which constantly
appear on their engraved stones, and to which they referred certain
mystical ideas. These were worn as amulets: sometimes used as love charms;
and our Correspondent will find some curious facts about them in an old
Greek papyrus just published by Mr. Godwin, in the_ Proceedings or
Transactions of the Cambridge Antiquarian Society.

C. E. F. _is informed that Mr. Eaton's proportion of ten grains of salt to
the pint is quite correct; and he will find it produce a most agreeable
tint_.

G. S. _"The Cataract of Lodore" will be found in Longman's one-volume
edition (1850) of Southey's_ Poetical Works, _p._ 164.

RUBI. _We have several communications for this Correspondent. How may they
be forwarded?_

ROSA, _who asks about_ Men of Kent and Kentish Men, _is referred to our_
5th Vol., p. 322.

I. N. (Leicester.) _There must be something wrong in the preparation of
your chemicals. Consult the directions given in our Nos. 151, 152. We have
seen some glass negatives of landscapes taken by DR. DIAMOND during the
past week, which have all the intensity which can be desired. The time of
exposure in these cases has varied from fifteen to sixty seconds, the lens
used being a single meniscus._

AMBER VARNISH. _Our Correspondent LITTLELENS will find the directions for
making this in_ No. 153. p. 320. _It will be reprinted in the_ Photographic
Notes _announced in our advertising columns_.

DR. DIAMOND'S PAPERS ON PHOTOGRAPHY. _It is as well to remind writers on
Photography that, DR. DIAMOND being about to republish his_ Photographic
Notes, _the reprinting of them by any other parties would be
uncourteous--not to say piratical_.

SIR W. NEWTON'S Calotype Process _in our next. His first communication was
in type before the amended copy reached us_.

_Errata._--P. 90. col. 1. for "immiscuer_u_nt" read "immiscuer_i_nt." P.
86. col. 1. for "honour" read "humour"." P. 84. col. 1. lines 46. and 48.,
for "Trajecte_a_sem" read "Trajectensem."

_We again repeat that we cannot undertake to recommend any particular
houses for the purchase of photographic instruments, chemicals, &c. We can
only refer our Correspondents on such subjects to our advertising columns._

OUR SIXTH VOLUME, _strongly bound in cloth, with very copious Index, is now
ready, price 10s. 6d. Arrangements are making for the publication of
complete sets of "NOTES AND QUERIES," price Three Guineas for the Six
Volumes_.

"NOTES AND QUERIES" _is published at noon on Friday, so that the Country
Booksellers may receive copies in that night's parcel, and deliver them to
their Subscribers on the Saturday_.

       *       *       *       *       *


Just published, fcp. 8vo., 6s.,

DEMOCRITUS IN LONDON; with the Mad Pranks and Comical Conceits of Motley
and Robin Goodfellow: to which are added Notes Festivous, &c. By GEORGE
DANIEL, Author of "Merrie England in the Olden Time," "The Modern Dunciad,"
&c.

"An exquisite metrical conceit, sparkling with wit and humour, in the true
spirit of Aristophanes, in which Democritus guides his brilliant and merry
muse through every fantastic measure, evincing grace in the most grotesque
attitudes. As a relief to his cutting sarcasm and fun, the laughing
philosopher has introduced some fine descriptive scenes, and passages of
deep pathos, eloquence, and beauty. Not the least remarkable feature in
this very remarkable book are the recondite and curious notes, at once so
critical and philosophical, so varied and so amusing, so full of
interesting anecdote and racy reminiscences.--See _Athenaeum, Critic_, &c.

WILLIAM PICKERING, 177. Piccadilly.

       *       *       *       *       *


HANDEL'S MESSIAH, newly arranged by JOHN BISHOP, of Cheltenham, from his
large folio edition, including Mozart's Accompaniments. This edition
contains the Appendix, and is printed on extra fine stout paper, imperial
8vo., pp. 257. Price (whole bound in cloth) 6s. 6d.

"Mr. John Bishop, coming after other arrangers, has profited by their
omissions."

HAMILTON'S MODERN INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE PIANOFORTE. Edited by CZERNY. 34th
edition, 48 large folio pages, 4s.

"It is sufficient to say that the present edition is the 34th edition, to
stamp it with the genuine mark of excellence. It really deserves all the
popularity it enjoys."--_Sunday Times._

London: ROBERT COCKS & CO., New Burlington Street; and of all Musicsellers.

Also, their MUSICAL ALMANACK for 1853, Gratis and Postage Free.

       *       *       *       *       *


RALPH'S SERMON PAPER.--This approved Paper is particularly deserving the
notice of the Clergy, as, from its particular form (each page measuring
5-3/4 by 9 inches), it will contain more matter than the size in ordinary
use; and, from the width being narrower, is much more easy to read: adapted
for expeditious writing with either the quill or metallic pen; price 5s.
per ream. Sample on application.

ENVELOPE PAPER.--To identify the contents with the address and postmark,
important in all business communications; it admits of three clear pages
(each measuring 5-1/2 by 8 inches), for correspondence, it saves time and
is more economical. Price 9s. 6d. per ream.

F. W. RALPH, Manufacturing Stationer, 36. Throgmorton Street, Bank.

       *       *       *       *       *


KERR & STRANG, Perfumers and Wig-Makers, 124. Leadenhall Street, London,
respectfully inform the Nobility and Public that they have invented and
brought to the greatest perfection the following leading articles, besides
numerous others:--Their Ventilating Natural Curl; Ladies and Gentlemen's
PERUKES, either Crops or Full Dress, with Partings and Crowns so natural as
to defy detection, and with or without their improved Metallic Springs;
Ventilating Fronts, Bandeaux, Borders, Nattes, Bands a la Reine, &c.; also
their instantaneous Liquid Hair Dye, the only dye that really answers for
all colours, and never fades nor acquires that unnatural red or purple tint
common to all other dyes; it is permanent, free of any smell, and perfectly
harmless. Any lady or gentleman, sceptical of its effects in dyeing any
shade of colour, can have it applied, free of any charge, at KERR &
STRANG'S, 124. Leadenhall Street.

Sold in Cases at 7s. 6d., 15s., and 20s. Samples, 3s. 6d., sent to all
parts on receipt of Post-office Order or Stamps.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTICE.

SUBSCRIBERS TO EVELYN'S DIARY AND CORRESPONDENCE

Are respectfully informed that the THIRD and FOURTH VOLUMES of the New and
Enlarged Edition, printed uniformly with Pepys's celebrated "Diary," are
now ready for delivery; and they are requested to order the completion of
their sets without delay, to prevent disappointment, as the Volumes will
only be sold separately for a limited period.

Published for HENRY COLBURN by his Successors, HURST & BLACKETT, 13. Great
Marlborough Street. Orders received by all Booksellers.

       *       *       *       *       *


Foolscap 8vo., 10s. 6d.

THE CALENDAR OF THE ANGLICAN CHURCH: illustrated with Brief Accounts of the
Saints who have Churches dedicated in their Names, or whose Images are most
frequently met with in England; also the Early Christian and Mediaeval
Symbols, and an Index of Emblems.

"It is perhaps hardly necessary to observe, that this work is of an
Archaeological, and not a Theological character. The Editor has not
considered it his business to examine into the truth or falsehood of the
legends of which he narrates the substance; he gives them merely as
legends, and, in general, so much of them only as is necessary to explain
why particular emblems were used with a particular Saint, or why Churches
in a given locality are named after this or that Saint."--_Preface._

"The latter part of the book, on the early Christian and mediaeval symbols,
and on ecclesiastical emblems, is of great historical and architectural
value. A copious Index of emblems is added, as well as a general Index to
the volume with its numerous illustrations. The work is an important
contribution to English Archaeology, especially in the department of
ecclesiastical iconography."--_Literary Gazette._

JOHN HENRY PARKER, Oxford; and 377. Strand, London.

{122}

       *       *       *       *       *


To Members of Learned Societies, Authors, &c.

ASHBEE & DANGERFIELD LITHOGRAPHERS, DRAUGHTSMEN, AND PRINTERS, 18. Broad
Court, Long Acre.

A. & D. respectfully beg to announce that they devote particular attention
to the execution of ANCIENT AND MODERN FAC-SIMILES, comprising Autograph
Letters, Deeds, Charters. Title-pages, Engravings, Woodcuts, &c., which
they produce from any description of copies with the utmost accuracy, and
without the slightest injury to the originals.

Among the many purposes to which the art of Lithography is most
successfully applied, may be specified.--ARCHAEOLOGICAL DRAWINGS,
Architecture, Landscapes, Marine Views, Portraits from Life or Copies.
Illuminated MSS., Monumental Brasses, Decorations, Stained Glass Windows,
Maps, Plans, Diagrams, and every variety of illustrations requisite for
Scientific and Artistic Publications.

PHOTOGRAPHIC DRAWINGS lithographed with the greatest care and exactness.

LITHOGRAPHIC OFFICES, 18. Broad Court, Long Acre, London.

       *       *       *       *       *


PHOTOGRAPHY.--The AMMONIO-IODIDE OF SILVER in Collodion (price 9d. per
oz.), prepared by DELATOUCHE & CO., Photographic and Operative Chemists,
147. Oxford Street, has now stood the test of upwards of Twelve months'
constant use; and for taking Portraits or Views on Glass, cannot be
surpassed in the beautiful results it produces. MESSRS. DELATOUCHE & CO.
supply Apparatus with the most recent Improvements, PURE CHEMICALS,
PREPARED SENSITIVE PAPERS, and every Article connected with Photography on
Paper or Glass. Paintings, Engravings, and Works of Art copied in their
Glass Room, at Moderate Charges. Instructions given in the Art.

See HENNAH'S new work on the Collodion Process, price 1s., by post 1s. 6d.

       *       *       *       *       *


TO PHOTOGRAPHERS.--Pure Chemicals, with every requisite for the practice of
Photography, according to the instructions of Hunt, Le Gray, Brebisson, &c.
&c., may be obtained of WILLIAM BOLTON, Manufacturer of pure chemicals for
Photographic and other purposes.

Lists of Prices to be had on application.

146. Holborn Bars.

       *       *       *       *       *


ROSS'S PHOTOGRAPHIC PORTRAIT AND LANDSCAPE LENSES.--These lenses give
correct definition at the centre and margin of the picture, and have their
visual and chemical acting foci coincident.

_Great Exhibition Jurors' Reports_, p. 274.

    "Mr. Ross prepares lenses for Portraiture having the greatest intensity
    yet produced, by procuring the coincidence of the chemical actinic and
    visual rays. The spherical aberration is also very carefully corrected,
    both in the central and oblique pencils."

    "Mr. Ross has exhibited the best Camera in the Exhibition. It is
    furnished with a double achromatic object-lens, about three inches
    aperture. There is no stop, the field is flat, and the image very
    perfect up to the edge."

Catalogue sent upon Application.

A. ROSS, 2. Featherstone Buildings, High Holborn.

       *       *       *       *       *


PHOTOGRAPHY.--Collodion (Iodized with the Ammonio-Iodide of Silver).--J. B.
HOCKIN & CO., Chemists, 289. Strand, were the first in England who
published the application of this agent (see _Athenaeum_, Aug. 14th). Their
Collodion (price 9d. per oz.) retains its extraordinary sensitiveness,
tenacity, and colour unimpaired for months; it may be exported to any
climate, and the Iodizing Compound mixed as required. J. B. HOCKIN & CO.
manufacture PURE CHEMICALS and all APPARATUS with the latest Improvements
adapted for all the Photographic and Daguerreotype processes. Cameras for
Developing in the open Country. GLASS BATHS adapted to any Camera. Lenses
from the best Makers. Waxed and Iodized Papers, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *


PHOTOGRAPHIC PICTURES.--A Selection of the above beautiful Productions may
be seen at BLAND & LONG'S, 153. Fleet Street, where may also be procured
Apparatus of every Description, and pure Chemicals for the practice of
Photography in all its Branches.

Calotype, Daguerreotype, and Glass Pictures for the Stereoscope.

    BLAND & LONG, Opticians, Philosophical and Photographical Instrument
    Makers, and Operative Chemists, 153. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


PHOTOGRAPHIC PAPER.--Negative and Positive Papers of Whatman's, Turner's,
Sanford's, and Canson Freres' make. Waxed-Paper for Le Gray's Process.
Iodized and Sensitive Paper for every kind of Photography.

Sold by JOHN SANFORD, Photographic Stationer, Aldine Chambers, 13.
Paternoster Row, London.

       *       *       *       *       *


PHOTOGRAPHIC PORTRAITS and VIEWS by the Collodion and Waxed-Paper Process.
Apparatus, Materials, and Pure Chemical Preparations for the above
processes, Superior Iodized Collodion, known by the name of Collodio-iodide
or Xylo-iodide of Silver, 9d. per oz. Pyro-gallic Acid, 4s. per drachm.
Acetic Acid, suited for Collodion Pictures, 8d. per oz. Crystallizable and
perfectly pure, on which the success of the Calotypist so much depends. 1s.
per oz. Canson Freres' Negative Paper, 3s.; Positive do., 4s. 6d.; La
Croix, 3s.; Turner, 3s. Whatman's Negative and Positive, 3s. per quire.
Iodized Waxed Paper, 10s. 6d. per quire. Sensitive Paper ready for the
Camera, and warranted to keep from fourteen to twenty days, with directions
for use, 11x9, 9s. per doz.; Iodized, only 6s. per doz.

GEORGE KNIGHT & SONS (sole Agents for Voightlander & Sons' celebrated
Lenses), Foster Lane, London.

       *       *       *       *       *


PHOTOGRAPHY.--XYLO-IODIDE OF SILVER, prepared solely by R. W. THOMAS, has
now obtained an European fame; it supersedes the use of all other
preparations of Collodion. Witness the subjoined Testimonial.

    "122. Regent Street

    "Dear Sir,--In answer to your inquiry of this morning, I have no
    hesitation in saying that your preparation of Collodion is incomparably
    better and more sensitive than all the advertised Collodio-Iodides,
    which, for my professional purposes, are quite useless when compared to
    yours.

             "I remain, dear Sir,
                 "Yours faithfully,
                     "N. HENNEMAN.

          Aug. 30. 1852.
      to Mr. R.W. Thomas."

MR. R. W. THOMAS begs most earnestly to caution photographers against
purchasing impure chemicals, which are now too frequently sold at very low
prices. It is to this cause nearly always that their labours are unattended
with success.

Chemicals of absolute purity, especially prepared for this art, may be
obtained from R. W. THOMAS, Chemist and Professor of Photography, 10. Pall
Mall.

N.B.--The name of Mr. T.'s preparation, Xylo-Iodide of Silver, is made use
of by unprincipled persons. To prevent imposition each bottle is stamped
with a red label bearing the maker's signature.

       *       *       *       *       *


PHOTOGRAPHY.--HORNE & CO.'S Iodized Collodion, for obtaining Instantaneous
Views, and Portraits in from three to thirty seconds, according to light.

Portraits obtained by the above, for delicacy of detail rival the choicest
Daguerreotypes, specimens of which may be seen at their Establishment.

Also every description of Apparatus, Chemicals, &c. &c. used in this
beautiful Art.--123. and 121. Newgate Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


BENNETT'S MODEL WATCH, as shown at the GREAT EXHIBITION, No. 1. Class X.,
in Gold and Silver Cases, in five qualities, and adapted to all Climates,
may now be had at the MANUFACTORY, 65. CHEAPSIDE. Superior Gold London-made
Patent Levers, 17, 15, and 12 guineas. Ditto, in Silver Cases, 8, 6, and 4
guineas. First-rate Geneva Levers, in Gold Cases, 12, 10, and 8 guineas.
Ditto, in Silver Cases, 8, 6, and 5 guineas. Superior Lever, with
Chronometer Balance, Gold 27, 23, and 19 guineas. Bennett's Pocket
Chronometer, Gold, 50 guineas; Silver, 40 guineas. Every Watch skilfully
examined, timed and its performance guaranteed. Barometers, 2l., 3l., and
4l. Thermometers from 1s. each.

BENNETT, Watch, Clock, and Instrument Maker to the Royal Observatory, the
Board of Ordnance, the Admiralty, and the Queen,

65. CHEAPSIDE.

       *       *       *       *       *


WESTERN LIFE ASSURANCE AND ANNUITY SOCIETY,

3. PARLIAMENT STREET, LONDON.

Founded A.D. 1842.

   _Directors._
  H. Edgeworth Bicknell, Esq.
  William Cabell, Esq.
  T. Somers Cocks, Jun. Esq. M.P.
  G. Henry Drew, Esq.
  William Evans, Esq.
  William Freeman, Esq.
  F. Fuller, Esq.
  J. Henry Goodhart, Esq.
  T. Grissell, Esq.
  James Hunt, Esq.
  J. Arscott Lethbridge, Esq.
  E. Lucas, Esq.
  James Lys Seager, Esq.
  J. Basley White, Esq.
  Joseph Carter Wood, Esq.

   _Trustees._
  W. Whateley, Esq., Q.C.;
  L. C. Humfrey, Esq., Q.C.;
  George Drew, Esq.

_Consulting Counsel._--Sir Wm. P. Wood, M.P.

_Physician._--William Rich. Basham, M.D.

_Bankers._--Messrs. Cocks, Biddulph, and Co., Charing Cross.

VALUABLE PRIVILEGE.

POLICIES effected in this Office do not become void through temporary
difficulty in paying a Premium, as permission is given upon application to
suspend the payment at interest, according to the conditions detailed on
the Prospectus.

Specimens of Rates of Premium for Assuring 100l., with a Share in
three-fourths of the Profits:--

  Age       L   s.  d.
   17       1  14   4
   22       1  18   8
   27       2   4   5
   32       2  10   8
   37       2  18   6
   42       3   8   2

ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A., F.R.A.S., Actuary.

Now ready, price 10s. 6d., Second Edition, with material additions,
INDUSTRIAL INVESTMENT and EMIGRATION: being a TREATISE on BENEFIT BUILDING
SOCIETIES, and on the General Principles of Land Investment, exemplified in
the Cases of Freehold Land Societies, Building Companies, &c. With a
Mathematical Appendix on Compound Interest and Life Assurance. By ARTHUR
SCRATCHLEY, M.A., Actuary to the Western Life Assurance Society, 3.
Parliament Street, London.

       *       *       *       *       *


TO PHOTOGRAPHERS.--MR. PHILIP DELAMOTTE begs to announce that he has now
made arrangements for printing Calotypes in large or small quantities,
either from Paper or Glass Negatives. Gentlemen who are desirous of having
good impressions of their works, may see specimens of Mr. Delamotte's
Printing at his own residence, 38. Chapstow Place, Bayswater, or at

MR. GEORGE BELL'S, 186. Fleet Street.

{123}

       *       *       *       *       *


SECOND VOLUME OF LANDON'S ECCLESIASTICAL DICTIONARY.

Now ready, in 12mo., price 10s. 6d., carefully edited and revised, Vol. II.
(containing 700 pages) of

A NEW GENERAL ECCLESIASTICAL DICTIONARY.

By the REV. EDWARD H. LANDON, M.A.,

FORMERLY OF CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

This Work includes an Account of the Sees, Patriarchates, Religious
Foundations and Brotherhoods, together with Lists of the Archbishops and
Bishops throughout Christendom from the earliest times; also, a History of
Sects; an Explanation of Rites and Ceremonies, and of Ecclesiastical and
Ecclesiological Terms; and a Copious Biographical Dictionary of Eminent
Ecclesiastical Persons, with a List of their Writings.

RIVINGTONS, St. Paul's Church Yard, and Waterloo Place.

       *       *       *       *       *


SAMUEL BAGSTER AND SONS,

15. PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON.

POLYGLOT BIBLES in every Style of Elegant Flexible Bindings, with and
without the Book of Common Prayer, Indexes, Maps, Metrical Psalms,
Concordances, the Greek New Testament interleaved, &c. &c., in various
sizes, from the Small Pocket Editions to Large Print Facsimile Editions.
Detailed Catalogues by Post free.

FAMILY BIBLES (Bagster's Comprehensive Bible) in various sizes, and in
every style of durable elegant binding. Copies for presentation sumptuously
prepared. Catalogues by Post free.

BIBLES FOR MANUSCRIPT ANNOTATIONS, with either broad margins for the Notes,
or alternate blank pages, ruled and Indexed in great variety. Catalogues by
Post free.

ANCIENT ENGLISH BIBLES and TESTAMENTS, by the Reformers. The Genevan
Version, Tyndale's, Coverdale's, &c. &c. Catalogues by Post free.

PARALLEL PASSAGE BIBLES, Pocket and Quarto sizes. Catalogues by Post free.

HEBREW, GREEK, LATIN, FRENCH, GERMAN, ITALIAN, SPANISH, PORTUGUESE, and
SYRIAC BIBLES and TESTAMENTS, alone or combined, in every variety of
interpaging, and bound in "Bagster's Flexible Turkey" binding. The Greek
Testaments with and without English Lexicons, &c., constitute an important
feature of this class. PSALTERS also in very great variety. Catalogues by
Post free.

AIDS TO THE STUDY OF THE OLD TESTAMENT SCRIPTURES, Critical, Philological,
and Devotional; Lexicons, Grammars, Analyses, &c. &c. Catalogues by Post
free.

AIDS TO THE STUDY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT, in the same variety.

GENERAL, BIBLICAL, and MISCELLANEOUS WORKS. Catalogues by Post free.

Specimens, Prospectuses, &c., will be forwarded by the Post, free of
expense.

[Greek: Pollai men thnetois Glottai mia d' Athanatosin.]

London: SAMUEL BAGSTER & SONS, 15. Paternoster Row.

       *       *       *       *       *


Third Edition, cloth, 1s.; by Post, 1s. 6d.

WELSH SKETCHES, FIRST SERIES. By the Author of "Proposals for Christian
Union."

Contents:--1. Bardism. 2. The Kings of Wales. 3. The Welsh Church. 4.
Monastic Institutions. 5. Giraldus Cambrensis.

London: JAMES DARLING, 81. Great Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields.

       *       *       *       *       *


SIR ARCHIBALD ALISON'S WORKS.

Just published, price 15s., Vol. I.

HISTORY OF EUROPE, FROM THE FALL OF NAPOLEON IN 1815 TO THE ACCESSION OF
LOUIS NAPOLEON IN 1852.

BY

SIR ARCHIBALD ALISON, BART.

To be completed in 5 vols. 8vo., uniform with the LIBRARY EDITION of the
"History of Europe from 1789 to 1815."

BY THE SAME AUTHOR.

THE HISTORY OF EUROPE, from the Commencement of the FRENCH REVOLUTION in
1789 to the BATTLE OF WATERLOO.

LIBRARY EDITION (Eighth), 14 vols. demy 8vo., with Portraits, 10l. 10s.

CROWN OCTAVO EDITION, 20 vols., 6l.

THE LIFE OF JOHN DUKE OF MARLBOROUGH, with some Account of his
Contemporaries, and of the War of the Succession. Second Edition. 2 vols.
demy 8vo., Portraits and Maps, 1l. 10s.

ESSAYS, POLITICAL, HISTORICAL, and MISCELLANEOUS. 3 vols. demy 8vo., 2l.
5s.

EPITOME OF ALISON'S EUROPE, for the Use of Schools and Young Persons. 4th
Edition, bound, 7s. 6d.

ATLAS TO ALISON'S EUROPE: 109 Plates. Constructed under the direction of
SIR A. ALISON, by A. KEITH JOHNSTON, F.R.S.E., &c., Author of the "Physical
Atlas," &c. Demy 4to., 3l. 3s.; Crown 4to., 2l. 12s. 6d.

WILLIAM BLACKWOOD & SONS, Edinburgh and London.

       *       *       *       *       *


This day is published (fourth edition), price 15s.

[This edition contains 100 pages of additional matter, and the price has
been reduced from 18s. to 15s.]

AN ELEMENTARY COURSE OF MATHEMATICS, designed principally for Students of
the University of Cambridge. By the REV. HARVEY GOODWIN, M.A., late Fellow
and Mathematical Lecturer of Gonville and Caius College. Fourth Edition.

"As Tennis is a game of no use in itself, but of great use in respect it
maketh a quick eye, and a body ready to put itself into all postures; so in
the Mathematics, that use which is collateral and intervenient is no less
worthy than that which is principal and intended."--BACON, _Advancement of
Learning_.

Cambridge: JOHN DEIGHTON. SIMPKIN, MARSHALL & CO., and GEORGE BELL, London.

       *       *       *       *       *


PREPARING FOR IMMEDIATE PUBLICATION.

PHOTOGRAPHIC NOTES: Comprising Plain Directions for the Practice of
Photography, including the Collodion Process on Glass; the Paper and
Wax-Paper Processes; Printing from Glass and Paper Negatives, &c.

By DR. DIAMOND, F.S.A.

With notes on the Application of Photography to Archaeology, &c.,

By WILLIAM J. THOMS, F.S.A.

London: GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


ROYAL IRISH ACADEMY TRANSACTIONS. Vol. XXII.

  ART.    Part III.--SCIENCE. Price 7s. 6d.

   VII. Description of a new Anemometer, &c.;
        by REV. T.R. ROBINSON, D.D., &c.

  VIII. On the Equilibrium and Motion of an
        Elastic Solid; by the REV. J.H.
        JELLETT, M.A., &c.

    IX. Account of Experiments made with a
        Friction Sledge for stopping Railway
        Trains; by the REV. SAMUEL
        HAUGHTON, M.A., &c.

     X. On certain Improvements in the construction
        of Galvanometers, &c.; by
        MICHAEL DONOVAN, ESQ., &c.

    XI. On the Original and Actual Fluidity of
        the Earth and Planets; by the REV.
        SAMUEL HAUGHTON, M.A., &c.

   XII. On the Homology of the Organs of the
        Tunicata and the Polyzoa; by GEO.
        JAMES ALLMAN, M.D., &c.

  Part IV.--POLITE LITERATURE, Price 10s.

   III. On Two Medallion Busts which are
        preserved in the Library of Trinity
        College, Dublin, and on Two Inedited
        Patmian Inscriptions; by REV.
        JAMES KENNEDY BAILLIE,
        D.D., &c.

    IV. On the Assyrio-Babylonian Phonetic
        Characters; by REV. EDWARD
        HINCKS, D.D., &c.

The Proceedings, Vol. V., Part II., are also ready, price 2s. 6d.

Dublin: ROYAL IRISH ACADEMY, and HODGES & SMITH, 104. Grafton Street.
London: T. & W. BOONE, 29. New Bond Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


This day is published, price 5s.

APOSTOLIC MISSIONS: Five Sermons preached before the University of
Cambridge in May, 1852, by the REV. W. B. HOPKINS, M.A., Fellow and Tutor
of St. Catharine's Hall, and formerly Fellow and Mathematical Lecturer of
Gonville and Caius College.

Cambridge: JOHN DEIGHTON. London: F. & J. RIVINGTON.

       *       *       *       *       *


This day is published, price 7s. 6d.

THE CONFIRMATION OF FAITH BY REASON AND AUTHORITY. The Hulsean Lectures,
preached before the University of Cambridge in 1852. By the REV. GEORGE
CURREY, B.D., Preacher at the Charterhouse, formerly Fellow and Tutor of
St. John's College.

Cambridge: JOHN DEIGHTON; MACMILLAN & CO. London: F. & J. RIVINGTON.

{124}

       *       *       *       *       *


BOOKS ON SALE BY

JOHN RUSSELL SMITH,

36. SOHO SQUARE, LONDON.

HOLBEIN'S DANCE OF DEATH, with an Historical and Literary Introduction by
an Antiquary. Square post 8vo. with 54 Engravings, being the most accurate
copies ever executed of these gems of Art, and a Frontispiece of an Ancient
Bedstead at Aix-la-Chapelle, with a Dance of Death carved on it, engraved
by Fairholt, cloth, 9s.

    "The designs are executed with a spirit and fidelity quite
    extraordinary. They are indeed most truthful."--_Athenaeum._

LOWER'S (M. A.) ESSAYS ON ENGLISH SURNAMES. 2 vols. post 8vo. Third
Edition, greatly enlarged. Cloth, 12s.

BIOGRAPHIA BRITANNICA LITERARIA; or Biography of Literary Characters of
Great Britain and Ireland, arranged in Chronological Order. By THOMAS
WRIGHT, M.A., F.S.A., Member of the Institute of France. 2 thick vols. 8vo.
Cloth. Vol. I. Anglo-Saxon Period. Vol. II. Anglo-Norman Period. 6s. each,
published at 12s. each.

Published under the superintendence of the Royal Society of Literature.

COINS. An Introduction to the Study of Ancient and Modern Coins. By J.Y.
AKERMAN. Fcp. 8vo. with numerous wood engravings, from the original coins,
6s. 6d.

COINS OF THE ROMANS RELATING TO BRITAIN, described and illustrated. By J.Y.
AKERMAN, F.S.A. Second edition, 8vo. greatly enlarged with plates and
woodcuts, 10s. 6d. cloth.

GUIDE TO ARCHAEOLOGY. An Archaeological Index to Remains of Antiquity of
the Celtic, Romano-British, and Anglo-Saxon periods. By JOHN YONGE AKERMAN,
fellow and secretary to the Society of Antiquaries. 1 vol. 8vo. illustrated
with numerous engravings, comprising upwards of 500 objects, cloth, 15s.

    "One of the first wants of an incipient antiquary is the facility of
    comparison, and here it is furnished him at one glance. The plates,
    indeed, form the most valuable part of the book, both by their number
    and the judicious selection of types and examples which they contain.
    It is a book which we can, on this account, safely and warmly recommend
    to all who are interested in the antiquities of their native
    land."--_Literary Gazette._

    "A book of such utility--so concise, so clear, so well condensed from
    such varied and voluminous sources--cannot fail to be generally
    acceptable."--_Art Union._

WRIGHT'S (THOS.) ESSAYS ON THE LITERATURE, POPULAR SUPERSTITIONS, AND
HISTORY OF ENGLAND in the MIDDLE AGES. 2 vols. post 8vo. cloth, 16s.

WRIGHT'S (THOS.) ST. PATRICK'S PURGATORY: an Essay on the Legends of
Purgatory, Hell, and Paradise, current during the Middle Ages. Post 8vo.
cloth, 6s.

THE NURSERY RHYMES OF ENGLAND, collected chiefly from oral tradition.
Edited by J. O. HALLIWELL. Fourth edition, 12mo. with 38 Designs by W. B.
Scott. 4s. 6d. cloth.

POPULAR RHYMES AND NURSERY TALES, with Historical Elucidations; a Sequel to
"The Nursery Rhymes of England." Edited by J.O. HALLIWELL. Royal 18mo. 4s.
6d.

LOWER'S CURIOSITIES OF HERALDRY, with Illustrations from Old English
Writers. 8vo. Numerous Engravings. Cloth, 14s.

HERALDS' VISITATIONS. An Index to all the Pedigrees and Arms in the
Heraldic Visitations and other Genealogical MSS. in the British Museum. By
G. SIMS, of the Manuscript Department. 8vo. closely printed in double
columns, cloth, 15s.

*** An indispensable book to those engaged in genealogical or topographical
pursuits, affording a ready clue to the pedigrees and arms of above 30,000
of the gentry of England, their residences, &c. (distinguishing the
different families of the same name, in every county), as recorded by the
Heralds in their Visitations, with Indexes to other genealogical MSS. in
the British Museum. It has been the work of immense labour. No public
library ought to be without it.

CONSUETUDINES KANCIAE. A History of GAVELKIND, and other remarkable Customs
in the County of KENT, by CHARLES SANDYS, Esq., F.S.A. (Cantianus),
illustrated with fac-similes, a very handsome volume, 8vo. cloth, 15s.

BRUCE'S (REV. J.C.) HISTORICAL AND TOPOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF THE ROMAN WALL
FROM THE TYNE TO THE SOLWAY. Thick 8vo. 35 plates and 194 woodcuts, half
morocco, 1l. 1s.

BOSWORTH'S (REV. DR.) COMPENDIOUS ANGLO-SAXON AND ENGLISH DICTIONARY. 8vo.
closely printed in treble columns, cloth, 12s.

    "This is not a mere abridgment of the large Dictionary, but almost an
    entirely new work. In this compendious one will be found, at a very
    moderate price, all that is most practical and valuable in the former
    expensive edition, with a great accession of new words and
    matter."--_Author's Preface_.

ANALECTA ANGLO-SAXONICA. Selections in Prose and Verse from Anglo-Saxon
Literature, with an Introductory Ethnological Essay, and Notes, critical
and explanatory. By LOUIS F. KLIPSTEIN, of the University of Giessen, 2
thick vols. post 8vo. cloth, 12s. (original price 18s.)

A DELECTUS IN ANGLO-SAXON, intended as a First Class-book in the Language.
By the Rev. W. BARNES of St. John's College, Cambridge, author of the Poems
and Glossary in the Dorset Dialect. 12mo. cloth, 2s. 6d.

    "To those who wish to possess a critical knowledge of their own native
    English, some acquaintance with Anglo-Saxon is indispensable; and we
    have never seen an introduction better calculated than the present to
    supply the wants of a beginner in a short space of time. The
    declensions and conjugations are well stated, and illustrated by
    references to the Greek, Latin, French, and other languages. A
    philosophical spirit pervades every part. The Delectus consists of
    short pieces on various subjects, with extracts from Anglo-Saxon
    History and the Saxon Chronicle. There is a good Glossary at the
    end."--_Athenaeum_, Oct. 20, 1849.

FACTS AND SPECULATIONS ON THE ORIGIN AND HISTORY OF PLAYING CARDS. By W.A.
CHATTO, Author of "Jackson's History of Wood Engraving," in one handsome
vol. 8vo. illustrated with many Engravings, both plain and coloured, cloth
1l. 1s.

    "It is exceedingly amusing."--_Atlas._

    "Curious, entertaining, and really learned book."--_Rambler._

    "Indeed the entire production deserves our warmest
    approbation."--_Literary Gazette._

    "A perfect fund of Antiquarian research, and most interesting even to
    persons who never play at cards."--_Tait's Mag._

BIBLIOTHECA MADRIGALIANA; a Bibliographical account of the Music and
Poetical Works published in England in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth
Centuries, under the Titles of Madrigals, Ballets, Ayres, Canzonets, &c. By
DR. RIMBAULT. 8vo. cloth, 5s.

A DICTIONARY OF ARCHAIC AND PROVINCIAL WORDS, Obsolete Phrases, Proverbs,
and Ancient Customs from the reign of Edward I. By JAMES ORCHARD HALLIWELL,
F.R.S., F.S.A., &c. 2 vols. 8vo. containing upwards of 1,000 pages closely
printed in double columns, cloth 1l. 1s.

It contains about 50,000 Words (embodying all the known scattered
Glossaries of the English language), forming a complete key to the reading
of the works of our old Poets, Dramatists, Theologians, and other authors,
whose works abound with allusions, of which explanations are not to be
found in ordinary Dictionaries and books of reference. Most of the
principal Archaisms are illustrated by examples selected from early
inedited MSS. and rare books, and by far the greater portion will be found
to be original authorities.

A LITTLE BOOK OF SONGS AND BALLADS, gathered from Ancient Musick Books, MS.
and Printed. By E.F. RIMBAULT, LL.D., &c. Post 8vo. pp. 240, half-bound in
morocco, 6s.

    ---- Antique Ballads, sung to crowds of old,
  Now cheaply bought for thrice their weight in gold.

GUIDE TO THE ANGLO-SAXON TONGUE, with Lessons in Verse and Prose, for the
Use of Learners. By E.J. VERNON, B.A., Oxon. 12mo. cloth, 5s. 6d.

*** This will be found useful as a Second Class-book, or to those well
versed in other languages.

       *       *       *       *       *


Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5. New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London; and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
street aforesaid.--Saturday, January 29. 1853.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Number 170, January
29, 1853, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES ***

***** This file should be named 42785.txt or 42785.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/7/8/42785/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram, Keith Edkins
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian
Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

