The Project Gutenberg Etext of Mastery of Self
by Frank Channing Haddock

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before distributing this or any other
Project Gutenberg file.

We encourage you to keep this file, exactly as it is, on your
own disk, thereby keeping an electronic path open for future
readers.  Please do not remove this.

This header should be the first thing seen when anyone starts to
view the etext. Do not change or edit it without written permission.
The words are carefully chosen to provide users with the
information they need to understand what they may and may not
do with the etext.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These Etexts Are Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get etexts, and
further information, is included below.  We need your donations.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a 501(c)(3)
organization with EIN [Employee Identification Number] 64-6221541



Title: Mastery of Self

Author: Frank Channing Haddock

Release Date: July, 2003  [Etext #4286]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on December 30, 2001]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

The Project Gutenberg Etext of Mastery of Self
by Frank Channing Haddock
******This file should be named 4286.txt or 4286.zip******

Robert Rowe, Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.

Project Gutenberg Etexts are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep etexts in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our etexts one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
etexts, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any Etext before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2001 as we release over 50 new Etext
files per month, or 500 more Etexts in 2000 for a total of 4000+
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
should reach over 300 billion Etexts given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 4,000 Etexts.  We need
funding, as well as continued efforts by volunteers, to maintain
or increase our production and reach our goals.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of November, 2001, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Arkansas, Connecticut, Delaware,
Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Maine, Michigan, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Oregon,
Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee,
Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin,
and Wyoming.

*In Progress

We have filed in about 45 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

All donations should be made to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fundraising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fundraising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etexts,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this etext,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the etext,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.10/04/01*END*




Robert Rowe, Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.

Mastery of Self for Wealth Power Success

by Frank Channing Haddock, M. S., Ph. D.





PART 21

POWER FOR SUCCESS





WHAT THIS BOOK TEACHES

This book brings to a close that portion of MASTERY OF SELF, which
deals with the art of Success-Magnetism.

Acquiring magnetism is a constructive effort. It is a building
process. You are rearing a structure. You rise, from the
foundation, through successive stories to the culminating peak.
The most pleasing, notable structures men build from granite and
steel and wood, tower like a Woolworth Building or a Rheims
Cathedral--higher and higher, until they finally reach a gold-
tipped crown or spire, high in the sunlit sky.

And so, in rearing your invisible shrine of personal Success-
magnetism, we now come to the topmost peak of the structure. This
book gives you the crowning inspirations, tipped and topped with
the final "Golden Laws of Magnetism in all Applied Life."

Master these lessons in the magnetism of success, and you will go
forth upon the highways and by-ways of life, endowed with a kingly
confidence in your ability to win a measure of success achieved by
few.

But remember--(should discouragement seek to dog your steps)--
every great structure requires the process of time. "The giant
trees of California were once puny saplings. The slow lapse of
time has drawn nature into their mighty hearts." Just as surely as
the absorption of natural forces built the giant redwoods, just as
surely can you draw upon nature for GIANT POWERS.





     The Fire.

In ancient myth, Prometheus
Filched fire from the altars of the gods
To warm the world,
Incurring Jove's dread wrath
And endless torment.

Lo, mind,--inflamed by the vision:
Of victim and the torturing bird,
Of black vindictiveness and suffering Will,
Rived forever, yet for aye supreme,--
Heroizes the deed and soul
And wreaks on canvas and in drama high
Its passionate admiration.

Now, too, in palace and hut confronted,
In battleship and iron steed defying space,
In flaring furnace of the smelted ore,
In haunts of coal and steam below the whirling wheels,
Life laughs and sings and thunders
An oratorio merging all the powers of harmony,
And hails the high-born Thief,
As giver of ethereal fire.

The atomic thrill waits also the clear call
To lift dull bodies till the joy of flesh
Becomes a common luxury;--
To vibrate rhythmically swift
Through all the responsive cells of thought
Till a man might solemnly hold
All things are possible on the bursting earth;--
To energize the mystic self
With consciousness of life deific
Till the whole world, jubilant, should flame
With its glory, actual, concrete, the one sure Truth
Of a rock-girt globe, or a sun-filled space.
--THE AUTHOR.





THE TWENTY-SEVENTH LESSON--The Four Pyramids.

     This equation's writ
     In every scene:
     The end shall fit--
     As extremes to mean--
     Whatever's forerunner to it.
     --THE AUTHOR.

PRINCIPLE--The best use of self demands that it be understood.


Our ideal specimen of human nature is the whole man at his best.

The etheric life demands (a) the vibrations native to the body in
health--(Physical Magnetism)--(b) the vibrations induced by the
active mind, (c) the vibrations intensified by controlled
emotional states, (d) the regulative vibrations of psychic
righteousness or honor--(Psychic Magnetism). In this scheme
nothing is inferior, but all elements are appointed to be
subordinate to the last. These vibrations should run through the
whole etheric activity a binding thread of force.

We are now to study the four pyramids of the etheric life. The
purpose is four-fold. If you will put yourself into this lesson as
you have, presumably, put yourself into the preceding twenty-six
lessons, you will discover--

Firstly--Magnetic CONCENTRATION;

Secondly--The RELATION of the DIVISIONS of self to the WHOLE self;

Thirdly--A better UNDERSTANDING of your personality;

Fourthly--The supreme importance of PSYCHIC RIGHTEOUSNESS.

It is altogether probable that the majority of people live almost
wholly in the physical pyramids of existence.

Properly speaking, the illustration on page 422 is a single
pyramid rather than four pyramids. It is composed of four
triangular walls, each of which is called a pyramid for
convenience and represents a certain phase of your nature. The
great pyramidal I AM is complete only as all sides of your
selfhood are fully built up. You are LOOKING DOWN from the "I AM."


A CURIOUS ILLUSTRATION.


A point has neither length, breadth, nor thickness. Move it in
thought any distance in one direction, and you have the line. Move
the line FROM its direction any distance, you have the surface.
Move the surface OUT of its plane any distance, you have the
solid. Thus you have obtained length, breadth, thickness, line,
surface, solid, motion, space, time, number, structure, body, and,
in the attention, mind,--and scores of other factors (study out a
long list),--by means of that which has no length, no breadth, no
thickness.

The real YOU is that point. YOU move and describe a line of life.
This line, repeated, becomes habit, which moved through time,
makes conduct, and right conduct, projected through life, yields
magnetism.

If you live only on surface I, you are mere animal. If you
project, that surface through to III, you are a fine moral person.
If you project surface II through to surface IV, you are magnetic.
If you combine these solids, YOU are the Ideal Pyramid, "_I_ AM
POWER."

Let us add the following:

"Culture is not measured by the greatness of the field which is
covered by our knowledge, but by the nicety with which we can
perceive relations in that field, whether great or small."

This book desires that you become acquainted with the unused
portions of your nature.

In order to this, you are now invited to make a long regime of
mining out the magnetic significance of--


THE FOUR PYRAMIDS.


I

Harmony--
Exercise--Recreation
--Air--Sleep--Water
--Food--Regularity--Digestion
--Cleanliness--Economy--
Scientific Body-Building and Using.
I. Pyramid of Physical Health

II

Will--Muscular
Development
--Nervous Condition
--Inner Energy--
Responsiveness--Self Control--Staying
Power--Health--Body-Tone--
Personal Qualities--Physical Characteristics.
II. Pyramid of Physical Magnetism.

III

Peace--Will
--Righteousness--
Love--Knowledge
Faith--Hope--Courage--
Body-Health--Right Heredity--
Right Environment--Right Training.
III. Pyramid of Moral Health.

IV

Will--Alertness
--Fidelity--
Hope--Courage--
Confidence--Honor--Thought--
Faith in System--Physical
Basis: Health--Body-Magnetism.
IV. Pyramid of Personal Magnetism.


You are now invited to write out all the possible TRUE
combinations of these four pyramids, and particularly to observe
the following


RIGHT PYRAMIDAL COMBINATIONS.


We see that--

1. Physical Health makes for Physical Magnetism;

2. Physical Magnetism bases Psychic Magnetism;

3. Physical Health neighbors Moral Health;

4. Moral Health conduces to Physical Magnetism;

5. Moral Health is indispensable to Psychic Magnetism;

6. Psychic health bases Physical Magnetism.

We also observe that--

7. Physical Magnetism assists Physical Health;

8. Psychic Magnetism assists Physical Health;

9. Moral Health assists Physical Health.

It now appears that--

10. Physical Magnetism is indifferent to TRUE Moral Health;

11. Psychic Magnetism assists Moral Health;

12. Psychic Magnetism assists Physical Magnetism.

We therefore conclude that the following are


INCOMPLETE PYRAMIDAL COMBINATIONS.


1. Physical Health--[Physical Magnetism + Psychic Magnetism +
Moral Health].

2. Physical Health + Physical Magnetism--[Psychic Magnetism +
Moral Health].

3. Physical Health + Physical Magnetism + Psychic Magnetism--
[Moral Health].

4. Physical Magnetism--[Psychic Magnetism + Moral Health].

5. Physical Magnetism + Psychic Magnetism--[Moral Health].
Impossible.

6. Psychic Magnetism--[Physical Health + Physical Magnetism].

7. Psychic Magnetism + Physical Health--[Physical Magnetism +
Moral Health]. Impossible in part.

8. Moral Health--[Physical Health + Physical Magnetism].

9. Moral Health + Physical Health--[Physical Magnetism + Psychic
Magnetism]. Impossible in part.

You may thus possess physical health without physical magnetism.
But if you seek physical magnetism, you must go by the way of
physical health.

You may possess moral health without full psychic magnetism, but
if you seek the highest form of psychic magnetism, you must go by
the way of moral health.

It is now evident that the following are


IDEAL COMBINATIONS.


FIRST--FROM THE STANDPOINT OF MORALS.

1. First:--Moral Health. Next:

2. Moral Health + Psychic Magnetism + Physical Magnetism +
Physical Health. Next:

3. Moral Health + Psychic Magnetism + Physical Magnetism. Next:

4. Moral Health + Psychic Magnetism + Physical Health. Next:

5. Moral Health + Psychic Magnetism. Next:

6. Moral Health + Physical Magnetism. Next:

7. Moral Health + Physical Health. Next:

8. Psychic Magnetism. Impossible alone.

9. Physical Magnetism. Impossible alone.

10. Physical Health. Mere animal life.


SECOND--FROM THE STANDPOINT OF MAGNETISM.


1. First:--Psychic Magnetism. Next:

2. Psychic Magnetism + Moral Health + Physical Magnetism +
Physical Health. Next:

3. Psychic Magnetism + Moral Health + Physical Magnetism. Next:

4. Psychic Magnetism + Moral Health + Physical Health. Next:

5. Psychic Magnetism + Moral Health. Next:

6. Psychic Magnetism + Physical Magnetism. Next:

7. Psychic Magnetism + Physical Health. Next:

8. Moral Health. Next:

9. Physical Magnetism. Impossible alone. Next:

10. Physical Health. Valueless alone.


CONCLUSIONS.


Summarizing possible conclusions, we have the following:

1. Physical health is indispensable to physical magnetism;

2. Psychic righteousness (health) is indispensable to psychic
magnetism;

3. Psychic magnetism is indispensable to best physical magnetism;

4. Physical magnetism is not wholly indispensable to psychic
magnetism.

5. PERFECT PSYCHIC MAGNETISM INVOLVES HEALTH, PHYSICAL MAGNETISM
AND PSYCHIC RIGHTEOUSNESS.

The ALL-IMPORTANT departments of your personality are those of
PSYCHIC RIGHTEOUSNESS and PSYCHIC MAGNETISM.

But the IDEAL MAN of success is the WHOLE MAN always AT HIS BEST.

The whole man is more than psychic development; he is a PRODUCT
AND A CREATOR OF PRACTICAL AFFAIRS.


MAGNETISM A GROWTH.


Let us understand. You cannot reasonably hope to succeed by merely
DREAMING about success.

You surely cannot achieve success if you PLUNGE BLINDLY through
your career.

You cannot really succeed without possessing some degree of
PERSONAL MAGNETISM.

When you began the present study, you certainly possessed a
measure of magnetic capacity, either physical or psychic,
otherwise you would not have purchased this book. If you have
energetically observed its directions, you have developed both
varieties; but, above that, you have also combined them into one
living whole, the magnetic personality.

This result has required at least a year of persistent effort. If
you have arrived at this point in less time, you should go back
and begin where haste first retarded your progress.


MAGNETISM IS A NATURAL GROWTH.


No matter how great may be your ability to read and understand
books, that growth, that law, require time as well as intelligent
effort. No matter how poor may be your ability in such respect,
that growth is absolutely certain if you put reasonable time and
genuine effort into its acquisition.

The giant trees of California were once puny saplings. The slow
lapse of time has drawn nature into their mighty hearts. Magnetism
can no more be acquired by the mere reading of a book, or by
hurried practice of its directions, than can these giants of the
West be produced in the hot-house culture of a northern summer.

MAGNETIC GROWTH IS NATURALLY SLOW. Its principles, its methods,
and the results of its study, have to be deeply sunk into and
absorbed and assimilated by the subjective self before the
reaction of magnetism in the objective life can obtain. This book
has promised no miracle. If you have read it correctly, you have
learned that magnetic growth cannot be hurried. These statements
are placed here because, had they appeared at the beginning of our
work, the outlook would have seemed, perhaps, discouraging, but
more especially because they would not have been understood. You
now understand them because you have toiled, and you can afford to
smile at such possible discouragement. You have paid an easy price
for magnetic power, for the gains discount the pains.


MAGNETISM AND PRACTICAL LIFE.


The faithful observance of the suggestions of this volume has
developed many surprises during the time occupied. It is possible
that the lessons have unduly cultivated your subjective life. In a
work of this kind, such a danger is unavoidable. The growth of
magnetism involves intense and continuous concentration of thought
upon the psychic field, and it is very likely that you may find it
necessary to guard against that danger. The method of so guarding
is briefly indicated below.

The sole value of magnetism consists in its practical application
to everyday affairs. Success-Magnetism is not an accomplishment
merely; it is a practical power. When rightly developed and used,
it controls the subjective self in the concrete work of the
objective. The definition of the goal you have been seeking now
appears:

SUCCESS-MAGNETISM IS PERSONAL MAGNETISM INTELLIGENTLY MULTIPLIED
INTO ACTUAL LIFE.

The first duty of man is practical sanity.


AVOID MERE OCCULTISM.


It is possible that you have now discovered in yourself certain
occult talents, such as telepathy, hypnotism, mediumship,
clairaudience, clairvoyance, psychometry, psychic healing, and the
like.

It would be evidence of ignorance to call in question these
"faculties" of the human ego. The author's personal experience
forbids. Nevertheless, it is now freely stated:

NO SO-CALLED OCCULT SCIENCE FORMS ANY INTEGRAL PART OF PERSONAL
MAGNETISM.

Hypnotism and magnetism are widely separated.

Psychic healing occupies another field.

Clairaudience and clairvoyance are not utilizable by magnetism.

Telepathy and psychometry are related to its etheric explanation
alone.

Mediumship is totally independent of it.

In other words, personal magnetism in operation requires NONE of
these talents, except, perhaps, telepathy and genuine palmistry--
the study of hands as indicative physiologically (not occultly) of
present character (not past or future events).

It is a noble characteristic of personal magnetism that, while
issuing in and from the subconscious self, its real instruments
are the everyday body, the everyday mind, the everyday self, as
its real field is the everyday, objective world, big with
opportunity, adequate to the splendid development of any human
being.

YOU ARE NOW URGED TO PERMIT NO OCCULT STUDY OR TALENT TO INTERRUPT
OR BEFOG YOUR PRACTICAL LIFE. All things are his who steadfastly
remembers that "life is real, life is earnest." Magnetism is
sanity at work. It is unalterably opposed to runaway fads,
chimerical visions, unstrung nerves, mental aberration, psychic
gourmandism. Magnetism is practical cooperation with level-headed
people who are bent on making the best of self and the world
through created opportunity.

For these reasons, you cannot study magnetism too deeply nor
practise it too faithfully. Its legitimate culture will harm none,
will benefit all.

To him who possesses any occult power and uses it nobly, this book
extends congratulations.





How May Contentment Dull My Zeal

     If one small fact my mind could know
       Of matter or of spirit,--
     Within, without, above, below,
       And never neighbor near it,--
     This tiny thing a Universe would be,
     Clear as Arabian caves to Sesame.

     Then should I scan the littlest laws
       Their mightier kin unfolding,
     Detect the essence of all Cause
       And see the Cosmos molding;
     Then should I run, a new-born god, the race
     Begun with thought, complete in planet-space.

     How might one stay the perfect quest
       In surfeit of succeeding?
     This were a weak and venal rest--
       Vast yonder-wealth unheeding.
     This were to make of Knowing that high goal
     Which truth declares is Culturing a Soul.

    How may contentment dull my zeal,
       With range on range uprising,
     While growing power to know and feel
      Adds to the soul's sure prizing?
     Let me, one god, like Him, the Infinite All,
     In each achievement hear the Higher Call.

                             --THE AUTHOR





THE TWENTY-EIGHTH LESSON--Higher Magnetic Laws.

     Relays of races, rugged and long,
       Up the peaks rising and blending!
     Wine for the daring, meat for the strong,
       Power with toil contending!
    "Higher! Yet higher!" the man's full song--
      "Never a last ascending!"

                             --THE AUTHOR.


Scattered here and there through the preceding pages, various laws
of magnetism have appeared. We now proceed to formulate certain
other laws that have been involved in our discussion, but not, for
the most part, expressed as such. These laws are of an advanced
order, and should be exhaustively studied in the interest of the
highest magnetic intelligence and power. Necessarily this work
must be purely individual and cannot be specifically directed. We
begin with


I. LAWS OF MAGNETIC DEVELOPMENT.


FIRST LAW: DISCOVERY OF ENDOWMENT. The limits of magnetic
endowment latent in every normal person emerge only through
prolonged effort in the culture of magnetism.

SECOND LAW: DIFFICULT ENVIRONMENT. Magnetism develops in direct
proportion to the difficulty of environment.

THIRD LAW: MAGNETIC INTENTION. Magnetism evolves solely through
multiplication of endowment into environment by the persistent
magnetic intention.

FOURTH LAW: FREE ADJUSTMENT. The culture of magnetism imperatively
demands that central adjustment of the self to all powers which
realizes in absolute psychic freedom.

FIFTH LAW: CONCENTRATION. The magnetic multiplication of endowment
into environment is only possible to intense, persistent and
unified concentration to the methods of Success-Magnetism.

SIXTH LAW: PURPOSE-IDEALS. Growth of noblest magnetism depends, in
the larger sense, upon general adherence to a single, preeminent,
ideal life-purpose, and, in the particular sense, upon
specialization of the individual in studied magnetic conduct
related to that end.

SEVENTH LAW: RECEPTIVITY. The highest magnetism realizes through
magnetic laws in proportion as the inner self maintains alert
receptivity to the Universal Forces.

EIGHTH LAW: DEMAND. The silent, persistent demand of the self upon
the Universal Magnetism makes it a center toward which the Forces
naturally gravitate.

NINTH LAW: AFFIRMATION. Continuous, intense affirmation of actual
possessed magnetic power stimulates the success-elements,
maintains receptivity, emphasizes demand, harmonizes and
intensifies inner etheric vibrations, and induces a positive
movement of the universal ether and its forces inward toward the
central self.

TENTH LAW: PSYCHIC ENERGY. All personal magnetism involves psychic
energy developed and directed by magnetic intention.

ELEVENTH LAW: SELF-CONTROL. Magnetic energy concentrates through
psychic control of its tendencies.

TWELFTH LAW: MAGNETIC QUALITY. The inner psychic attitude--the
character of magnetic intention--determines the quality and
effectiveness of the effort to multiply endowment into
environment, and, therefore, the kind and degree of magnetism
attained.

THIRTEENTH LAW: SELF-VALUATION. Other things being equal,
magnetism unfolds as gratifying, but unostentatious, self-
valuation develops.

FOURTEENTH LAW: USE OF SELF. Under conformity to other magnetic
laws, the highest magnetism issues only from the constant best use
of self at its best to the best advantage.

FIFTEENTH LAW: MAGNETIC HEROISM. Self-pity, complaint, and all
kindred states, confuse, weaken and waste every variety of
magnetic power, while heroic acceptance of conditions for their
betterment, and courageous assertion of self as master, conserve
and enormously develop the noblest magnetism in proportion to the
sway of the magnetic intention.

SIXTEENTH LAW: ACTION AND REACTION. Highest magnetism involves not
only studied cultivation, but, as well, the magnetic utilization
of stimulating reactions induced by intelligent employment.

SEVENTEENTH LAW: RECOVERY. Whoever, on occasion of any psychic
(magnetic) failure or defeat, dedicates the whole of aroused
desperation to recovery of ground, infallibly induces a stress in
the etheric life around him which ultimately draws to his aid,
with the onsweep of worlds, the Universal Forces.

EIGHTEENTH LAW: REPRODUCTION. "Everything is transmitted,
everything is transformed, everything is reproduced" (Ochorowicz);
in physical and psychic health alone, therefore, are the Universal
Forces transmitted through perfect etheric vibrations, transformed
through effective etheric conduction, and reproduced in magnetism
by adequate and harmonious psychic control of etheric
capabilities.

NINETEENTH LAW: SUPERIORITY OF CULTURE. The crude values of
natural magnetism, the automatic functions of unconscious
magnetism, demonstrate at their best solely as they climax in full
conscious magnetic culture.


II. LAWS OF MAGNETIC ACTION.


FIRST LAW: Relation of Power to "Tone." The effectiveness of
magnetism in action depends upon harmony of "tone" between its
possessor and any other person, and in securing such "tone"-
harmony, on any magnetic plane, in any particular psychic state,
at any given time, psychic and physical magnetism mutually
cooperate.

SECOND LAW: Magnetic Intention. The magnetic intention ("I INTEND
MAGNETICALLY") intensifies otherwise unconscious magnetism, and
runs through all the mass of general etheric vibrations like a
theme in complicated music, imparting to them unity, character,
intelligence, and definite and enormous effectiveness in practical
employment.

THIRD LAW: Influence of Purpose. In the employment of magnetism,
long-run purpose establishes etheric character, and specialized
purpose confirms that character if it concentrates the general
purpose, but confuses that character, perhaps destroys it, if it
antagonizes the general purpose.

FOURTH LAW: Force of the Ideal. Idealism of motive determines the
character of etheric vibrations, and idealism of magnetic
activities determines the quality of magnetism achieved.

FIFTH LAW: Sway of Other-Interest. The general sway of other-
interest in life, and the particular influence of other-interest
on special occasions, impart to uses of magnetism enormous
effectiveness, and not least in relation to self.

SIXTH LAW: Reaction of Admiration. The consciousness of admiration
for others, recognized by them, reacts with tremendous power to
stimulate magnetic action.

SEVENTH LAW: Measure of the Intake. In the magnetic life, intake
of power is correctly measured by output of power: inversely in
waste, directly in intelligent expenditure.

EIGHTH LAW: Adjustment. Magnetic effectiveness is proportioned to
accuracy and fulness of adjustment,--to things, to laws, to
forces, to times, to situations, to qualities, to facts, to
truths, to persons,--and only studied experience can discover and
establish such adjustment.

The problems of adjustment to persons are these:

With inferiors, to put self magnetically, without appearance of
condescension, on their levels for the end in view,--applying then
the general principles of magnetism.

With EQUALS, to apply the general principles.

With SUPERIORS, to assume their level while magnetically
deferring, without adulation or humility, to such superiority,
regardless of its reality or unreality, for the end in view,
applying the general principles of magnetism.

NINTH LAW: THE MAGNETISM OF IDENTITY. The magnetic value of
adjustment expresses the force and completeness with which the
individual can identify himself with another person, suggesting
oneness through attitude, gesture, act, eye, tone, language, and
telepathic sympathy.

TENTH LAW: THE USE OF REACTIONS. Magnetic skill exhibits in the
manner in which beneficial reactions are received and utilized,
negative or indifferent reactions are ostensibly ignored, yet
constituted stimulation for further persistent magnetic action,
and hostile reactions are refused, without ostentation, but with
determination (if worth while) to "win out" through better
adjustment and increased magnetic endeavor.

ELEVENTH LAW: MAGNETIC ATTACK. Magnetic success demands the direct
attack when etheric harmony of "tone" is assured, but the indirect
method otherwise; that is, such attack-methods as will secure that
harmony.

TWELFTH LAW: THE CONQUEST OF ANTAGONISM Magnetism ostensibly
ognores, and refrains from, exciting antagonism; but, when
antagonism is evident, rejects it and proceeds on the indirect
attack, or openly accepts it and adopts the direct or the indirect
method as the one or the other promises speediest and most perfect
harmony of "tone."

THIRTEENTH LAW: MORTAL ANTIPATHIES. Success-Magnetism conquers the
influence of deep-seated natural antipathies only by avoiding
their causes.

FOURTEENTH LAW: RE-ADJUSTMENT. The etheric life is unceasing
reaction, and magnetism, therefore, demonstrates itself by
squaring with every issue and making of every change and every
defeat a new opportunity.

FIFTEENTH LAW: CONTROL OF OUTPUT. It is an important to know when
to open the circuit--that is, to cut off the current of magnetic
force--as it is to know when to close the circuit--to pour forth
magnetic influences.

SIXTEENTH LAW: CONCESSION. Concession becomes magnetic in its
timeliness. If premature or belated, it defeats magnetism.

SEVENTEENTH LAW: HARMONIC CONDITIONS. Magnetism enhances through
beauty of personal surroundings,--in cleanliness, order,
adornment, art, literature, music, and the like.

EIGHTEENTH LAW: SOVEREIGNTY OF WILL. is the director of native and
unconscious magnetism and the creator and director of developed
magnetism. Power of will is indispensable to magnetic power.

NINETEENTH LAW: ENERGY IN MAGNETIC ACTION. The projection of
magnetic influence proportions to inner, conscious intensity of
psychic and nervous states. Exploding powder in the gun calls for
the man behind the weapon, and the soul within the man, and
powerful vibrations within the soul's arena, and magnetic
intention within the vibrations, and psychic energy within the
intention.

TWENTIETH LAW: SELF-CONTROL. Magnetic power becomes effective
precisely as mastery of self, in restraint and in handling,
approaches perfection.

TWENTY-FIRST LAW: MAGNETIC HANDLING OF SELF. The attitude of
magnetism,--the magnetic intention and psychic pose,--"I STAND
POSITIVELY MAGNETIC TOWARD THIS PERSON OR THIS SITUATION,"--
constantly maintained, ultimately instructs in all the arts of
magnetic self-handling through the law of auto-suggestion, and
realizes in practical form its own ideals.

TWENTY-SECOND LAW: THE MAGNETIC MASK. The mask of magnetism
achieves effectiveness when it covers personal states and purposes
in a manner positively to attract, and in that manner alone.

TWENTY-THIRD LAW: MAGNETIC CONSCIOUSNESS. Intense magnetic
consciousness--without thought concerning it--secures, by its
uplifting and stimulating influence, the greatest exaltation of
personal powers when employed.

TWENTY-FOURTH LAW: MAGNETIC FAITH. A deep and vital faith in the
certainty of magnetic success renders all latent and developed
magnetism dynamic, if that faith is thrown into action.

TWENTY-FIFTH LAW: THE DEMAND IN USE. In the application of
magnetism to any task, intense, persistent demand upon the
Universal Forces swings them directly into the effort.

TWENTY-SIXTH LAW: THE AFFIRMATION IN USE. When, in the application
of magnetism, one affirms, mentally, intensely, persistently, "_I_
AM RECEIVING AND EXERTING POWER," he unconsciously calls to aid
all the success-elements and makes himself a center toward which
the Universal Forces inevitably gravitate.

TWENTY-SEVENTH LAW: THE MAGNETIC TELESCOPE. The magnetic
attitudes, faith, demand and affirmation, constitute a magnetic
telescope through which the distant goal of success is magnified
and all nearer obstacles, lures and irritating conditions are
closed out of view.

TWENTY-EIGHTH LAW: MAGNETIC ACCUMULATIONS. Magnetism, through
correct application to life, not only develops in the individual,
but accumulates in his environment, and reacts beneficially
without direct personal supervision.

TWENTY-NINTH LAW: THE PERSONAL ATMOSPHERE. The personal atmosphere
exactly reflects the inner self, and it furnishes a perfect field
for magnetic effectiveness only when the self and the body are
clean and buoyantly healthy. [Footnote: See the small booklet,
"The Personal Atmosphere."]

THIRTIETH LAW: SUBORDINATION OF PHYSICAL MAGNETISM. In the
subordination of physical to psychic magnetism, each finds its
greatest effectiveness--according to the relative development of
both orders.

THIRTY-FIRST LAW: THE FIXED IDEA. Long-continued association with
some fixed, great and attractive idea sets into operation certain
deep, subconscious operations of the soul, which, for a time
unrecognized and unmanifest in life, gradually and surely
coordinate all individual powers thereto, induce a working of the
whole system in harmony therewith, and finally emerge in the
objective life and consciousness as a unified, actual dynamic
force. The idea has swung the individual, has transformed him, has
harmonized and intensified his faculties and his personal ether,
has come to sovereignty in his personal atmosphere, and from there
exerts a dynamic force upon other people and life's conditions.

This book has tried to saturate you with the idea of success
coordinating with its necessary elements, and has thus endeavored
to swing your whole being into mighty belief that large success is
also for YOU.

If you have rushed through the lessons, you have failed to give
the above great law its full opportunity. If you have abided with
the book, patiently, confidently, energetically, taking plenty of
time to work over into your practical life its teachings and
directions, you have invoked that law, and, soon or late, you will
find yourself a new soul and successful, provided you do not
nullify the law by dropping out of your career the practical use
of the lessons herein given.

You are now invited to assemble with these laws those that have
been previously stated, and to make them guiding principles for
life.

And you are finally urged to return to the first lesson and to
repeat the work, greatly improved, through which you have passed.

If you cannot do this (or choose not to do so), you should at
least constitute this book a permanent companion. You will find,
as you refer to it from time to time, that many values have
escaped you, that new values are constantly appearing, and that
the volume is becoming more and more a friend and a guide. The
principles and methods herein set forth should not be laid aside,
at least permanently, nor forgotten, but should be worked into the
very fibre of your being. You will then, and by so much, certainly
demonstrate Success-Magnetism.

Many of our most persistent students have declared that this book
GROWS ON THEM WITH EVERY READING. In revising its pages the author
is more than ever satisfied that the volume is a great inspiration
and of incalculable value to those who will make it, as designed,
a Companion For Life. You will never uncover its enormous wealth.


MAGNETISM APPLIED.


Having pursued our work to the present point, little need be said
on the application of the magnetic power. The culture of magnetism
implies all along its address to life. If you have toiled for the
goal you have used the results, and experience, the greatest of
teachers, has instructed you in the art of employing the etheric
talent.

A few suggestions are, nevertheless, now offered as indicators of
the larger possible treatment,--remembering that our field is not
general success alone, nor pure magnetism alone, but is the
condensed subject, Success-Magnetism. You are, therefore, invited
to observe the following considerations:

I. GENERAL LIFE-PRINCIPLES:

1. Magnetism entertains no unnecessary thought of evil concerning
others.

2. It is altogether superior to low-minded revenge.

3. It never reveals personal embarrassment.

4. It permits no show of irritation.

5. It is incapable of losing temper.

6. It refuses to exhibit hostility.

7. It never admits, never discloses, defeat.

8. The magnetic person never shows indifference toward others.

9. Magnetism conceals the feelings of ridicule and contempt.

10. If you are magnetic, you never indulge in violence.

11. You neither look for slights and insults, nor do you feel
them, unless they are persistently thrust upon you.

12. You are invited to resolve upon the increase of your circle of
friends, and never to lose an opportunity of winning a well-
wisher.

13. This means, of course, that you retain every friend secured,
if possible in self-respect--which should not be unduly rigid.

14. The instant recognition of faces and recollection of names is
intensely magnetic.

15. Magnetism ignores all caste distinctions, and is friendly
toward all.

16. If you would be magnetic in personal relations, you must
splendidly believe both in yourself and in other people.

17. The general magnetic attitude is a close compound of the
magnetic thought and the success-thought, buoyant in hope and
courage and bound together by the magnetic will.

18. In the use of this attitude, every obligation should be
regarded as profoundly sacred. The magnetic person cannot be
careless in this respect.

19. This book has all along insisted that magnetic success
imperatively demands the life of highest honor.

20. Above all, you are again urged to banish from the inner self
fear, worry, discouragement, depression, and every such enemy to
peace and power. There is in your mind an UPPER LEVEL; LIVE IN
THAT. When worry and the like appear, you will find them occupying
the lower level and absorbing your attention. You should instantly
force consciousness to the higher ground, expelling these enemies
and holding up to the better mood. This is the one secret of
victory over the king's foes. The author guarantees the remedy in
any case that is not fit for the hospital.

21. In the conduct of life, the magnetic person sets before the
mind a definite goal, either life-long or particular, and adheres
thereto with bulldog pertinacity.

22. And he, therefore, wastes no values, but economizes all.

23. He saves part of his earnings; he carries his money in his
pocket-book, not loosely.

24. But he has the wisdom to recreate, to rest the body, to ease
the mind, to take needed breathing-spells for magnetic increase.


II. DEALING WITH OTHERS:


Let us finally understand. In applied magnetism, you simply
harmonize the etheric states of others with those of yourself, and
convey to them through the ethereal medium the purpose of your
will. The FIRST condition of success here is agreeableness, the
SECOND consists in tact and perseverance, the THIRD is will-power
--not brutal will-force, but magnetic power of will.

In all application of magnetism to persons, you are urged to
remember that your very first goal, always and preeminently, is an
agreeable feeling within their minds. You should never try to
induce a person to act your way until you have thoroughly
established in him a good feeling toward yourself. This is the
prime initial step. When such a condition has been secured, you
are then ready for the magnetic assault--and then only.

When you are dealing with other people, endeavoring magnetically
to win them to your wish, you should summon the general magnetic
feeling within yourself, will them to do as you desire, and at the
same time think of them as already consenting and acting. Your
inner condition should be perfectly calm, buoyant, hopeful,
whatever the external means employed, your mind should be
concentrated upon the thing desired, and its accomplishment should
be thought of as now secured. The response of the person may be
delayed, but this should not discourage you, for some minds do not
take suggestions (those of your unspoken will are referred to)
quickly, and they do not act instantly upon their own thought. It
is invariably best to induce people to believe that they are
acting on their personal impulse or judgment; they should be made
to feel perfectly free, not at all coerced, and that they are
doing their own will rather than yours--simply because they wish
so to do.

We may summarize all these suggestions in the words of a
distinguished scientific writer:

"Life is not a bully who swaggers out into the open universe,
upsetting the laws of energy in all directions, but rather a
consummate strategist, who, sitting in his secret chamber over his
wires, directs the movements of a great army." This is a good
description of magnetism.


III. THE SUCCESS-MAGNETISM ASSUMPTION:


We are now ready for the great assumption-principle of magnetism
in applied life:

THINK OF EVERY GOAL AS ALREADY REACHED, OF EVERY UNDERTAKING AS
ALREADY ACHIEVED.

TREAT YOURSELF AS A LIVE AND A SURELY SUCCESSFUL PROPOSITION.

So closes this book. The subject before us has been vast and
profound. It is unnecessary to confess that the field has by no
means been exhausted. At every step of study its immensity is
discovered. Even when the general arena of success in life has
been closed out of consideration, as in these pages, Success-
Magnetism defies any single mind to fathom it or to bound it.

With this feeling, yet with the confident belief that you are more
completely furnished for magnetic achievement because you have
read, studied, absorbed and practised the teachings now closed,
the author bids you all good-speed in life and signs himself,

Yours for real success,

A BROTHER COOPERATIVE.





PART 22

CULTURE OF COURAGE





The route by which we approach the pinnacle of MASTERY OF SELF now
takes a new turn. It is neither that of Business and Financial
achievement, as we studied in the First Division of the course,
nor is it that of Success and Magnetism as was taught in the
Second Division. For many students we now come to the real battle-
ground where they must wage the fight for supremacy. The final 14
lessons group under the general title, The CULTURE OF COURAGE.

There is an insidious foe to mastery and freedom, which dooms
millions to self-imposed bondage. Most people know it has them in
its grip; countless others do not know what the hidden power is
which holds them from the richer, freer, happier conditions of
life.

This foe is FEAR. It assumes numerous disguises. It appears in
many phases of our daily lives. It has done more to wreck careers
and ruin happiness than all the wars of history. Hordes of earth
toilers believe themselves beyond its influence--while all the
time it is riding their backs and laughing at them.

One reason for this is the common misunderstanding of what fear
really is. Most people think of it only as fearing to meet certain
people, or fearing some accident may happen to them or their loved
ones. Yet there are fears of the future, fears of one's self,
fears of events, fears of natural phenomena, fears of old age,
fears of poverty. And there are still more hidden, stunting fears
developed by the un-religious teachings of blind, bigoted, crafty
Religion.

Therefore our higher advance to MASTERY OF SELF is up the steps of
the following 14 lessons, in which the underlying note is the
everlasting declaration, "I AM COURAGE! WHATEVER BETIDES, THE TRUE
SELF OF ME DEMANDS COURAGE!"

Dr. Haddock will open new views of individual nature, personal
fears, avenues of self-unfoldment, which are wholesome and
uplifting for you. The following lessons are more than a conquest
of fear; they are A GREAT ADVENTURE into the heart of a courageous
life philosophy. They tear away bond after bond of habit, thought
and action which have smothered your true, inner Self.

Passing the brief "Introductory" matter, you start in lesson one--
"The World's New Dawn," laying the foundation for Courage-power.
Dr. Haddock first makes it clear why man is steadily becoming more
free--why darkening, dreadful, shackling fear is being dispelled
from the world. His second lesson analyzes Fear and Reason. The
third lesson explains why the healthy "tone" of mind and body is
the basis upon which the structure of personal Courage is to be
reared.





ANNOUNCEMENT.


                      "For all may have,
    If they dare choose, a glorious life."
                              --Herbert.

I have received many letters from people who are distressed by
their fears. To every such an one let me send this assured
message:

You can grow in your soul a perfect courage.

The methods adapted to this ideal are simple, not impossible to
any, and will become less and less difficult as you continue to
make them more and more a real part of your life.

I do not say, "Be courageous."

I do not say, "Destroy your fears."

Such advice is common enough, but it is altogether barren unless
you know how to carry it out. I hope, rather, to present methods
which shall be definite and practical, so that you will be able to
do the very thing needful. These methods, in the large, I now
announce as follows:

FIRST METHOD: THE INSPIRATION OF THE SUBCONSCIOUS MIND. You are
invited, always through the reading of this book and during life,
to believe, assume and realize--

_I_ AM GROWING IN MY SOUL A PERFECT COURAGE.

SECOND METHOD: THE ELIMINATION OF FEAR. This is the negative phase
of our work. Specific instructions will be given having to do with
every kind of fear. I shall endeavor to suggest practical help to
all readers for each particular difficulty.

THIRD METHOD: THE CULTURE OF SPIRITUAL COURAGE. By the word
"spiritual" I mean not merely religious in the ordinary sense, but
rather that kind of courage which is just the breath and tone of
the White Life manifest in the human life. The WHITE LIFE in you
is harmony with the White Life which is The Good, The Beautiful,
The True, The All-Health, The Father, The Infinite Soul of this
wonderful Universe in which we live. If you come to harmony with
the White Life, your fears will vanish because you will then share
in the Courage of the Eternal Good.

There are two kinds of courage:

THE COURAGE THAT DARES AND WINS; and

THE COURAGE THAT SMILES AND RECEIVES.

    "And shall I with a Giant strive,
    And charge a Dragon on the field?"

In these lines we have the first kind of courage. It is good, but
there is a type which is vastly superior:

I AM THE COURAGE OF THE SOUL HARMONIC WITH THE PERFECT WHOLE.

These lines indicate the second kind of courage--than which there
is no higher. "Herein is love with us made perfect, that we may
have boldness."

These are our methods. They are commended to your approval. I
shall try to state them plainly, going on from one fear to
another, and another, until the long list is disposed of, and
always shall I follow details of procedure similar to those set
forth in "POWER FOR SUCCESS," the ideal constantly being

EXACTLY WHAT TO DO AND HOW TO DO EXACTLY THAT.





FOREWORD.


"There is no limit to the knowing of the mind that knows."--
Indian Upanishads.

I wish to indulge in a little Foreword because in this way may be
indicated a warning against contentment with a seemingly very
sensible conclusion which will prove, on further thought, to be
hasty and incomplete.

Five years ago I wrote in this identical place in our study these
words:

"Fear will never go out of this world until pleasure loses value,
desire ceases for want of an object, and reason no longer imposes
responsibility.

"The best gift of Nature to primitive man, after reason, was fear.

"The imagination is reason's magnifying power.

"Fear observed and obeyed by reason is a friend.

"Fear and reason take care of man.

"Fear and imagination send him into a panic."

To many minds these statements will have the look of sanity.

But there are others who will instantly perceive that they
represent thought on a comparatively low plane. I now observe:

The best gift of Life to primeval man, after love, was reason.

The imagination, void of love,--the feeling of harmony with all,--
forgets reason and permits fear to enter the soul.

Fear is an ALIEN to our life, and never a friend. The real friend
is reason, acting amid harmonic conditions.

When you are threatened by some hostile force or event, reason
tries to induce self-protection, but you know no real fear if you
are saturated with the feeling of harmony. You may believe it is
FEAR that seeks your self-protection. But your REASON can do
precisely the same thing without fear. Fear is, then, only an
extra, a distressing extra, foisted in front of reason.

You are invited now to live the WHITE LIFE, to cast fear out, and
to make real reason its substitute. By so much you will add
immeasurably to personal comfort and power.

Love and reason alone can take care of man, so far as his own
efforts are concerned. In properly blended proportions these
constitute the very life of courage. What conceivable service
then, can fear render any man or woman?

If you desire panic and distress, let imagination fill your soul
with fears. But if peace, happiness, health and power be your
desires, live the WHITE LIFE and hold fast only to reason.

By the reality called reason I do not mean mere cold calculation
and hard logic. Such phases of reason are legitimate in their
place, if freed from cunning and deceit, but the higher reason is
to these as a woman's love--look is to the glitter of ice. The
higher reason is not alone intellection, it is also intuition and
harmonic assurance--what religious thought calls faith. The higher
reason declares self-preservation to be the first law of life, and
then, just because this is true, it cares for self and trusts the
White Universe to assist. I really do not see what a human soul
need actually fear when that soul and the White Universe are bent
on the same goal, the soul's welfare.

The Universe is a growing organism. It is forever striving to
realize its own best estate. This is the true goal for all
individuals. It is saying the same thing if we affirm the goal to
be Health--for worlds or man: Body-Health, Mind-Health, Self-
Health.

When any form of health is threatened, you say, perhaps, it is
FEAR that warns you to self-preservation. But I say it is REASON,
and your fear-feeling is unnecessary and hurtful. If you can
remember that the White Life or Universe and you have the same
desire, your highest welfare, you can banish the fear-element,
reserving only the reason-assurance element. All the fears in the
world cannot benefit you. Harmony and courage will sublime your
whole life.

I have never known a person whose reason has induced self-
suffering. Suffer-fear is always a product of diseased
imagination. What some may call reason-fear, when they think they
are extremely sensible, is simply fear, and nothing but fear, and
it is due to imagination, not to reason.

"But," you say, "are there not all sorts of evils in the world,
and do they not threaten us, and should we not forefend against
them? In this forefending, how can we escape fear?"

These questions show how thoroughly fear is knit into our very
lives.

Now this is precisely the point. Fear has no rightful place with
any rightful living, because the WHITE LIFE alone is rightful, and
in that life reason-assurance only is possible, and, therefore,
rightful.

The best way in which to forefend against evil is to deny it and
cast out the fiction.

This entire question of evil is at your command. Evil exists
because other people admit its existence. If all were to live the
WHITE LIFE, each person might rightly declare, "There is no evil."
The only real evil is that which can hurt your best self. When
anything hurts your best self, it is your self that hurts your
self. The only evil in the Universe is some one's act hurting
others, but more, hurting self. If to you evil is, then, it is
yourself. You can so live the sublime WHITE LIFE of harmony as to
be able to say: "So far as I am concerned, evil has gone out of
the world. There is no evil to me."

You see, surely now, that you need not fear "evil." I do not know
anything more absolutely and sufficiently opposed to the
permission of that self-acting which alone, for you, is evil, than
reason. Fear has nothing properly to do with the matter. And
reason-assurance has to do with it only by living the WHITE LIFE
and denying fear and evil altogether.

You are invited to make these heaven-born truths your own.

_I_ AM GROWING IN MY SOUL A PERFECT COURAGE.





CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I. The World's New Dawn
CHAPTER II. Fear and Reason
CHAPTER III. Physical Tone
CHAPTER IV. Dual Health-Tone of the Self
CHAPTER V. Fear of Self
CHAPTER VI. Fear for Others
CHAPTER VII. Fear of Things
CHAPTER VIII. The Fears of Timidity
CHAPTER IX. Some People We Fear
CHAPTER X. Some of Life's Relations
CHAPTER XI. The Fearful Crowd.
CHAPTER XII. Fear of Events-Old Age
CHAPTER XIII. Courage for Future Events
CHAPTER XIV. A Perpetual Tonic


PREFATORY MATTERS.


"The New Dawn"
"Fear-Thought and Fear-Feeling"
"The Soul of the Cell"
"A Regime"
"Fear Not Thyself
"Fear Not For Others"
"Fear Not Dumb Things"
"The Massing of a Hundred Faces"
"Fear Not Thy Fellows"
"Life's Relations"
"The Raw Material"
"Youth is Courage"
"Fear Not Events"
"The Rock of Courage"





     The Call of Life.

     Now must the man be summoned forth
     To discover himself, his dual reality:
     His world, ten thousand fathoms deep,
     His star-vault, ten thousand spaces high;
     And come to his own like a king.





THE CULTURE OF COURAGE.





THE NEW DAWN.

"The dawn of a New Day!"
Never an Aryan felt the flare of this electric Fact,
Nor any, or priest at his worship or earth-toiler swarming the land,
Till Zarathustra discovered Ahura Mazda,
Till Buddha discovered himself, the Thou of THAT, BRAHMA,
Till the CHRIST-MIND assumed IT to be the _I_ AM THAT _I_ AM.

(The flare--the ghostly breath of the long-coming Dawn--
Had passed o'er the Nature-Face, had kissed the swart Human,
Ages and ages, with never a conscious start
In the Man-Soul, till these had upsprung as if gods.--
For, whosoever kens the flare, kens THAT and knows the ONE
ONLY WHO IS).

So, thrice have men ventured the Word:
"Comes now a full Day that is New!"

Since these giant Men-Types, what times of the Small
Have opened and set on poor mouthings of Truth!
What Night for a thousand years twice told!
With Fear, and the fierce Stars, and no Sun in the Void!
Shadows--and Fear--and Death!

A fourth time man whispers: "The Dawn!"
We LIVE! And behold a New Day!"
Does the Flare of its Flood-Tide winds stir YOU?
Does the light of its splendoring Sun thrill YOU?
Does the marvelous Life of it stimulate YOU
To a birth of the self and the kingship of THAT?

YOU live! The New Day is for each:
For the hitherto Common Man, slave,
For the Women, no longer a Thing,
For the Child, now escaped from the animal lair.
Dawn's here!
(With Opportunity leading "captivity captive,"
(And the stars urging on to achievement,
(And the Sun, breeding life triumphant);
With heart courageous and faith almighty
To fare forth and possess the whole world!
Soul of YOU, awaken! The New Day is yours.

--THE AUTHOR.





THE CULTURE OF COURAGE.

CHAPTER I.

THE WORLD'S NEW DAWN.

"Let us not look at ourselves but onwards, and take strength from
the leaf and the signs of the field. He is indeed despicable who
cannot look onwards to the ideal life of man. Not to do so is to
deny our birthright of mind."--Thomas Coke Watkins.


I am often asked, "Do you think the world is really becoming
better?"

My inmost self--the self I trust and try to assist--is sure that
the world is growing better, whatever the hampered intellect may
from time to time aver.

For one thing, I FEEL that the world's mind is slowly yet swiftly
changing its adjustment to one supreme reality--Truth.

Always have men believed that they desired only the truth, and
always have they sought and found it in part. But then they have
immediately wrapped it in packages and stowed it in boxes with
elaborate labels. Our nature craves reality, not wrappings and
tables of contents. Therefore every age has torn off some of the
ancient outer things, and insisted at last on truth alone. More
than during all the centuries before, men today demand reality--
just the essential reality a human soul craves, and can recognize,
and can use in the building of its life.

Henry Drummond spoke of the adjustment which a great telescope
needs for photographing the stars. Let us think of one fixed star.
"No adjustment is ever required on behalf of the star. That is one
great fixed point in this shifting universe. But the WORLD MOVES.
And each day, each hour, demands a further motion and adjustment
of the soul. A telescope in an observatory follows a star by
clock-work, but the clock-work of the soul is the WILL." The world
and the man must WILL TO ADJUST TO TRUTH if they would really find
and know Truth.


THE WORLD ADJUSTING TO TRUTH.


I hold that the world to-day, more perfectly than ever before, is
urging an accurate adjustment of the human soul to truth--that
which alone the body demands for health, the mind for development,
the deeper self for peace and power.

The old adjustments no longer satisfy. Truth is, indeed, eternal,
but our relation must keep pace with it as we swing through the
vast heavens of time. The photographs of yesterday do not speak
correctly for to-day. We do not deny the stars; we only deny the
science that is past.

This adjustment is a huge PRAYER. It is a request for truth, in a
sense, but for truth only. And it is an ASSURANCE. It expects the
truth. Now, that is the best kind of praying I know--Expectation
in Adjustment.

When you plant your seed or properly place your telescope, you
have created adjustment, and you expect harvest and picture.
EXPECTATION IN ADJUSTMENT IS ASSUMPTION.

The world no longer merely ASKS for truth; it harmonizes with
Nature and Life, and so, APPROPRIATES.

The World's New Dawn.

You are invited to make this thought a lifelong affirmation: IN
HARMONY _I_ APPROPRIATE ALL GOOD.

Such is one of my reasons for believing that the world is growing
better. This attitude toward Truth has influenced for the better
every legitimate activity of man. The results are seen in
Benevolence, Business, Education, Government, Religion. A new day
of splendid, unhampered, happy and growing spiritual life is
bursting over the earth. Souls are coming free. Hearts are
thrilling with courage. In minds has begun the swing and heave of
the sea.

I ask you to take the following lines as a symbol of the world's
wonderful sense of appropriation that is everywhere evident.

   The sea, the pine, the stars, the forest deep,
      Bequeath to me at will their subtle wealth.
   Or still days brood, or rough winds round me sweep,
      Mine is the buoyant earth-man's vibrant health:
   All things for love of me their vigils keep--
         I am the soul of health, of wealth.

          Run, sea, in my heart!
          Pine, sing in my heart!
          Stars, glow in my heart!
             For ye are mine, and my soul,
          Like ye, is a part
             Of the Marvelous Whole.

   There's no thing dear to me is not my wealth,
      And none that sees me I would distant keep;
   For swift possession is my earth-man's health,
      Or still days brood, or rough winds round me sweep:
      All things for love of me their vigils keep--
         I am the soul of health, of wealth.

You are invited, now, to seize and use the spirit of this attitude
of appropriation for your own welfare and power.


COURAGE ABROAD.


And I hold that our life is growing better for the reason that I
discover, in all this new adjustment to truth, this expectation
and assumption that Good will not withhold itself, and BECAUSE of
these things, a new era of courage sweeping the heart of humanity
from sea to sea. There is abroad a Universal Breath, manifest of
Life. This breath consists of two general activities, that of
Denial and that of Affirmation. Courage is a denial of fear and of
the reality of fear's cause. But denial is only the beginning; the
really vital thing is confidence in self and in the huge friendly
Universe in which we live. Kindly remember this. You are not
making progress merely because you turn your back on the Night.
Progress means that you also turn face to the Sun and walk
buoyantly into the Day. Courage is affirmation:

    I am the spirit of the soul
    Harmonic with the Perfect Whole.

Why, the attitude of healthy denial is everywhere apparent. Permit
me to run over some of the things that are coming more and more to
be refused acceptance. You will understand that the items are
illustrations only. We are denying: The divine right of kings; the
littleness and unholiness of fundamental human nature; a God who
is a kind of huge carpenter; a Deity who needs to be appeased; a
Providence which punishes; the idea that some people are created
for toil and service and others for ease and to be served; the
notion that we must eschew all drugs or depend only on drugs; the
thought which makes disease an entity; the fancy that the illness
of some is a divine will; the feeling that wealth should not be
craved, or that it exists for a favored few; the creed that "evil"
is a necessary existence; the faith that heaven is reserved for
the "elect" who "believe" a number of things; the horror of an
eternal hell; the heresy that religion, the spiritual, need have
anything to do with creeds, rites or ceremonies; the feeling that
success is only for the favored ones of earth; and so on, and so
on.

These are merely miscellaneous examples of the thousand old-time
"truths" which are now more and more denied. Many pages would be
required to set forth the ideas and dogmas which are unceasingly
and emphatically being rejected, thoughtfully, deliberately, and
in a wholesale manner throughout the world of earnest men and
women to-day.

But when you deny, it is a great mistake if you do not affirm
something better. The breath of courage which is sweeping over the
earth, therefore, is splendidly declaring for ten thousand
deathless realities to take the place of mistaken beliefs. I have
space simply for a few illustrations. Are we not affirming
somewhat as follows at the present time?


SIGNS OF THE NEW LIFE.


Deity is neither Jew nor Gentile; He is the Infinite All-Good--the
Eternal White Life.

The Infinite and Eternal White Life is evolving a Universe toward
the ultimate perfection of absolute harmony.

All HUMAN BEINGS are in fundamental nature divine.

We are here for the purpose of GROWING TO BEST ESTATE.

Every man, woman and child in the world is ENTITLED TO HEALTH,
HAPPINESS, POWER.

"EVIL" is derangement in individual life induced by individual and
world-thought gone wrong. As such derangement "evil" is real, but
this reality is not necessary or essential, and it may be banished
totally and forever.

DISEASE is dis-easement of the matter of a body induced by dis-
easement of soul in a body. The self creates or builds its own
body, and the condition of the self determines the condition of
the body. In "Power For Success" I have stated what I believe to
be the growing conviction in this regard. "The sound body is a
perfect material expression of the Universal Forces playing into
its field, and its physical character is determined by the psychic
character of its owner." "In a state of health, all physical
movements must necessarily cooperate harmoniously with one another
and with the Universal Forces."

What we call MIND is a collection of powers organized for use by
the self, and these powers are rightly developed only by the good,
the true, the beautiful. If the feeling of goodness, or of
trueness, or of beauty, is deep within the subconscious phase of
the self, mind-life exhibits as mental health. Mental health is a
universal right.

The "SPIRIT"--not to refine on philosophy--is the real self which
builds body and may unfold mind. The highest state of the
individual, therefore, is religious at the top. This is
spirituality. But the only conceivable essential to spirituality
is a belief in, and an intelligent (truth-using) surrender to, the
White Life--conceived in one's own way--for harmony and oneness
therewith.

HAPPINESS consists in being consciously harmonized with the true,
the good and the beautiful. It is not necessary, however, although
it is, of course, better, to know these words. The child vibrates
with goodness without understanding the name "goodness." And so
on.

POWER IS PERSONALITY RECEIVING ITS OWN IN THE REALMS OF LIFE.

All things exist for all beings.

Such are some of the realities that are being quietly and potently
assumed and affirmed to-day throughout the world. Of course the
language of assertion will vary with each individual, but this is
immaterial. The essences affirmed are beyond cavil. Other
illustrations might be given, but they would be mere phases of
that one breath of new hope and courage that is stirring in every
land, to "spread contagion on mankind," of the "life which really
is."

These higher thoughts, however, are of the Dawn only. The full Day
is not yet with us. Shadows still there are, and error, disease
and pain. Why must these false "realities" remain? Solely because
of three things that linger on:

FALSE THOUGHT--SELFISHNESS--FEAR.

And when fear vanishes, replaced by the WHITE LIFE, selfishness
will die as impossible, and thought will no longer be false for
the reason that only truth will be possessed.

If the whole world, then, would but thrust out fear and receive
the spirit of courage, I do not know any "evils" that could endure
a century.

And if you who read these pages will but swing up to the WHITE-
LIFE harmony-plane, Health, Happiness and Power must be yours as
surely as air rushes into a broken vacuum. If you ask, "What are
the limits of this truth?" I answer, "I don't know." To speak
otherwise would be mere speculation. I affirm the great truth: All
things are yours. That YOU, if stricken through and through with
dis-harmony, may be ABLE to receive ALL you crave, I may not
affirm. Nevertheless, it is permitted to say:" Launch out! Launch
out in the New Thought of Life, and receive, as you do so,
whatever is rightly your own, as you are increasingly able to do
so."

Man has banished many of his fears already. It is not a long run
of the centuries since he quaked before the gloom of the forest,
the solitude of the hills, the fog of the vast sea, and, creating
innumerable gods and devils by that wizard of distortion, the
imagination, lodged them in every object of existence under and in
the heavens. He has gotten rid of these.

But when we observe the fear of water, the fear of tornadoes, the
fear of lightning, the fear of fire, the fear of disease, the fear
of accident, the fear of death, the fear of ridicule, the fear of
public opinion, the fear of bankruptcy, the fear of self, the fear
for self, the fear of others, the fear of failure, the fear of
devils, the fear of a vindictive God, the fear of the future, the
fear of a hell--Oh, then, we know that the sun of light is not at
his meridian height. We can yet get rid of these also. This is one
of the world's tasks. This is your task, if you would make the
most of your self and life.

"There is yet very much land to be possessed." No one will possess
all of that land in the present stage of existence. Some will be
able to claim more than others, but they will err if they assume
themselves to be favorites, and the "others" will do worse than
err if they complain, "We, alas, are down on our luck." Be assured
of one thing: all may be rid of their fears and the whole mass of
distress induced by fears. All may acquire dauntless yet serene
courage. In that state, if it be of the highest, as it may be,
will come to them a peace, a happiness, an influx of buoyancy, a
confidence, a sense of well-being, the like of which they have
never known.


PRIME DENIALS AND AFFIRMATIONS.


You who now read this page are, thus, invited to begin our study
by denying and affirming, as follows:

FIRST--THE DAILY REGIME OF DENIAL:

I deny the existence of error, so far as I am concerned.
I deny disease to be my necessary portion.
I deny the need of any of my fears.
I deny the reality of any cause for fear.
I deny that I am less than a king.
I deny that ignorance is an essential part of my lot.
I deny that poverty is decreed to me.
I deny that I am low-born or of bad blood.
I deny that I am "down on my luck."
I deny by my life that others are my superiors.
I deny that anything can hurt the essential ME.
I deny a vindictive God.
I deny that slavery is religious.
I deny that I am not the friend of the White Life.
I deny that I am mean, low or ignoble in morals.
I deny that my best life depends on creeds.
I deny that the Universe is not for me.
I deny that health is not my rightful claim.
I deny that I am unhappy or depressed.
I deny that I am weak and a nonentity.
I deny that I shall not unfold forever.
I deny all that is opposed to my best welfare.


SECOND--THE DAILY REGIME OF AFFIRMATION.
I affirm truth to be my desire and possession.
I affirm health to be my rightful claim.
I affirm fearlessness of that which I have feared
I affirm cause and reason only for courage.
I affirm that reason is independent of fear.
I affirm my sovereign selfhood.
I affirm that life is my perfect university.
I affirm that I am success.
I affirm that a part of the world's plenty is for me.
I affirm myself the WHITE-LIFE equal of others.
I affirm my real self impregnable to hurt.
I affirm the Infinite Life to be my Friend.
I affirm that spirituality is true freedom.
I affirm myself the friend of the Infinite.
I affirm that mine is the WHITE-LIFE.
I affirm my independence of narrow creeds.
I affirm buoyant happiness as my present possession.
I am power!
I shall live and unfold forever.

It may be that all this is strange thought to you, almost
meaningless, perhaps. You are invited, therefore, to remember that
thousands of people have felt similarly at first, have then caught
a glimpse of the truth here and there, and finally have
experienced a wondrous recognition of the New Dawn which has now
surely come to the world. It is significant that these are saying,
"There is nothing else worth while in the whole earth."

Two men were scraping paint from a house preparatory to putting
on. a new coat of color, One of them who had been helped back from
mental unbalance, and helped solely by thought, broke a long
silence and said: "This is the whole thing." He referred to the
dawn of Real Life in himself.

If, now, this chapter has seemed to broach the subject of
religion, remember, it does not deal with religion as you perhaps
know religion. The only thing valuable in religion is the White
Life within the human self. That alone is religion. Call it what
you will. And it means just that courage which makes us buoyantly
equal to any kind of life that is right. The methods of this book
will prove of value to you, whether or no you go into the WHITE-
LIFE phase of existence. But they will realize completest value if
you will swing at the start clean out into the one greatest
thought--"_I_ SURRENDER TO, AND _I_ RECEIVE, THE INFINITE WHITE
LIFE."

It is because I desire every reader to get this perfect start in
our study that I have indulged in the rather general outlook on
the world's New Dawn. Hereafter our work will be more specific and
adressed to the varying conditions of the individual man or woman.





FEAR--THOUGHT AND FEAR--FEELING.


The INTELLECT coldly reflects What Is:
An icy, crystalline lake portraying earth and sky
In shadows beautiful as death--
And void of pulse, or warmth, or music of good life.
This is no Eye with which to view the world!

The SOUL reflects the universe
With ECSTASIES of heat, of hue, of harmony!
Its INNER gaze creating Life in Fact,
So, robing sheer Reality in colors ravishing,
Giving it Voice, forming within it Heart,
And vitalizing All with Feeling--Being's blood.
This is our Eye, viewing the world it builds.

Fear blurs that Eye, while Reason clears:
Pure mind lacks Passion adding values to existence;
(Who loves mere ghost--flowers born of moonlight?)
Pure Feeling lacks in REASON, needing values,
And, lacking so, fills Eye of Soul with fantasies,
With wild distortions of imagination's lust.
(Who loves the fire--hued, smoke blooms of Hell's Land?)
And always Fear feeds Feeling's grotesque growths
Till Soul's Eye on its own creation looks
As on eternal Truth.
Then Truth and Nature, Deity and Man
Evolve dread enmity and horrors multiple,
And Soul flees terror-stricken on to Death.

Oh, I will rule heart's Feeling for good Life,
Given Soul's Mind for this--naught else:
That Reason may re--think the Beautiful and Happiness
And see eternal Truth and Truth-Fact as my lovers--
Veracious Guardian Angels guiding all my way--
Cooperative, like the brain and heart of body,
To lead my soul on Courage (not on Death)
And make me worth the skill
Of the illimitable years--a Mind--Man, whole!
--THE AUTHOR.





CHAPTER II.

FEAR AND REASON.

"In civilized life it has at last become possible for large
numbers of people to pass from the cradle to the grave without
ever having had a pang of genuine fear. Many of us need an attack
of mental disease to teach us the meaning of the word."--William
James.


We have all heard the seemingly discriminating remarks that fear
is normal and abnormal, and that normal fear is to be regarded as
a friend, while abnormal fear should be destroyed as an enemy.

The fact is that no so--called normal fear can be named which has
not been clearly absent in some people who have had every cause
therefor. If you will run over human history in your mind, or look
about yea in the present life, you will find here and there
persons who, in situations or before objects which ought, as any
fearful soul will insist, to inspire the feeling of at least
normal self-protecting fear, are nevertheless wholly without the
feeling. They possess every feeling and thought demanded except
fear. The idea of self-preservation is as strongly present as with
the most abjectly timid or terrified, but fear they do not know.
This FEARLESS awareness of fear--suggesting conditions may be due
to several causes. It may result from constitutional make-up, or
from long--continued training or habituation, or from religious
ecstasy, or from a perfectly calm sense of spiritual selfhood
which is unhurtable, or from the action of very exalted reason.
Whatever the explanation, the fact remains: the very causes which
excite fear in most of us, merely appeal, with such people, if at
all. to the instinct of self-preservation and to reason, the
thought-element of the soul which makes for personal peace and
wholeness.


BANISH ALL FEAR.


It is on such considerations that I have come to hold that all
real fear-FEELING should and may be banished from our life, and
that what we call "normal fear" should be substituted in our
language by "instinct" or by "reason," the element of fear being
dropped altogether.

"Everyone can testify that the psychical state called fear
consists of mental representations of certain painful results"
(James). The mental representations may be very faint as such, but
the idea of hurt to self is surely present. If, then, it can be
profoundly believed that the real self cannot be hurt; if the
reason can be brought to consider vividly and believingly all
quieting considerations; if the self can be held consciously in
the assurance that the White Life surrounds the true self, and is
surely within that self, and will suffer "no evil to come nigh,"
while all the instincts of self--preservation may be perfectly
active, fear itself must be removed "as far as the east is from
the west."

This splendid conviction I earnestly commend to all readers.

These are the ways, then, in which any occasion for fear may be
divided:

As a warning and as a maker of panic. But let us say that the
warning should be understood as given to reason, that fear need
not appear at all, and that the panic is perfectly useless pain.
With these discriminations in mind, we may now go on to a


PRELIMINARY STUDY OF FEAR.


Fear is (a) an impulse, (b) a habit, (c) a disease.

Fear, as it exists in man, is a make-believe of sanity, a creature
of the imagination, a state of insanity.

Furthermore, fear is, now of the nerves, now of the mind, now of
the moral consciousness.

The division depends upon the point of view. What is commonly
called normal fear should give place to REASON, using the word to
cover instinct as well as thought. From the correct point of view
all fear is an evil so long as entertained.

Whatever its manifestations, wherever its apparent location, fear
is a psychic state, of course, reacting upon the individual in
several ways: as, in the nerves, in mental moods, in a single
impulse, in a chronic habit, in a totally unbalanced condition.
The reaction has always a good intention, meaning, in each case,
"Take care! Danger!" You will see that this is so if you will look
for a moment at three comprehensive kinds of fear--fear of self,
fear for self, fear for others. Fear OF self is indirectly fear
FOR self--danger. Fear for others signifies foresensed or
forepictured distress to self because of anticipated misfortune to
others. I often wonder whether, when we fear FOR others, it is
distress TO SELF or hurt to THEM that is most emphatically in our
thought.

Fear, then, is usually regarded as the soul's danger signal. But
the true signal is instinctive and thoughtful reason.

Even instinct and reason, acting as warning, may perform their
duty abnormally, or assume abnormal proportions. And then we have
the FEELING of fear. The normal warning is induced by actual
danger apprehended by mind in a state of balance and self-control.
Normal mind is always capable of such warning. There are but two
ways in which so-called normal fear, acting in the guise of
reason, may be annihilated: by the substitution of reason for
fear, and by the assurance of the WHITE LIFE.

Let it be understood, now, that by normal fear is here meant
normal reason--real fear being denied place and function
altogether. Then we may say that such action of reason is a
benefactor to man. It is, with pain and weariness, the
philanthropy of the nature of things within us.

One person said: "Tired? No such word in my house!" Now this
cannot be a sound and healthy attitude. Weariness, at a certain
stage of effort, is a signal to stop work. When one becomes so
absorbed in labor as to lose consciousness of the feeling of
weariness, he has issued a "hurry call" on death. I do not deny
that the soul may cultivate a sublime sense of buoyancy and power;
rather do I urge you to seek that beautiful condition; but I hold
that when a belief or a hallucination refuses to permit you to
hear the warning of nerves and muscles, Nature will work disaster
inevitably. Let us stand for the larger liberty which is joyously
free to take advantage of everything Nature may offer for true
well-being. There is a partial liberty which tries to realize
itself by denying various realities as real; there is a higher
liberty which really realizes itself by conceding such realities
as real and by using or disusing them as occasion may require in
the interest of the self at its best. I hold this to be true
wisdom: to take advantage of everything which evidently promises
good to the self, without regard to this or that theory, and
freely to use all things, material or immaterial, reasonable or
spiritual. I embrace your science or your method; but I beg to
ignore your bondage to philosophy or to consistency. So I say that
to normal health the weary-sense is a rational command to
replenish exhausted nerves and muscles.

It is not liberty, it is not healthful, to declare, "There is no
pain!" Pain does exist, whatever you affirm, and your affirmation
that it does not is proof that it does exist, for why (and HOW)
declare the non-existence of that which actually is non-existent?
But if you say, "As a matter of fact I have pain, but I am
earnestly striving to ignore it, and to cultivate thought-health
so that the cause of pain may be removed," that is sane and
beautiful. This is the commendable attitude of the Bible character
who cried: "Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief." To
undertake swamping pain with a cloud of psychological fog--that is
to turn anarchist against the good government of Nature. By pain
Nature informs the individual that he is somewhere out of order.
This warning is normal. The feeling becomes abnormal in the mind
when imagination twangs the nerves with reiterated irritation, and
Will, confused by the discord and the psychic chaos, cowers and
shivers with fear.

I do not say there is no such thing as fear. Fear does exist. But
it exists in your life by your permission only, not because it is
needful as a warning against "evil."

Fear is induced by unduly magnifying actual danger, or by
conjuring up fictitious dangers through excessive and misdirected
psychical reactions. This also may be taken as a signal of danger,
but it is a falsely-intentioned witness, for it is not needed, is
hostile to the individual because it threatens self-control and it
absorbs life's forces in useless and destructive work when they
ought to be engaged in creating values. Hence we state


THE FIRST GREAT PRINCIPLE OF FEAR-CONQUEST.


Timidity, apprehension, fear, alarm, fright, consternation,
terror, panic, desperation, are all false imitations of reason's
interpretation of the warning signals of Nature, to be displaced
by reason itself, which may then determine whether the occasion be
real or unreal, and always to be disregarded and overcome if
evidently refering to causes which do not actually exist.

This principle is adduced in the interest of three things: peace,
health, power. You are invited to note how vital these interests
really are.

The truest peace, of which courage is a sublime bloom, is a growth
solely of honorable living and robust self-respect.

Health is of the following realities: body, mind, soul--the deeper
self. Health is soundness. A sound human is a triune wholeness.
Physical soundness with weak intellect is often the athletic field
of superstitions innumerable. Intellectual greed in an unsound
body may breed the direst fears of life. A decayed soul is always
a House of Fear. The ideal of human existence is--The white life
in the sound mind in the vibrantly whole body.

It is because there are so many people who are in some sense sick,
that fears abound in every direction. But--it is because so many
fears are permitted and actually nursed as boons that so many sick
people abound in every direction. If all our fears could be
removed absolutely, we should no longer require physicians. This
world would be a paradise in every respect. I do not know anything
wrong with it that cannot be traced to a fear.

The causes of fear are weak reason, uncontrolled imagination, want
of self-control, and ill-health. And the first three items are
really phases of the last.

The ability to master and destroy fear depends, it would now seem,
upon the following factors of our life:

The General Tone of the Individual; The Soul's Power of Will; The
Development and Balance of the Reason.

Reason is demanded to distinguish between right and wrong causes
for personal effort in self-protection, and to utterly ignore all
wrong causes.

Will-power is demanded to banish fears and to utilize reason's
dictates.

But the sway of reason and the force of action are always
immensely assisted by a vigorous general tone of the personal
life. Now appear, in view of these considerations,


THREE GREAT LAWS.


FIRST LAW: The warnings of reason are based in the nature of
things within us, and are universal benefactors.

SECOND LAW: Fear is contrary to the ground-plan of life. It is no
primary part of the nature of things; it is an alien in the world-
system.

THIRD LAW: The destruction of fear always follows the growth of
general courage in the individual. The fear-brood will not depart
until the soul has acquired a fixed habit of courage. Whatever
establishes that habit, or spirit, secures the service of reason-
instinct, and so undermines and finally destroys the power of
every variety of fear. These laws formulate a great


PRIMARY INJUNCTION.


Let your soul be saturated, with the sure conviction that fear is
an alien in the world-system of life, having no proper place nor
legitimate rights therein, and meanwhile resolutely set about the
task of cultivating in every possible way the permanent habit-
spirit of courageous living.

This book was written for the sole purpose of suggesting definite
methods by which such courage-habit may be developed. In order
that our practical methods may be understood, it is now necessary
to analyze the subject of fear in its general outlines.

It is important to remember that the warnings of reason, sometimes
called normal fears, may have actual causes outside the mind and
are rightly proportioned thereto and to possible consequences,
while real fear is due to causes not based in reality, or, if so
based, is permitted to agitate the mind in a way not warranted by
possible consequences viewed by a rational, well-balanced life.
Our analysis, then, exhibits fear where reason ought to appear, in


A GENERAL ENUMERATION OF FEAR-CAUSES.


Fear of hurt of self by self (fear of self): substitute reason,
thus--just estimate; no cause; cause magnified.

Fear of hurt of self by outer things (fear for self): substitute
reason, thus--just estimate; no cause; cause magnified.

Fear of threat by things: substitute reason, thus--right cause; no
cause; cause magnified.

Threat by others: substitute reason, thus--right cause; no cause;
cause magnified.

Threat to others: substitute reason, thus--right cause; no cause;
cause magnified.

Threat by events: substitute reason, thus--right cause; no cause;
cause magnified.

Threat by the future: substitute reason, thus--right cause; no
cause; cause magnified.

You are invited to work out the particulars of this analysis, and
to examine them with reference to your self and life. You will
make some important discoveries. One of the many questions
suggested is this: Is the cause of anticipated possible
consequences justly estimated in your thought--is it a right
cause--is it really as you suppose? The idea is that you think of
any one of your fears and then ask the question in the form just
indicated. Thus we may have the following statement of


KINDS OF FEARS.


Fear of Self: timidity, lack of confidence, possible unaccountable
states.

Fear for Self: weakness, anticipated failure, imagined disgrace.

Fear of Things: animals, inanimate objects, physical forces.

Fear of Others: human beings, apparitions, devils, Deity.

Fear for Others: children, parents, husband, wife, relatives,
friends, strangers.

Fear of Events: present, future, imaginary, possible, probable,
contingent.

Fear of the Future: in life; beyond the present life.

Instinct and reason strive to place us in right relations with all
these causes. The existence in us of fear shows that we already
are, either in mind or in fact, in wrong relations therewith.

The mastery of fear involves the discovery of right relations,
mental or concrete, and the placing of self in those right
conditions which are determined and provided for by the ground-
plan of our nature.

And the first thing thus provided for is health. All treatment for
the conquest of our universal enemy must begin with development of
individual tone: tone of body, tone of mind, tone of the deeper
self.

I am not writing for those who are constitutionally fearless, but
I have in mind all who do yield to the feeling of fear. Our ideal,
however, is not a mere animal courage, not the courage of
insensibility. It is rather the courage of the whole man or woman
making for the WHITE LIFE. If you are only partially yourself, you
cannot possess the highest courage. Such courage may be yours,
infallibly, if you will but resolve for the goal and go on into
the great ideals of the harmonic personality. This you can do--
anyone can do. And to come thereto is the greatest thing in the
world.

You are invited, then, to begin by substituting in your thought
the idea of self-preserving reason for any kind of fear (even the
so-called normal) as your perpetual guard and guide. Make it a
profound conviction of your deepest self that no real harm can
come to that self because you have entered the highway of the
WHITE LIFE--THE LIFE OF PURITY, REASON, HONOR, GOOD-WILL, AND
CONFIDENT ASSURANCE. Swing your life into the unfolding and
infolding of the Infinite White Life of Worlds. Courage will
become to you the very breath of your lungs.

    I send you this sure message: Fear is dead
    In all the pure, by reason's wisdom led,
    Who wear white honor and evince good-will,
    And trust the self to Love's unfailing skill.
    I send you this sure message: Courage lives
    When man to Courage all assurance gives.





THE SOUL OF THE CELL.

This crystal of Quartz,--the queen of its tribe,
Amethyst, Onyx, Chalcedony, Heliotrope, Agate,--
Some toiler of old Japan, the Artist fantastic,
Has polished to likeness of ice,
Ruining form to reveal it Fleche d'Amour
That the marvelous, delicate, hairlike inclosures
Of crystallizations foreign might please the beholder.
Herein worked the Infinite well,
And, let us say, too, the artisan patient,
To one limit--significant boundary!
HEALTH!

I request you to define it--configure the wonder
Of this dust-common, beneficent Gift.
Who lacks it, he knows quite precisely his want;
Who has it divulges precisely the thing.
Yet never man--scientist, poet, physician--
In words can portray it--the Soul of the Cell,

THAT lurks only in spheres of the Substance of Life;
Fares past the quartz and hides in the throat of the wearer.
Shuns diamond glory for greater of flesh;
Builds higher and higher to balance unstable
In beauty of male and in exquisite female,
And sends through the intricate meshwork of cells--
Sheer matter, kin of this quartz--
Its evidence: light-hue, radiance crimson,
Eye-gleam, pulse-throb, vigor and nerve-thrill
Of just that common, miraculous Gift,
HEALTH of a body wherein dwells soul.

THERE, say I, the Infinite worked well!
Come now to YOU the artisan's skill for this marvel,
Physical man: to refine and ennoble;
To reveal the inclosure of spirit unmarred,
And grow in the mobile, responsive flesh
Mind perfect, held fast in OUR Crystal superb,
The Universe complete.
--THE AUTHOR.





CHAPTER III.

PHYSICAL TONE.

"In the healthy body every cell is polarized in subjection to the
Central Will. Perfect health, therefore, is orderly obedience,
government and harmony. Every cell is a living entity, whether of
vegetable or animal potency, and wherever disease is, there are
disunion, error, rebellion and insubordination; and the deeper the
seat of the confusion, the more dangerous the malady and the
harder to quell it."--J. C. Street.


The thought of the above quotation does not mean that the
insubordination is necessarily conscious to the diseased
individual, but that it surely obtains within the physical arena
of his life. Because it is not the outcome of his deliberate
choice, the case is not hopeless in the nature of things, but is
open to better conditions. The deeper self which has intended no
rebellion against the laws of bodily well-being may now distinctly
intend harmony, and so lift the body to a higher plane.

And the last sentence in the quotation does not mean that you are
to undertake a vast amount of hard work, assuming that you are not
in perfect physical condition. You are, rather, just to begin and
go on thinking yourself in a real way as in harmony with the
Central Will, which is our White Life, and to hold steadfastly in
the deeper self the ideas, Affirmation and Realization of Splendid
Personal Tone.

Some of the meanings of these powerful words will be unfolded
later, In the meantime, as all things are subject to law, let us
observe a number of the general conditions to three-fold health,
that of body, mind and the inner self, regarding their totality as
the atmosphere, so to speak, in which courage most easily and
perfectly thrives.

Fear in man is a result of repeated suggestion, to which low
health-tone is a natural invitation. Health is the primary tonic
against fear. Perfect physical health is mere strength. Perfect
mental health is mere brain sanity. Perfect soul-health is the
whole of the man at his best. When the body is buoyant, the mind
clear and inspired, the soul harmonic with all existence rightly
in the universe, then is the impulse of fear easily mastered and
the habit of fear finds no encouragement. There are, indeed,
courageous invalids who have not come into the secret of right
thought so far as health is concerned, and fearing atheltes and
scholars who have neglected the secret of courage, and timorous
saints who have failed to possess themselves of the confidence of
goodness. Nevertheless, the eternal law is evident that the one
great enemy of fear is

The White Life in Harmonic Mind in Buoyant Body.

A person who affirms and realizes these conditions must, in the
nature of things, be possessed of perfect health. In the tone of
such health courage is inevitable.

That you may come to this ideal, you are invited to observe the
following instructions. Health is a trinity, and we may begin our
studies with its natural basis:


THE GENERAL TONE OP HEALTH.


The word "tone" means, "sound in relation to volume, quality,
duration and pitch," then, "peculiar characteristic sound as of a
voice or instrument," then, "characteristic style or tendency,
predominating aim or character, tenor, strain, spirit."

Hence, in the sense of health, tone signifies "the state of
tension or firmness proper to the tissues of the body; the state
in which all the parts and organs have due tension or are well
strung; the strength and activity of the organs on which healthy
functions depend; that state of the body in which all the normal
functions are performed with healthy vigor."

We thus see that health-tone involves the whole personality,
physical, mental and moral.

But the truth of the matter hides in a deeper region than that of
mere material flesh or organ. Matter is a form of the Universal
Ether, so far as science seems to declare, or, at least, matter
presupposes the ether in a state of vibration. Your body is a
"field" in which etheric vibrations are constantly taking place.
All its reality and all its activities involve such vibrations.
The brain, regarded as the organ of conscious life, of thought and
feeling, and the entire nervous system, involve such vibrations.
And as your thought and feeling constitute the foundation of your
moral character, the latter also becomes a matter of movements in
the ether.

In the case of heat, light, electricity, etc., differing kinds of
such vibrations determine the kinds of phenomena. We may say,
then, that there is one general kind of ether-movement for matter,
and another for thought and feeling, and another for the moral
life. Each individual, however, presents variations of these
general kinds of vibrations,--a particular variation for his body,
and for his mental person, and for his right or wrong self-spirit.
We individualize the ether, Or, we are individualized as we use
the ether.

The tone of a person's health is determined by the state of the
etheric movements characteristic to himself.

If the vibrations underlying the body life are full and harmonious
according to their individual character for a person, his organs
are all sound and active. He possesses physical tone. If there is
a similar fullness and harmony within his mental life, he must
exhibit health of mind. If a corresponding condition obtains in
the moral personality, the highest health of the deeper self
prevails.

These three individualized varieties of ether-movement in man
mutually interact and determine one another's character. I know
that this law does not always seem to operate. Poor minds and
wrong morals are sometimes found in apparently healthy bodies, and
great minds and noble spirits in feeble bodies. But the bodies of
the one class do NOT represent the finest physical health,
involving coarseness, flabbiness, susceptibility to disorder,
etc., etc., and are not contradictions of the law. Moreover, the
inner life is not always fully expressed by apparent departures
from right living: as you may frequently see in some sudden burst
of nobility, generosity, tenderness, heroism, in those who possess
sound bodies but are outwardly not particularly refined. The rough
exterior may hide a splendid germ of true spiritual manhood or
womanhood. Could we look deeply into the physical nature, we
should always find the law holding good that our three-fold ether-
movements do influence and in the long run determine one another
for weal or ill. Where the inner self is right yet the physical
tone weak or disturbed, we should perceive, if we had the "spirit
of discernment," that the better life within has surely influenced
and ennobled the essential nature of the body. It should be
remembered that two confusing factors prevail where a fine spirit
dwells in a diseased body: first, the thought-life of centuries
has, so to speak, warped the character of the inherited body and
its vibrations to such an extent that they may not, perhaps (I do
not know), be altogether reformed within a human lifetime;
secondly, the thought-life of the individual, however nearly right
in many respects, is wrong in one particular, the belief, feeling,
conviction--an inheritance of ages--that disease of the body must
necessarily obtain in some cases at least, no matter what the
inner life may be. This conviction is a tremendous force for harm.
Invalids accept it as true, and try to be reconciled. But it is
not true. The belief prevails, and so prevents the real truth from
appearing: that PERFECT HEALTH IS THE PRIMARY INTENTION OF THE
NATURE OF THINGS FOR ALL. When we can believe this magnificent
truth, we shall be able to see that right vibrations underlying
the mental and moral personality must tend to reform wrong
vibrations underlying the body. So long as the former conviction
prevails, that disease is somehow a part of Nature, the better
life contends with a double difficulty, the existing physical
conditions and the false suggestion that the individual must
continue to be ill in the nature of things or as the will of
Deity. The false suggestion should be displaced by the affirmation
and realization of physical health. Such a reforming suggestion,
made effective by mental realization and proper regimes, tends to
counteract the existing effects of previous wrong suggestions and
positively to change conditions of ill-health, because fullness
and harmony of the three kinds of ether-movements are the designed
ideals of our lives and the laws of perfect well-being (what other
design can we possibly imagine?), and the good suggestion operates
to bring about that ideal.

Let us be rid of the notion that anyone is ill because a Divine
Being wants him to be ill.

But we must remember that while these principles cannot be
otherwise than true, every individual has behind him, at any
present moment, two great forces--the past of his ancestors and
the past of his own life. Let us be sensible, even while we insist
upon truths which are among the most beautiful in the world. The
past means much to all of us. Such is law. We cannot get away from
law, whatever our theories or religious belief. To me all Nature's
laws are of the White Life and untellably beneficent. The idea
that law is something hard and disagreeable is itself a false
suggestion and a wrong thought. Law is good. The law that life is
determined more or less by the past is a fine example of this
goodness. If it seems to go against us in some cases, it surely
goes for us in assisting a right past to make for a right future.
When it seems to work hardship, the fact is the law is trying to
face us about for a right time to come. That is the meaning of
experience: it is law talking, to us out of our past. The law that
our past and that of our ancestors must be reckoned with in all
our efforts to reform the etheric vibrations in our personal
fields involves the element of time, which element may be greater
than we can control in the material life. This element of time is
important because there is another law, that great real reforms in
the individual require effort continued more or less in order that
all laws involved may properly and fully operate. If the person
who is a noble self in a weak body could add to his thought-life
the sufficiently powerful affirming realization of physical health
for himself and live long enough, I certainly believe the
suggestion would ultimately prevail. For I do not for a moment
accept disease as a necessary part of human life. Is disorder in
your machinery a part of the machine? I cannot see how a
continuously perfect self, starting with a sound body, could ever
come to possess a diseased body. I must believe that the self,
growing to the ideal, may bring into harmony a diseased body,
provided its health-suggestion is strong enough and sufficient
time is afforded for the full working of the law. The law does
not, of course, cover such cases as broken bones, because
treatment then calls for mechanical operations, which involve laws
altogether distinct from those that govern harmony among the
functions and organs of the body as underfounded by etheric
vibrations within the physical, mental and moral fields.

The limits set to self-healing power we do not know for any
individual case. The splendid general law is not overwhelmed, is
not contradicted, by such limits, whatever they may be, because
the limits are not set by the original intention of the nature of
things, but by wrong living and false ideas running through
centuries. As we may not know the limits in any case, and as the
great law shines ever before us and is equally for all so far as
it may be claimed, and not for a favored few of some particular
religious or semi-religious belief, it is ours to seize all
advantages afforded by the best medical science together with
every atom of power in the white life affirming and realizing
physical health at its best. You do not know your own limits;
therefore lay hold upon the law, the universal, age-long law, for
all you can derive from its beneficence. You are not required to
turn your back upon any other advantage, but only to swing the law
into harmony with that advantage.

Health-tone, then, is really a triune series of full and
harmonious ether-movements within the personal field working
together for a buoyant right self in a sane and truth-loving mind
in a spiritually expressing physical organism. By so much as it is
yours, by so much, in the nature of the case, must fear be an
alien and courage the breath of your life.

We may now go on to the general consideration of


PHYSICAL TONE.


It would seem almost unnecessary to suggest the ordinary regimes
for health of body. Nevertheless, I shall refer to these regimes
because, first, their importance cannot be overestimated, and
secondly because they involve certain laws of laws in relation to
health which are seldom worked out in hygienic instruction.

What may be called the laws of laws of health would seem to be as
follows:

1. Scrupulous Cleanliness of the Body, Without and Within, Makes
for Royal Health-Tone. The law should be given rational, not
slavish, obedience. Your body and your deeper self are in a
constant state of interaction. Material uncleanness consented to
contaminates that self. Uncleanness of the self also contaminates
the body. The white life requires the clean dress of honored
flesh. You are invited, therefore, to affirm always and
practically,

    This robe I wear of unsoiled flesh
    Keeps mind and spirit ever fresh.

2. Sweet, Sound and Early Sleep Gives the Universal Forces their
Perfect Opportunity for Good. During sleep the Universal Thought
strives to restore, as our conditions permit, harmony of
vibrations between its manifests in matter within the body and its
manifests in the non-material self. The degree of harmony is made
less in all cases by centuries of wrong living, the effects of
which are more or less accumulated by inheritance in every man and
woman (right living, however, promising in the future perfect
freedom there-from on earth), and by the disturbing power of
individual wrong living. In order, then, to secure the best
results of sleep, our waking thought should be kept in attune, by
all practical as well as by all idealizing methods, with reality,
truth, beauty and goodness. You are invited, for the reason
suggested, to live during the day in such a manner that your last
fearless thought at night may be,

    "Let my soul walk softly in me,
       Like a saint in heaven unshod,
     For to be alone with Silence
       Is to be alone with God."

3. The Utility of Nourishment Issues From Conformity to the Plan
of the Universal Forces for Each Individual. For every human body
there is a plan on which it is intended to be evolved and
maintained. The individual plan is merely a variation of the
general plan of our common human nature. That general plan
provides for certain foods and kinds of drink, for the manner in
which they are to be taken and digested, and for their utilization
in building and sustaining the body. This general plan is varied
for different persons in the primary intention of the nature of
things. Your food and drink, therefore, should depend upon your
own peculiar needs. The science of the matter investigates the
kinds of nourishment which you in particular require and advises
all items furnishing the material elements you demand. But some
individual variations, in respect to questions of taste,
usefulness and harmfulness, digestibility and adaptation, are
undoubtedly results of restrained liberty and wrong thought-life
in the past, either of your ancestors or of yourself. That degree
of liberty, therefore, which ought to be yours, has perhaps, come
to be more or less limited. It is possible for you to secure a
desirable enlargement of freedom with regard to food and drink. Of
course you have no liberty in the way of natural poisons and
beverages which dethrone common sense. Aside from the limits set
by Nature, you may acquire the largest measure of personal freedom
in the matter if you will determine therefor in the exercise of
sound reason. I have had my experience with things not liked and
things harmful--apricots, chickens, salmon---and today I eat all
that's eatable by civilized man, and I drink whatever I choose to
drink--alcohol tabooed because I want and need all the brains I
possess. It is for you to bring yourself more nearly to the
original plan for human bodies in this respect, if you will begin
with your inner thought-life and proceed more or less in the
following manner:

(a). By insisting upon a LARGER FREEDOM, not in the way of
demanding one thing or another, but in the way of realizing in
your deeper self the idea of power therefor;

(b). By endeavoring constantly to bring your thought-life more and
more into HARMONY WITH THE WHITE LIFE IN NATURE;

(c). By affirming that the food and drink of which you partake
will surely MAKE FOR HEALTH and buoyancy of the body; not merely
stating the proposition, but, while so partaking, believing the
truth and assuming it to be true--actual for you;

(d). By manifesting at all times the mood of blended COURAGE,
HOPE, CONFIDENCE, HAPPINESS;

4. THE VALUE OF WORK AND PLAY IS THE OUTCOME OF BALANCING
REACTIONS OR RESTORATIONS AMONG OUR PERSONAL ACTIVITIES. If we
conceive of any individual as a "field" of vibrations in matter
and the ether, induced by muscular and nervous action and by
feeling and thought, we see at once that there ought to be an
ideal "field" in which all such vibrations are in a state of
harmony. The state indicated would be a condition of balance. When
activities in one direction are over intense and unduly prolonged,
all vibrations tend to a strain in that direction. Such strain--
all in one direction--is not normal, because it signifies
disturbance of balance. If harmony in the "field" is to be
restored, the one direction-strain must be released so that all
right activities may recur and all vibrations proper to the
"field" may again take place. Always the ideal is general harmony
throughout the personal field. Now, some of the activities of our
life are normally those of work, inducing corresponding vibrations
in the individual "field," and some of them are normally those of
recreation, which is a true word because it means recreation, that
is, action or rest inducing corresponding vibration differing from
those of work, running, so to speak, in different directions, and
so restoring harmony. Work and recreation are, therefore, equally
essential to the normal life. We have, however, built up wrong
ideas of each of these important functions, so that most of us
distinguish work as essentially different in its basic nature from
recreation, and more or less an evil, and distinguish recreation
as altogether and in itself a good. Both ideas are surely
erroneous. I know that too much work, and work under certain
conditions, cannot be regarded as a good in itself. Precisely the
same is true of recreation. Neither, then, is to be valued or
condemned because of the kind of activities involved or vibrations
induced, but always and solely with reference to the state of
balance or harmony represented in the field of the personal self.
The limit of permitted work should be determined by that question
alone; work should always be offset, so to speak, by recreation.
The limit of recreation permitted should be determined by the same
question. It should always be offset by work. In other words, the
value of either work or play consists in change of activities
restoring balance in the personal field.

But work and recreation are not essentially different in their
true nature. In both cases we have activities and vibrations. In
all cases some portion of the body is involved. In all cases some
features of the mind are active. Action in either case is called
work or recreation according to the idea entertained regarding it.
If the idea is that of TASK, the thing is work. If the idea is
RELAXATION, the thing is recreation. I have taken the task-idea
into recreation, and soon wearied. I have taken the recreation-
idea into work, and have been obliged to call self to account
under that law of balance or harmony. A boy, for example, is
sawing wood alone: this is work. Neighboring boys join him, and
soon invest the whole place with imagination, all busy sawing,
splitting,--playing. It is the idea--that is, the real thought,
which determines the names we give the two general sets of
activities. Nature will check work-vibrations and restore
recreation-vibrations, FOR A TIME, until harmony of the field is
comparatively restored, if only suggestion use the magic word.

You are now invited to maintain, IN ALL YOUR WORK, THE IDEA OF
HARMONY WITH THE UNIVERSAL FORCES OF NATURE, and the inspiration
of the idea that your WORK IS GOOD and is building your self to
better.

You are invited also to maintain, IN ALL YOUR RECREATION, THE IDEA
OF HARMONY WITH THE UNIVERSAL FORCES and the inspiration of the
thought that YOUR RECREATION IS GOOD and is building your self to
better.

5. PURITY IN THE SEX-LIFE CHARGES THE PERSONAL FIELD WITH THE
MAGNETIC POWER OF THE UNIVERSAL FORCES. In this respect the
individual should be as a god. The human body is designed for
Temple-Presence of the Infinite White Life. Epicurus regarded it
as a husk, but Aristotle defined the soul as the "perfect
expression of the body," meaning, not that the soul is a product
of physiological conditions, but that it is the TRUTH of body, the
idea, purpose, in which only do the bodily conditions gain their
real meaning. To this great Greek the chief of human virtues was
HIGH-MINDEDNESS, a crowning Self-Respect. This attitude of the
self toward the house in which it lives recognizes the perfect
interaction of self and body, the one being influenced by the
other, and so it insists that no injury shall come to the body
from the inner sex-life, or from the sex-life to the inner self,
but that both shall be maintained in harmony with the absolute
whiteness of Eternal Being.

You are invited, then, to maintain purity under the law of
liberty, and to adopt this thought as a permanent law: MY PERSONAL
DIGNITY STOOPS NOT TO PHYSICAL DEGRADATION.

6. THE LIBERTY OF CONSCIOUS HARMONY WITH THE UNIVERSAL FORCES
EMBRACES THE INTELLIGENT USE OF THE SCIENCE OF MEDICINE. The
science of medicine is fairly indicated for our present purpose in
the following quotation--from Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes:

"What is the honest truth about the medical art? That by far the
largest number of diseases which physicians are called upon to
treat will get well at any rate, even in spite of reasonably bad
treatment. That of the other fraction, a certain number will
certainly die, whatever is done. That there remains a small number
of cases where the life of the patient depends on the skill of the
physician. That drugs now and then save life; that they often
shorten disease and remove symptoms; but that they are second in
importance to food, air, temperature, and the other hygienic
influences. Throw out opium; throw out wine, and the vapors which
produce the miracle of anesthesia, and I firmly believe that if
the whole materia medica, as now used, could be sunk to the bottom
of the sea, it would be all the better for mankind."

"It is a mistake to suppose that the normal state of health is
represented by a straight horizontal line, Independently of the
well-known causes which raise or depress the standard of vitality,
there seems to be--I think I may venture to say there is--a
rhythmic undulation in the flow of the vital force. The 'dynamo'
which furnishes the working powers of consciousness and action has
its annual, its monthly, its diurnal waves, even its temporary
ripples, in the current it furnishes. There are greater and lesser
curves in the movement of every day's life,--a series of ascending
and descending movements, a periodicity depending on the very
nature of the force at work in the living organism."

There is also in our life a periodicity of the deeper self--a
curve of the soul's condition, which varies from time to time.
When the curve is downward in both the physical and the spiritual
case, drugs are of no more value than stones. When the curve is
upward in both cases, drugs may be totally gratuitous, and they
may actually retard the combined movements. When the health-curve
is downward, the psychic curve may follow suit, but it need not
necessarily do so. When the psychic curve is downward, the health-
curve tends in the same direction. When the health-curve is
upward, the psychic curve usually follows. When the psychic curve
is upward, we have the best condition for the cure of disease. But
Nature always does the curing. The physician never cures any
disease; he merely assists Nature.

It is the function of medical science to arrest downward curves by
any tried methods, to take advantage of upward curves, and to know
what the curves are in any given case. I call my physician because
I may want him when I cannot help myself in these important
respects. I will have in my hands the greatest number of the best
forces when I am subject to abnormal conditions. I believe that is
common sense, and I know it is perfectly permissible to the most
exalted faith in the Soul of our Universe.

I am ready to concede that in a sublime state of ultimate
evolution there is nothing which a drug or a doctor can do except
surgery that may not better be accomplished by the power of
harmonic WHITE-LIFE THOUGHT claiming health. But in such a future
state disease will long since have vanished. Nevertheless, we do
now certainly know a great law of mental power over the body. I do
not concede any limits, except as above indicated, to the
operation of that law if we could get it fully under control. Its
scope, even as matters are, is immense. The law is real, and it
belongs to no particular age or body of people. It is as long as
time and as wide as earth. Any human being may claim the benefit
in total disregard of any philosophy or form of religious belief,
provided the WHITE LIFE and the health-claim are with him, under
the sole limitations imposed by thousands of years of wrong
thought-life in ancestry and similar error in personal past
decreasing ability to affirm and realize in a way to secure the
full benefits of the law. It is for every human being,
nevertheless, to strive for the inner harmony, to invoke the law
of spiritual mastery over the body, and to put forth all possessed
and obtainable power of thought and realization for health, in
good cheer, with valiant heart, and inspired by the truth that,
whatever betide, nought can really harm the abiding self. "Be not
faithless; but believing."

And so I think that our great Nature-Universe bids us hear these
words from the Infinite White Life: "Sons and daughters of the
All-Good, the power of thought and harmony are surely for you. If
you realize your highest liberty and its greatest efficiency as
you now are, you will use, not deny, those instrumentalities which
are provided in my ministers, Science and Faith. Must you be a
slave either to the material or to the immaterial? Can you not
employ both for your welfare? May not the king call in whomsoever
he will? All things are yours."

Let us not fall into the old-time religious error of assuming that
some particular philosophy or faith which we have discovered
embraces all truth and value. Let us not label this or that with
our little words, and say: "This is law--this only." The law of
thought-power in the physical realm is older than any present
civilization. The law of harmony as the supreme health-restorer
and health-builder is not a law created by the Infinite during
the last twenty-five years. I uncover my heart to every soul who
is trying for the best things and believes he has found a true
way; but I must not believe that this world has been left in stark
ignorance of the most fundamental law of our earth-life--that
health in its triune wholeness comes of the WHITE LIFE and the
realizing claim--to await the birth and word of any man or woman
in these times. It is a little too late. Therefore I say to you
who may read these pages: "Stand free! Use every means and all
methods, material and spiritual (for the material is but a phase
of the spiritual), for health and happiness."

7. THE SECRET OF THOUGHT IN RELATION TO HEALTH IS THE CLAIM OF THE
WHITE LIFE CONSCIOUSLY PUT FORTH FOR PHYSICAL WELL-BEING. In
explanation of this principle, let us try to obtain certain true
conceptions concerning the material and pyschic nature of man.

All existences come to being through the activity of one Infinite
and Eternal Reality.

The medium in which all material existences exhibit is the
universal ether of science, vibrations in this medium constituting
light, heat, electricity, magnetism, etc., etc.

So far as we can think, the ether is a manifest, perhaps a primary
manifest, of Infinite and Eternal Reality.

It is coming to be scientific to hold that matter reduces in its
last analysis to electricity and is a complex form of vibrations
of the ether within the ether. Matter is not merely pervaded by
the ether; it is a state of the ether.

Matter, then, is a manifest of Infinite and Eternal Reality.

Life is a phase of the activity of matter. If we think of matter
in its grossest form, nearest to us in the process of evolution,
life may be regarded as an entity different from that matter. We
do somehow feel that matter and life are distinct realities. But
if we think of matter as a complex form of etheric vibrations,
nothing forbids our saying that life also is a form of vibration
of the ether within the ether. With this view in mind, we shall
think of matter and life as comparatively simultaneous manifests
of the ether, life, however, appearing only when the state of
etheric vibrations resulting in matter has reached a stage in
which vibrations resulting in life can be possible. We should then
say that life is a product of etheric vibrations emerging through
those that have resulted in matter; that is, life is a product of
material activities. This view cannot justly be called materialism
because Life is, then, also a manifest of Infinite and Eternal
Reality.

We do not scientifically know any sort of mind that is not
exhibited through matter. The human mind always exhibits through a
human body. What we call mind is a complex of states of
consciousness engaged in various activities. Consciousness
involves certain physical activities within us. If nothing were
acting within, we should not be conscious. This has always been
true. The first dawn of consciousness in Nature involved
activities within the organism. If we think of that first faintly
conscious existence as a mass of crude matter, then the self and
its body will appear to be distinctly separated in reality. But if
we think of that body as a manifest of etheric vibrations in which
life-vibrations also obtained, there is nothing to forbid our
saying that consciousness was equally a product of such
vibrations. If so, the psychic factor was a form of vibrations of
the ether within the ether--and so, when it appeared, had evolved
to higher forms, was consciousness.

Matter is an evolution, and out of it hare evolved life, the
psychic factor, consciousness. But consciousness is, then, for the
reasons above indicated, a manifest of Infinite and Eternal
Reality.

Consciousness is the condition of personality. When the former
first appeared, it was a product. Thenceforth, because personality
was a psychic factor in consciousness, it became a creator. That
is to say, it was capable of enlargement and enrichment, and so,
began to unfold its powers, to enrich its own contents by
appropriation, and to organize itself in various ways depending
upon its nature in each case and the influence of environment. In
seeking to realize itself, as it must do in the nature of things,
and in adjusting to environment, which was a second necessity of
its being, it began to direct the activities of matter comprising
its own body, to select matter from without needful for its kind
of body, and to build this material up into a kind of body best
adapted to its existence, and thus, by its own character, to
determine the character of the organism which it inhabited.

All this work seems entirely independent until we remember that
ether, matter, life, the psychic factor, are manifests of Infinite
and Eternal Reality. But when we so remember, we see that
personality consisting of a conscious self and a body is similarly
a manifest of that Reality.

This conclusion will appear to identify man and Deity unless we
discriminate a little. Every object in Nature is a manifest of
Infinite and Eternal Reality, but the latter transcends the former
simply because the object is such a manifest, A thing which is a
manifest or expression of something superior cannot be identified
with the superior something. I am not the words which I write,
although they manifest me and could not exist without me. Every
object in Nature is precisely what it is as a manifest of Reality.
There is scant freedom in the natural world apart from man.
Nothing in Nature could be other than it is. Man, on the other
hand, is a manifest of Infinite and Eternal Reality in the sense
that he has a body, and must have one, and is a personality and
must be one (if he is man); but in the man psychic factor has come
to consciousness, and consciousness, as we have seen, always
reveals itself in SELF-DIRECTION AND SELF-ORGANIZATION ACCORDING
TO ITS DEVELOPED POWER TO THINK OF ITSELF AS SELF-CONSCIOUS
EXISTENCE. Were it unable to so think of itself, it could not be
self-directive in the fullest sense. And were it unable to self-
direct its own activities, it could not be conscious in the
fullest sense of the word. Our existence manifests Infinite and
Eternal Reality, but the power to USE that existence is determined
by the fact that we are psychic factors in the highest sense
exhibited in the earth, and the use we make thereof is determined
by our exercise of the power of self-direction and self-
organization. We cannot help being human beings, but what KIND of
human beings we are, within the limits of personal endowments,
depends solely upon ourselves.

We may see, then, that the psychic factor within us builds the
bodies we live in, so that our physical character is largely an
expression of our personal character. Ages of wrong thought-life
are behind us, yet even so, it is within our power to improve
physical character very greatly indeed.

Now, the power of personal right thinking and harmony with the
White Life of Infinite and Eternal Reality may be explained in the
following way (you will understand, of course, that the outline is
designed merely to be suggestive):

ALL MATTER IN THE REALM OF NATURE BEING A MANIFEST OF INFINITE AND
ETERNAL REALITY, NATURE AND HER SUBSTANCES ARE PHASES OF ETERNAL
THOUGHT. The study of Nature is just the study of that Thought,
conducted in various ways and for various purposes. The Thought,
in all its existences and relations, is a vast and complex whole,
and yet, from the point of view of its highest value to man, a
great Word, comparatively simple and open to every earnest and
sincere seeker throughout all the ages. If you will ask yourself,
What are the main and abiding thoughts which are embodied in
Nature? your conclusion, I think, need not be elaborate and
confusing. The question, however, must be asked in a receptive and
unprejudiced mood, and not merely by the matter-of-fact intellect.
"Every inch of earth, of water, of fire, and of air contains the
fundamental principles of the universe, and man is the connecting
link between dust and Deity, and can bridge the gulf through the
illumination of his mind. The most powerful telescope known to man
is mind's eye." "He who has cultivated and learned to open his
heart to the touch of outward Nature illuminates his inner being
by the elevation and refinement of his emotional and imaginative
nature. This is the first principle in the objective world of the
higher education of mind and soul. The first lesson of Mother
Earth is to instruct her children to be softened and sympathetic
toward the moods of outward Nature. Thus mankind softens,
broadens, and grows, becoming more susceptible to impressions,
taking in the glory of the Divine Architect, which is in the world
revealed, and the golden gates of the soul are opened."

Seeking with such a spirit, then, the main Thoughts which Nature
embodies, I venture to say that Infinite and Eternal Reality has
there expressed itself in these great Words:

Reality,   Truth,         Law,
Beauty,    Goodness,      Harmony,
Power,     Development,   Happiness,
Love,      Service,       LIFE.

These are the Thoughts expressed in Nature which are manifest of
the White Life. For such the nature of things always declares,
when free to do so. By so much as any object of existence fully
realizes itself, by so much are these Thoughts, so far as such
realization requires, made concrete if only we have the seeing
mind and the feeling heart. With these powers of perception, the
seeing mind and the feeling heart, we come to know that all in
Nature is good and means good to every man and woman and child in
this world. There is no evil in Nature. All so-called evil in
Nature is due either to some phase of her existence wrongly used
or to some false interpretation in human thinking. Nature is REAL,
TRUE, LAW-FULL, BEAUTIFUL, GOOD, HARMONIOUS, FULL OF POWER, A
GROWING ORGANISM, A MINISTER OF SERVICE AND WELL-BEING, A LIVING
THING, A LITERATURE OF LOVE. If you refer to microbes, poisons,
deadly serpents, and the like, I reply that the perfect WHITE LIFE
in man, together with the knowledge of science, would teach him to
avoid wrong relations and develop within him physical, mental and
moral tone (tonus, in the language of the schools). Thus would he
be rendered immune from all so-called evils.

If your inner life contains nothing alien to these great Nature-
Thoughts, if you see to it that their character is given your
personal character, you will secure in the body a degree of the
power of harmony which they possess, and your health will
infallibly correspond. Do no mistake this sentence. Will you
kindly read it--again until you see what it really means? The only
limit to your health will be the limit of your ability to realize
in yourself the mighty Thoughts which make Nature what she is. I
do not mean that splendid results must immediately issue from the
course indicated. Patience and time are important factors. I do
not mean that a dying man can inevitably realize these Thoughts
sufficiently to recover health. There are limits, not to the law,
but to one's ability to use the law. In spiritual effort, effort
of the inner self to lay hold upon the Universal Forces, you can
make your own personal discoveries. I may not say a greater word.
Above all, I do not mean that merely thinking the Thoughts will be
enough, in any case. The method is one of realization as well as
affirmation. But by so much as you become that which the Nature-
Thoughts suggest, by so much will your physical and psychic health
come to buoyancy, joy and power. You are now invited, then, to
adopt the following as the permanent law of your thought-life:

I am, in every function of my body and every activity of my deeper
self, entirely GENUINE, representing TRUTH, obeying LAW, loving
BEAUTY, striving for GOODNESS, coming to HARMONY, possessed of
POWER, GROWING to better things, full of HAPPINESS, eager to
SERVE, a LIVING white life, and a Lover of all that is good.

If you will thoughtfully and believingly repeat this law twice a
day say, for one hundred days, you will find life unfolding new
meanings, fears fading and dying, and courage growing to real
greatness.

8. IN THE MYSTERY OF THE SILENCE THE POWER OF REALIZATION BECOMES
GREATEST AND MOST EFFECTIVE BECAUSE IN SUCH A STATE THE SELF MAKES
ITS HIGH THOUGHTS A CONSCIOUS CLAIM ON ALL GOOD THINGS. The direct
utility of the right thought-life is nowhere doubted. By this the
psychic factor largely molds the body and influences its
functions. Preceding methods or laws have all referred to the
truth involved. But the law of direct realization is needed in
order to complete the workings of the truth. By direct realization
the self consciously claims the present benefit of the spirit or
attitude of harmony. You may think of yourself as splendidly well
and fearless: that is one thing-you REGARD yourself as in such
conditions. And you may claim yourself NOW to be well and
courageous: that is another thing--you TREAT yourself for health
and fearlessness. When you think of your arm as moving, it does
not necessarily move; you have merely entertained the idea. When
you will your arm to move, you have claimed your power to move it
and have realized the power--realized in actual thought that
power. The difference would obtain if your arm were bound: you
could still realize in thought the sense of movement. Realization
of the Eternal Thoughts is a conscious claim in spirit and
appropriation in spirit of the Thoughts as actual within yourself.
Realization of benefits for health is a conscious holding of them
in mind as present in you. One may in time acquire the fixed mood
of realization, but it will assist you to bring about that mood if
you will occasionally, say once a day, shut out all disturbances
and alien thoughts and feelings, and try to come into communion
with the White Life--go into the silence and, by quiet
affirmation and sincere, trustful realization, claim the Universal
Forces as your helpers in building up your physical tone and the
spirit of courage. A sentence like the following may be used:

"Conscious of psychic uprightness in the white life, and of the
beauty, utility and wonder of my physical being in its nature, and
function, I now claim, and without doubt am receiving, the
Universal Forces for my best tone and courage-spirit in all-
improving health."


End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of Mastery of Self
by Frank Channing Haddock

