Project Gutenberg's Little Ann and Other Poems, by Jane Taylor and Ann Taylor

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Little Ann and Other Poems

Author: Jane Taylor
        Ann Taylor

Illustrator: Kate Greenaway

Release Date: June 15, 2013 [EBook #42947]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE ANN AND OTHER POEMS ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)










LITTLE ANN AND OTHER POEMS

[Illustration]

[Illustration]





LITTLE ANN AND OTHER POEMS

BY JANE AND ANN TAYLOR

[Illustration]

ILLUSTRATED BY KATE GREENAWAY

[Illustration]

    LONDON
    FREDERICK WARNE & CO. LTD.
    & NEW YORK

[Illustration]




[Illustration:

    DEDICATED TO
    GODFREY, DOROTHY, OLIVER & MAUD
    CHILDREN OF FREDERICK LOCKER ESQ.]




[Illustration]




CONTENTS.


                                                  PAGE
    A True Story                                     7
    The Boys and the Apple-Tree                      9
    Sophia's Fool's-Cap                             11
    Frances Keeps Her Promise                       12
    Careless Matilda                                14
    The Violet                                      16
    The Orphan                                      17
    The Disappointment                              18
    James and the Shoulder of Mutton                19
    The Good-Natured Girls                          21
    To a Little Girl that has Told a Lie            22
    Dirty Jim                                       24
    Meddlesome Matty                                25
    The Butterfly                                   27
    The Gaudy Flower                                28
    George and the Chimney-Sweep                    29
    Deaf Martha                                     31
    The Little Cripple's Complaint                  33
    Negligent Mary                                  35
    The Spider                                      36
    For a Naughty Little Girl                       37
    The Child's Monitor                             39
    The Chatterbox                                  40
    Jane and Eliza                                  41
    Sleepy Harry                                    42
    Washing and Dressing                            43
    The Vulgar Little Lady                          44
    The Wooden Doll and the Wax Doll                46
    The Baby's Dance                                48
    The Pin                                         49
    The Cow                                         50
    Come and Play in the Garden                     50
    Little Girls Must Not Fret                      52
    The Field Daisy                                 53
    Learning to Go Alone                            54
    Finery                                          55
    Greedy Richard                                  56
    The Holidays                                    58
    The Village Green                               59
    Mischief                                        61
    About the Little Girl that Beat Her Sister      62
    The Apple-Tree                                  63




[Illustration]




A TRUE STORY.


    Little Ann and her mother were walking one day
      Through London's wide city so fair,
    And business obliged them to go by the way
      That led them through Cavendish Square.

    And as they pass'd by the great house of a Lord,
      A beautiful chariot there came,
    To take some most elegant ladies abroad,
      Who straightway got into the same.

    The ladies in feathers and jewels were seen,
      The chariot was painted all o'er,
    The footmen behind were in silver and green,
      The horses were prancing before.

    Little Ann by her mother walk'd silent and sad,
      A tear trickled down from her eye,
    Till her mother said, "Ann, I should be very glad
      To know what it is makes you cry."

    "Mamma," said the child, "see that carriage so fair,
     All cover'd with varnish and gold,
    Those ladies are riding so charmingly there
     While we have to walk in the cold.

    "You say God is kind to the folks that are good,
      But surely it cannot be true;
    Or else I am certain, almost, that He would
      Give such a fine carriage to you."

    "Look there, little girl," said her mother, "and see
      What stands at that very coach door;
    A poor ragged beggar, and listen how she
      A halfpenny tries to implore.

    "All pale is her face, and deep sunk is her eye,
      And her hands look like skeleton's bones;
    She has got a few rags, just about her to tie,
      And her naked feet bleed on the stones."

    'Dear ladies,' she cries, and the tears trickle down,
      'Relieve a poor beggar, I pray;
    I've wander'd all hungry about this wide town,
      And not ate a morsel to-day.

    'My father and mother are long ago dead,
      My brother sails over the sea,
    And I've scarcely a rag, or a morsel of bread,
      As plainly, I'm sure, you may see.

    'A fever I caught, which was terrible bad,
      But no nurse or physic had I;
    An old dirty shed was the house that I had,
      And only on straw could I lie.

    'And now that I'm better, yet feeble and faint,
      And famish'd, and naked, and cold,
    I wander about with my grievous complaint,
      And seldom get aught but a scold.

    'Some will not attend to my pitiful call,
      Some think me a vagabond cheat;
    And scarcely a creature relieves me, of all
      The thousands that traverse the street.

    'Then ladies, dear ladies, your pity bestow:'--
      Just then a tall footman came round,
    And asking the ladies which way they would go,
      The chariot turn'd off with a bound.

    "Ah! see, little girl," then her mother replied,
      "How foolish those murmurs have been;
    You have but to look on the contrary side,
      To learn both your folly and sin.

    "This poor little beggar is hungry and cold,
      No mother awaits her return;
    And while such an object as this you behold,
      Your heart should with gratitude burn.

    "Your house and its comforts, your food and your friends,
      'Tis favour in God to confer,
    Have you any claim to the bounty He sends,
      Who makes you to differ from her?

    "A coach, and a footman, and gaudy attire,
      Give little true joy to the breast;
    To be good is the thing you should chiefly desire,
      And then leave to GOD all the rest."




THE BOYS AND THE APPLE-TREE


    As William and Thomas were walking one day,
      They came by a fine orchard's side:
    They would rather eat apples than spell, read, or play,
      And Thomas to William then cried:

    "O brother, look yonder! what clusters hang there!
      I'll try and climb over the wall:
    I must have an apple; I will have a pear;
      Although it should cost me a fall!"

    Said William to Thomas, "To steal is a sin,
      Mamma has oft told this to thee:
    I never have stolen, nor will I begin,
      So the apples may hang on the tree."

    "You are a good boy, as you ever have been,"
      Said Thomas, "let's walk on, my lad:
    We'll call on our schoolfellow, Benjamin Green,
      Who to see us I know will be glad."

[Illustration]

    They came to the house, and ask'd at the gate,
      "Is Benjamin Green now at home?"
    But Benjamin did not allow them to wait,
      And brought them both into the room.

    And he smiled, and he laugh'd, and caper'd with joy,
      His little companions to greet:
    "And we too are happy," said each little boy,
      "Our playfellow dear thus to meet."

    "Come, walk in our garden, this morning so fine,
      We may, for my father gives leave;
    And more, he invites you to stay here and dine:
      And a most happy day we shall have!"

    But when in the garden, they found 'twas the same
      They saw as they walk'd in the road;
    And near the high wall when those little boys came,
      They started as if from a toad:

    "That large ring of iron, you see on the ground,
      With terrible teeth like a saw,"
    Said their friend, "the guard of our garden is found,
      And it keeps all intruders in awe.

    "If any the warning without set at naught,
    Their legs then this man-trap must tear:"
    Said William to Thomas, "So you'd have been caught,
    If you had leapt over just there."

    Cried Thomas in terror of what now he saw,
    "With my faults I will heartily grapple;
    For I learn what may happen by breaking a law,
    Although but in stealing an apple."




[Illustration]




SOPHIA'S FOOL'S-CAP.


    Sophia was a little child,
    Obliging, good, and very mild,
    Yet lest of dress she should be vain,
    Mamma still dress'd her well, but plain.
    Her parents, sensible and kind,
    Wish'd only to adorn her mind;
    No other dress, when good, had she,
    But useful, neat simplicity.

    Though seldom, yet when she was rude,
    Or ever in a naughty mood,
    Her punishment was this disgrace,
    A large fine cap, adorn'd with lace,
    With feathers and with ribbons too;
    The work was neat, the fashion new,
    Yet, as a fool's-cap was its name,
    She dreaded much to wear the same.

    A lady, fashionably gay,
    Did to mamma a visit pay:
    Sophia stared, then whisp'ring said,
    "Why, dear mamma, look at her head!
    To be so tall and wicked too,
    The strangest thing I ever knew:
    What naughty tricks, pray, has she done,
    That they have put that fool's-cap on?"




[Illustration]




FRANCES KEEPS HER PROMISE


    "My Fanny, I have news to tell,
      Your diligence quite pleases me;
    You've work'd so neatly, read so well,
      With cousin Jane you may take tea.

    "But pray remember this, my love,
      Although to stay you should incline,
    And none but you should think to move,
      I wish you to return at nine."

    With many thanks the attentive child
      Assured mamma she would obey:
    Whom tenderly she kiss'd, and smiled,
      And with the maid then went away.

    Arrived, the little girl was shown
      To where she met the merry band;
    And when her coming was made known,
      All greet her with a welcome bland.

    They dance, they play, and sweetly sing,
      In every sport each one partakes;
    And now the servants sweetmeats bring,
      With wine and jellies, fruit and cakes.

    Then comes papa, who says, "My dears,
      The magic lantern if you'd see,
    And that which on the wall appears,
      Leave off your play, and follow me."

    While Frances too enjoy'd the sight,
      Where moving figures all combine
    To raise her wonder and delight,
      She hears, alas! the clock strike nine.

    "Miss Fanny's maid for her is come."--
      "Oh dear, how soon!" the children cry;
    They press, but Fanny will go home,
      And bids her little friends good bye.

    "See, dear mamma, I have not stay'd."
      "Good girl, indeed," mamma replies,
    "I knew you'd do as you had said,
      And now you'll find you've won a prize.

    "So come, my love, and see the man
      Whom I desired at nine to call."
    Down stairs young Frances quickly ran,
      And found him waiting in the hall.

    "Here, Miss, are pretty birds to buy,
      A parrot or macaw so gay;
    A speckled dove with scarlet eye:
      A linnet or a chattering jay.

    "Would you a Java sparrow love?"
      "No, no, I thank you," said the child;
    "I'll have a beauteous cooing dove,
      So harmless, innocent, and mild."

    "Your choice, my Fanny, I commend,
      Few birds can with the dove compare;
    But, lest it pine without a friend,
      I give you leave to choose a pair."



[Illustration]




CARELESS MATILDA.


    "Again, Matilda, is your work undone!
    Your scissors, where are they? your thimble, gone?
    Your needles, pins, and thread and tapes all lost;
    Your housewife here, and there your workbag toss'd.

    "Fie, fie, my child! indeed this will not do,
    Your hair uncomb'd, your frock in tatters, too;
    I'm now resolved no more delays to grant,
    To learn of her, I'll send you to your aunt."
    In vain Matilda wept, entreated, pray'd,
    In vain a promise of amendment made.

      Arrived at Austere Hall, Matilda sigh'd,
    By Lady Rigid when severely eyed:
    "You read and write, and work well, as I'm told,
    Are gentle, kind, good-natured, and not bold;
    But very careless, negligent, and wild--
    You'll leave me, as I hope, a different child."

    The little girl next morn a favour asks;
    "I wish to take a walk."--"Go, learn your tasks,"
    Replies her aunt, "nor fruitlessly repine:
    Your room you'll leave not till you're call'd to dine."
    As there Matilda sat, o'erwhelm'd with shame,
    A dame appear'd, Disorder was her name:
    Her hair and dress neglected--soil'd her face,
    Her mien unseemly, and devoid of grace.

    "Here, child," said she, "my mistress sends you this,
    A bag of silks--a flower, not work'd amiss--
    A polyanthus bright, and wondrous gay,
    You'll copy it by noon, she bade me say."
    Disorder grinn'd, and shuffling walk'd away.

    Entangled were the silks of every hue,
    Confused and mix'd were shades of pink, green, blue;
    She took a thread, compared it with the flower:
    "To finish this is not within my power.
    Well-sorted silks had Lady Rigid sent,
    I might have work'd, if such was her intent."
    She sigh'd, and melted into sobs and tears:
    She hears a step, and at the door appears
    A pretty maiden, clean, well-dress'd, and neat,
    Her voice was soft, her looks sedate, yet sweet.
    "My name is Order: do not cry, my love;
    Attend to me, and thus you may improve."
    She took the silks, and drew out shade by shade,
    In separate skeins, and each with care she laid;
    Then smiling kindly, left the little maid.

    She leaves the room--"I've done my task," she cries,
    The lady look'd, and scarce believed her eyes;
    Yet soon her harshness changed to glad surprise:
    "Why, this is well, a very pretty flower,
    Work'd so exact, and done within the hour!
    And now amuse yourself, and walk, or play."
    Thus pass'd Matilda this much dreaded day.
    At all her tasks, Disorder would attend;
    At all her tasks, still Order stood her friend.
    With tears and sighs her studies oft began,
    These into smiles were changed by Order's plan.
    No longer Lady Rigid seem'd severe:
    The negligent alone her eye need fear.

    And now the day, the wish'd-for day, is come,
    When young Matilda may revisit home.
    "You quit me, child, but oft to mind recall
    The time you spent with me at Austere Hall.
    And now, my dear, I'll give you one of these
    To be your maid--take with you which you please.
    What! from Disorder do you frighten'd start?"
    Matilda clasp'd sweet Order to her heart,
    And said, "From thee, best friend, I'll never part."




THE VIOLET.


    Down in a green and shady bed,
      A modest violet grew;
    Its stalk was bent, it hung its head
      As if to hide from view.

    And yet it was a lovely flower,
      Its colour bright and fair;
    It might have graced a rosy bower,
      Instead of hiding there.

    Yet thus it was content to bloom,
      In modest tints arrayed;
    And there diffused a sweet perfume
      Within the silent shade.

    Then let me to the valley go
      This pretty flower to see;
    That I may also learn to grow
      In sweet humility.




[Illustration]




THE ORPHAN.


    My father and mother are dead,
      Nor friend, nor relation I know;
    And now the cold earth is their bed,
      And daisies will over them grow.

    I cast my eyes into the tomb,
      The sight made me bitterly cry;
    I said, "And is this the dark room,
      Where my father and mother must lie?"

    I cast my eyes round me again,
      In hopes some protector to see;
    Alas! but the search was in vain,
      For none had compassion on me.

    I cast my eyes up to the sky,
      I groan'd, though I said not a word;
    Yet God was not deaf to my cry,
      The Friend of the fatherless heard.

    For since I have trusted his care,
      And learn'd on his word to depend,
    He has kept me from every snare,
      And been my best Father and Friend.




[Illustration]




THE DISAPPOINTMENT.


    In tears to her mother poor Harriet came,
      Let us listen to hear what she says:
    "O see, dear mamma, it is pouring with rain,
      We cannot go out in the chaise.

    "All the week I have long'd for this holiday so,
      And fancied the minutes were hours;
    And now that I'm dress'd and all ready to go,
      Do look at those terrible showers!"

    "I'm sorry, my dear," her kind mother replied,
      The rain disappoints us to-day;
    But sorrow still more that you fret for a ride,
      In such an extravagant way.

    "These slight disappointments are sent to prepare
      For what may hereafter befall;
    For seasons of _real_ disappointment and care,
      Which commonly happen to all.

    "For just like to-day with its holiday lost,
      Is life and its comforts at best:
    Our pleasures are blighted, our purposes cross'd,
      To teach us it is not our rest.

    "And when those distresses and crosses appear,
      With which you may shortly be tried,
    You'll wonder that ever you wasted a tear
      On merely the loss of a ride.

    "But though the world's pleasures are fleeting and vain,
      Religion is lasting and true;
    Real pleasure and peace in her paths you may gain,
      Nor will disappointment ensue."




JAMES AND THE SHOULDER OF MUTTON.


    Young Jem at noon return'd from school,
      As hungry as could be,
    He cried to Sue, the servant-maid,
      "My dinner give to me."

    Said Sue, "It is not yet come home;
      Besides, it is not late."
    "No matter that," cries little Jem,
      "I do not like to wait."

    Quick to the baker's Jemmy went
      And ask'd, "Is dinner done?"
    "It is," replied the baker's man.
      "Then home I'll with it run."

    "Nay, Sir," replied he prudently,
      "I tell you 'tis too hot,
    And much too heavy 'tis for you."
      "I tell you it is not.

    "Papa, mamma, are both gone out,
      And I for dinner long;
    So give it me, it is all mine,
      And, baker, hold your tongue.

    "A shoulder 'tis of mutton nice!
      And batter-pudding too;
    I'm glad of that, it is so good;
      How clever is our Sue!"

[Illustration]

    Now near the door young Jem was come,
      He round the corner turn'd,
    But oh, sad fate! unlucky chance!
      The dish his fingers burn'd.

    Now in the kennel down fell dish,
      And down fell all the meat;
    Swift went the pudding in the stream,
      And sail'd along the street.

    The people laugh'd, and rude boys grinn'd
      At mutton's hapless fall;
    But though ashamed, young Jemmy cried.
      "Better lose part than all."

    The shoulder by the knuckle seized,
      His hands both grasp'd it fast,
    And deaf to all their gibes and cries,
      He gain'd his home at last.

    "Impatience is a fault," cries Jem,
      "The baker told me true;
    In future I will patient be,
      And mind what says our Sue."




THE GOOD-NATURED GIRLS.


    Two good little children, named Mary and Ann,
    Both happily live, as good girls always can;
    And though they are not either sullen or mute,
    They seldom or never are heard to dispute.

[Illustration]

    If one wants a thing that the other would like--
    Well,--what do they do? Must they quarrel and strike?
    No, each is so willing to give up her own,
    That such disagreements are there never known.

    If one of them happens to have something nice,
    Directly she offers her sister a slice;
    And never, like some greedy children, would try
    To eat in a corner with nobody by!

    When papa or mamma has a job to be done,
    These good little children immediately run;
    Nor dispute whether this or the other should go,
    They _would_ be ashamed to behave themselves so!

    Whatever occurs, in their work or their play,
    They are willing to yield, and give up their own way:
    Then now let us try their example to mind,
    And always, like them, be obliging and kind.




[Illustration]




TO A LITTLE GIRL THAT HAS TOLD A LIE.


    And has my darling told a lie?
    Did she forget that GOD was by?
    That GOD, who saw the things she did,
    From whom no action can be hid;
    Did she forget that GOD could see
    And hear, wherever she might be?

    He made your eyes, and can discern
    Whichever way you think to turn;
    He made your ears, and he can hear
    When you think nobody is near;
    In every place, by night or day,
    He watches all you do and say.

    Oh, how I wish you would but try
    To act, as shall not need a lie;
    And when you wish a thing to do,
    That has been once forbidden you,
    Remember that, nor ever dare
    To disobey--for GOD is there.

[Illustration]

    Why should you fear the truth to tell?
    Does falsehood ever do so well?
    Can you be satisfied to know,
    There's something wrong to hide below?
    No! let your fault be what it may,
    To own it is the happy way.

    So long as you your crime conceal,
    You cannot light and gladsome feel:
    Your little heart will seem oppress'd,
    As if a weight were on your breast;
    And e'en your mother's eye to meet,
    Will tinge your face with shame and heat.

    Yes, GOD has made your duty clear,
    By every blush, by every fear;
    And conscience, like an angel kind,
    Keeps watch to bring it to your mind:
    Its friendly warnings ever heed,
    And neither tell a lie--nor need.




[Illustration]




DIRTY JIM.


    There was one little Jim,
    'Tis reported of him,
      And must be to his lasting disgrace,
    That he never was seen
    With hands at all clean,
      Nor yet ever clean was his face.

    His friends were much hurt
    To see so much dirt,
      And often they made him quite clean;
    But all was in vain,
    He got dirty again,
      And not at all fit to be seen.

    It gave him no pain
    To hear them complain,
      Nor his own dirty clothes to survey:
    His indolent mind
    No pleasure could find
      In tidy and wholesome array.

    The idle and bad,
    Like this little lad,
      May love dirty ways, to be sure;
    But good boys are seen
    To be decent and clean,
      Although they are ever so poor.

[Illustration]




MEDDLESOME MATTY.


    One ugly trick has often spoil'd
      The sweetest and the best;
    Matilda, though a pleasant child,
      One ugly trick possess'd,
    Which, like a cloud before the skies,
    Hid all her better qualities.

    Sometimes she'd lift the tea-pot lid,
      To peep at what was in it;
    Or tilt the kettle, if you did
      But turn your back a minute.
    In vain you told her not to touch,
    Her trick of meddling grew so much.

    Her grandmamma went out one day,
      And by mistake she laid
    Her spectacles and snuff-box gay
      Too near the little maid;
    "Ah! well," thought she, "I'll try them on,
    As soon as grandmamma is gone."

    Forthwith she placed upon her nose
      The glasses large and wide;
    And looking round, as I suppose,
      The snuff-box too she spied:
    "Oh! what a pretty box is that;
    I'll open it," said little Matt.

    "I know that grandmamma would say,
      'Don't meddle with it, dear;'
    But then, she's far enough away,
      And no one else is near:
    Besides, what can there be amiss
    In opening such a box as this?"

    So thumb and finger went to work
      To move the stubborn lid,
    And presently a mighty jerk
      The mighty mischief did;
    For all at once, ah! woful case,
    The snuff came puffing in her face.

    Poor eyes, and nose, and mouth, beside
      A dismal sight presented;
    In vain, as bitterly she cried,
      Her folly she repented.
    In vain she ran about for ease;
    She could do nothing now but sneeze.

    She dash'd the spectacles away,
      To wipe her tingling eyes,
    And as in twenty bits they lay,
      Her grandmamma she spies.
    "Heyday! and what's the matter now?"
    Says grandmamma, with lifted brow.

    Matilda, smarting with the pain,
      And tingling still, and sore,
    Made many a promise to refrain
      From meddling evermore.
    And 'tis a fact, as I have heard,
    She ever since has kept her word.




[Illustration]




THE BUTTERFLY.


    The Butterfly, an idle thing,
    Nor honey makes, nor yet can sing,
      As do the bee and bird;
    Nor does it, like the prudent ant,
    Lay up the grain for times of want,
      A wise and cautious hoard.

    My youth is but a summer's day:
    Then like the bee and ant I'll lay
      A store of learning by;
    And though from flower to flower I rove,
    My stock of wisdom I'll improve
      Nor be a butterfly.




THE GAUDY FLOWER.


    Why does my Anna toss her head,
      And look so scornfully around,
    As if she scarcely deign'd to tread
      Upon the daisy-dappled ground?

    Does fancied beauty fire thine eye,
      The brilliant tint, the satin skin?
    Does the loved glass, in passing by,
      Reflect a graceful form and thin?

[Illustration]

    Alas! that form, and brilliant fire,
      Will never win beholder's love;
    It may, indeed, make fools admire,
      But ne'er the wise and good can move.

    So grows the tulip, gay and bold,
      The broadest sunshine its delight
    Like rubies, or like burnish'd gold,
      It shows its petals, glossy bright.

    But who the gaudy floweret crops,
      As if to court a sweet perfume!
    Admired it blows, neglected drops,
      And sinks unheeded to its doom.

    The virtues of the heart may move
      Affections of a genial kind;
    While beauty fails to stir our love,
      And wins the eye, but not the mind.

[Illustration]




GEORGE AND THE CHIMNEY-SWEEP.


    His petticoats now George cast off,
      For he was four years old;
    His trousers were of nankeen stuff,
      With buttons bright as gold.
    "May I," said George, "just go abroad,
      My pretty clothes to show?
    May I, mamma? but speak the word;"
      The answer was, "No, no."

    "Go, run below, George, in the court.
      But go not in the street,
    Lest boys with you should make some sport,
      Or gipsies you should meet."
    Yet, though forbidden, he went out,
      That other boys might spy,
    And proudly there he walk'd about,
      And thought--"How fine am I!"

[Illustration]

    But whilst he strutted through the street,
      With looks both vain and pert,
    A sweep-boy pass'd, whom not to meet,
      He slipp'd--into the dirt.
    The sooty lad, whose heart was kind,
      To help him quickly ran,
    And grasp'd his arm, with--"Never mind,
      You're up, my little man."

    Sweep wiped his clothes with labour vain,
      And begg'd him not to cry;
    And when he'd blacken'd every stain,
      Said, "Little sir, good-bye."
    Poor George, almost as dark as sweep,
      And smear'd in dress and face,
    Bemoans with sobs, both loud and deep,
      His well-deserved disgrace.




[Illustration]




DEAF MARTHA.


    Poor Martha is old, and her hair is turn'd grey,
      And her hearing has left her for many a year;
    Ten to one if she knows what it is that you say,
      Though she puts her poor wither'd hand close to her ear

    I've seen naughty children run after her fast,
      And cry, "Martha, run, there's a bullock so bold;"
    And when she was frighten'd,--laugh at her at last,
      Because she believed the sad stories they told.

    I've seen others put their mouths close to her ear,
      And make signs as if they had something to say;
    And when she said, "Master, I'm deaf, and can't hear,"
      Point at her and mock her, and scamper away.

    Ah! wicked the children poor Martha to tease,
      As if she had not enough else to endure;
    They rather should try her affliction to ease,
      And soothe a disorder that nothing can cure.

    One day, when those children themselves are grown old,
      And one may be deaf, and another be lame,
    Perhaps they may find that some children, as bold,
      May tease them, and mock them, and serve them the same.

    Then, when they reflect on the days of their youth,
      A faithful account will their consciences keep,
    And teach them, with shame and with sorrow, the truth,
      That "what a man soweth, the same shall he reap."

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




THE LITTLE CRIPPLE'S COMPLAINT.


    I'm a helpless cripple child,
      Gentle Christians, pity me;
    Once, in rosy health I smiled,
      Blithe and gay as you can be,
    And upon the village green
    First in every sport was seen.

    Now, alas! I'm weak and low,
      Cannot either work or play;
    Tottering on my crutches, slow,
      Thus I drag my weary way:
    Now no longer dance and sing,
    Gaily, in the merry ring.

    Many sleepless nights I live,
      Turning on my weary bed;
    Softest pillows cannot give
      Slumber to my aching head;
    Constant anguish makes it fly
    From my heavy, wakeful eye.

    And, when morning beams return,
      Still no comfort beams for me:
    Still my limbs with fever burn
      Painful still my crippled knee.
    And another tedious day
    Passes slow and sad away.

    From my chamber-window high,
      Lifted to my easy-chair,
    I the village-green can spy,
      Once _I_ used to frolic there,
    March, or beat my new-bought drum;
    Happy times! no more to come.

    There I see my fellows gay,
      Sporting on the daisied turf,
    And, amidst their cheerful play,
      Stopp'd by many a merry laugh;
    But the sight I scarce can bear,
    Leaning in my easy-chair.

    Let not then the scoffing eye
      Laugh, my twisted leg to see:
    Gentle Christians, passing by,
      Stop awhile, and pity me,
    And for you I'll breathe a prayer,
    Leaning in my easy-chair.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




NEGLIGENT MARY.


    Ah, Mary! what, do you for dolly not care?
      And why is she left on the floor?
    Forsaken, and cover'd with dust, I declare;
      With you I must trust her no more.

    I thought you were pleased, as you took her so gladly,
      When on your birthday she was sent;
    Did I ever suppose you would use her so sadly?
      Was that, do you think, what I meant?

    With her bonnet of straw you once were delighted,
      And trimm'd it so pretty with pink;
    But now it is crumpled, and dolly is slighted:
      Her nurse quite forgets her, I think.

    Suppose now--for Mary is _dolly_ to me,
      Whom I love to see tidy and fair--
    Suppose I should leave you, as dolly I see,
      In tatters, and comfortless there.

    But dolly feels nothing, as you do, my dear,
      Nor cares for her negligent nurse:
    If I were as careless as you are, I fear,
      Your lot, and my fault, would be worse.

    And therefore it is, in my Mary, I strive
      To check every fault that I see:
    Mary's doll is but waxen--mamma's is alive,
      And of far more importance than she.




[Illustration]




THE SPIDER.


    "Oh, look at that great ugly spider!" said Ann;
    And screaming, she brush'd it away with her fan;
    "'Tis a frightful black creature as ever can be,
    I wish that it would not come crawling on me."

    "Indeed," said her mother, "I'll venture to say,
    The poor thing will try to keep out of your way;
    For after the fright, and the fall, and the pain,
    It has much more occasion than you to complain.

    "But why should you dread the poor insect, my dear?
    If it _hurt_ you, there'd be some excuse for your fear;
    But its little black legs, as it hurried away,
    Did but tickle your arm, as they went, I dare say.

    "For _them_ to fear _us_ we must grant to be just,
    Who in less than a moment can tread them to dust;
    But certainly _we_ have no cause for alarm;
    For, were they to try, they could do us no harm.

    "Now look! it has got to its home; do you see
    What a delicate web it has spun in the tree?
    Why here, my dear Ann, is a lesson for you:
    Come learn from this spider what patience can do!

    "And when at your business you're tempted to play,
    Recollect what you see in this insect to-day,
    Or else, to your shame, it may seem to be true,
    That a poor little spider is wiser than you."




[Illustration]




FOR A NAUGHTY LITTLE GIRL.


    My sweet little girl should be cheerful and mild,
      She must not be fretful and cry!
    Oh! why is this passion? remember, my child,
      GOD sees you, who lives in the sky.

    That dear little face, that I like so to kiss,
      How alter'd and sad it appears!
    Do you think I can love you so naughty as this,
      Or kiss you, all wetted with tears?

    Remember, though GOD is in Heaven, my love,
      He sees you within and without,
    And always looks down, from His glory above,
      To notice what you are about.

[Illustration]

    If I am not with you, or if it be dark,
      And nobody is in the way,
    His eye is as able your doings to mark,
      In the night as it is in the day.

    Then dry up your tears and look smiling again,
      And never do things that are wrong;
    For I'm sure you must feel it a terrible pain,
      To be naughty and crying so long.

    We'll pray, then, that GOD may your passion forgive,
      And teach you from evil to fly;
    And then you'll be happy as long as you live,
      And happy whenever you die.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




THE CHILD'S MONITOR.


    The wind blows down the largest tree,
    And yet the wind I cannot see!
    Playmates far off, who have been kind,
    My thought can bring before my mind;
    The past by it is present brought,
    And yet I cannot see my thought;
    The charming rose scents all the air,
    Yet I can see no perfume there.
    Blithe Robin's notes how sweet, how clear!
    From his small bill they reach my ear,
    And whilst upon the air they float,
    I hear, yet cannot see a note.
    When I would do what is forbid,
    By _something_ in my heart I'm chid;
    When good, I think, then quick and pat,
    That _something_ says, "My child, do that:"
    When I too near the stream would go,
    So pleased to see the waters flow,
    That _something_ says, without a sound,
    "Take care, dear child, you may be drown'd:"
    And for the poor whene'er I grieve,
    That _something_ says, "A penny give."

    Thus _something_ very near must be,
    Although invisible to me;
    Whate'er I do, it sees me still:
    O then, good Spirit, guide my will.



[Illustration]




THE CHATTERBOX.


    From morning till night it was Lucy's delight
      To chatter and talk without stopping:
    There was not a day but she rattled away,
      Like water for ever a-dropping.

    No matter at all if the subjects were small,
      Or not worth the trouble of saying,
    'Twas equal to her, she would talking prefer
      To working, or reading, or playing.

    You'll think now, perhaps, that there would have been gaps,
      If she had not been wonderfully clever:
    That her sense was so great, and so witty her pate,
      It would be forthcoming for ever;

    But that's quite absurd, for have you not heard
      That much tongue and few brains are connected?
    That they are supposed to think least who talk most,
      And their wisdom is always suspected?

    While Lucy was young, had she bridled her tongue,
      With a little good sense and exertion,
    Who knows, but she might now have been our delight,
      Instead of our jest and aversion?




JANE AND ELIZA.


    There were two little girls, neither handsome nor plain;
    One's name was Eliza, the other's was Jane:
    They were both of one height, as I've heard people say,
    They were both of one age, I believe, to a day.

    'Twas fancied by some, who but slightly had seen them,
    That scarcely a difference was there between them;
    But no one for long in this notion persisted,
    So great a distinction there really existed.

    Eliza knew well that she could not be pleasing,
    While fretting and fuming, while sulky or teasing;
    And therefore in company artfully tried,
    Not to _break_ her bad habits, but only to _hide_.

    So, when she was out, with much labour and pain,
    She contrived to look almost as pleasant as Jane;
    But then you might see, that in forcing a smile,
    Her mouth was uneasy, and ached all the while.

    And in spite of her care, it would sometimes befall,
    That some cross event happen'd to ruin it all;
    And because it might chance that her share was the worst,
    Her temper broke loose, and her dimples dispersed.

    But Jane, who had nothing she wanted to hide,
    And therefore these troublesome arts never tried,
    Had none of the care and fatigue of concealing,
    But her face always show'd what her bosom was feeling.

    At home or abroad there was peace in her smile,
    A cheerful good nature that needed no guile.
    And Eliza work'd hard, but could never obtain
    The affection that freely was given to Jane.




[Illustration]




SLEEPY HARRY.


    "I do not like to go to bed,"
    Sleepy little Harry said;
    "Go, naughty Betty, go away,
    I will not come at all, I say!"

    Oh, silly child! what is he saying?
    As if he could be always playing!
    Then, Betty, you must come and carry
    This very foolish little Harry.

    The little birds are better taught,
    They go to roosting when they ought;
    And all the ducks, and fowls, you know,
    _They_ went to bed an hour ago.

    The little beggar in the street,
    Who wanders with his naked feet,
    And has not where to lay his head,
    Oh, he'd be glad to go to bed.




[Illustration]




WASHING AND DRESSING.


    Ah! why will my dear little girl be so cross,
      And cry, and look sulky, and pout?
    To lose her sweet smile is a terrible loss,
      I can't even kiss her without.

    You say you don't like to be wash'd and be dress'd,
      But would you not wish to be clean?
    Come, drive that long sob from your dear little breast,
      This face is not fit to be seen.

    If the water is cold, and the brush hurts your head,
      And the soap has got into your eye,
    Will the water grow warmer for all that you've said?
      And what good will it do you to cry?

    It is not to tease you and hurt you, my sweet,
      But only for kindness and care,
    That I wash you, and dress you, and make you look neat,
      And comb out your tanglesome hair.

    I don't mind the trouble, if you would not cry,
      But pay me for all with a kiss;
    That's right--take the towel and wipe your wet eye,
      I thought you'd be good after this.



[Illustration]




THE VULGAR LITTLE LADY.


    "But, mamma, now," said Charlotte, "pray, don't you believe
      That I'm better than Jenny, my nurse?
    Only see my red shoes, and the lace on my sleeve;
      Her clothes are a thousand times worse.

    "I ride in my coach, and have nothing to do,
      And the country folks stare at me so;
    And nobody dares to control me but you
      Because I'm a lady, you know.

[Illustration]

    "Then, servants are vulgar, and I am genteel;
      So, really, 'tis out of the way,
    To think that I should not be better a deal
      Than maids, and such people as they."

    "Gentility, Charlotte," her mother replied,
      "Belongs to no station or place;
    And nothing's so vulgar as folly and pride,
      Though dress'd in red slippers and lace.

    "Not all the fine things that fine ladies possess
      Should teach them the poor to despise;
    For 'tis in good manners, and not in good dress,
      That the truest gentility lies."




[Illustration]




THE WOODEN DOLL AND THE WAX DOLL.


    There were two friends, a very charming pair,
    Brunette the brown, and Blanchidine the fair;
    And she to love Brunette did constantly incline,
    Nor less did Brunette love sweet Blanchidine.
    Brunette in dress was neat, yet always plain;
    But Blanchidine of finery was vain.
      Now Blanchidine a new acquaintance made--
    A little girl most sumptuously array'd,
    In plumes and ribbons, gaudy to behold,
    And India frock, with spots of shining gold.
    Said Blanchidine, "A girl so richly dress'd,
    Should surely be by everyone caress'd,
    To play with me if she will condescend,
    Henceforth 'tis she alone shall be my friend."
    And so for this new friend in silks adorn'd,
    Her poor Brunette was slighted, left, and scorn'd.
      Of Blanchidine's vast stock of pretty toys,
    A wooden doll her every thought employs;
    Its neck so white, so smooth, its cheeks so red--
    She kiss'd, she fondled, and she took to bed.
      Mamma now brought her home a doll of wax,
    Its hair in ringlets white, and soft as flax;
    Its eyes could open and its eyes could shut;
    And on it, too, with taste its clothes were put.
    "My dear wax doll!" sweet Blanchidine would cry--
    Her doll of wood was thrown neglected by.
      One summer's day, 'twas in the month of June,
    The sun blazed out in all the heat of noon:
    "My waxen doll," she cried, "my dear, my charmer!
    What, are you cold? but you shall soon be warmer."
    She laid it in the sun--misfortune dire!
    The wax ran down as if before the fire!
    Each beauteous feature quickly disappear'd,
    And melting, left a blank all soil'd and smear'd.
    Her doll disfigured, she beheld amazed,
    And thus express'd her sorrow as she gazed:
    "Is it for you my heart I have estranged
    From that I fondly loved, which has not changed?
    Just so may change my new acquaintance fine,
    For whom I left Brunette that friend of mine.
    No more by outside show will I be lured;
    Of such capricious whims I think I'm cured:
    To plain old friends my heart shall still be true,
    Nor change for every face because 'tis new."
    Her slighted wooden doll resumed its charms,
    And wronged Brunette she clasp'd within her arms.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




THE BABY'S DANCE.


    Dance, little baby, dance up high:
    Never mind, baby, mother is by;
    Crow and caper, caper and crow,
    There, little baby, there you go;
    Up to the ceiling, down to the ground,
    Backwards and forwards, round and round:
    Then dance, little baby, and mother shall sing,
    While the gay merry coral goes ding-a-ding, ding.




[Illustration]




THE PIN.


    "Dear me! what signifies a pin!
      I'll leave it on the floor;
    My pincushion has others in,
      Mamma has plenty more:
    A miser will I never be,"
    Said little heedless Emily.

    So tripping on to giddy play,
      She left the pin behind,
    For Betty's broom to whisk away,
      Or some one else to find;
    She never gave a thought, indeed,
    To what she might to-morrow need.

    Next day a party was to ride,
      To see an air-balloon!
    And all the company beside
      Were dress'd and ready soon:
    But she, poor girl, she could not stir,
    For just a pin to finish her.

    'Twas vainly now, with eye and hand,
      She did to search begin;
    There was not one--not one, the band
      Of her pelisse to pin!
    She cut her pincushion in two,
    But not a pin had slidden through!

    At last, as hunting on the floor,
      Over a crack she lay,
    The carriage rattled to the door,
      Then rattled fast away.
    Poor Emily! she was not in,
    For want of just--a single pin!

    There's hardly anything so small,
      So trifling or so mean,
    That we may never want at all,
      For service unforeseen:
    And those who venture wilful waste,
    May woful want expect to taste.




THE COW.


    Thank you, pretty cow, that made
    Pleasant milk to soak my bread,
    Every day and every night,
    Warm, and fresh, and sweet, and white.

    Do not chew the hemlock rank,
    Growing on the weedy bank;
    But the yellow cowslips eat;
    They perhaps will make it sweet.

    Where the purple violet grows,
    Where the bubbling water flows,
    Where the grass is fresh and fine,
    Pretty cow, go there and dine.

[Illustration]




COME AND PLAY IN THE GARDEN.


    Little sister, come away,
    And let us in the garden play,
    For it is a pleasant day.

    On the grass-plat let us sit,
    Or, if you please, we'll play a bit,
    And run about all over it.

    But the fruit we will not pick,
    For that would be a naughty trick,
    And very likely make us sick.

    Nor will we pluck the pretty flowers
    That grow about the beds and bowers,
    Because you know they are not ours.

[Illustration]

    We'll take the daisies, white and red,
    Because mamma has often said
    That we may gather them instead.

    And much I hope we always may
    Our very dear mamma obey,
    And mind whatever she may say.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




LITTLE GIRLS MUST NOT FRET.


    What is it that makes little Emily cry?
    Come then, let mamma wipe the tear from her eye:
    There--lay down your head on my bosom--that's right,
    And now tell mamma what's the matter to-night.

    What! Emmy is sleepy, and tired with play?
    Come, Betty, make haste then, and fetch her away;
    But do not be fretful, my darling; you know
    Mamma cannot love little girls that are so.

    She shall soon go to bed and forget it all there--
    Ah! here's her sweet smile come again, I declare:
    That's right, for I thought you quite naughty before.
    Good night, my dear child, but don't fret any more.




[Illustration]




THE FIELD DAISY.


    I'm a pretty little thing,
    Always coming with the spring;
    In the meadows green I'm found,
    Peeping just above the ground,
    And my stalk is cover'd flat
    With a white and yellow hat.

    Little Mary, when you pass
    Lightly o'er the tender grass,
    Skip about, but do not tread
    On my bright but lowly head,
    For I always seem to say,
    "Surely winter's gone away."




[Illustration]




LEARNING TO GO ALONE.


    Come, my darling, come away.
    Take a pretty walk to-day;
    Run along, and never fear,
    I'll take care of baby dear:
    Up and down with little feet,
    That's the way to walk, my sweet.

    Now it is so very near,
    Soon she'll get to mother dear.
    There she comes along at last:
    Here's my finger, hold it fast
    Now one pretty little kiss,
    After such a walk as this.




[Illustration]




FINERY.


    In an elegant frock, trimm'd with beautiful lace,
    And hair nicely curl'd, hanging over her face,
    Young Fanny went out to the house of a friend,
    With a large _little_ party the evening to spend.

    "Ah! how they will all be delighted, I guess,
    And stare with surprise at my handsome new dress!"
    Thus said the vain girl, and her little heart beat,
    Impatient the happy young party to meet.

    But, alas! they were all too intent on their play
    To observe the fine clothes of this lady so gay,
    And thus all her trouble quite lost its design;--
    For they saw she was proud, but forgot she was fine.

    'Twas Lucy, though only in simple white clad,
    (Nor trimmings, nor laces, nor jewels, she had,)
    Whose cheerful good-nature delighted them more
    Than Fanny and all the fine garments she wore.

    'Tis better to have a sweet smile on one's face,
    Than to wear a fine frock with an elegant lace,
    For the good-natured girl is loved best in the main,
    If her dress is but decent, though ever so plain.




[Illustration]




GREEDY RICHARD.


    "I think I want some pies this morning,"
    Said Dick, stretching himself and yawning;
    So down he threw his slate and books,
    And saunter'd to the pastry-cook's.

    And there he cast his greedy eyes
    Round on the jellies and the pies,
    So to select, with anxious care,
    The very nicest that was there.

    At last the point was thus decided:
    As his opinion was divided
    'Twixt pie and jelly, being loth
    Either to leave, he took them both.

    Now Richard never could be pleased
    To stop when hunger was appeased,
    But would go on to eat still more
    When he had had an ample store.

    "No, not another now," said Dick;
    "Dear me, I feel extremely sick:
    I cannot even eat this bit;
    I wish I had not tasted it."

    Then slowly rising from his seat,
    He threw his cheesecake in the street,
    And left the tempting pastry-cook's
    With very discontented looks.

    Just then a man with wooden leg
    Met Dick, and held his hat to beg;
    And while he told his mournful case,
    Look'd at him with imploring face.

    Dick, wishing to relieve his pain,
    His pockets search'd, but search'd in vain;
    And so at last he did declare,
    He had not left a farthing there.

    The beggar turn'd with face of grief,
    And look of patient unbelief,
    While Richard now his folly blamed,
    And felt both sorry and ashamed.

    "I wish," said he (but wishing's vain),
    "I had my money back again,
    And had not spent my last, to pay
    For what I only threw away.

    "Another time I'll take advice,
    And not buy things because they're nice;
    But rather save my little store,
    To give to those who want it more."

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




THE HOLIDAYS.


    "Ah! don't you remember, 'tis almost December,
      And soon will the holidays come;
    Oh, 'twill be so funny, I've plenty of money,
      I'll buy me a sword and a drum."

    Thus said little Harry, unwilling to tarry,
      Impatient from school to depart;
    But we shall discover, this holiday lover
      Knew little what was in his heart.

    For when on returning, he gave up his learning,
      Away from his sums and his books,
    Though playthings surrounded, and sweetmeats abounded,
      Chagrin still appear'd in his looks.

    Though first they delighted, his toys were now slighted,
      And thrown away out of his sight;
    He spent every morning in stretching and yawning,
      Yet went to bed weary at night.

    He had not that treasure which really makes pleasure,
      (A secret discover'd by few).
    You'll take it for granted, more playthings he wanted;
      Oh no--it was something to do.

    We must have employment to give us enjoyment
      And pass the time cheerfully away;
    And study and reading give pleasure, exceeding
      The pleasures of toys and of play.

    To school now returning--to study and learning
      With eagerness Harry applied;
    He felt no aversion to books or exertion,
      Nor yet for the holidays sigh'd.

[Illustration]




THE VILLAGE GREEN.


    On the cheerful village green,
      Skirted round with houses small,
    All the boys and girls are seen,
      Playing there with hoop and ball.

    Now they frolic hand in hand,
      Making many a merry chain;
    Then they form a warlike band,
      Marching o'er the level plain.

    Now ascends the worsted ball,
      High it rises in the air,
    Or against the cottage wall,
      Up and down it bounces there.

    Then the hoop, with even pace,
      Runs before the merry throngs;
    Joy is seen in every face,
      Joy is heard in cheerful songs.

[Illustration]

    Rich array, and mansions proud,
      Gilded toys, and costly fare,
    Would not make the little crowd
      Half so happy as they are.

    Then, contented with my state,
      Where true pleasure may be seen
    Let me envy not the great,
      On a cheerful village green.

[Illustration]




MISCHIEF.


    Let those who're fond of idle tricks,
    Of throwing stones, and hurling bricks,
      And all that sort of fun,
    Now hear a tale of idle Jim,
    That warning they may take by him,
      Nor do as he has done.

    In harmless sport or healthful play
    He did not pass his time away,
      Nor took his pleasure in it;
    For mischief was his only joy:
    No book, or work, or even toy,
      Could please him for a minute.

    A neighbour's house he'd slyly pass,
    And throw a stone to break the glass,
      And then enjoy the joke!
    Or, if a window open stood,
    He'd throw in stones, or bits of wood,
      To frighten all the folk.

    If travellers passing chanced to stay,
    Of idle Jim to ask the way,
      He never told them right;
    And then, quite harden'd in his sin,
    Rejoiced to see them taken in,
      And laugh'd with all his might.

    He'd tie a string across the street,
    Just to entangle people's feet,
      And make them tumble down:
    Indeed, he was disliked so much,
    That no good boy would play with such
      A nuisance to the town.

    At last the neighbours, in despair,
    This mischief would no longer bear:
      And so--to end the tale,
    This lad, to cure him of his ways,
    Was sent to spend some dismal days
      Within the county jail.

[Illustration]




ABOUT THE LITTLE GIRL THAT BEAT HER SISTER.


    Go, go, my naughty girl, and kiss
      Your little sister dear;
    I must not have such things as this,
      And noisy quarrels here.

[Illustration]

    What! little children scratch and fight,
      That ought to be so mild;
    Oh! Mary, it's a shocking sight
      To see an angry child.

    I can't imagine, for my part,
      The reason of your folly;
    She did not do you any hurt
      By playing with your dolly.

    See, see, the little tears that run
      Fast from her watery eye:
    Come, my sweet innocent, have done,
      'Twill do no good to cry.

    Go, Mary, wipe her tears away,
      And make it up with kisses:
    And never turn a pretty play
      To such a pet as this is.




THE APPLE-TREE.


    Old John had an apple-tree, healthy and green,
    Which bore the best codlins that ever were seen,
      So juicy, so mellow, and red;
    And when they were ripe, he disposed of his store,
    To children or any who pass'd by his door,
      To buy him a morsel of bread.

    Little Dick, his next neighbour, one often might see,
    With longing eye viewing this fine apple-tree,
      And wishing a codlin might fall:
    One day as he stood in the heat of the sun,
    He began thinking whether he might not take one,
      And then he look'd over the wall.

    And as he again cast his eye on the tree,
    He said to himself, "Oh, how nice they would be,
      So cool and refreshing to-day!
    The tree is so full, and one only I'll take,
    And John cannot see if I give it a shake,
      And nobody is in the way."

    But stop, little boy, take your hand from the bough,
    Remember, though John cannot see you just now,
      And no one to chide you is nigh,
    There is One, who by night, just as well as by day,
    Can see all you do, and can hear all you say,
      From his glorious throne in the sky.

    O then little boy, come away from the tree,
    Lest tempted to this wicked act you should be:
      'Twere better to starve than to steal;
    For the great GOD, who even through darkness can look,
    Writes down every crime we commit, in His book;
      Nor forgets what we try to conceal.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 10, blank line placed before the stanza beginning (Come, walk in
our garden)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Little Ann and Other Poems, by 
Jane Taylor and Ann Taylor

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE ANN AND OTHER POEMS ***

***** This file should be named 42947.txt or 42947.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/9/4/42947/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
