The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of the Zulu Campaign, by
Waller Ashe and E. V. Wyatt-Edgell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Story of the Zulu Campaign

Author: Waller Ashe
        E. V. Wyatt-Edgell

Release Date: June 15, 2013 [EBook #42956]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF THE ZULU CAMPAIGN ***




Produced by Steven Gibbs, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Transcriber's Note:

    Minor spelling and typographical errors have been corrected without
    note. Variant spellings, mostly proper nouns, have been retained:
    _Inyezane_, _Inyesani_, _Inyezani_, _Ingesani_, etc. The oe ligature
    is represented by [oe].




                               THE STORY
                                   OF
                           THE ZULU CAMPAIGN.


                                   BY

                MAJOR ASHE (LATE KING'S DRAGOON GUARDS),
         AUTHOR OF "THE MILITARY INSTITUTIONS OF FRANCE," ETC.

                                  AND

                  CAPTAIN THE HON. E. V. WYATT-EDGELL
                   (17TH LANCERS, KILLED AT ULUNDI).


       _DEDICATED BY SPECIAL PERMISSION TO HER IMPERIAL MAJESTY_
                          THE EMPRESS EUGENIE.


                               WITH MAP.


                                London:
               SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON, SEARLE, & RIVINGTON,
                  CROWN BUILDINGS, 188, FLEET STREET.
                                 1880.

                        [_All rights reserved._]




                                LONDON:
                    Gilbert and Rivington, Printers,
                           St. John's Square.




TO HER IMPERIAL MAJESTY

THE EMPRESS EUGENIE

_THIS RECORD OF THE ZULU WAR IS, BY GRACIOUS PERMISSION, HUMBLY
DEDICATED, AS A POOR TRIBUTE AND OFFERING_.


In Memoriam.

Worthy of the Race of Guzman, and of the soldier of Lodi and Arcola,
while recalling memories of him who gave to the gods of the Tiber the
gift most precious to Rome--Human Valour--PRINCE LOUIS NAPOLEON'S name
will live in the hearts of all his English comrades, as a type of pure
chivalry, of knightly generosity, and as a rainbow of Hope over two
great western powers, for centuries at war, but now allied in
friendship.




PREFACE.


Some apology or explanation may be deemed requisite, for delaying the
publication of this "Story of the Zulu War" for more than a year after
its conclusion. The little book itself was written very shortly after
the capture of the king, Cetywayo, and the tardiness of its appearance
has been, to a certain extent, intentional on my part.

Although it may seem ungracious and, perhaps, ungrateful to cavil at the
war criticisms and descriptions which, by every post and telegram, adorn
the pages of contemporaneous journalism, I would submit that the
practice of writing _ex cathedra_ on war topics the day after an
engagement, is too early to allow us to examine motives as well as
facts, so that we may form conclusions to which we can only justly
arrive, when "Time, the corrector, where our judgments err," has
softened prejudice and exposed partisan feeling. The worst and most
valueless criticisms on Waterloo were given to the world immediately
after the fight of Mont St. Jean. The most unreliable, and indeed
erroneous, opinions in regard to the splendid errors of Inkerman and
Balaklava, appeared before the Crimean war was ended, and many a hero,
elevated by the verdict of contemporaneous eulogy to a temporary
pedestal in the Temple of Fame, has since been dethroned by the calmer
and more honest judgment of a later generation. When the Emperor
Napoleon called us a "nation of shopkeepers," he, perhaps,
intentionally, paid us a compliment; for peace, commerce, and
prosperity, have, as a rule, I venture to hold, been more regarded in
our islands than projects of violence, warfare, or conquest; and this
with us has ever been an honourable characteristic of the Spirit of our
present Age.

But as Sir Bartle Frere, one of England's greatest, wisest, and most
humane administrators, was well aware, the great and time-honoured law
of self-defence sometimes compels a State, like an individual, to resort
to arms, and the Appeal of Battle, when all peaceful modes of
arrangement have been vainly tried, becomes occasionally unavoidable.
Then, and perhaps only then, we may be allowed, even by the Peace
Society and the Acolytes who trim the lamps for Mr. John Bright, to take
an interest in and feel proud of the disciplined courage, the love of
honour, and the sense of duty of which we read in the campaigns, where
those who are near and dear to us have fought and fallen under the
British flag. Then the commanders we may have known as subalterns, but
whose names are now in all circles as veritable "Household Words;" whose
careers we have watched with proud, yet kindly sympathy, and whose
triumphs we have seemed as countrymen to share; whose powers of
intellect and prescience array, regulate, and wield at will the grim and
stern materials at command; whose daring, and yet coolness in the midst
of death, acts like a talisman upon the rank and file--whose
providence, when one path fails, is ever ready for fresh resources and
designs--are not these the men of whom we may say with Tacitus,--

              _"Ratio et consilium propriae Ducis artes"?_

and of this class, I venture to think, were Lord Chelmsford and his
lieutenants. And when we are ourselves in the "sere and yellow leaf," or
have joined, mayhap, that "larger majority" which Gladstonian tactics
and energy cannot hope to rival, our children and children's children,
when they read of such names as Bartle Frere, Chelmsford, Wood, Pearson,
Buller, and Piet Uys, may look back to English History and see that our
"island mastiffs" have not become degenerate, either in courage or
generosity, since the days of Harold, the Black Prince, or that knightly
Sydney who fell at Zutphen!

Some experience of the Kaffir tribes and their characteristics, of the
physical and geographical difficulties which attend upon a campaign in
South Africa,--dating, indeed, as far back as a score of years ago, and
the interest which I have since taken in colonies where, as an Adjutant,
I passed some very happy years among Boers, Bok, and Kaffirs, had at the
commencement of the late war prompted me to follow its various phases,
with a view to write the story of the campaign. In this purpose I was
encouraged by the offers of many old comrades who were about to start
with their regiments for the seat of war, and who promised me by each
available opportunity the assistances of their several journals, notes,
and sketches.

    "But one I would select from that proud throng,
           .       .       .       .       .
    And partly that bright names will hallow song,
    And his was of the bravest."

And to those who have known that most accomplished gentleman and gallant
soldier, young, brave, cheery, and _debonnaire_, Edmund Wyatt-Edgell, I
need not say how delighted I was at his undertaking to correspond with
me, and, as far as time and opportunity permitted, to keep me _au
courant_ with the march of events. From the time of his arrival at Natal
to the fatal day on which he fell, he fulfilled that promise, and if any
merit be due to the narrative I now present to public notice, it will, I
believe, come through those descriptions which I received from my dead
comrade and friend--_Sit tibi terra levis!_

Another motive, or perhaps more than one, "pricked the sides of my
intent," and invited me to wield the pen upon a soil where erst I had
drawn a "regulation" sword. In the "unvexed silence of a student's
cell," i.e., London chambers, I could only watch the progress of the
campaign, without hoping to share in its toils or its dangers. I might
envy, but I could not participate--

    "For who can view the ripen'd rose, nor seek
    To wear it?"

In default of this, I could, however, follow in spirit the adventures,
by flood and field, of more than a score of old comrades and companions
in arms, who were winning honour and renown in a land not unfamiliar to
me. In the hasty and, with all deference I say it, somewhat ignorant
criticism of those amateur mentors who tell us how battles ought or
ought not to be won, and who, from the calm solitudes of Fleet Street,
would make or mar a military reputation, I venture to believe, was much
injustice done to the Commander-in-chief of our forces in South Africa.

    "A man must serve his time to every trade
    Save censure. Critics all are ready made."

And I was the more convinced of this partisan and hostile feeling from
the knowledge that, west of Temple Bar, and especially in the regions
where veterans do most congregate, in the clubs and haunts alike of
_vieilles moustaches_ and military neophytes, from the "Senior" to the
"Naval and Military," criticism was far less pronounced, and experience,
as it invariably is, was more moderate in stricture and charitable in
argument than elsewhere.

Lastly, the tragic fate of England's young chivalrous and knightly
guest, which formed such a terrible episode of the war and draped our
colours with mourning, even in the hour of victory, made a deep
impression upon my mind, and caused me insensibly to marvel at the
unworthy sentiments to which a large portion of the English public and
the English press at that time gave utterance. Political feeling seemed
then, as it now seems in poor Ireland, to override all sense of manly
honour, generosity, hospitality, or common decency. The slaughter, for
it was nothing less, of the princely and noble lad, who came to the
shores of his country's hereditary foe, as a messenger of hope, alliance
and future friendship, who had been taught by his father to love and
study our English laws and customs, and who, in his abandonment in that
fatal donga, must have felt shame for the comrades to whom his safety
was entrusted; the sacrifice, I say, of this pure and devoted spirit,
seemed to me to call for some record, less evanescent than a passing
note or a newspaper article. If I have spoken strongly of the living in
my sorrow for the dead, as a soldier I can but plead in vindication,
that, in all my remembrance of the records of our English army I can
recall no instance, save the one I have quoted, where an officer wearing
our royal uniform and holding a royal commission, galloped away in front
of his escort, and allowed a comrade to be done to death in unknightly
fashion!

In conclusion I may say that this little work, although written _con
amore_ and from details furnished to me by my friend, Captain the Hon.
E. V. Wyatt-Edgell, and others, lays no claim to historical value, but
assumes to be merely the _impressions de voyage_ of those who were
actors in the scenes described.

                                                            WALLER ASHE.

 Hare Court, Temple,
    _Nov. 1880._




CONTENTS.


                               CHAPTER I.
                                                                    PAGE

  Origin of Zulus--Their tribes--Senzagacone--Chaka--His
    wars--Innovations--Administration--Standing
    army--Death--Position of Zulus amongst kindred tribes--First
    contact with whites--The Boers--The English--Panda--His reign
    and death--Accession of Cetywayo--His promises to the
    English--Breaches of faith--The boundary question--Its origin
    and nature--The case of Sirayo--Its history--The Middle Drift
    affair--Other causes of war--The Ultimatum sent--Official
    declaration of war--State of the British forces--Cetywayo's
    army and its organization--Their tactics.                          1


                              CHAPTER II.

  Plan of campaign--Native levies--Special service officers--The
    advance--Pearson's column--Glyn's column--Wood's
    column--Utrecht--First brush with the enemy--Difficulties of
    transport--Action on Inyezani--Pearson at Ekowe--Glyn's
    advance--Durnford's failure--Isandhlwana--Description of
    camp--The battle--Details--Reconnaissance and return of Lord
    Chelmsford--Rorke's Drift--Causes of Isandhlwana--Remarks.        24


                              CHAPTER III.

  Ekowe described--The fort--Guard for the frontier--Raid on
    Dabulamanzi's Kraal--Another raid--Life in Ekowe--Wood at
    Potter's Kraal--Capture of Baglusini--Skirmish and capture
    of cattle--Destruction of Manyanyoba Kraal--Colonel
    Rowlands--Capture of Makatees Kop--Junction with Wood--Camp
    at Kambula--Coming in of Oham--Disaster at Intombi
    Drift--Death of Moriarty--Rescue of Oham's wives and
    people--Events that led to the attack on Umbelini--The
    Zlobani--The attack--Details--Death of Campbell--Narrow
    escape of Wood--Death of Weatherly--St. Helena and H.M.S.
    "Shah."                                                           67


                              CHAPTER IV.

  Effects of Zlobani--Description of Kambula Camp--Desperate Zulu
    attack thereon--Description of the battle--Deaths of
    Lieutenants Bright and Nicholson--Gallant rescue by Captain
    Woodgate--Force and commanders of the Zulu attack--Their
    losses--The English losses--Fortifications at Kambula
    Kop--Block House--Arrival of despatches--Exciting scene.         132


                               CHAPTER V.

  Organization of column for relief of Ekowe--The
    march--Heliographic signals--Camp at Ginghilovo--Disposition
    of the troops--Zulu advance--The battle--English
    victory--Death of Colonel Northey--English losses--Zulu force
    and loss--Relief of Ekowe--Meeting of Pearson and
    Chelmsford--State of Ekowe garrison--Barrow's cavalry raid on
    Dabulamanzi's kraal--British sentry firing on British troops.    156


                              CHAPTER VI.

  End of first period of the Zulu war--Organization of fresh
    advance--Reinforcements from England--Scene in
    Durban--Disembarkation of troops--Cavalry camp at Berea--Lord
    Chelmsford's arrival at Durban--His reception--Review of
    Lancers and King's Dragoon Guards at Cato Manor--Plan of new
    campaign--Composition of No. 1 column--Composition of No. 2
    column--Cask bridge over Amatikula--Forts Crealock and
    Chelmsford--Wood's reconnaissance to Blood River--Description
    of Blood River and its scenery--Appearance of Buller's Light
    Horse--Removal of Wood's Kambula camp--Grandier's capture and
    escape--His tale--Description of Dabulamanzi and
    Cetywayo--Death of Dabulamanzi.                                  184


                              CHAPTER VII.

  Lord Chelmsford with Wood at Kambula--Patrol by Buller--Capture
    of cattle--Scene from Kambula Kop--Zulu attack on
    patrol--Removal of Wood's camp to Mayegwhana--Wood's
    force--Scarcity of drivers and voorlopers--Newdigate at
    Conference Hill--Fort and depot at Conference Hill--Work of
    No. 1 column--Exciting incident with a convoy--Distribution
    of troops--Forts on the Tugela, Inyezani, and at
    Ginghilovo--System of guards and precautions against
    surprises--All ready for the advance--Recapitulation of
    military situation--Newdigate's forts at Landsman's
    Drift--Arrangements for garrisons in rear of advance--The
    Lower Tugela command--Patrol by Wood and Buller in direction
    of Isandhlwana--Second patrol by Buller--Zulu attack--The
    Prince Imperial on patrol--Reconnaissance in force to
    Isandhlwana and burial of the dead.                              221


                             CHAPTER VIII.

  Advance of the 2nd column--Landsman's Drift to Kopje
    Allein--Description of camp--Plan of campaign--Discovery of
    Port Durnford--It becomes the base of 1st division--Troops
    composing 1st column--Crealock's journey to Durnford.            256


                              CHAPTER IX.

  Death of the Prince Imperial--Lieutenant Carey's
    account--Discrepancies in and comments thereon--Feeling in
    the camp--Expedition under General Marshall to search for the
    body--Description of the spot--Recovery of the
    body--Court-martial on Carey.                                    268


                               CHAPTER X.

  March of the 2nd column--Kopje Allein--Climate of the
    locality--Sickness among the troops--Evil effects of
    Cardwell's system--Embassy from Zulu chiefs--Cavalry
    skirmish--Death of Adjutant Frith--Difficulties of
    transport--Reinforcement of Wood--Appointment of Sir Garnet
    Wolseley--Opinion of the troops thereon--Alleged
    inhumanities--The helioscope.                                    295


                              CHAPTER XI.

  Advance of 1st column--Description of route--Forts Crealock and
    Chelmsford--Causes of delay--Sickness of troops and its
    origin--Capture of cattle--Proposals for peace by
    Umsintwanga--His interview with Crealock--Surrender of
    Umguelumgwizi--Advance of 2nd division--Details of troops
    composing it--A fortified kraal--Fort built by Wood on the
    Umlatoosi--Patrol by Buller--Burning of five kraals in the
    Usipexi district--Amhlabatini--Depot there described--Envoys
    from Cetywayo--Advance to White Umvolosi--Wood's camp--Lord
    Chelmsford's ultimatum to Cetywayo.                              311


                              CHAPTER XII.

  Raid across the Umvolosi by Buller--Gallant rescue of a
    sergeant by Lord William Beresford--Buller's losses--Umvolosi
    crossed by the main body--Formation of troops into
    square--Total numbers--Firing of kraals--Advance of Zulus
    from Ulundi--The Zulu attack--Repulse of Zulus--Pursuit by
    Cavalry--Death of Wyatt-Edgell--Losses of both
    sides--Withdrawal of English army--Effects of the battle of
    Ulundi--Surrender of 700 Zulus to Crealock--Cause of retreat
    after Ulundi--Resignation of Lord Chelmsford--His farewell
    parade--Epitome of work done by 1st column, and why it was
    not present at Ulundi--Ondini burnt by Barrow.                   337


                             CHAPTER XIII.

  Arrival of Sir Garnet Wolseley--Reception at Durban--Changes
    made by Wolseley--His plans for the future--Attempt to land
    at Port Durnford and its failure--Sir Garnet at St.
    Paul's--Grand council of Zulu chiefs--Resignation of General
    Crealock--His farewell to his troops at Camp Umlalasi--Fetes
    in honour of Lord Chelmsford--Wolseley at
    Pietermaritzburg--Disturbances in Pondoland and
    Transvaal--Wolseley at Rorke's Drift--McLeod and the
    Swazis--Their appearance and habits--Wolseley at
    Intanjaneni--Surrender of guns by Mbelebele--Adhesion of
    various chiefs.                                                  359


                              CHAPTER XIV.

  Plans for the capture of Cetywayo--The Jantjis--Vijn's
    appearance at Victoria--His narrative--Its
    consequences--Despatch of Major Barrow and Lord Gifford in
    pursuit of the king--Their march--Description of country
    traversed--Gifford and Maurice sent on by Barrow--Marches and
    countermarches--Physical characteristics of country; its
    flora and fauna--Visit to kraal of friendly Zulus--Capture of
    two of the king's attendants--Women of the king's household
    captured--Captain and twenty Basutos join Lord
    Gifford--Gifford's stratagem to obtain information of the
    king's hiding-place--Cetywayo's refuge discovered--Forced
    night-march--Message to Major Marter--His arrival on the
    scene--Capture of the king.                                      379

                   *       *       *       *       *

  NOTES                                                              406




THE STORY OF THE ZULU CAMPAIGN




CHAPTER I.

  Origin of Zulus--Their tribes--Senzagacone--Chaka--His
    wars--Innovations--Administration--Standing army--Death--Position of
    Zulus amongst kindred tribes--First contact with whites--The
    Boers--The English--Panda--His reign and death--Accession of
    Cetywayo--His promises to the English--Breaches of faith--The
    boundary question--Its origin and nature--The case of Sirayo--Its
    history--The Middle Drift affair--Other causes of war--The Ultimatum
    sent--Official declaration of war--State of the British
    forces--Cetywayo's army and its organization--Their tactics.


The Emashlabatini country was originally occupied by a small tribe
called the Abanguni; of its more ancient kings little is known beyond
that they seem to have been of peaceful habits, making no wars, but
breeding cattle; also that the name of one was Zulu. In their own
country the appellation of Abanguni in course of time died out, though
still used by their neighbours, and for it was substituted Abakwa-Zulu
(sons of Zulu), Zulu and Undabezita. The tribe was composed of several
families or clans, each having its own chieftain. In the time of
Cetywayo's reign the names of these clans and their respective chiefs
were as follows:--The Uhutilezi, a family having two branches; Umnyama,
Cetywayo's prime minister, was chief of one, and Umtyubane of the other;
the Ubixela and Umgazi, who were divisions of one family, the former
owning Umvumhlana as chief, the latter Sigodi--subsequently slain at
Isandhlwana--whose predecessor was Panda's prime minister Masipula, and
his successor Mapoko; the Umtombelo and Umblalosi, also two branches of
one family, whose respective chiefs were Mabanda and Segetwayo; the
Uquabe, whose chief was named Rouhlo; the Uzimgu, whose chieftain
rejoiced in the appellation of Unfanawenklela; the Fakazi, whose chief
was Umkasana; the Umtanzi, with a chieftain Umbono by name; and the
Igazi, whose head was Umkanyile; the Amagungebe, their chief was the
notorious Sirayo; the Ukanyile, whose chief was Upagatwayo; the Ulanga,
their chief Umhlaka; the Umpingose, whose chief was Ganse; and the
Umhloben, a scattered family having no head.

The word Zulu, or Undabezita, was invariably employed in addressing any
member of these families, whatever his rank or station might happen to
be.

The first king of whom any particulars are known was Senzagacone, son of
Ufaina. When this king began to reign he had no legitimate offspring: he
had, however, a natural son by Unamdi, daughter of Umkeki, chief of the
Langmene tribe, named Chaka (the bastard). He afterwards married this
Unamdi, by whom he had a daughter Nuncoba, but no sons. She being his
favourite wife, the king, according to the custom of the country, "gave
her for a son," his natural son Chaka, thus legitimating him. When Chaka
was fifteen, his father, thinking he might become troublesome, sent to
kill him; but Chaka, being warned, fled to Dingiswayo, chief of the
Umtwetwa, where he remained until the king's death, though on the
occasion of his legitimation an invitation was given him to return to
the paternal kraal.

Meanwhile Chaka had become an Induna of great influence and popularity
in the land of his refuge; so when on the death of Senzagacone the Zulu
tribe sent to him requesting him to be their king, and he consented, all
the tribes through which he passed on his way to the Zulus accompanied
him; and the whole of the Zulu clans assembled to meet him, and he was
made king with great rejoicings. In the interim between Senzagacone's
death and Chaka's accession, Umkaibye (paternal aunt of Chaka) ruled the
Zulus and arranged for Chaka's return. It was now that the jealousy long
smouldering between the Umdwandwe and the Umtwetwa, the two most
powerful tribes in that part of Africa, broke into an open quarrel.
Uzwidi, chief of the former, attacked and utterly routed the latter,
killing their chief, Dingiswayo, Chaka's friend and protector. The
worsted tribe naturally applied to Chaka for help. Thereupon Uzwidi
immediately marched to attack the Zulus, and a great battle ensued on
the south of the White Umvolosi. The result was that the left wing of
either army was victorious; but both lost so heavily that they retired
to their respective countries.

On his retreat, Chaka was attacked by the Langmeni, but failing in their
assault, this tribe then deserted their own country and joined the
Umdwandwe. Having defeated another coast tribe which assailed him, Chaka
occupied both these countries, leaving the Emashlabatini district waste
and uninhabited.

Uzwidi had now gathered a fresh army, which Chaka, by a night march,
surprised and defeated between Kwagmagwasa and the Umhlatuzi river. He
then retreated, but was rapidly followed up by Uzwidi, who had soon
regathered his forces, and who succeeded in capturing much Zulu cattle
and slaying a number of men, women, and children, surprised in their
kraals by the swiftness of his advance. He then again retreated. Uzwidi
now made a great and final effort to crush his adversary. All the tribes
around were pressed into his service, and the result was that he soon
had an army--collected from ten tribes--far superior in point of numbers
to the Zulu force, which represented only two tribes. Chaka therefore
retreated before Uzwidi's advance, and eventually occupied a strong
position on the Inkankla range. Here he awaited his opponent's onset. In
place of the old missile weapon, Chaka had armed his men with a shorter
and stronger assegai, intended for use at close quarters; he therefore
gave them strict orders not to throw their assegais but to charge the
foe and fight them hand to hand. He also skilfully placed his force
amidst broken ground, so that it was impossible for the enemy to attack
in a compact and organized body. The battle, as usual, began in the
early morn and continued till after midday. The Zulus, carrying out
their leader's instructions, waited till the assault was delivered, and
then charged so vigorously on the foe that they swept everything before
them. Chaka following up this defeat utterly dissipated the Umdwandwe
army. Uzwidi fled beyond his own country, which Chaka annexed, and thus
became the chief potentate in that part of Africa, levying tribute from
all the tribes around him. Chaka now waged several wars. First he
attacked and despoiled the Mangwani, a tribe on the Drakenberg; then he
fell upon and extirpated the clan of Zulukanafu, a chief residing to the
north of that range. Soon after he sent an army against the Pondos,
which captured a considerable amount of cattle and then retreated.
Again, in the following year, there was a similar expedition, and the
Pondos sued for peace, which was granted. By this time Chaka claimed to
rule over the entire country, from the sea to the Pondola, to the
Drakenberg, and to the land of the Pondos. His next object was to
consolidate his power. Accordingly, the petty kings under his rule were
no longer recognized as such, but became tributary chieftains; if any
one of these was remiss in payment of his tribute, an "impi" was sent
"to eat him" up. From time to time Chaka would also call up these chiefs
to his royal kraal, where he would receive them with marks of
distinction, and ask their advice on state matters. Another important
step to weaken the power of the chiefs, and at the same time to augment
his own, was the establishment of a standing army. Military service was
made compulsory on all males, each being told off to a certain regiment
according to his age. Thus a man ceased to serve under the chief of his
own clan, but belonged to a king's regiment, which was composed of men
of all tribes. Similar divisions were also made amongst the females,
who had to marry into regiments at the king's commands, though on a
marriage cattle was still handed over to the bride's father or brother.
Furthermore, regiments were not allowed wives till they were entitled to
wear "head-rings," and this did not occur till men had reached forty
years of age. Chaka's next war was against the Swazis, whom he defeated
and made to pay tribute.

In the following year an immense expedition was despatched against the
Sotshangana, a people dwelling across the Somba Mountains, beyond
Delagoa Bay.

So large was this army that Zululand was almost denuded of warriors, an
event which was taken advantage of by Dingaan and five more of the
king's brothers, to treacherously fall upon Chaka, whom they slew,
together with his chief councillor, Umxamana.

The benefits conferred on his people by Chaka can hardly be
over-estimated; he had raised them from a small tribe to a nation, and
that nation a dominant one. As the Quirites were amongst the component
tribes of the earlier Roman kingdom, so were the Zulus or Undabezita
amongst the various tribes subject to the central Zulu authority, and
curiously enough this resemblance extends still further; the Quirites
were subdivided into gentes, or families, each with a distinctive name,
and in a precisely similar manner, as has been before stated, the
Undabezita were divided into sub-tribes or clans, each with its own
gentile or family name. Nor were his people ungrateful to the memory of
their first great king, for after the time of Chaka, the bastard, that
name was never employed in its original signification, but to the
present day a substitute, "Umlandhwana," is always used by a Zulu to
express that idea.

That Chaka was not averse to civilization and white men was evinced by
his treatment of Fynn and five others who were rescued from a shipwreck
in St. Lucia Bay. He even went so far as to accompany Fynn the whole way
to Durban, to see him embark on a ship sent round from Cape Town for
him, and to send at considerable expenditure in the shape of cattle two
envoys to England, which he contemplated visiting himself, if their
report should prove favourable. But this latter project failed in
consequence of the king's murder, and the messengers got no further than
Cape Town.

A year or two after his departure Fynn returned, and with Chaka's
sanction established a trading-station at Durban (1824). Once Fynn and
some white men, being called upon for aid, assisted Chaka to punish a
refractory tribe. When Chaka's army for the second time invaded the
Pondos, it was through Fynn's representations that they would come into
collision with the white men that the army proceeded no further.

On the army returning from the Sotshangana expedition, Panda, a brother
of Chaka, was requested to assume the chief authority, but he declined,
so Dingaan became king. Dingaan commenced his reign by killing all his
brothers, except Panda, and all the late king's most trusted ministers.
This caused great uneasiness amongst the chiefs, one of whom named
Umquetu wishing therefore to withdraw from Dingaan's rule, departed with
all his clan and cattle to the south. Coming into collision with the
Pondos they were extirpated; hereupon Dingaan despatched an army to
recover the cattle, which he regarded as his, from the Pondos. About the
same time another chief, Umzilikazi, also revolted, and withdrew himself
to the spot where Pretoria now stands. An expedition was in a similar
manner despatched against him, and after capturing nearly all his
cattle, returned therewith to the king.

Meanwhile the Boers had appeared on the scene at Natal, and they now
claimed from Dingaan a considerable quantity of the cattle captured from
Umzilikazi, alleging it had been originally stolen from them. To this
Dingaan replied by bidding them recover some cattle that a petty chief
had taken from him. Having done this and imprisoned the captured chief
at Maritzburg, the Boers again applied for their own cattle, and a party
under the command of one Peter Retief was sent to Dingaan. There now
ensued a game of "diamond cut diamond," the Boers trying to outwit the
king and capture him in his kraal, and Dingaan acting in much the same
way to the Boers. The exact course of events is unknown, but for certain
in the result Retief and his party were surprised and slain (Feb. 5th,
1838). Dingaan then invaded Natal, slaughtered many of the Boers, and
captured much cattle. His forces penetrated as far as Ladismith, whence,
after a heavy repulse in an attack on the Dutch laager, they retired
home. Encounters from time to time continued to occur between the Zulus
and the Boers with varying success to either side, till at length a
peace was patched up. Panda showed himself so active in this war as to
excite Dingaan's jealousy, in consequence of which he, with all his
people went over and joined the Boers. Soon after this (Jan. 1840) the
Boers, in conjunction with Panda, invaded Zululand. The great fight
occurred at Magongo, on the Umkusi river. Dingaan was utterly defeated,
and retiring with a few attendants beyond the Bomba range, was killed by
the Swazis. Panda now became king, and peace was made between the Zulus
and Boers, the former ceding to the latter the Natal territory as far as
the Tugela.

It was about this time that there occurred a struggle at Natal between
the English and Dutch, in which the latter, being worsted, retired to
the Utrecht district, where they received permission from Panda to
dwell; Utrecht, it is said, being assigned as their outside limit.

Panda waged no more external wars, but lived peaceably in his kraal,
breeding cattle. Most conspicuous amongst the sons of Panda were
Cetywayo and Umbulazi; these two, having quarrelled, waged a sort of
civil war one against the other, and in the result Umbulazi was defeated
and killed. Amongst the army of Umbulazi were John Dunn and about thirty
other white men armed with rifles. Cetywayo then quarrelled with another
brother, and the same state of disorder continued till Panda's death,
which occurred in October, 1872.

Cetywayo being thereupon accepted as king by the Zulu nation, applied to
the English Government to recognize him. Accordingly, Sir
Theophilus--then Mr.--Shepstone was sent as envoy, and publicly crowned
Cetywayo at the Umlambongmenya kraal, on which occasion he spoke thus to
the assembled Zulus: "Here is your king. You have recognized him as
such, and I now do also, in the name of the Queen of England. Your kings
have often met violent deaths at the hands of their people, but if you
kill this one, we shall surely require his blood of you." He then went
on to say, "that as the English had recognized him as king, they would
expect him to give all men a fair trial before condemnation. Even a
witch should be let off, and merely sent away to another district." To
this the Zulus returned that they would kill any man who went with the
king's women, any man who ran away with another's wife, any thief of
cattle, royal or otherwise; that a witch should not be put to death on a
first accusation, but should any persist in witchcraft, he should be
killed. And to this Shepstone signified his assent. The chiefs then rose
in a body and said, "We will so govern the country under our King
Cetywayo, and we look to England to support him as the king of the Zulu
nation." Shepstone replied that he hoped the Zulus would live peaceably
under the new king, whom England would expect to adhere to the terms to
which he had just assented.

But these promises were broken on more than one occasion. Cetywayo
having called up his army, and finding them tardy in response, and many
absentees on the plea of illness, forthwith sent a regiment to slay all
those thus absent, saying, "Sick men are no good; I will save the
doctors the trouble of attending them." Again, one of the divisions of
females being ordered to marry a certain regiment, objected that they
were too few. Another regiment was named, and further objections raised.
Then an impi was sent to punish these women, and a great number were
killed. Great abuses in the practice of "smelling out" by witch-doctors
also prevailed, though in this respect Cetywayo appears slightly better
than his predecessors.

It is now time to turn attention to what is called the Boundary
Question.

It has been previously stated that in Panda's time the Boers had settled
in the Utrecht district. From time to time cattle undoubtedly was passed
between the Boers and the Zulu king. The former assert that it was the
price for the absolute ownership of the land they occupied, whilst on
behalf of Cetywayo it is urged that it was merely a tribute from the
Boers, whose outside limit had been fixed at Utrecht. Be this as it may,
there kept occurring at frequent intervals outrages, robberies, and
reprisals on either side, Sirayo, whose kraal was nearest the border,
being the most prominent actor in these scenes.

Umbelini also now appeared, to further complicate matters. Originally a
Swazi, he had fled from his native land, and settled in Zululand,
together with his uncle Umbeliani and his people. This uncle joined the
Boers, taking his cattle with him. Land was assigned to Umbeliani by the
Boers close to where Umbelini was dwelling. No sooner, therefore, had
the former built himself a kraal than the latter attacked and destroyed
it. Thus ensued a contest between the Boers and Umbelini. The Boers
drove Umbelini from his stronghold, but failed to capture him. He,
retreating, erected a new kraal on the Dumbe range, north of the
Zlobani, whence he continued to make raids into Swaziland and the
Transvaal, which had now become British soil.

At Cetywayo's coronation this vexed question of the boundary had been
referred to Mr. Shepstone, and he, in accordance with a promise then
given, subsequently met the Zulu envoys at Conference Hill to hear their
claims in this matter. They then claimed the Buffalo river as their
original and proper boundary. In reply, Mr. Shepstone said that he
considered this was asking too much; but that a fair line would be the
Blood river and the old hunting road running close by the Kambula Kop to
the Pongola or Zulu side of Luneberg. He would, however, examine the
question more closely before coming to a final decision, which, when
arrived at, would be communicated to them.

During all this time the Zulu army had been growing more and more
restless, and the younger men especially were clamorous for an
opportunity of "washing" their spears. For this sole purpose they
contemplated a raid on the Swazis, then in alliance with England. But on
Cetywayo's applying to the British Government for its sanction to this
project, it naturally declined to allow its allies to be thus wantonly
attacked.

There also existed amongst the Zulu an intense antipathy to the Boers;
and Cetywayo, after his capture, himself admitted that had the Transvaal
not been annexed, it was a mere question of time how soon a war broke
out between his people and the Dutch settlers; nor can this afford much
ground for wonder, when the characteristics of a Boer are had well in
mind. The typical Boer is doubtless a pattern of hospitality, simplicity
of heart, fondness for his home and family, and of those general
domestic attributes which are so dear to an Englishman. But in his
relations and contact with the native races and real owners of the soil,
the Dutch Boer seems to lose all sense of reason and justice, and to
remember only those early and blood-stained annals of pioneering, when
the white man and the black neither gave nor asked for quarter in their
struggle for supremacy in the land. Indeed his intolerance of a native
is so intense that he cannot be induced to look upon him as a human
being, but he regards the unfortunate aboriginal as a wild beast to be
hunted and shot down. But the Boer has his fairer side, although his
type has as yet been unchangeable. As he existed when he ruled in Cape
Colony in 1808, so he now exists in the present day in his settlements
in the interior. He is uneducated, uncultivated, unprogressive, and
obstinate; but he developes qualities under adverse circumstances which
must command English respect. He is certainly domestic as far as his own
family circle is concerned, but, at the same time, the reverse of
gregarious in regard to the world in general. When he first commences to
farm and settle he likes to possess not less than 6000 and not more than
20,000 acres of good undulating "veldt." When he has obtained this, he
starts in his waggon with his wife, his children, his scanty supply of
goods and chattels, his cattle and sheep, and his only literature, the
family Bible. He selects a good spring of water, being careful that no
neighbour is located within at least ten miles. He builds his house with
one large central hall, with the kitchen in rear, and four or five
bedrooms opening out of the hall, all on the ground floor, and sometimes
with a wide verandah outside. Kraals for his cattle, fences to his
garden, and enclosures of 50 or 100 acres, are quickly run up; and so
fertile is the soil and so favourable the climate, that in four or five
years his garden will be full of oranges, lemons, citrons, peaches,
apricots, figs, apples, pears, and vines. His herds and flocks multiply,
his wheat and Indian corn thrive, and thus he lives in a rude but
grateful abundance. His sons arrive at manhood and marry; his daughters
are sought as wives, and if the land is good and plenty they remain and
farm near, and for each generation and new family a new house is built a
few hundred yards from the original. More acres with each generation are
brought under the plough, and the man who is a good farmer, good father,
and good husband cannot be brought to see that he must not covet his
neighbour's land when that neighbour happens to be a black man! Without
sentiment, without tenderness, and without a particle of enthusiasm, and
with the most circumscribed intellectual horizon, he has a stubborn
practicability which is admirably suited for the work of a pioneer, but
which never developes into a power of civilization amongst savage
tribes.

As has been shown in the preceding narrative the relations between the
Zulu king and the English Government had been growing more and more
tense. Two conspicuous outrages in the early part of 1878 at length
brought matters to a climax. These two events were the Sirayo affair,
and the Middle Drift difficulty. To understand the Sirayo business it is
necessary to enter somewhat into detail. Sirayo and his tribe had a
quarrel with one of the royal tribes--the Ischeni. This, like many
another tribal dispute common enough in Zululand, never grew to an
"assegai" matter, but encounters frequently occurred, in which sticks
only were used, and the object of the rival factions was to drive off
the opponent's cattle. The result of this, and a "law-suit" between the
parties, settled by the king, was that Sirayo lost all his cattle.
Shortly after this, one of Sirayo's wives, who had already been put
aside on account of having a son whose legitimacy was suspected, being
again in the family-way, fled with her paramour into Natal. Another
wife, in a similar condition, also accompanied her. Nothing was done at
the time, but Sirayo's sons subsequently learning that these women were
in kraals close to the border, having collected an armed band, crossed
the river Buffalo in broad daylight, seized one of the women, recrossed
the stream, and then killed her. The Natal Kaffirs armed and threatened
a rescue, but made no attack on Sirayo's party, who, on the same night,
made another incursion, and the second woman suffered the same fate as
the first.

Thereupon the English demanded the surrender of Sirayo's sons. Cetywayo
sent to Sirayo advising him to hand over cattle instead of his sons.
Sirayo replied that in consequence of the Ischeni dispute he had no
cattle; that he was aware that his sons had transgressed; and that he
was sorry. Again the English insisted on the surrender of the two young
men. To this Cetywayo replied that they were very young, and therefore
their conduct should be excused, and mercy shown to them. He added, that
beyond all doubt they had done wrong; that the English had good cause
for anger, and that he himself was displeased with Sirayo for not
sending either his sons or cattle.

The Middle Drift affair occurred thus:--At the very beginning of 1878
the English were constructing a road from Kranz Kop to the middle drift
of the Tugela. The men at work on this were interrupted, and driven away
from their task by the Zulus living in the district, and Smith, the road
engineer, who had landed on the island at this drift, was seized,
stripped of all his clothing, and much maltreated by the same people.
Reparation was demanded by the Government for this outrage. Furthermore,
from June, 1877, it was evident that Cetywayo was instigating Secocoeni
to hostilities; and even allowing that part of this chief's claim for
compensation was just, it was necessary that the former chief should be
made to understand that while arbitration was going on the law could not
be broken by either side. With great tact, Sir T. Shepstone kept the
peace until the Galeka and Gaika war was over, when Lord Chelmsford and
his forces were freed, and it became possible to support words by
action. Such were the events which led to the sending of an ultimatum by
Sir Bartle Frere.

In the beginning of December, 1878, therefore, Messrs. John Shepstone,
Brownlie, Walker, Fynn, and Fyney were selected to be the messengers to
Cetywayo, to whom they were to communicate a message, of which the
following was the purport:--The boundary-line was to be drawn from the
junction of the Buffalo and Blood rivers to the Magedala Mountains, and
thence on to the district of Roundhill and the source of the Pongolo.
All the farmers on the frontier and disputed territory who could produce
any tangible evidence of damage or loss due to Zulu menace or warlike
demonstration were to receive a moderate but fixed compensation. A fine
of 500 head of cattle and the surrender of the guilty members of the
tribe was imposed upon Usirayo's (Sirayo) people, and twenty days only
allowed for the payment of the penalty; 100 head of cattle to be paid
for the outrage upon Lieut. Smith; Umbelini, who had given so much
trouble, to be handed over to and dealt with by the Transvaal
Government; the whole of King Cetywayo's large army at once to be
disbanded; freedom of marriage to be allowed when the parties thereto
were of age; justice to be impartially administered; missionaries to be
allowed to return to the Zulu country; British Residents to be
appointed; all disputes between Europeans to be referred to the king and
the resident; and, finally, no expulsion from Zulu territory to be
carried into effect without the distinct approval of the resident.

It was further intimated to the king that unless he showed his
compliance with these terms, on or before December 31st, then on January
1st, 1879, the British army would commence the invasion of his land, and
would enforce them at the point of the bayonet. The advance, it has been
said, originally was to have been made on the 1st; but his Excellency
the High Commissioner, allowing for the possibility of letters being
delayed by the swollen state of the river, the Tugela being then in
flood, extended his term of grace to the 11th. A _Gazette_ extraordinary
was published on January 6th, containing a declaration from Sir Bartle
Frere, demanding from Cetywayo unqualified submission, stating that the
general would after the 11th instant demand redress, and that the Zulu
people were to be protected. The following was its form:--


    "NOTIFICATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE HIGH COMMISSIONER

    "In July last two armed bodies of Zulus, retainers of the Chief
    Usirago, led by his sons and brothers, entered Natal and took away
    by force refugee women, who were claiming protection from the
    resident magistrate of Umsinga. These women were dragged across the
    border, and, it is believed, murdered. These acts of outrage were
    promptly brought to Cetywayo's notice by his Excellency the
    Lieutenant-Governor of Natal, but no explanation or redress could be
    obtained from Cetywayo. Twenty-one days were allowed to the Zulu
    king to surrender the three sons and brother of the Chief Usirago
    for trial, and as this term expired on 31st December, 1878, the High
    Commissioner entertains no hope that it is the intention of the Zulu
    king to afford the redress which her Majesty's Government has a
    right to demand.

    "Therefore I hereby make known, for the information of Cetywayo and
    all the Zulu people, that I have placed the further prosecution of
    this and all other demands for redress and reparation in the hands
    of his Excellency the Lieutenant-General Lord Chelmsford, commanding
    her Majesty's Forces in South Africa, with the request that he will
    take such steps as he may find necessary to protect the British
    territory from further aggression, and to compel the Zulu king to
    comply with all the demands made on him for satisfaction due to the
    British Government, or for the greater security of the British
    territory, or for the better and more peaceable government of the
    Zulu people. Lieutenant-General Lord Chelmsford will carefully
    notify to all Zulu chiefs and people who may come within his reach
    that the commands of the British Government are made on Cetywayo, as
    much in the interests of the Zulu people as of the English nation,
    and that till the 11th January the Lieut.-General will be willing to
    receive and to transmit to me any intimation of the unqualified
    acceptance by Cetywayo of all the terms offered to him. If such
    intimation of unqualified and complete acceptance be received by the
    Lieut.-General before the 11th January no further hostile movement
    will be made, unless rendered necessary by the action of the Zulu
    forces, and up to the above date Lord Chelmsford will be ready to
    consider any steps which the Zulu king may propose for the purpose
    of giving real and permanent effect to the demands of the British
    Government. But unless all these terms be fully complied with by the
    above date, the Lieut.-General will no longer be bound by the terms
    of the 11th December, but will take such measures as the forces
    under his command will permit for compelling the submission of the
    Zulu king; always bearing in mind that the British Government has no
    quarrel with the Zulu nation, and that the future good government
    and well-being of the Zulus is as much an object of the steps now
    taken as the safety and protection of the British territories of
    Natal and the Transvaal. And I do hereby warn all residents and
    inhabitants of her Majesty's possessions and colonies in South
    Africa, of whatever race, to be guided by this, my notification,
    and I do strongly charge and command all her Majesty's officers,
    ministers, and subjects, and all others whom it may concern, to
    govern themselves and to act accordingly, and to take due notice of
    and to pay due regard to the tenor thereof.

                                              "H. B. E. FRERE,
                                                      High Commissioner.

    "Pietermaritzburg, Natal, Jan. 4, 1879."

During the whole of December Lord Chelmsford had been indefatigable in
collecting and organizing the military forces at his command. The result
was that at this date (Jan. 11th) the return in the order-book was as
follows:--


                   GENERAL STATE OF THE FIELD FORCES.


       NO. 1 COLUMN (Headquarters, Thring's Post, Lower Tugela).

  Commandant--Colonel C. K. Pearson, the Buffs.

  Naval Brigade--170 bluejackets and marines of H.M.S. "Active" (with
    one Gatling and two 7-pounder guns), under Captain Campbell, R.N.

  Royal Artillery--Two 7-pounder guns and rocket battery, under Lieut.
    W. N. Lloyd, R.A.

  Infantry--2nd battalion 3rd Buffs, under Lieut.-Col. H. Parnell.

  Mounted Infantry--100 men under Captain Barrow, 19th Hussars.

  Volunteers--Durban Rifles, Natal Hussars, Stanger Rifles, Victoria
    Rifles, Alexandra Rifles. Average, forty men per corps, all
    mounted.

  Native Contingent--1000 men, under Major Graves, the Buffs.


      NO. 2 COLUMN (Headquarters, Helpmakaar, near Rorke's Drift).

  Commandant--Colonel Glyn, 1st battalion 24th Regiment.

  Royal Artillery--N battery 5th brigade Royal Artillery (with
    7-pounder guns), under Major A. Harness, R.A.

  Infantry--Seven companies 1st battalion 24th Regiment and 2nd
    battalion 24th Regiment, under Lieut.-Col. Degacher.

  Natal Mounted Police--Commanded by Major Dartnell.

  Volunteers--Natal Carabineers, Buffalo Border Guard, Newcastle
    Mounted Rifles. All mounted; average forty men.

  Native Contingent--1000 men, under Commandant Lonsdale, late 74th
    Highlanders.


                 NO. 3 COLUMN (Headquarters, Utrecht).

  Commandant--Colonel Evelyn Wood, V.C., C.B., 90th Regiment.

  Royal Artillery--11th battery 7th brigade R.A. (with four 7-pounder
    guns) under Major E. Tremlett, R.A.

  Infantry--1st battalion 13th Regiment and 90th Regiment.

  Mounted Infantry--100 men, under Major J. C. Russell, 12th Lancers.

  Frontier Light Horse--200 strong, under Major Redvers Buller, C.B.,
    60th Rifles.

  Volunteers--The Kaffrarian Vanguard, Commandant Schermbrucker, 100
    strong.

  Native Contingent--The Swazis, our native allies, some 5000 strong.

An idea of the numbers and nature of Cetywayo's force may be gathered
from the report of the Government Intelligence Department made at this
time.

"The Zulu army, as at present constituted, is drawn from the entire male
population, as every male between the ages of fifteen and sixty-five is
called upon to serve, without any exemption. The military force consists
of fourteen corps or regiments, divided into wings right and left, and
the latter into companies. The companies, however, are not of equal
strength, but vary immensely, even from ten to 200, according to the
numerical strength of the corps to which they belong. In fact, the
companies and regiments would more correctly be termed families or
clans, and each corps possesses its own military headquarters, or
kraal, with the following hierarchy, namely, one commanding officer,
chief, or Iduna-Yesibaya; one second in command, major, or
Iduna-Yohlangoti, who has charge of the left wing; two wing officers,
and company officers according to the need of the battalion. As a rule,
all these officers are in command of men of the same ages as themselves,
and the method of recruiting is as follows:--At stated and periodical
intervals, generally from two to five years, a general levy takes place,
when all the youths who happen at that time to have attained the age of
fifteen are formed into a regiment and undergo a year's probation,
during which time they are supposed to pass from boyhood to manhood. As
the regiment becomes disciplined and seasoned it receives large drafts
from other corps, so that as the elders die out young men come in to
fill up the ranks. The entire Zulu army consists of thirty-three
regiments, married and unmarried. No one in Zululand, male or female, is
allowed to marry without the king's permission, and this permission is
never granted until the men are about forty years of age. They then have
to shave the crown of the head, and to put a ring round it, and carry a
white shield, in contradistinction to the unmarried regiments, who do
not shave their heads and carry coloured shields. Many of these
regiments are too young for active service, others are too old,
consequently it is estimated that only about twenty-five regiments would
be able to take the field, and these would muster perhaps 40,000. Of
these 4500 are between fifty and sixty years of age; 3400 are between
forty and fifty; 10,000 between thirty and forty; and 22,000 between
twenty and thirty. We have heard a great deal about the drill of these,
but their movements, as far as we can learn, are few and very simple,
but very quickly performed in their own way. They form circles of
regiments in order to outflank the enemy. From this formation they break
into columns of regiments or companies, and from these into skirmishing
order, with supports and reserves. The sole commissariat of the Zulu
army consists of three or four days' grain, carried by the lads who
follow each corps, and, if necessary, a herd of cattle driven with each
column."




CHAPTER II.

  Plan of campaign--Native levies--Special service officers--The
    advance--Pearson's column--Glyn's column--Wood's
    column--Utrecht--First brush with the enemy--Difficulties of
    transport--Action on Inyezani--Pearson at Ekowe--Glyn's
    advance--Durnford's failure--Isandhlwana--Description of camp--The
    battle--Details--Reconnaissance and return of Lord
    Chelmsford--Rorke's Drift--Causes of Isandhlwana--Remarks.


The plan of the campaign now commenced was to advance into Zululand in
four columns, each column complete in itself, having its own artillery,
cavalry, and independent leader. Each column was also to keep up
communications with the columns on flank, thus creating, as it were, the
effect of an advance in one extended line.

By this means it was intended to thoroughly sweep the entire Zulu
territory, and at the same time to prevent any large body of the enemy
from slipping between the columns, and so getting to the rear and
delivering a counter-attack on the colonies.

In addition to the regular European forces, large native levies had been
raised, amounting in all to 7400. It is a great error to suppose that
these were without arms, dress, or discipline. On the contrary, a great
many of them came to us well armed with serviceable-looking rifles,
evidently of Birmingham or Sheffield make, while some of the
older-fashioned fire-arms had the Tower mark.

Nor were they clothed only with the conventional blanket. On the
contrary, their uniform was neat, and, at the same time, workmanlike,
and consisted of a corduroy tunic, or rather patrol jacket, and
breeches, with long boots of untanned leather, and a broad-leafed
_sombrero_ as a head-dress.

Several native corps were rapidly formed, in the following manner:--The
commandant and his staff officers were British officers, the captains
mostly retired British officers, colonists, or settlers; the
non-commissioned officers, white settlers of different nationalities,
and the privates usually Kaffirs.

Among the English officers who received commands in this native
contingent were Captain Nolan (Pioneers), Major Bengough, Captain
Russell (Rocket Battery), Captain Ulich de Burgh (5th West York
Militia), Captain Cherry (32nd Foot), and Lieutenant Hon. H. Gough.
Colonel Durnford had command of the whole column, which was to be
entirely native so far as the rank and file were concerned, and to be
composed of all the three arms--artillery, cavalry, and infantry.

There was also a considerable contingent of European Volunteers--more
especially of mounted men, whose total reached close on 1000.
Conspicuous amongst these were the Volunteer Hussars and Alexandra
Mounted Rifles, the Durban Mounted Rifles, Captain Raaf's Diamond Field
and Free State Horse, and a contingent of mounted Boers under Piet Uys,
who gallantly responded to Colonel Wood's spirited and soldierlike
appeal. These Boers were a splendid body of men, most of them crack
shots with the rifle, and although somewhat fierce and uncompromising
towards their ancient enemies, the Zulus, proved of invaluable service
through their knowledge of localities.

The following "special service" officers, sent out from England, had
also arrived and entered on their respective duties:--Captain Cherry
(32nd Light Infantry), was placed in command of the 3rd battalion Natal
Contingent; Captain Gardner (14th Hussars), was sub-director of
transports at headquarters, as well as Captain Huntley (10th Regiment),
who was posted to the River Mooi; Captains Essex (76th), and Hon. H.
Campbell (Coldstream Guards), were also directors of transports. Major
Hopton had this duty at Pietermaritzburg. Captain Brunker, of the
Cameronians (26th), had the command of a squadron of Light Horse.
Captain Barton (7th Regiment), was staff officer to Colonel Durnford;
Captains Pelly Clark (103rd Regiment), Spratt (29th), and Lieutenant
Lawrence (18th), were all employed on transport duty at Durban, where,
as most of the ammunition and stores were landed, their office was no
sinecure. Captain Macgregor (29th Regiment), was staff officer to
Colonel Pearson, and Captain Hart (31st Regiment) was on the staff of
Lord Chelmsford.

Meanwhile Cetywayo's term of grace had expired; the 11th of January had
come and gone without any sign from the Zulu monarch. On the following
day the war had begun, and the Tugela was successfully crossed. By four
o'clock on the 12th the Buffs, four companies of the 99th, the Victoria
Mounted Rifles, the native Sappers, the 1st Natal Native Contingent, and
the Naval Brigade were well over the Lower Tugela, near Fort
Buckingham. The pontoon worked remarkably well, making three trips an
hour. Four small boats were also employed. A herd of cattle was brought
into the camp by the vedettes, who also reported that a large Zulu force
was in position about twenty miles off, and also at Ondini. It has been
mentioned that four columns would be formed from out of the three (whose
details have been given above), and these four were now advancing into
Zululand in a line which partly described a crescent, of which the left
extremity rested on Luneberg and the Pongolo, the right upon the Lower
Drift of the Tugela, close to the sea, while the inner half of the
circle was represented by the boundaries of Natal and the Transvaal.

The centre may be considered as being at Fort Pearson, where there was a
strongly entrenched camp on the summit of a rising or bluff overlooking
the river Tugela. The column moving from Fort Pearson consisted of 1500
regular infantry, that is to say, eight companies of the Buffs, under
Colonel Parnell; six companies of the 99th, under Colonel Welman; one
company Royal Artillery and two 7-pounder guns, drawn by mules under
Lieutenant Lloyd; one Naval Brigade of 276 bluejackets and Marines,
under Captain Campbell, from her Majesty's ships "Active" and "Tenedos,"
with three Gatlings; 200 Mounted Infantry, under Captain Barrow, and 200
Mounted Volunteers (Durban Mounted Rifles), under Captain W. Shepstone;
the Alexandra Mounted Rifles, Captain Arbuthnot; Victoria Mounted
Rifles, Captain Saner; Stanger Mounted Rifles, Captain Addison; the
Natal Hussars, Captain Norton. Colonel Pearson, of the Buffs, was in
command of the column, and had to co-operate with him a native
contingent of 2000 men, under Major Graves, as well as two companies of
the 99th posted at Stanger and Durban. The total strength of Colonel
Pearson's column may, therefore, be set down at 2200 Europeans and 2000
natives.

The second or right centre column moved from Kranz Kop, a most
formidable position, supported by Fort Buckingham. This was the scene of
operations in 1861. The heights are commanding and look over a wide
field of country. The position is unassailable except from the Natal
side, and this was strongly fortified. Colonel Durnford, R.E., commanded
this district and attack, and had with him now the 1st Regiment Native
Contingent, which then consisted of three fine battalions, with three
rocket tubes, under Lieutenant Russell, and 250 mounted natives, making
altogether 3300 natives, officered by 200 European officers.

Following the line of advance to the left, and occupying about fifty or
sixty miles of frontier, we come to column three, the left centre
attack, commanded by Colonel Glyn. Take any good map and you will remark
how the boundary winds serpentine fashion in its length from Fort
Buckingham to Rorke's Drift and Helpmakaar. Helpmakaar made an excellent
base to Rorke's Drift. Being situated on a lofty plateau, it formed an
admirable place for a permanent encampment. It also had depots at
Greytown on the one side and Ladismith on the other. Colonel Glyn had
with him seven companies of the 1st battalion 24th and eight companies
of the 2nd battalion 24th, six 7-pounder guns with Kaffrarian carriages
under Colonel Harness, a squadron of mounted infantry under Captain
Browne, the Natal Mounted Police (150 men), the Natal Carabineers under
Captain Shepstone, the Buffalo Border Guard (Captain Robson), the
Newcastle Mounted Rifles (Captain Bradstreet), also the native
contingent (2nd Regiment), 2000 strong, under Commandant Lonsdale,
officered by 200 whites. From Rorke's Drift, about five miles over the
river is Ungusdana, and thence on the traveller comes to the Intalalala
river, which is about fifteen miles inland. The country all about the
district is rugged and broken, and calculated to afford positions of
great defensive strength. Colonel Glyn was, if possible, to bear a
little to his left flank after crossing the boundary with a view to
communication being opened with Wood's right flank. To effect this
connexion, however, there was a sad need of cavalry.

We now come to the extreme left of the advance, whose headquarters were
Utrecht, and which was thus composed:--Colonel Evelyn Wood, V.C., C.B.,
90th Light Infantry, commanding No. 4 Column; Staff Orderly Officer,
Lieutenant Lysons, 90th Infantry; Principal Staff Officer, Captain Hon.
R. G. E. Campbell, Coldstream Guards; general Staff duties, Captain
Woodgate, 4th Regiment; transport duties, Captain Vaughan, R.A.; senior
commissary officer, Commissary Hughes; commissary of ordnance, Assistant
Commissary Philimore; subdistrict paymaster, Paymaster M'Donald; senior
medical officer, Surgeon-Major Cuffe. Corps--Royal Artillery, six
7-pounders, Major Tremlett, R.A.; 1st-13th Light Infantry,
Lieutenant-Colonel Gilbert, 13th; 90th Light Infantry, Brevet
Lieutenant-Colonel Cherry, 90th; Frontier Light Horse, Brevet
Lieut.-Colonel Buller, C.B., 60th; Wood's Irregulars, 700 men,
Commandant Henderson. In addition, a few Boers were coming in, and more
were expected.

Utrecht is the most southerly part of the Transvaal, and lies upon the
border of both Natal and Zululand. It is separated from the former by
the Buffalo river, and, after crossing the Blood river, a few marches
bring one to the territories of King Cetywayo. From the lowest, or most
southerly portions of Utrecht, just where the Buffalo and Blood rivers
form a junction, to the port of Durban, on the coast of Natal, is but
100 miles, and the capital city is about thirty miles from Newcastle,
the most northern of Natal towns. The two districts are connected by a
tolerably fair road and a drift over the Buffalo river. Utrecht, in a
strategical point of view, wedged in as it were between Natal and
Zululand, cannot be equalled by any position of a similar nature. The
interior of this district extends away to the summit of the Drakenberg
range, one of which reaches an altitude of 4000 feet. Most of the
Utrecht land lies in what is called the "terrace country," and has the
advantage of the most splendid bracing air, added to which are mountain
ridge and peak, precipice, wooded gorge, and grass-land, and scenery
whose characteristics are of a grander and nobler nature than that of
the Cape Colony. The portion of the Drakenberg which runs through
Utrecht has its eastern front and glacis looking towards the sea, which
is about eighty miles distant, and as each terrace or range slopes down
the character of the country changes, presenting many of the features
of the upper portions of the Cape Colony, that is to say, broad
undulating downs in one part and immense flats covered with bush on the
other. All the principal rivers and streams of Utrecht and their
tributaries flow eastward to the Indian Ocean. On one boundary there is
the Pongola, and on the other the Buffalo, while the Blood river passes
through it with a south-eastern flow, and the Pifan does the same, but
with an inclination to the north-east. From the wild highlands between
these two streams issue the head waters of the Umoolosi, which traverses
Zululand and empties itself into St. Lucia Bay.

Wood's column marched from Utrecht on the 7th, so as to be on the
borderland in order to operate with the right-hand column on the
appointed day. General Lord Chelmsford had given orders that Colonel
Wood was to be at a certain point on the 10th, and consequently
arrangements were made to carry out these instructions. It was known
that Sirayo would probably oppose the crossing of Colonel Glyn at
Rorke's Drift, and Colonel Wood had been told, if possible, to get
sufficiently near to operate on the enemy's right and rear should such
an attempt be made. Leaving a small guard at his camps at Sandspruit,
the rest of Wood's force paraded in the lightest possible order at 1.30
p.m. on the 10th, and marched from two that afternoon until six p.m. A
halt was then made until 1.30 a.m., when by the light of a glorious moon
the advance was pursued. A mounted advanced guard was thrown out,
flanking patrols were organized and told off, and the troops moved in
the greatest silence, not a word in the ranks being allowed to be
spoken. At 3 a.m., a short halt took place, and the chief ordered
forward a reconnaissance, consisting of Buller's Light Horse, two
7-pounder guns under Major Tremlett, and twenty-four picked shots from
the 13th and 90th Regiments respectively. These men were to be carried
in some of the mule waggons, and were accompanied by the 700 irregulars,
horse and foot. Colonel Wood accompanied this advanced force, leaving
the remaining (main) body in charge of Colonel Gilbert, who was ordered
to follow at a fixed time. The advanced body arrived within ten miles of
Rorke's Drift at 7.30 a.m., and by eight the camp fires were lit and the
men comfortably having their breakfasts on the banks of a small stream;
the mounted men having at once off-saddled, the infantry piled arms, and
the horses and mules turned out to graze under a strong guard.

About nine o'clock the general, Lord Chelmsford, cantered up to the
camp, accompanied by his staff and an escort of 100 mounted infantry and
some Natal mounted police. The general seemed delighted at the celerity
with which his orders had been carried out, as in eighteen hours Wood's
party had covered twenty-seven miles, and the men and horses were as
fresh as paint. A long consultation took place with the general, and
then the order was issued for the return to the main body; but this was
not found necessary, as Colonel Gilbert met them after about ten miles.

In this day, or rather twenty-four hours, the men had marched thirty-one
miles, and were not fated, on camp being pitched, to enjoy the fruits of
their labour and toil, for soon after they were settled for the evening
a heavy thunderstorm came suddenly over the tents, and in a quarter of
an hour they were up to their ankles in a perfect river of water. The
tents went down in all directions, and in many cases poles were snapped.
The next day, however, a patrol of Buller's horse was paraded soon after
daybreak, as scouts had brought in information that a large number of
cattle were to be seen in the neighbouring kloof. Soon after leaving
camp Buller's men were fired upon, but the Zulus did not stand their
ground, and by the afternoon they had brought in nearly 1000 cattle.
Captain Barton, who had gone out later in the day with another party,
marched twenty miles in the direction of Umkanga's kraal, where in the
skirmish which resulted 550 cattle were taken, and seven of the Zulus
were killed and wounded. On the following morning a strong
reconnaissance was made in the direction of the Bushee Valley. The Zulus
were in considerable force, and their general tried to induce the
English skirmishers to follow him to ground of his own choosing. Colonel
Wood, however, kept his men well in hand, and contented himself by
sending forward two companies of the 13th Light Infantry, Colonel
Gilbert's fine corps, and menacing the Zulu flank with some score or
more horsemen, who, galloping to a favouring eminence, made capital
practice at the Zulu main body with their rifles at 700 and 800 yards.
The Zulus still continued to creep up in rear, getting what cover they
could from the bushes, and a sharp fire was kept up on both sides. As
the men in skirmishing order pushed the enemy gradually before them, the
mounted force harassed them on either flank, sometimes galloping round
to the right and left to obtain vantage-ground and cover, and then
dismounting in sections, and acting as infantry, while the main body was
kept carefully out of sight in the dense mimosa which was found in the
rear. The bush, as they advanced, gradually became more dense, and the
path scarcely allowed them to move in fours by a steep descent into a
wooded valley. Instinctively it was guessed that here would be the main
body of the foe, and this turned out to be the case, for away to the
left front, on a tall "copjie" or circular hill, about twenty mounted
Zulus were to be seen, evidently the commander and his staff giving
orders and directing the operations of the columns in the plain. The
firing had now become general, but the soldiers were not allowed to
waste their ammunition, and nearly every shot told with fatal effect.
Colonel Wood had taken the precaution to strengthen his flanks as he
advanced, and as the enemy could not tell how strong he was, the main
body being still invisible, they were completely puzzled by the daring
of the mounted men, who seemed ubiquitous. The guns were found rather a
nuisance; one of the carriages broke down, and the limber had to be left
behind, while the gun itself was secured. The head of the first line of
skirmishers had now made good their way through the kloof with slight
loss, and the Zulus attempted in vain to get round to its rear, but
found all hopes of such a man[oe]uvre utterly futile--as the flanking
parties were on the _qui-vive_. It was now Wood's turn to push them, and
he used the opportunity. Two more companies were advanced at the double
to force the centre of the Zulu line, and in a few moments we had cut
it in two. In the meanwhile one of the light field-pieces had obtained a
favourable position, and had got the enemy's range exactly, but the
execution done was not what could have been obtained with a good honest
nine or twelve-pounder. The pursuit was carried on for about a mile, and
the Zulus were scattered in all directions, but the commander was too
wary to allow his men to go too far, and the recall was sounded, and in
a short time brought back the excited fellows, puffing and blowing, to
rejoin the main body.

For some days this column continued to advance steadily without meeting
any serious opposition. Having moved on from the Blood River, Wood's
force encamped at Bemba's Kop till the 20th January. The country over
which they had passed since they left Utrecht may be described as a
succession of large rolling plains, interspersed in all directions by
watercourses (_dongas_), which radiate from the bases of the
table-topped mountains rising at intervals throughout this part of the
country. These watercourses are as a rule about twelve to fourteen feet
deep, and serve to irrigate the country, which seems prosperous and
well-populated. What would be called a road in England does not exist in
Zululand. The tracks made by the traders with their waggons answer the
purpose. These tracks are, however, tolerably good, and experience
proved that artillery could be moved almost anywhere, except in wet
weather. Waggons could pass each other at almost any part of the main
road from Utrecht to Ulundi, except at that portion leading across the
Inhlazatye Mountain, which runs along a narrow ledge, and where it
ascends the Intendeka table-land. Wherever the troops moved they came
across numerous kraals, each kraal containing from eight to fifteen
huts, and each hut ten to fifteen men. From Bemba's Kop they moved on
the 20th to Wolpoint, as nearly as possible seven miles west of the
White Umbolosi, and thence went on to Tunguin's Neck, where a laager was
planned and completed. After a reconnaissance made by Colonel Wood on
the 22nd, in which his troops had a slight skirmish with a small body of
Zulus, suffering no casualties, and inflicting a slight loss upon them,
he halted on the 23rd, and sent out strong patrols in the direction of
the Ingwazini River. These men rode over an open plain admirably suited
for cavalry operations, but found nothing but some deserted kraals and
the dead bodies of some Zulus, who, it was subsequently discovered, were
wounded at Isandula the previous day. On their return the party were
fortunate enough to discover the whereabouts of a strong body, some 4000
to 5000 Zulu warriors, who, it was imagined, were merely the nucleus of
a force intended to surprise Wood's column. They were posted in a
well-chosen position at a place called Tintas Hill, and when they moved
down in his direction the following day, Wood had concealed a portion of
his force so well, that he got them between two fires, and in about half
an hour had killed about sixty or seventy of them, his own casualties
being only two men wounded. It was during this action that information
was brought by Captain Alan Gardner, who gallantly rode without any
escort from Helpmakaar to Utrecht, notifying the terrible disaster of
the 22nd, and the destruction of No. 3 Column. This news caused Colonel
Wood to change his plans, and after a halt of a couple of hours, he
turned back towards the Umbolosi, where his little force arrived at
seven a.m. on the 25th. On Sunday (26th) he moved on to Ugaba Ka Hawana,
where good camping-ground and a defensive position were chosen, and
where the minor essentials of wood and water were in plenty.

Colonel Pearson, who commanded No. 1 Column on the extreme right, had
also been prosecuting his advance with the greatest vigour, and the
results were in every way satisfactory, though already the tremendous
difficulties of commissariat and transport had made themselves
unpleasantly evident. This force assembled near Fort Stanger, and
crossed the Lower Tugela on the 12th, having as nearly as possible 1500
regular troops, consisting of eight companies of the old Buffs, under
Colonel Parnell; six companies of the 99th, under Colonel Welman; one
company Royal Engineers, and two 7-pounder guns. A naval brigade,
however, which might be considered as a little army in itself, went with
them, and were under Colonel Pearson's command. This force consisted of
270 bluejackets and marines, under Captain Campbell, of her Majesty's
ships "Active" and "Tenedos," with three of the new-pattern Gatling. Two
hundred mounted infantry and 200 colonial mounted riflemen also formed
part of the column, while the whole force was supplemented by Major
Griffiths and about 2000 men of the Native Contingent. The crossing of
the river was at first impeded by the rains, and another delay occurred
at the lower drift, where the river was at least 400 yards wide, but all
these difficulties were overcome, and after a week's delay a flying
column was sent forward on the 18th in the direction of Ekowe, which is
a mission-station not quite forty miles inland, and distant nearly
seventy from the king's kraal at Ulundi. It was the intention of Colonel
Pearson to establish here an entrenched post as a _point d'appui_ to the
invading army. On the following day the colonel was followed by the rear
division, escorting the heavy baggage, necessary though inconvenient
_impedimenta_, as it contained stores and ammunition. The column of
waggons extended for five miles, and it took the officers in charge all
their time and the services of three horses each during the day to
supervise its progress from inspan till outspan. Again, two days later,
came the commissariat, and here imagination fails to describe the
difficulties encountered. The subject of transport is one that must be
considered in any future operations in Africa. The waggons must be
stronger than those employed; the animals should be proof against
sickness caused by climate, the tulip plant, and the tsetse fly, and
this can be avoided by choosing one's own season for marching. The
employment of mules would be much preferable to that of oxen, although
in many books the converse is stated, the Dutch being infatuated in
regard to the superior qualities of the latter. Mules, for instance,
have this advantage over oxen. They can travel twenty-five miles a day
with ease, while twelve or fifteen a day with oxen is considered good
work; but, on the other hand, it must be remembered that a mule costs
twice as much as an ox, apart from the cost of feeding. The mule must,
of course, be fed on forage carried for him or bought on the road,
while the ox will feed on the veldt, except during the three winter
months, when his services are not often required. Two kinds of mules can
be procured about Pretoria--the Montevidean and the home-bred animal.
The latter is generally preferred, although no doubt the former is most
tractable. There is an immense trouble in selecting oxen for
campaigning, as none but those bred in the sour veldt of Natal or
Zululand are of any use for such rough food and hard work; and, as a
rule, these will live where others would die. The usual load is 7000
lbs., placed on a waggon weighing 3000 lbs., and drawn by sixteen or
eighteen oxen. The cost for oxen averages about 9_l._ each, but during
this war they went up to 18_l._, and even 25_l._ Each waggon, with
dissel-boom and yokes complete, costs at least 180_l._ The cost of mules
will average 20_l._ each, and mule waggons 100_l._, with harness at
5_l._ for each animal.

The road, after crossing the river Tugela, crosses no less than four
streams, and before reaching Ekowe passes through a broken bushy
country. On the 22nd, the day on which Isandula was attacked, Colonel
Pearson had a sharp engagement with the enemy at a place called by the
natives Inyezane, about four or five miles beyond his camping-ground of
the 21st. Major Barrow had been sent forward along a fertile valley
which led to the Inyezane, when Colonel Pearson received a despatch from
him, saying that he had selected a tolerably good place for camping,
which he had carefully guarded by vedettes. On receiving this
information the colonel at once rode on to the spot, and although he did
not quite approve of the ground, as being too full of bush for an
outspan, he decided to allow the waggons to be outspanned for two hours
on account of there being no water near at hand. This was done to rest
and feed the oxen, and to allow the men to have their morning meal.
About eight o'clock, just as the waggons had begun to park, and while
the officers were busy in directing the posting of pickets, scouts, and
sentries, the advanced company of the Native Contingent, which had been
scouting in front under Captain Hart, discovered the Zulus in force
rapidly advancing over the slopes and attempting to gain the bushes on
both flanks. They came on in skirmishing and extended order in the
finest style, rushing from bush to bush in a steady but stealthy manner
until within 100 or 150 yards of the outposts. Captain Hart's men, being
in the open, had to bear the brunt of a heavy fire, and not without
casualties, as they lost one officer, four non-commissioned officers,
and four privates almost at once. These poor fellows, it is feared, were
sacrificed, inasmuch as they did not understand the order to retire and
seek cover, and concluded that it was their duty to remain in the open.
The Naval Brigade was now ordered into action, and most ably they
acquitted themselves. Two 7-pounders and two 24-pounder Naval Brigade
rockets were smartly brought into action on a knoll at the base of the
pass, but commanding the valley from which the flank attack was made.
Meanwhile two companies of the Buffs and A and B companies of the Naval
Brigade opened a heavy and well-directed fire upon the enemy, and
effectually held him in check. This coign of vantage was occupied by
Colonel Pearson, whence he directed the movements of his troops during
the fight. All this time the waggons continued to park, and while the
fire was kept up by Commander Campbell, Lieutenant Lloyd, with his guns,
and Lieutenant Martin with the Buffs, two other companies of the same
regiment which had been employed in guarding waggons were moved down,
ready to clear the bush as soon as it was well shelled and swept with
rockets and musketry. Colonel Pearson selected Captain Macgregor to
undertake this duty, with the assistance of Captains Harrison and Wyld,
who, getting their men into skirmishing order, and bringing their
shoulders gradually forward as steadily as if man[oe]uvring at a
field-day, sent the Zulu braves flying discomfited before them, and
exposed them once more in the open to the hail of shot and shell which
swept the plain. Colonel Welman, 99th Regiment, now took advantage of
this favourable moment, when the enemy was demoralized, to send forward
Captain Wynne and Major Barrow with the infantry. These, with
skirmishers and flankers on the left, and supported by two
half-companies of the Buffs and 99th, now moved forward at a steady
pace.

The Zulus, however, were not beaten, though evidently puzzled, and
Campbell, who was in charge of the Naval Brigade, saw that they were
making a flank movement on the left. This officer at once obtained
permission from Colonel Pearson to take a portion of his men and drive
out a body of Zulus who had obtained possession of a kraal about 400
yards from the knoll. Captain Hart, with part of his Native Contingent,
gallantly supported this movement. They managed to obtain possession of
the high ground to the left of the Ekowe road, and effectually checked
the enemy in their movement on the British left.

But the gallant sailor Campbell was not satisfied with this partial
success, and sent for further permission to follow up his _coup_ by
driving on the foe to a more respectable distance. Colonel Parnell, of
the Buffs, who up to this time had been acting as a sort of reserve with
Captain Foster's company at the foot knoll, where Colonel Pearson
remained throughout the action, had now an opportunity of mingling in
the fray. Smartly deploying his men, he advanced at the double, and
forming up on the right of the bluejackets, swept the heights beyond the
kraal which a few moments before were crowned with savage warriors. This
decided the action, as the Zulus, thoroughly distracted, fled in all
directions, the guns making capital practice wherever a group collected.
The last round from the rocket-tubes seemed to carry destruction and
confusion amongst them, and was fired a little before ten a.m.

Colonel Pearson and Colonel Parnell both had their horses shot under
them, and several officers remarked that the fire of the Zulus was
principally directed at the English leaders. The regiments opposed to
Pearson were composed of the Umxapu, Umdhlanefu, and Ingulubi, and as
near as could be judged, and from the information subsequently received,
numbered about 5000 men. Of these at the very least 300 were slain,
while the number of wounded, as a rule carried away into the bush, could
not have been less than double that. Pearson's loss was eight killed and
sixteen wounded, and of these were six officers and non-commissioned
officers of the Native Contingent. The following day two companies of
the Buffs, two companies Native Contingent, and a few mounted men were
sent off to the help of Colonel Ely, 99th Regiment, who with three
companies of his regiment was bringing up a convoy, much wanted, of
seventy waggons of stores and ammunition, while on Saturday, the 18th,
Major Coates started with fifty extra waggons to bring up more supplies.
On the day after the Inyezane engagement Pearson arrived at Ekowe. The
position was a strong one, and he immediately set to work to make it
still more formidable. Water was close to the fort, and well under its
fire.

At this juncture news of the Isandhlwana disaster reached Colonel
Pearson. After consultation with his officers, he decided to remain
where he was, feeling confident that even without further supplies or
reinforcements he could hold his position for at least a couple of
months. All his waggons came in safety to the fort except five, which
broke down and had to be abandoned. The mounted men and Native
Contingent were sent back to save food, and there thus remained 1200
British troops, having 320 rounds per man.

The first failure in the carrying out of Lord Chelmsford's plans
occurred to No. 4 Column, and proved the initial step to the crowning
disaster of Isandhlwana. The right centre column, which should have
operated simultaneously with Colonel Wood's force, was unfortunately
composed almost entirely of natives, and these fellows did not succeed
in getting over at the point directed in orders. As this column could
not be brought over the river, a portion of it was left behind to keep
open communications and guard the frontier, while the remainder, under
Colonel Durnford, was moved up to Rorke's Drift to reinforce Colonel
Glyn's command. The following day (12th) Colonel Glyn had his first
brush with the enemy. Lord Chelmsford had joined this column, and after
crossing the Tugela ordered out a reconnaissance by the Bashee Valley
and along the road leading to Izpizi. Glyn took with him three companies
of the 1st battalion 24th and one battalion 3rd Regiment Natal Native
Contingent, while the mounted men, crossing the valley, went rapidly
along the road leading over the Ngudu mountains, where high cliffs close
in the gorge for more than three miles. Cattle and armed Zulus were seen
on the heights, and some of the 24th and the natives were ordered to
bear round to the right flank and cut them off. The skirmish which
followed lasted about twenty minutes, and was a very smart affair. It
resulted in the taking of the fastnesses and the precipitate flight of
the Zulus, who suffered a loss of ten killed, three wounded, and nine
prisoners taken, together with a quantity of cattle, horses, and sheep.
Colonel Glyn's loss was two privates Natal Contingent killed, one
officer of the same, Lieutenant Purvis, severely wounded; Corporal
Mayer, Natal Native Contingent, severe wound in thigh. Four companies of
the 2nd battalion 24th, and four companies of the 2nd battalion 3rd
Regiment Natal Native Contingent, under Colonel Degacher, were now
ordered by the General to advance up the Bashee and attack Usirayo's
kraal, a place called Loxie, about two or three miles farther on. This
place, situated in a wild and mountainous gorge or krantz, interspersed
with caves, guarded by huge boulders, was completely explored by these
men. In the meantime Russell and his mounted men had ascended to the
summit of the Ngudu mountain, where they were fired upon at a distance
of 90 or 100 yards. Sixteen of the Zulus were killed, and a very heavy
thunderstorm came on during the fight. No signs could be observed of any
Zulu force in reserve, and this was explained by the subsequent news
that Usirayo had made a precipitate flight in the direction of the
king's kraal. On the following day communications were opened between
Wood's column and that of Colonel Glyn. The General's movements from the
first appear to have been hampered by baggage and transport
arrangements, and a similar reason delayed Colonel Pearson. Lord
Chelmsford was present with this column when it moved from Rorke's
Drift, and saw the site which was chosen by Colonel Glyn at Insalwana,
ten miles on the road to the Indeni forest. He then left Colonel Glyn in
charge of the camp, and on the same day moved, with a portion of the
force, ten miles further on, to reconnoitre the country in front.
Returning to camp that evening, without having had time to fully
explore, the General, the following morning, sent out two separate
reconnoitring columns, under the command respectively of Major Dartnell,
who took with him the Mounted Police and Natal Volunteers, of which he
is commandant, and Commandant Lonsdale with two battalions of his Native
Contingent. Dartnell went along the same road as that explored by the
General the previous day, while Lonsdale moved along the southern slope
of the Inhlazatye range, towards a hill called Malaka's Kop. If
possible a junction between these two bodies was to be effected; and, as
soon as information could be obtained as to the situation of the enemy
and the strategical features of the locality, both were to return to the
headquarter camp. By some extraordinary oversight, neither of these
reconnoitring columns seems to have been supplied with rations, while it
was usual on such expeditions for the men to take preserved meat and
three days' biscuit in their haversacks, supposing that mule transport
cannot be had. On the afternoon of the Tuesday Major Dartnell sent an
officer to the headquarter camp, to inform the General that he could not
advance beyond the Insangu river, a small stream near Inkankla Mountain,
as the Zulus were posted there in force. Dartnell, therefore, sent an
orderly to call up Lonsdale with his Native Contingent, and sent to Lord
Chelmsford to request a reinforcement of regulars to enable him to
attack the enemy. His lordship did not consider it advisable to comply
with this demand, as the daylight was almost gone, and the distance was
long. A supply of biscuit was, however, sent out to the exploring party,
who bivouacked at the foot of the Inhlazatye. During the night, however,
Major Dartnell appears to have become aware of his critical position,
and at half-past two on the morning of the 22nd (Wednesday), Colonel
Glyn received a letter from him, saying that the Zulus had been strongly
reinforced, and were now in his front in great strength. Instead of
recalling the column, or at once pushing forward troops to its
assistance, a delay took place, and a staff officer was despatched to
ask Dartnell what he wished done. After some further lapse of time the
General ordered Colonel Glyn to march to Major Dartnell's assistance
with the 2nd battalion 24th Regiment, consisting of six companies, the
mounted infantry, and four of Harness's guns. As this detachment would
considerably weaken the camp, the General at the same time sent off two
expresses to Colonel Durnford, who had been left at Rorke's Drift,
telling him to move up at once to Isandula with his 500 native troops,
250 of whom were mounted. The General then decided to accompany Colonel
Glyn's force, and Lieutenant-Colonel Pulleine, 1-24th, was left in
charge of the camp, with orders to defend it, pending the arrival of
Durnford's natives. The actual fighting strength of Pulleine's force
consisted of 2 officers, 78 men, and 2 guns R.A.; 1-24th Regiment, 15
officers, 334 men; 2-24th Regiment, 5 officers, 90 men; mounted
Europeans, 5 officers, 204 men; Native Contingent, 19 officers, 391 men;
Natal Pioneers, 1 officer, 10 men; while Durnford, when he arrived very
soon after, brought with him 18 officers and 450 men, thus making an
aggregate of 772 Europeans and 850 natives, or in all 1622 combatants.
On his arrival at the camp, Colonel Durnford, being the senior officer,
of course immediately assumed the command.

To the right understanding of what follows it is necessary to give a
somewhat detailed account of the situation. The leading feature of the
plain on the southern slopes of which the English camp was placed is the
Isandhlwana, or Lion Hill. To the west it rises abruptly, forming the
head of the crouching animal it resembles in shape; after forming the
back it descends sharply to the east. At both ends are necks or ridges
connecting the hill with the smaller undulations of which the more level
part of the country consists. The road from Rorke's Drift passes over
the western ridge, while on the north facing the camp was a deep ravine
and watercourse. To the immediate right was a small copse; beyond this
the ground was much broken, irregular krantzes and hills all covered
with huge boulders continuing as far as the Buffalo river. To the left
of the camp, at the distance of rather more than a mile, ran a long
ridge towards the south, connecting it with the great Isandhlwana hill,
having on its summit a plateau which, towards the east, opened on to an
open and extensive valley. On the extreme left of the camp, looking
towards the ridge, were pitched the tents of the Natal Native
Contingent; between these and the next two battalions intervened a space
of rather less than 300 yards; occupying the centre were the British
regular Infantry, just above whom came the headquarters camp of Lord
Chelmsford, and in close proximity the headquarters of the column. On
the right were the guns and mounted corps lining the edge of the road.
Soon after it came over the neck at the back of the camp the ground rose
considerably, until the bottom of the precipitous Isandhlwana was
reached: the camp therefore literally had its back to a wall.

At six a.m. on the 22nd, a company of the Natal Natives was ordered to
scout towards the left, the enemy having appeared in that direction.
Whilst these were away Durnford arrived, about nine o'clock, with a
rocket battery under Colonel Russell, R.A., 250 mounted natives, and 250
native foot. News was now brought in that the Zulus in very large
numbers were driving the pickets before them. A later messenger--a
native without uniform, supposed by some to be a Zulu purposely sent
with false intelligence--brought the news that the Zulus had divided
into three columns, one of which it was supposed was about to attack
Colonel Durnford's baggage, still on the road from Rorke's Drift, the
other to harass Lord Chelmsford and Colonel Glyn's party in their rear,
whilst the third was to hover round and watch the camp. Finally came the
news "Zulus retiring in all directions." Colonel Durnford thereupon
asked Colonel Pulleine to lend him a couple of the 24th companies, but
he declined, saying his orders were to guard the camp, and he could not,
under the circumstances, let them go without a positive command.
Durnford then determined to go on with his own force, which he divided
into three, one part being sent up the hill to the left (east), one to
the left front, and the third to the rear, in the direction of Rorke's
Drift, to act as an escort for the baggage not yet arrived. The rocket
battery was of the party that proceeded to the front under Colonel
Durnford in person, to a distance of four or five miles from the camp,
but being unable to keep pace with the mounted force was soon left
behind.

The body of troops despatched to the left became engaged with the enemy
almost immediately, and firing was soon heard all along the crest of the
hill. In about an hour Durnford's mounted men re-appeared over the
hills, hotly pursued by swarms of Zulus; at the same time the horsemen
to the front were also driven back. These, after retiring steadily in
skirmishing order for about two miles, came upon the remains of the
rocket battery, which had been cut off and broken up, whilst a hand to
hand engagement was going on with those who remained. It appears that
Russell, whilst advancing with his battery, perceived a body of the
enemy on his left, he fired three rockets with some effect; then the
Zulus fired a volley, upon which the Native Contingent of infantry
retreated, the mules were frightened, and disorder ensued. Taking
advantage of this, the enemy charged down the hill, a _melee_ ensued,
and Russell was killed. As the mounted men retired towards them, the
Zulus retreated to their cover, and they, after making a final stand in
a spruit about a mile and a half in front of the camp, were eventually
driven in.

As the cavalry on the left was being pushed rapidly back, Captain Mostyn
was ordered to advance with two companies of 1-24th on the eastern neck
of the Isandhlwana, where at a distance of about a mile and a half the
Zulus were advancing in large numbers along the north of the
Isandhlwana, to outflank the camp on the right, and with this wing of
the foe they at once became engaged.

Meanwhile the Zulu left rapidly, and the centre steadily, though more
slowly, pushed forward, despite the artillery fire poured into them.
Orders were now given for three companies of the 1-24th to occupy ground
near the Native Contingent camp, facing the hill over which the Zulu
force was streaming. These three companies were supported to their right
front by the Natal Native Contingent.

Immediately to the right of the Native Contingent tents came the guns,
at a distance of about four hundred yards from the left, and rather more
from the right, which was composed of two companies, 24th Regiment and
the Mounted Corps, and which occupied the extreme right of the camp and
rested on the road. The infantry, in extended order, were by this time
engaged along the whole line, and were firing rapidly and steadily.
Though the enemy fell in hundreds they kept advancing in apparently
undiminished numbers. As rank after rank of the foremost were swept down
others pressed on, till at length the companies of the 1-24th above
mentioned had been driven back to within 300 yards of that portion of
the camp occupied by the Native Contingent. A number of the native
infantry now began a hasty retreat to the camp; their officers
endeavoured to restrain them, but without effect. Captain Essex pointed
this out to Colonel Durnford, who ordered him to take men to that
portion of the field, and endeavour to hold the enemy in check. But
before this could be executed the natives rushed back in the utmost
disorder, thus laying open the right and rear of the companies of the
first battalion of the 24th on the left and rear, and the enemy dashing
forward at once poured in through this part of the line. In a moment all
was disorder, and but few had time to fix bayonets before the Zulus were
amongst them, using their assegais with terrible effect. Then followed a
scene of utter confusion; horse and foot, black and white, English and
Zulu, friend and foe, in a struggling, fighting crowd, pushed gradually
through the camp towards the road, where the Zulu right already barred
the way. Every man endeavoured to escape towards the Buffalo river, but
this was almost an impossibility even for mounted men. The ground was
rugged, broken with water-washes, boulder-strewn: ground over which an
active native Zulu could progress even faster than a horse. In front ran
the river, swift, deep, and fordless, sharp rocks, and deep water
alternating. Not half of those who escaped from the camp succeeded in
crossing this obstacle: many were drowned, many assegaied, some few
shot, and so the pursuit continued right into Natal. The guns moved from
right to left across the camp, and endeavoured to get on the Rorke's
Drift road. This being occupied by the enemy, they turned off to the
left, and coming to grief in a donga had to be abandoned. Major Smith,
though wounded, managed to reach the Buffalo, but was there shot.

Lieuts. Melvill and Coghill, seeing all was lost, made an attempt to
escape on horseback with the colours of the 24th. Coghill succeeded in
getting safely across the Buffalo, but Melvill was struck by a shot just
as he was reaching the far bank of the river. Coghill, with heroic
devotion, turned back to assist his less fortunate comrade--alas! only
to share his fate. Their bodies were subsequently discovered in close
proximity, and around them a group of dead Zulus. The colours which they
had so desperately defended were also found in the bed of the river,
saved from the degradation of capture and contamination by the hands of
savages.

In this sad affair there perished twenty-six Imperial officers and 600
non-commissioned officers and men. The loss of the Colonial forces was
not less terrible, twenty-four officers being included in the list.

The following is a detailed list of the victims of that sad
day:--1-24th, Col. Pulleine, Major White; Captains Degacher, Wardell,
Mostyn, Younghusband; Lieuts. Hodson, Cavaye, Atkinson, Daly, Anstey,
Porteous, Melvill, Quarter-Master Pullen, and five entire companies:
2-24th, Lieuts. Pope, Austin, Dyer, Griffiths, Quarter-Master
Bloomfield, and ninety men. Royal Engineers, Colonel Durnford, Lieut.
McDowell, Captain G. Shepstone (political assistant to Col. Durnford),
Lieut. Coghill, A.D.C. (to Sir Bartle Frere), Surgeon-Major Shepherd.
The Mounted Police Carabineers and Volunteers lost forty-three out of
seventy-one, including Captain Bradstreet, Lieut. F. J. D. Scott, and
Quarter-Master Hitchcock. The Mounted Infantry lost thirty out of
thirty-four. The N Battery 5th Brigade, Royal Artillery, under Major
Stuart Smith, was destroyed (Lieut. Curling escaped), as also the Rocket
Battery under Major Russell, R.A. 1st Battalion 3rd Regiment, N.N.C.,
lost in officers, Captains Robert Krohn and James Lonsdale, Lieuts.
Avery, Holcraft, and Jameson; Surgeon F. Bull, Quarter-Master John
McCormick. 2nd Battalion 3rd Regiment, N.N.C., lost Captains Erskine,
Barry, and Murray; Lieuts. Pritchard, Young, Gibson, Standish Vereker,
and Rivers, Quarter-Master A. Chambers. The loss of material is put down
at 102 waggons, 1400 oxen, 2 guns, 400 shot and shell, 1200 rifles,
250,000 rounds of rifle ammunition, 60,000_l._ worth of commissariat
supplies, a rocket trough, and a number of tents.

Four special-service officers, viz. Captain Alan Gardner, 14th Hussars
and Essex 75th Regiment, and Lieuts. Smith, Dorien, 95th, and Cochrane,
32nd, together with Lieut. Curling, R.A., succeeded in escaping, and
rode away to Helpmakaar, where a laager was immediately formed. The same
night, as no other messenger could be found, and it was feared Wood's
column might be cut off in rear, Captain Gardner started to give him
timely warning. Riding all night, he reached Utrecht about four o'clock
next day, thence despatching a messenger to Colonel Wood, he himself
returned to Helpmakaar.

The following account is of great interest as having been given by a
Zulu deserter:--

"The Zulu army, consisting of the Ulundi corps about 3000 strong, the
Nokenke 2000, the Nkobamakosi, including the Uve, 5000 strong, the
Umcityu 4000 strong, the Nodwengu 2000 strong, the Umbonambi 3000, and
the Udkloko 1000--a total of 20,000 men in all--after an address from
the king left the Nodwengu military kraal on January 17th, and proceeded
on their march towards Rorke's Drift. On the 20th they halted for the
night close by the Isipezi hill, and on the 21st, keeping to the
eastward, they occupied a valley running north and south under the spurs
of the Ngutu hill, which concealed that of Isandhlwana, distant about
four miles nearly due west. The order of encampment was--on the right,
the Nodwengu, Nokenke and Umcityu; in the centre, the Nkobamakosi and
Umbonambi; on the left, the Ulundi and Udkloko corps. On the morning of
the 22nd there was no intention of making an attack on account of some
superstition as to the state of the moon, and they were sitting down
resting when firing was heard by the Zulus on the right. This was at
first supposed by them to be an attack on the centre, but a move being
made in that direction this proved not to be the case; and it was soon
found out that this was the whites engaged with Matyana's people some
ten miles off to the left front. Just after the Zulus had resumed their
position, and again sat down, a herd of cattle came past their line
driven down by some of their scouts from the right. Just when these were
opposite the Umcityu regiment a body of mounted men on the hill to the
west were seen galloping and evidently trying to cut them off. When
several hundred yards off, seeing the Umcityu, they dismounted, fired a
volley, and retired. The Umcityu at once jumped up and charged. This
example was followed by the Nokenke and Nodwengu on the right, as well
as by the Nkobamakosi and Umbonambi in the centre, whilst the Undi and
Udkloko formed a circle--as is customary with the Zulus when a force is
about to engage--and remained in their position. With these were the two
chief officers Mavamingwana and Tyugwayo, who after a short pause led
away these centre troops in a north-westerly direction, and keeping to
the north of the Isandhlwana performed a turning movement, unseen by the
English through the nature of the ground. Thus the original Zulu left
became the extreme right, the right the centre, and the centre the left.
The two regiments forming the latter--the Nkobamakosi and
Umbonambi--made a turning movement along the front of the camp to the
English right, but became engaged before they could complete it. The Uve
battalion of the Nkobamakosi had to retire till reinforced; and the
Umbonambi suffered heavily from the artillery fire. Meanwhile the Zulu
centre, consisting of the Umcityu (left centre) and Nokenke and
Nodwengu (higher up on the right) under the hill, were making a direct
attack on the left of the camp. The Umcityu suffered very severely from
both artillery and musketry fire; the Nokenke from musketry fire alone;
while the Nodwengu suffered least. When the camp was carried the
regiments became all mixed up together; some pursued the fugitives to
the Buffalo; the remainder plundered the camp: but the Undi and Udkloko
made the best of their way to Rorke's Drift, in order to plunder the
post there."

It is now time to turn attention to the remainder of the troops that had
left the camp before this sad event occurred.

The force under Colonel Glyn, accompanied by Lord Chelmsford, moved off
at early dawn, and had reached Major Dartnell by 6.15 a.m. The General
at once took command, and ordered out scouting parties of mounted men to
gain intelligence of the positions and strength of the enemy, who soon
after showed in some force on the opposing heights parallel to the
Inhlazatye Mountains. A general advance of the troops was made, and the
enemy retired slowly, but without firing. The guns and 24th Regiment
meanwhile moved up the valley, their left being protected by the Mounted
Infantry, while the Mounted Police and Volunteers guarded the right
flank. The main body of the enemy drew back in regular order and took up
a position with great skill on the spurs of the Isipisi Mountain,
distant about six miles, but Captain Shepstone, with his Natal
Carabineers, managed to cut off about 300 of the stragglers and
destroyed fifty of them. At nine a.m. a messenger, whose horse was
panting and covered with foam, arrived before Colonel Glyn with a brief
despatch from Colonel Pulleine, notifying that musketry firing was heard
on the left front of the camp. Lord Chelmsford at once sent a staff
officer, Lieutenant Milne, to an eminence from whence the camp and
valley of Insalwana could be seen, and it seems that a delay of an hour
took place while this officer was vainly scanning the horizon. The
actual scene of conflict where Colonel Durnford was engaged with the
Zulu army was five miles away, and hidden by some hills intervening
between Lord Chelmsford's position and the British camp. The General,
therefore, seems to have felt no apprehensions in regard to the safety
of the camp, and continued his operations against the supposed main body
of the Zulus.

About two o'clock Lord Chelmsford was on the banks of the Amange stream,
selecting a fit spot for a camp, he having already in the morning sent
Captain Gardner back to Colonel Pulleine with an order to that officer
to forward the camping materials of the party out on reconnaissance.
While thus engaged a native on horseback galloped down from the opposite
ridge saying that an attack was being made on the camp, and that he had
seen heavy firing and heard the big guns. Lord Chelmsford immediately
hastened to the crest of the hill, whence through a glass the camp could
be plainly seen. All, however, seemed quiet: the sun was shining on the
white tents; no signs of firing were seen, and the bodies of men moving
about in the camp were put down to be English soldiers and friendly
natives. Knowing how careful were his dispositions and how positive his
orders for the defence of the camp, one and all of Lord Chelmsford's
escort came to the conclusion that an attack had been made and repulsed.
It was then decided that the headquarters camp should move to the spot
selected on the Amange stream, whilst the General himself, who was
anxious to know the details of the attack, should proceed back to camp.
The Carabineers and the Mounted Infantry accompanied him: the 1st
battalion 24th Regiment, the four guns, the Mounted Police and 2nd
battalion of 3rd Regiment Native Contingent were left to form the new
camp. During the first seven miles of the journey nothing occurred to
excite the General's suspicion. Certainly some of the tents had
disappeared, but then this was in accordance with the orders given in
the morning. When about four miles from the camp he fell in with the
Natal Native Contingent, which had been ordered to return many hours
previously, but which seeing the camp attacked by forces superior to its
own had wisely halted. In about half-an-hour they were met by a solitary
horseman coming at a foot pace from the direction of the camp.
Commandant Lonsdale, for it was he, rode up to the General and uttered
the astounding words "The camp is in possession of the enemy." It
appears that Lonsdale, who had been ill, being very tired was quietly
returning from Glyn's column to the camp. He had crossed the small
water-wash to the south of the camp and was jogging slowly along in a
sort of lethargy, from which he was roused by the discharge of a rifle
close to him. Looking up, he saw a native, who had evidently just fired,
and him he imagined to be one of his own contingent indulging in
reckless firing; so he pursued his way. Sitting in and around the tents
were groups of red-coats, so he still kept on till within a bare ten
yards of the tents. He then saw a great black Zulu come out of one with
a blood-besmeared assegai in his hand. Gazing more carefully, he saw
that black men, and black men only, were the wearers of the red-coats.
The truth flashed on him: turning his pony sharp round he galloped off
before the enemy knew what he was about. Not less than 150 shots were
fired at him as he did so, but, providentially, he escaped to warn the
General, who, without such warning, his staff and troops with him, would
have walked unsuspiciously into the trap, and the whole force would
probably have perished to a man.

The General at once sent back to hurry up Colonel Glyn and his force,
while Colonel Russell was sent on to reconnoitre the camp, which was
found to be as Commandant Lonsdale had reported. On Colonel Glyn's
arrival the whole force was disposed in fighting order, and moved
rapidly across the plain, but could not arrive in the vicinity of the
camp until after dark. All was found a wreck--corpses, broken tents,
dead horses, oxen, and other _debris_ were strewed around; and the men,
most of whom were without ammunition, and had not tasted food for
forty-eight hours, were ordered to bivouac amidst the crowd of
blood-stained relics which marked the day's slaughter. Our soldiers had
covered more than thirty miles on the previous day without food or
ammunition, and if resolutely attacked by the entire force of Zulus
might have shared the fate of their comrades. The next morning,
therefore, before daylight a sad retreat was effected to Rorke's Drift,
where the first glad tidings were heard of the glorious defence which
had been made by Chard and Bromhead, with their handful of men.

It came about thus. Lieutenant Chard, with one sergeant and six men, had
been left in charge of the ponts over the Tugela at this point. Close by
was a commissariat depot in charge of Lieutenant Bromhead and a company
of the 24th Regiment. About three o'clock on January 22nd news of the
disaster at Isandhlwana reached this officer, together with a note,
saying that the enemy were advancing in force against his post, which
was to be held at all costs. Chard immediately withdrew his small party,
and in concert with Bromhead arranged for the loopholing and barricading
the store-building and hospital, and for connecting the defences of the
two by building walls of mealie-bags. At 3.30 an officer of Durnford's
Horse with about 100 men came in, and was asked to send them out as
vedettes; these, when pressed, to fall back and assist in the defence of
the buildings. At 4.30 this officer returned with the news that the
enemy was close at hand, that his men would not obey orders, but had
galloped off to Helpmakaar. About the same time Captain Stephenson and
his detachment of natives also withdrew. It was at once perceived that
the line of defence was now too extended for the small force left, and
an inner entrenchment of biscuit-boxes was made, and this had been
completed to a wall two boxes high, when suddenly 600 of the enemy
turned the hill to the south. They advanced at a run against the
southern wall, and notwithstanding a tremendous fire reached to within
fifty yards of it. Being here encountered by a cross-fire from the store
they were stopped. Taking advantage, however, of some shelter afforded
by the cookhouse and ovens, they kept up heavy musketry volleys thence,
whilst the main body moved on to the left round the hospital, whence
they made a rush upon the north-west wall and breastwork of mealie-bags.
Meanwhile the mass of the advancing foe lined a ledge of rocks and
filled the caves overlooking the English position at a distance of 100
yards to the south, whence they too kept up a constant fire. Another
party to the left occupied a garden in a hollow in the road, and also
the bush beyond, which time had not permitted to be cut down. The enemy
could thus advance close to the English works, and were soon in
possession of one whole side of the wall, whilst on the other in a line
extending from the hospital all along the wall to the bush they made a
series of determined onsets. But each attack was met and splendidly
repulsed with the bayonet, Corporal Schiess (N.N.C.) especially
distinguishing himself. The fire from the ledge of rock and caves at
length became so galling, that it was necessary to retire behind the
inner line of biscuit-boxes.

All this time the enemy had been trying to force the hospital, and at
length they did set fire to the roof. The garrison defended the place
room by room, bringing out all the sick who could be moved before they
retired. Privates Williams, Hook, R. Jones, and W. Jones, 24th Regiment,
were the last to leave, holding the doorway against the Zulus with their
bayonets, their ammunition being quite expended. Five sick men, owing to
the smoke and want of interior communication, had unfortunately to be
left to their fates. Two heaps of mealie-bags were now converted into a
sort of redoubt, and a second line of fire was thus obtained all round.
Darkness now came on, and after several more furious attacks had been
repulsed the defenders had ultimately to retire to the middle, and then
to the inner wall of the kraal, east of the position they had at first
held. The attacks continued all night, the soldiers firing with the
utmost coolness, and never wasting a shot. At four a.m., January 23rd,
firing ceased, and by daybreak the enemy were disappearing over the hill
to the south-west. The ground was then patrolled, the arms of the dead
Zulus collected, and the position strengthened as far as possible. About
seven a.m. a large body of the enemy was again seen on the hill to the
south-west, and a friendly Kaffir, who had come in shortly before, was
sent to Helpmakaar to ask for assistance. However, about eight a.m. the
British 3rd column began to appear, whereupon the enemy, who had been
again advancing, fell back as the troops advanced, and Rorke's Drift
Post had been saved.

The number of English engaged in this action was eight officers and 131
non-commissioned officers and men; of these fifteen were killed and
twelve wounded, two subsequently dying of their hurts. The attacking
Zulu force consisted of two regiments--the Undi and Udkloko--in all a
total of something less than 4000. Of these 370 lay dead around the post
on the morning that Lord Chelmsford so opportunely arrived.

Surgeon Reynolds, Acting Commissary Officer Dalton, and Assistant
Commissary Dunne were throughout conspicuous for their gallantry and
coolness. Lieutenants Chard, R.E., and Bromhead, 24th Regiment,
subsequently received the thanks of both Houses of Parliament for their
heroic conduct, and were advanced to the rank of majors.

So much has been said and written as to the cause of, and so many people
have been held responsible for the Isandhlwana disaster that the subject
cannot here be passed over in silence.

The living no less than the dead have a claim to a full share of justice
and truth; but remembering that the mouths of one party--"les morts qui
ne reviennent pas"--are closed, we should be extremely careful in
drawing any conclusion from acts which, could the testimony of the
fallen be obtained, it would not only explain and excuse, but amply
justify.

The court of inquiry held at Helpmakaar found itself unable to form from
the available evidence any positive judgment; but the facts disclosed
point irresistibly to a negative conclusion. Had the troops acted on the
defensive, the camp would not have been lost.

Still there may have been cogent--nay irresistible reasons which caused
Colonel Durnford to push forward his forces. Were Colonel Pulleine
alive, he might give equally good reasons for acceding to Durnford's
urgent request and sending out the reinforcements.

The British regular infantry advanced successfully, retired slowly and
in unbroken order; they were still firing rapidly, coolly, and with
great effect. Things though desperate were by no means hopeless.
Suddenly the native levies, "though their officers tried to restrain
them, rushed back in the utmost disorder," thus exposing the flank and
rear of the regulars. "Few of the men had time to fix bayonets before
the enemy were amongst them, using their assegais with terrible effect."
Here is the answer to "How did it happen?" The natives on one side--the
Zulu--were regarded too lightly; on the other, fighting for the English
with too great confidence. "Why," it will be asked, "were not the
waggons laagered? Whose duty was it to see this done?" Lord Chelmsford
had issued a standing order at the very commencement of the campaign,
that this was to be the first consideration in all camps. Lord
Chelmsford, accompanied Colonel Glyn from Rorke's Drift, saw the site
chosen at Isandhlwana, and then immediately started on a reconnaissance
which lasted till after nightfall. Doubtless Lord Chelmsford supposed
Colonel Glyn had done what was necessary. On the following morning with
the first streak of dawn Colonel Glyn was ordered to proceed to Major
Dartnell's assistance, and Lord Chelmsford determined to accompany him,
after despatching an express to Colonel Durnford ordering him up "to
strengthen the camp." Doubtless Colonel Glyn supposed that Colonel
Pulleine would see to laagering the waggons. Colonel Pulleine was in
command of the camp a bare three hours, and doubtless, knowing how brief
his tenure of office was to be, preferred to let things remain as they
were till his successor's arrival. Colonel Durnford had not been a
single half-hour in camp before the action was commenced.

It is asked why did not the troops form squares? Hastings, we are told,
had Harold's men only remained in their position, would have been a
Saxon victory--Torres Vedras a disgrace instead of a glory had the
British troops been rashly taunted into leaving their trenches: and
Waterloo a more glowing theme for Beranger's lyre had Napoleon been able
to entice the patient English squares to forsake their adamantine
formation. But why was Colonel Durnford to form squares? How was he to
imagine that such an immense force was arrayed against him when the
Commander-in-chief had with him a superior force to that left in the
camp avowedly to operate against the enemy's main body? For such his
information and personal observation led him to believe was the force
against whom he and Major Dartnell were acting.

Colonel Durnford was no novice in South African war; like Caesar, he had
the gift of the pen no less than the sword; he had both written and
fought well. Colonel Pulleine was an experienced officer of no mean
reputation, and by whatever device they were deceived, we may be sure
that it was no ordinary one, and that few would have stood where they
fell.

Again, who could have anticipated the attack? We have it from the lips
of a Zulu that the onset was unpremeditated, and the result of accident.
With all humbleness, let it be confessed that--

    "Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well
    When our deep plots do fail; and that should teach us
    There's a divinity that shapes our ends
    Rough hew them as we will."

Another question, often asked, is, "Why did not Lord Chelmsford,
immediately on his return, make a counter-attack on the enemy." First of
all he had to wait for Colonel Glyn and the main body to come up to
him. Meanwhile darkness had come on. When Glyn arrived he did advance
with his troops formed up for action, and with the intention of
re-taking the camp, which he had every reason to suppose was occupied by
the enemy. The event proved they had abandoned it. Was not this a good
reason for striking a blow? Let the facts of the case be well borne in
mind. Lord Chelmsford knew that there was a large force in his rear; the
force that had sacked the camp was supposed, and reasonably enough, to
be on the right flank. In front were the bright watchfires of another
force, and the blazing hospital at Rorke's Drift, which, together with
Helpmakaar, there was every ground to believe had been captured and
looted by the foe; in a word, his force was surrounded. The men had only
fifty rounds of ammunition apiece; they had been twenty-four hours
without food; they were physically exhausted by eighteen hours'
continuous marching, and no less morally by the loss of their camp;
their probabilities of escape were distant. How could a general lead
troops in such a condition against a foe flushed and elated with spoil
and recent victory?




CHAPTER III.

  Ekowe described--The fort--Guard for the frontier--Raid on
    Dabulamanzi's Kraal--Another raid--Life in Ekowe--Wood at Potter's
    Kraal--Capture of Baglusini--Skirmish and capture of
    cattle--Destruction of Manyanyoba Kraal--Colonel Rowlands--Capture
    of Makatees Kop--Junction with Wood--Camp at Kambula--Coming in of
    Oham--Disaster at Intombi Drift--Death of Moriarty--Rescue of Oham's
    wives and people--Events that led to the attack on Umbelini--The
    Zlobani--The attack--Details--Death of Campbell--Narrow escape of
    Wood--Death of Weatherly--St. Helena and H.M.S. "Shah."


We must now return to Pearson, whom we left entrenching himself at
Ekowe.

The position is a most commanding one, being almost on the summit of the
Tyoe range, and more than 2000 feet above the sea level; and for beauty
of site could scarcely be surpassed. To the north, about a mile and a
half, is the Umlalazi river, at that time rather full from the late
rains, and beyond this stream are long undulating grassy plains, almost
devoid of bush, with the exception here and there of a few wild and
dwarf date-palms, and lichens in the hollows. Behind, to the south, is
the Umkukusi range, and a hilly but open country, while on the west is a
very broken and difficult country, bounded by the Hintza forest. Away to
the east, right to the coast at Port Durnford, is about forty miles of
undulating and here and there hilly country. About 1200 yards to the
south-east there is a rocky eminence at least 600 feet higher than the
fort, and from this place a magnificent view of Port Durnford and the
mouth of the Umlalazi can be seen. The sea is not more than twenty-two
miles off, in a line as the crow flies. The original building was
formerly a Norwegian mission station, and when the present war began it
was abandoned by the missionaries and plundered by the Zulus. The
buildings, when Pearson arrived, consisted of three moderately-sized
brick erections, thatched originally with straw, but subsequently
covered with a less inflammable material. In addition to these
buildings, which were utilized as stores, there was a small church,
built of the native-made sun-dried bricks, and covered, as most of these
edifices are in that country, with corrugated galvanized iron. The
church was turned into an hospital, while the tower made a capital
look-out, from whence could be seen the next post, and which afterwards
proved of such service in the way of signalling. Pearson now began to
suffer the inconveniences of a regular siege; his communications were
cut, and it was found that of the twelve messengers belonging to the
Natal Native Contingent sent from Ekowe with letters during the first
week in February, only one arrived, the others having been intercepted
and killed on their way. The fort soon completely changed its character
under the incessant labour bestowed upon it by Pearson's men, under the
vigilant supervision of their chief. It now became a six-angled
enclosure, about sixty yards wide, having a ditch eighteen feet in
depth, while its breadth was twelve feet. At the bottom it was studded
profusely with assegai heads securely planted, and the parapets,
carefully rivetted, were proof not only against any musketry fire, but
field artillery. From its southern angles ran out two well-built curtain
walls, enclosing a fine kraal for cattle and horses. These curtains were
well protected by the fire of the angles from which they sprung, while
the kraal itself had its own massive gateway and drawbridge. At the end
of the kraal, or cattle enclosure, furthest from the angular fort, was
constructed from the remains of a dilapidated magazine, a kind of
irregular redoubt, which also had a deep ditch and thick mud walls,
defended by a quantity of powerful thorns laid along the parapet. It was
most fortunate that this force brought with them a large supply of
well-selected entrenching tools, consisting of shovels, picks, spades,
billhooks, axes, and crowbars. Day by day, whenever their time could be
spared from patrol and outpost duty, the men were employed in making
entanglements of rows of felled trees, as well as constructing fascines,
filling sandbags, turning out gabions, loopholes, and _abattis_. All
these obstacles possessed the usual requisites. They were under the
close fire of the fort, were covered from the enemy's fire, and gave him
no cover; while they were all made so substantially that they could not
be cut down or removed without immense difficulty. The piquet duties
were rather severe, and each piquet had to furnish two or three double
sentries in reliefs, patrols, and links. They were posted under the best
circumstances obtainable, being sheltered from the enemy, having a good
range in front, with every advantage in retreating if attacked in force.
Each face or front of the fort was cleared up to 800 yards; shelter
trenches were made for the first line of defence; cover was left for the
supports and reserves; ranges were marked and measures taken for the
artillery and rifle fire, and all precautionary arrangements made in
regard to the supply and storage of provisions, forage, water, and
ammunition.

The water was good, and not brackish at that time of the year. It was
taken from a bright stream well under the fire of the fort, and fed by a
capital spring, also under fire of one of the seven-pounders. The church
and the storehouses were also carefully loopholed, and sandbags
furnished to make the defences more secure. These three strong loopholed
buildings, forming part of the _enceinte_, were rendered more formidable
by double planking, backed crossways by iron barrel hoops, while fine,
damp, heavy sand from the neighbouring hill was employed in filling
bags, made from old provision sacks.

Every man in the fort had his proper place assigned to him, and at
exercise it was found that with three minutes' notice each detachment
was in its place. The Buffs were told off to the two northern faces, on
which side there was a well-made _caponniere_ thrown up in the
re-entering angle. At the west angle of this fort one gun and a
detachment of the Royal Artillery were posted, while on the east salient
were two guns and a somewhat stronger number of men. Here there was a
small outlet for water-parties, guarded on the flank by a little
loopholed building, and commanded in the rear by a strong building with
a thatched roof. The rocket tubes were placed under charge of the Royal
Marines, on the south-west front, and could, if necessary, sweep the
trek oxen laager, and slaughter oxen laager outside the fort on that
side. The principal gateway was on the west face, and was guarded by a
company of the Buffs, who loopholed the church tower in their rear to
fall back upon, and to act as a commanding flanking fire. The front,
facing due south, was served by the 99th, with one gun at the salient
angle, a _caponniere_ in the centre, guarded by a Gatling, and with a
thirteen feet stockade at the opposing angle. Another strong building,
also thatch roof, commanded this front. Not a day passed but some
improvement was made in strengthening these works, and this as much for
prudence against possible attack, as to keep the men occupied and free
from the lassitude attendant upon long confinement. It should also be
mentioned that torpedoes had been laid down by the bluejackets for three
miles along the bed of the Tugela, so that if the Zulus attempted to
cross near any of the posts of observation they might be somewhat
astonished.

The ration daily used to be two pounds of beef--fresh killed and tough
as leather--a couple of commissariat biscuits--hard as flint--a very
small complement of coffee or tea, sugar, and one spoonful of lime
juice, which every man had to take whether he liked it or not; preserved
potatoes, compressed vegetables, and an occasional ration of beans, made
a little variety now and then. During the last days of the siege the
meat and biscuit ration was reduced. A day's routine was as
follows:--The men rose with the _reveille_ at four a.m. for a parade of
all hands and fatigue duties for a couple of hours, weather permitting:
the breakfast bugle sounded at eight, and fatigues were again performed
from 9.30 till noon; dinner bugle at 1.30, and rest and recreation till
4.30, and finally "retreat" at 6.30, when no one was to be outside the
walls. The men amused themselves with quoits, cricket, and athletics,
some of the Buffs being good "all round;" while all the officers,
especially the colonel, encouraged these pastimes by example as well as
precept. After all, the life was not more monotonous than that on board
ship. There was no lack of ammunition, as Colonel Ely on march to Ekowe
had to abandon only ten waggons, and these were looted. The rest,
however, arrived safely. The garrison also from time to time received
valuable and most reassuring information regarding the disposition and
whereabouts of their friends along the line of the Tugela, and in their
rear. At Fort Pearson, which might be said to be the principal base of
operations, and which commanded the river and lower drift from the Natal
side, there were sufficient men of the Naval Brigade to work the two
guns there. They had also the European officers and the non-commissioned
officers of the disbanded native corps. Then, to keep up communications,
the Mounted Volunteers of Coast District were posted at intervals along
the river, between Fort Pearson and Kranz Kop. Another fort on the Zulu
bank of the Tugela was called "Fort Tenedos," in compliment to the
detachment which formed its garrison. Major Barrow, with a squadron of
mounted infantry, and Lieutenant Kingscote, with a smart body of
marines and bluejackets, formed the defensive force. At Rorke's Drift
there were now five companies of the 2nd battalion of the 24th Regiment.
A strongly entrenched position had also been formed on a commanding site
called Macdonald's Farm, on a rocky eminence overlooking the Tugela.
Ditches ten feet deep were cut, parapets seven feet high thrown up, the
farmhouse itself strengthened, and all the garden walls loopholed. The
garrison consisted of the Stanger Mounted Rifles, and some native
auxiliaries, who proved most trustworthy as scouts and messengers.
Captain Lucas, whose admirable powers of organization were quite
proverbial amongst the colonists, and whose frontier experiences were of
long standing, was strongly posted at a bend of the river between the
farm and Thring's Post, and had with him a useful body of natives.
Thring's Post came next on the list, and here there were a couple of
hundred of well-mounted and well-armed volunteers divided into
squadrons, or corps of fifty men. Thring's Post is on the Imyamazana
Mountain, and is about twenty-seven miles from Fort Pearson. The
volunteers, knowing the country well, were employed in keeping up by
constant patrols communications with Fort Pearson and Fort Cherry.

News also reached them that Wood had been reinforced, and was more than
holding his own. There was, therefore, little anxiety felt for the
security of the frontier, and everything strengthened Colonel Pearson in
his determination to remain in his position instead of attempting to cut
his way out.

The health of the Ekowe garrison continued very good. The hospital, it
has been said, was the old church of the mission-station. At the end of
the second week in March there were only twenty-five men on the
sick-list, and many of these almost convalescent. They had, however,
lost two of their number lately, namely, poor Williams of the Buffs, and
another great favourite, young Coker, the mid-shipman, who fought his
Gatling so well at Inyanezi. Both these fine fellows were ill but a
short time, and succumbed to fever. They were buried with the usual
honours just outside the fort.

Lieutenant Rowden, 98th Regiment, who was nominated by Colonel Pearson
commander of the mounted scouts, performed his difficult and dangerous
task to perfection. He had by the end of February successfully explored
the country in the direction of the Isangweni military kraal, which was
not far from Ondini, and about three miles from Ekowe. He reported that
there were 1500 men there, and more collecting. The 1500 were composed
of the married regiment Isangu, whose average age is fifty-four, and
whose services in former wars had been most distinguished. The country
between the fort and Isangweni was an undulating table-land, running
parallel to the forests on either side, and admirably suited for
cavalry. Another brother of Cetywayo, named Dabulamanzi, had a fortified
kraal not far from that of Isangweni, and Pearson determined to attack
both those places as soon as he was in a position to move upon them.

The second week of March had now come to an end, and it was deemed
advisable to vary the monotony of life in the fort by one or two
offensive expeditions. The most important of these, both as to the
numbers engaged and its effects, was the foray on Dabulamanzi's kraal.
The forces detailed for this expedition consisted of fifty men of the
Buffs, the same number of the 99th, and twenty-five of the Naval
Brigade, with their Gatling, and a small body of mounted scouts, under
the active Lieutenant Rowden (98th). Starting about five a.m., the party
descended the slopes that led to the river, and continued its march
along a valley running north-east, and gradually narrowing. The track in
some places was crossed by difficult spruits, and was scarcely defined;
but their guides were well acquainted with the landmarks, although the
pathways were often obliterated by thorns and bush. The track was also
frequently commanded by spurs and bluffs projecting overhead, but these
were carefully explored by the mounted men, and no enemy could be seen.
A considerable watershed was reached about eight miles from Ekowe, and
here, in a favourable and secluded position, was made the first
off-saddle for half an hour. The country about here was entirely denuded
of fodder, but the horsemen had been fortunately directed to bring a few
mealies for their mounts. On resuming the march they crossed the bottom
of a deep sandy nullah with very precipitous sides, which they were
forced to follow, as it was the only practicable track. About a mile and
a half further on the advanced patrols sent back to inform the officer
of the main body that there was a camping-ground or temporary kraal
about three miles and a half north, where there was sufficient water and
grass. The orders were therefore given to push on for this point, and in
about forty-five minutes it was reached. It was now sundown, and their
chief, having decided that it was inexpedient to march during the
night, orders were issued for the usual precautions to be taken, and to
bivouac till daybreak.

During the night, however, no one slept, as they had several alarms, and
it became evident from certain indications known to the experienced in
Zulu camping-out, that they were being reconnoitred by the enemy, though
in all probability not in sufficient force to deliver an attack. As,
however, it was quite possible that messengers would be despatched to
the neighbouring kraals, it was deemed advisable to strengthen the
position, in case of their being surrounded before the morning. Taking
one of the guides, who said he knew the neighbourhood, from having
frequently hunted here, one of the officers and a couple of men were
sent to make a reconnaissance round the bivouac. This party at once
started without making any noise, and entering on the old watercourse
worked their way up towards the summit of the kloof. Large, indeed
enormous, blocks of stone were lying about in various directions, and
the water during the heavy rains had so far worked its way among these
rocks that several hollows were scooped out so as to form caves large
enough to hold one or two human beings. These places had evidently been
recently occupied, remains of mealies and the charred wood of a recent
fire indicating the use to which the shelter had been applied. Ascending
the kloof still farther, and keeping well under cover of the bush, these
scouts walked along what at first seemed an old war-path, and this being
examined it was evident that it had been worn by human beings, and not
long since. On following this path, it led to a small piece of
table-land not much larger than an ordinary mess-tent or marquee, and
this platform was formed by a solid piece of rock rising, not unlike the
Pieter Bot at Mauritius, to a couple of hundred feet above where the
explorers were standing. To the eye of a soldier the place was
impregnable, and as the scouts scanned the country round by the fitful
gleams of occasional moonlight they saw that twenty well-armed and
steady men could hold the rock against an army. The face of the rock had
been scooped out, and, either by time or human labour, a sort of cave or
shelter afforded additional protection. Upon leaving the rock and
descending the ravine to carry the intelligence to the column in
bivouac, these patrols were startled to see the outlines of several dark
figures moving in the neighbouring bush. Making all possible speed,
therefore, the messengers hurried back, and at the news received every
man stood to his arms. They had not long to wait, for the enemy soon
appeared, drawn out in clear relief against the grey of the early dawn,
which was now coming on. Bodies of Zulus on the opposite ridges, which
could not have been seen lower down, were now observed, while a few
cattle were being rapidly hurried away in the distance. The Zulu scouts
were evidently puzzled at the white men's proceedings, the more so as
before leaving the kop one of the guides had tied his handkerchief to an
overhanging branch, thus giving the enemy the idea that a detachment had
been left to occupy the post. This error on the part of their
antagonists served the troops materially, as, by hurrying forward at a
quick pace, they were enabled to gain the kop, and with some
considerable difficulty get their Gatling to the summit. Their horses,
of course, could not ascend, but halfway up there was an excellent
position, where grass and water were found, and here the animals were
tethered in the usual manner--by the head and knee. When daylight
enabled them to examine the surrounding country with field-glasses, they
could see the neighbouring kraals of the chief Dabulamanzi and his
neighbour, Ungakamatue, and it was evident that the alarm had been
given. Several extraordinary movements attracted their attention. Armed
bodies of natives were seen to be leaving the villages in various
directions, as if going upon messages of importance. Aware of the
celerity of movement of the Zulus, and the enormous distances their
soldiers can cover in a few hours, this activity was not reassuring, as
it was concluded that reinforcements were being sent for, for the
purpose of intercepting the retreat to the fort of Ekowe. The English
commander, however, was not long in choosing his plan of operations. It
would never do to sustain a siege on the rock or kop, which, however
defensible if provisioned, was sure to be taken by starvation in the
long-run. The Dabulamanzi kraal had evidently been weakened by the
absence of men harvesting, and it did not seem more than a mile from
where the troops were. One of the guides remembered a cattle-track
which, by a circuitous route, led back on the eastern side to Ekowe, and
as the road they had arrived by was certain to be now ambushed, it was
deemed advisable to make a dash at the kraal, and return with what spoil
they could obtain in the new direction. Having cut some long canes, some
of the soldiers fixed them securely between the ledges of the rocks,
and attached to them some coloured clothes, which they hoped would lead
to the belief that they still occupied the kop. These precautions having
been taken, the troops moved silently down through the dense bushes on
the reverse side of the cliff, and succeeded in getting away without
being observed by the Zulus, who evidently seemed principally anxious
about their cattle. Part of the mounted force went in front to explore
the bush, while the rest remained in rear to follow and reconnoitre. On
coming again to the valley, they moved still more rapidly until they
came to a little rise, which, on surmounting, they found led to a deep
kloof, the mouth of which was almost closed by the proximity of the
hills, on either side rising to about 600 feet in height. These
curious-looking hills appeared to be a series of ledges of rocks, with
lines of dykes--probably of volcanic origin--cropping up, and forming
the most natural-looking breastworks, behind which a determined party of
men might destroy any attacking party. Having waited to collect the tail
of the column, they descended the rise, and sending out a few men to
scout on the ridge skirting the hill on their right, the commander led
the main body under cover of this range towards the mouth of the kloof,
which the guides said was the main entrance to the kraal. When about 200
yards from the mouth of the gorge, the enemy commenced firing upon the
advanced files from behind a formidable-looking dyke, and seeing that
one of the horses had been badly wounded in the quarter, an officer sent
up a dozen men to the top of the range to extend as a covering party.
These had barely been posted in a good position, when a perfect shower
of bullets fell amongst the main body, the only casualty being, however,
one man struck by an almost spent bullet. It being thus seen that they
were out of range as far as any material injury could be effected, the
men were directed to keep moving along the flank, while the Buffs
advanced along the valley in a parallel line, closing to their centres
as they neared the mouth of the kloof. At the same time, the men of the
Naval Brigade (twenty-five) were detached with their Gatling towards the
foot of the left-hand hill, to see if there was a path by which the
kraal could be taken in reverse. This left-hand hill seemed to be the
key of the position, as it looked down upon the kraal itself. The 99th
were all this time held in reserve to prevent the troops being taken in
reverse should the enemy's reinforcements come up. While the English
were effecting these movements the Zulus, whose forces did not seem to
be augmenting, kept up what would have been a hot cross-fire had they
been armed with Martinis, but which was perfectly innocuous at 700
yards.

A bugle-call now gave notice to the skirmishers to close in, and when
this was effected the mounted men dashed through the kloof, followed by
the Buffs and the 99th at the double. The Naval Brigade meanwhile was
seen working its way in the most energetic manner round the left flank
and ready to effect a junction with the others at the foot of the mound
on which stood the outer defences of the kraal. A general stampede of
men, women, and cattle now took place, the soldiers being specially
warned not to fire at the two latter, and only at the former in return.
In ten minutes the outer and inner circles of the kraal were fired,
care having been taken to see that no living creature was hidden within.
As the Zulus generally store their mealies (Indian corn) underground in
the cattle enclosures, there was not time to look for any supplies, but
they managed to carry off a few large packages which were found in two
huts, as well as some millet (Kaffir corn). They also collected all the
cattle they could find, not many having been left, and getting them
together in the centre of the column, moved away by the path mentioned
by their guides. These movements were conducted so quickly, that they
were on the homeward march within half an hour of the time they had
entered the kraal. About half a mile from the kraal the kloof separated
into two narrow gullies, the ledges of rock between them being
inaccessible, and as it was known that these paths made a junction some
two miles on, it was decided to use them both, to enable the troops to
march more quickly. The Buffs accordingly took one trek, and the 99th
detachment the other, both uniting again without any casualty later on.
The English attack was undoubtedly a complete surprise, inasmuch as the
bulk of the people belonging to the kraal were away, and could not be
recalled in time to defend their village. Had the British column
possessed a larger force of mounted men, they could have intercepted and
carried back the cattle which they saw the attendants driving off. As it
was, however, it was not safe or prudent to risk the chances of
communications with the fort being cut off by delaying to pursue these
animals.

The column had made good about ten miles of the return march when they
discovered that their retreat had been found out; straight in front of
them also were wooded krantzes and dark ravines, where an army of Zulus
might have been concealed, but pioneers having been sent out reported
that all was safe in that direction. Upon this they used the utmost
speed to gain the friendly covert, as they saw that if pursued there was
the best chance of eluding the vigilance of their enemies; or if unable
to do this, they would have the opportunity of fighting them to the best
advantage. As the troops moved quickly on, they entered the forest and
lost sight of the Zulus, who seemed in force, and were apparently
retracing their steps for some mysterious object. They were not,
however, kept long in doubt as to their proceedings, for upon sending on
scouts to an eminence where they could see without being seen, it was
found that the whole Zulu force, apparently some 2000 strong, was upon
the crest of the hill over which they had passed. An advanced party of
skirmishers were running very rapidly, their shields held aloft, and
their assegais waving over their heads. They had discovered the trick
played upon them, and the ruse of the coloured cloths planted upon the
kop. When, however, they could not discover the spoor upon the direct
trek by which the English party had come, they lost a considerable
amount of time in casting about to make out their real direction. At
last, however, when crossing a bit of open veldt, the keen-sighted Zulus
observed their cattle being carried away, at least five miles from them.
The rage of the pursuers, and their contempt for the marching qualities
of British soldiers--compared to their own speed and powers of
endurance--no doubt made them confident of overtaking them; but the
latter had little apprehension of the result, even if this were
effected. They knew that as soon as their foes came within range, they
could pick them off at 1000 or 1200 yards, and the little column had
been specially furnished with several crack marksmen to whom this
distance was no difficulty. They continued their march therefore
steadily, and did not abandon the cattle, which, strange to say, gave
little trouble, and were kept at a good pace by some of the mounted men,
whose anticipation of a full beef ration on their return, from the
spoil, made them doubly zealous in their duties. In about an hour the
Zulus had gained considerably upon them; they were imprudent enough to
move in close order. The evening was, however, now drawing on, and in
another hour the troops should be under the guns of the fort. A mist,
which had been for some time hanging about the streams and the kloof,
prevented the exact progress of the pursuers being seen, but the pursued
were not long without intimation of their whereabouts. The rear-guard
were attracted, when about three miles from the fort, by what seemed to
be dark objects moving between some rocks about half a mile on their
left rear. So fitful was the view obtained, however, that the men were
uncertain whether they were Zulus or some of the larger species of
baboon, which often come out of their holes and caves to look at any
human creature passing by. A steady watch was, however, maintained, and
before many minutes they could plainly see that a large body of the
enemy had, by the most tremendous pedestrian feat, succeeded in getting
almost on a level with them, in a position to assail them in flank. The
column had not long to wait, for as they came to a portion of the trek
they could not avoid, on account of the proximity of a deep morass on
the right, the pursuers, deeming them within range, treated them to a
volley which rattled up to about fifty paces short of their flank. Ten
of the mounted men, all excellent shots, were now sent out to cover the
attacked flank, and, as far as they could, to harass the enemy. The
ground was difficult and broken, but this was no impediment to these
gallant fellows, who, gaining a commanding position 500 yards from the
Zulus, and where there was admirable cover, dismounted, and kept up such
a galling fire that the Zulus retreated, as if waiting for their main
body to come up. As the mist rolled away, they could distinctly be seen
carrying off their dead and wounded with improvised stretchers of
branches of mimosa. A running fire was now kept up, the English shot
taking deadly effect, while no casualty occurred to their men. For more
than half an hour this went on, until the fort was sighted, and as the
Zulu main body had not come up, the flanking party drew quietly off.

The sun was sinking in the horizon as the returning soldiers received
their well-earned welcome from their beleaguered comrades, who were
beginning to be somewhat anxious as to their safe return.

Pearson's next raid was a most brilliant affair. It was found out from
reliable sources that a body of Zulus had charge of a convoy of cattle,
intended for the king's kraal at Ulundi. Deeming the Ekowe garrison as
of no account for more than defensive purposes, the Zulu general had
merely detailed 400 or 450 men to form the escort, which was known to
be on its march not more than seven miles to the north-west of Ekowe,
not far from the Inyezani river. Now here Pearson had an opportunity of
achieving two objects at one stroke. He wished to explore the land and
salient features of the country towards Inyezani, in order to see
whether a road could be made by which the dense bush of Hintza could be
avoided, while, at the same time, he could inflict a lesson upon the
Zulus, and possibly obtain some cattle. The foray was not to be on such
a grand scale as that made on Dabulamanzi's kraal, but it was intended
to be equally important for military purposes. Twenty men of the Naval
Brigade, all the small force of acting engineers, forty of the Buffs,
twenty of the 99th, and the mounted scouts were placed under orders to
parade before daylight on Friday, 21st March. No Gatling was to
accompany, as the utmost celerity of movement was required, and if the
expedition did not succeed in its first dash an immediate retreat upon
the guns was to be made. On leaving the fort at 3.30 a.m., the road by
which the band advanced was found to be good, although here and there
commanded from the neighbouring mountains. About two miles from Ekowe a
bluff runs out from the spur of the range of hills which had often
served as a reconnoitring point, and this was immediately occupied by
the mounted men, who had orders to keep up signalling both with the fort
and the rest of the expedition. Continuing on its march, the column came
to the Inyezani river, which for several miles runs between two
remarkable mountains, the bases of which are clothed with luxuriant
forest growths, while above spring sheer precipices 1000 and 1100 feet
high. The formation seemed to be sandstone and limestone, affording
excellent material for building purposes. Before reaching these dark
solitudes the river passes through a country undulating and fertile, and
the horizon is closed by higher hills, covered in the most part by
forest. These forest-trees are of fine growth and of the most valuable
description. The banks of the river are fringed by a quantity of
bamboo-looking reeds, which serve as wattles in the district, and which
are about the thickness of a finger, and some ten or twelve feet high.
Tracks of hippopotami are occasionally seen, and it is known that such
are in the neighbourhood. The river here is about 200 yards broad, while
the depth averages twenty-five feet. The expedition now noticed a few
deserted kraals on the right bank, while those on the left were found to
be in ruins, as if lately destroyed. At eight a.m. a herd of cattle was
seen some two miles off, and rapidly skirting the base of a friendly
hill the troops managed to cut in between these animals and a body of
Zulus, who appeared to be bivouacking in front of some neighbouring
caves, where fires were lit and cooking was going on. The mounted men,
who were observing these movements, now descended from the bluff where
they had been watching, and coming up rapidly at a canter, made a dash
at the Zulus, to cover the infantry retreat, which they effected with
the capture of some thirty-five fine cattle. A desultory fire was kept
up upon them from the hills during their return, and the enemy, who
seemed to be gradually augmented, at one narrow gorge managed to get
within range, slightly wounding two or three of the rear-guard. By noon
on the same day the men with the captured cattle were safely discussing
their frugal dinner, consisting of an extra half-ration in honour of the
event, within the old fort, which they were already beginning to look
upon as a friend from whom they were soon to part.

In spite of the rapidity of the raid, the necessary observations were
made by the officers deputed for this duty, and a rough sketch of the
ground passed over gave all the information requisite for the
construction of the projected road. This work, which was forthwith taken
in hand, had a most satisfactory effect upon the spirits of the garrison
generally. The working parties were occasionally driven in, but not
without inflicting loss upon the enemy, whose attention was much taken
up in guarding and patrolling the main road by which Pearson came.

Wood, it has been mentioned, fell back upon receiving the news of
Isandhlwana; but this retrograde movement was of short duration, and
from that time till all was ready for the relief of Ekowe, his was the
only column acting on the offensive.

From the 25th January to the 1st February his marches and countermarches
afford little matter of interest. On the 28th he moved on to a new
camping-ground, called Potter's Store, and there obtained full
particulars of the Maglisini or Baglusini Kraal. This place Colonel Wood
had for some time known as one of the principal rallying-points and
depots of supplies for the Zulu armies. Large quantities of "mealies"
(Indian corn) and grain of other sorts were known to have been
accumulated at this magazine, while cattle in large droves had been
seen on their way to the depot. Under these circumstances it was
necessary to proceed with caution, as, had any ostentatious preparations
been made for an advance in the direction of the magazine, it is more
than probable Wood's object would only have been gained at a severe
cost. In this view it was determined that a cavalry raid should be made
by the mounted troops under Piet Uys, with his Burghers, and Colonel
Buller, with his dashing corps of Frontier Light Horse. From the camp
near Potter's Store to the Baglusini stronghold was at least thirty
miles. A plain suitable to the passage of cavalry intervened before the
Manzana river was reached, and Colonel Buller saw no reason why the
distance should not be covered in one day. The kraals of Umbelini and of
Inyatini were also in the same neighbourhood, therefore the utmost
caution and secrecy were necessary in making preparations for the
attack. The weather had been most unfavourable for some days, but
fortunately cleared up, and became settled on the 1st of February. On
that morning Colonel Buller, having selected on the previous day 106 of
his best mounted men and thirty-three of the Dutch Contingent under Piet
Uys, their commandant, paraded his men under the supervision of Colonel
Wood, and explained to them clearly the feat they were about to attempt,
not concealing the danger which they would have to incur in the
performance of a most difficult and dangerous duty. The scene was a most
dramatic one, as the camp lanterns lit up the faces of the bronzed and
stalwart volunteers who formed the devoted band. Each man was
exceedingly well horsed, and no precaution had been neglected in the
careful overhauling of arms, accoutrements, and saddlery. Biscuit and,
for those who cared, a little ration of rum were served out, and with a
hearty "God-speed" from their comrades, who half envied their chances of
adventure, the little troop of 141 gallant fellows started long before
the earliest streak of dawn. The utmost silence was ordered and
maintained, while the ground for some miles was so favourable that the
horses' hoofs were scarcely heard as they cantered over the light and
springy veldt. Distances on horseback are so differently estimated out
in South Africa and at home in England, that when the ground is
favourable, very long, and to European experience almost impossible,
marches are constantly made without distress to horse or rider. In the
present instance two short off-saddles only were indulged in; the first
not far from the centre of the flat, and the next after the Manzana
river had been safely crossed. The country now became more broken and
the pace was reduced to a walk, but before the sun was well up the goal
was in sight, and the herds of cattle were seen calmly feeding on the
slopes. No suspicion would seem to have been excited, and it is more
than probable that the very smallness of the attacking force, and its
being all composed of the mounted branch, contributed to the success of
the affair. The kraal was exceedingly well built, and seen from a
distance of 1200 or 1000 yards it was doubtful whether it held a large
guard or not. Cautiously yet swiftly advancing, Colonel Buller felt his
way, with a few of his best shots thrown out as vedettes. These men soon
encountered some scattered Zulus, who did not seem at all prepared for
any hostile demonstration, but on retiring towards the hills they were
reinforced by several other larger bodies, who had evidently been sent
out to reconnoitre. After a few shots had been fired, a sudden and
simultaneous advance was made on two sides of the kraal, and almost
without resistance on the part of its defenders the kraal was captured.
Two hundred and fifty well-built huts were counted by Buller's men, who,
losing not a moment, collected no less than four hundred head of cattle,
and a large quantity of grain, and then set fire to the magazine. Six
Zulus were killed in the capture of the place, and although more than
one body of them were seen hovering about in the vicinity, numbering
severally 100 to 200 and 300 men, no opposition was offered to the
rear-guard or patrols.

Wood then again moved his camp to the White Umvolosi. His position here
was a remarkably strong one, and from it he commanded the passage of the
White Umvolosi, the Pewana, while his day and night patrols held the
disputed territory south of the Pongolo. A raid was next made in the
direction of the Insulwa Kraal. The men got upon the road about seven
a.m., and steady marching for about three miles brought them opposite
the spot where, a few days before, a large force of Zulus had been seen
engaged at drill. A scout who had been sent out on the right front came
galloping back with the news that the Zulu cattle were in considerable
numbers at the lower end of the valley, while he also added that the
guard over these animals was not much larger than the English party.
Piet Uys at once concerted with a couple of his smart non-commissioned
officers, and decided, as they were exceedingly well mounted, to ride
for the kloof which formed the exit to the valley. To execute this
man[oe]uvre was the work of ten minutes, during which they were hidden
from sight of the Zulus by a tall ledge of scarped rocks which almost
divided the valley. In the meanwhile the remainder moved steadily on at
a walk, so as not to alarm their prey. In rather more than half an hour
they had so far gained upon the cattle that they could make a tolerable
guess as to their probable number, which was estimated at a couple of
hundreds. The main body had now arrived at a place which Piet Uys and
his Dutchmen seemed intimately acquainted with, and the Zulu cattle and
guard could be seen on a ridge running parallel to the one they
themselves were upon. Below was a deep kloof leading to the river. Some
of Buller's Horse were now sent round to the opposite side, to drive the
enemy down the kloof to the main party, while they continued to march
down the ridge to meet these men as they came on. But they had not
advanced very far when, as was expected, a much larger force appeared on
the neighbouring heights, but the cliff was so precipitous they could
not join their comrades. The seven-pounder was now brought into action,
and sent a couple of shells right in amongst them, one of the rounds
being a capital shot. Advancing still, the English leader saw that the
enemy lately on the heights had managed, by making a detour, to get to
the cover of a dense mimosa bush on his left. This move was answered by
several rounds of canister, which it was afterwards found were not
without effect. The foes were thus driven out into the open, and at one
moment it seemed as though they were going to fight; the Boers, however,
who had been detached to the neck of the valley now served their
comrades by an excellent ruse. They had taken with them one of the bugle
boys of the 13th, mounted on a wiry Kaffir pony, and the main party now
heard coming across the valley the echoes of his bugle sounding the
advance. The Zulus could not make out the meaning of this sound, and
evidently imagined that the English commander had posted at least the
wing of a regiment to intercept them. The consequence was, that the
moment the main body cantered forward with a bold front, the cattle were
abandoned; and they were left masters of the field, taking 170 head and
some few wounded prisoners. Two villages were left in flames behind the
retiring troops, who, as the crackling and flashing approached the bush
where the hills met the plain, could see individual forms of black
warriors shouting and gesticulating from out of the dust and smoke, wild
with impotent rage at the loss of their kraal and cattle. The ridges
beyond the gullies still afforded considerable shelter, and the English
party were continually fired upon as they returned with their spoil; but
it was evident that the Zulus had not any long-range weapons, as it
could be seen from the splashes of dust how far short their bullets were
falling. Ten of Buller's men were now sent on to cover the passage of
the guns through the drift, and in about twenty minutes, and under the
protection of the rear-guard, it was passed over in safety.

On the 15th, Wood was fortunate enough to destroy the great military
kraal of Manyanyoba. Several reconnaissances had been made by Colonel
Wood's directions, and from the local knowledge of one of Piet Uys's
men, Colonel Buller was enabled to carry out the instructions of his
chief with a success fully equal to the most sanguine expectations. The
stronghold in question was situated on the Intomba river, and had always
been considered by Cetywayo and his Indunas as a place of more than
ordinary strength. At ten p.m. on the 14th the men were got under arms,
and the column was composed of a strong detachment of Buller's Horse and
fifty of the Burgher Volunteers under Piet Uys, whose services had on
more than one occasion been most handsomely mentioned by Colonel Wood.
The men paraded without lights, bugles, or the slightest sound, and
moved off silently into the bush, without even the jingle of a sabre or
the clank of a chain. Their march was accompanied by one gun, the wheels
of which were, however, carefully wrapped with cloth and bound with raw
hide. This was not only a protection against sound, but a preventive to
injury to spokes and axles from the sharp boulders and rocks in the bed
of the drift. The column left the camp by moonlight, crossing the usual
ford, and were fortunate enough to gain the shelter of the bush without
being seen or heard in the neighbouring villages. After a couple of
hours' marching they reached a wide plain, where there was a broad
watercourse, but sufficiently shallow to be easily forded. Here the gun,
as the early grey of the morning came on in the sky, was brought into
position, and here the final instructions were given to the men. As the
daylight grew more marked there could be seen in front a long unbroken
range of mountains, varying in height from 900 to 1000 feet. This range
ran along the valley leading to the smaller kraals in the distance. Half
the cavalry were now sent away by Colonel Buller to the left, with
instructions to gain the bush, and wait dismounted until the shells were
heard. They were then to dash forward at a swinging canter and cut off
the cattle to be seen feeding on the slopes, which man[oe]uvre would, if
carried out, drive them into the hands of Piet Uys and his men posted on
the right. Just as the sun began to appear above the horizon the gunners
managed to hit off the range to a nicety, and the second shell crashed
and burst right into the centre of the interior circle where the cattle
were placed at night, and which is usually surrounded by the
beehive-shaped huts where the Zulus live. It was at once perceived that
this shot had caused the wildest commotion, as it was immediately
followed by smoke and flame, figures rushing about through the village,
the bellowing of oxen, and the shouts of men. As the horsemen advanced
at a gallop towards the kraal, the enemy, firing a random and hasty
volley, fled up the sides of the mountain, where cavalry could not
follow. All the huts and stores along the base of the mountain were now
destroyed without much resistance, although as soon as the Zulus got a
little vantage-ground on the cliffs, they turned, and replied to the
English fire. Four hundred head of cattle and a quantity of sheep and
goats were brought off by Buller's men, who behaved with the most
admirable coolness and steadiness. The fight had lasted about half an
hour, when indications of reinforcements to the Zulus were observed.
Seeing that nothing more was to be gained, and that he might lose the
cattle, Colonel Buller gave the order to make good the retreat, covered
by skirmishers and a rear-guard. This movement was skilfully effected
without loss, and the column reached the camp early in the afternoon,
having been about eight or nine hours in the saddle.

Meanwhile, to strengthen Wood's hands, the Commander-in-chief had
ordered Colonel Rowlands to join that general. Rowlands at this time had
with him, at his entrenched camp at New Derby, only a wing of the 80th,
a couple of guns, and 200 Swazis. Raaf's Horse and Weatherly's Borderers
were, however, expected daily to reinforce him. In the meantime,
Rowlands was not allowing the grass to grow under the feet of his men,
for, on the same day that Wood destroyed the Manyanyoba Kraal he left
his camp at Derby and marched on to the Talako range, where he knew the
enemy were in the numerous caves hidden by dense bush. The operations
were entirely successful. Five large kraals, some of them of great
natural strength, were burnt to the ground, 197 cattle, seventy goats,
and forty-five sheep were captured. Magalini, the chief, was killed,
with ten of his men, while defending one of the caves. One Zulu prisoner
was taken, and forty women and a number of children came in and claimed
protection. Six of the Swazi allies, under Fairlie, were wounded, and
one horse killed.

On a still more recent occasion Colonel Rowlands had shown even greater
activity. On the 20th February intelligence was brought to his camp that
a small force of Zulus had been left in charge of supplies at Makatees
Kop, a natural fortress close to Elozo, and intended as a depot for
future operations. The place was by no means easy of access, and
apparently innumerable difficulties were mentioned to dissuade the
colonel from any hostile attempt. On the date just named (20th) the
detachment sent forward as a sort of advanced guard by Colonel Rowlands
reached one of the mission-stations still left on the border. There was
a laager consisting of a simple stone enclosure, bastioned, however, and
loopholed, and situated on the bank of a running stream of bright and
clearly sparkling water. In the dead of night the sentries were heard to
challenge, and the sergeant on guard at once called his men to arms.
This alarm, however, proved to be merely the return of some mounted
Boers who had been sent on to reconnoitre on the previous day, and the
information they brought in was important. The kraal which they had been
seeking was about twenty miles off and supposed to be only held by about
fifty Zulus, belonging to the regiment of Nkobamakosi, and part of the
Undi or Royal corps. A large number of cattle were not supposed to be
yet there, but some were coming in daily, and it was considered
advisable to break this link in the enemy's communications. In the early
morning, preceded by a few horsemen (many were coming in as volunteers
to both Rowlands' and Wood's column), and marching with only their
haversacks full of rations for two days, the little expedition started
for a duty uncertain and believed to be full of risk. Eight European
officers, 275 natives, partly Swazi allies, and some volunteer horse,
the whole under command of Captain Harvey, staff officer, formed the
reconnaissance; but, as it turns out, a smaller force would have
sufficed. From the post or laager at the mission-station the road lay up
a narrow valley, from which, after an ascent of about 200 feet, it
stretched out on to a wide grassy plain ten miles in length. On the left
of this could be plainly seen a number of Zulus tending sheep and cattle
on the hills. Crossing part of the Iwangovini district, and fording a
drift on the Inpongo river, the Iembe mountain could be seen always to
the right; while the Eloso, a rocky height, loomed in front. At the
bottom of a steep, rocky, and heavily bush-grown gorge, fourteen miles
from the laager, a halt and short off-saddle were made, and every
precaution taken against surprise. From this point to the stronghold the
pathway was most difficult, and the men had to proceed with the greatest
caution, in case of an ambush, which was half suspected. Two columns of
smoke, one from a steep krantz on the left and another lower down on the
right, were noticed, but these were afterwards found to be abandoned
camping-grounds of the enemy, who fancied the British force was much
stronger than it really was. On nearing the kraal, and on turning an
angle of the gully, the column came in sight of the first village, which
was as usual fortified in the Zulu fashion. As the foremost files dashed
on, a couple of shots rang out and some assegais were thrown, causing a
couple of casualties amongst the Swazis, who, however, showed a bold
front, and, gallantly led by the European officers, carried the kraal by
a rush. The results of this skirmish may not appear of great importance,
but, taken in conjunction with Wood's recent successes, they had a most
useful effect upon both the minds of the regular soldiers and those of
the colonial volunteers.

The junction of Rowlands' column with Wood's was the next eventful
incident in the history of the latter force. It was found, of course,
impossible for Wood with so small a column and with so few cavalry to
keep an efficient and reliable watch over the lengthy border he had to
defend, and the result was that a Zulu force managed to effect a raid in
the German settlements over the Pongolo. Commandant Schermbrucker had
hitherto done remarkably well in keeping his line of defence intact, but
his want of mounted men seriously hampered him, and enabled the Zulus to
elude his vigilance. A serious raid happened on the 11th February; but
Schermbrucker came up with the marauders as they were retiring with
their booty, recaptured some of the cattle taken, and killed about a
dozen of the enemy. On the 13th a large Zulu force managed to cross the
Pongolo, and steal past the fort and laager of Luneberg. This was in the
dead of night, and by daybreak they had burnt a number of huts belonging
to natives friendly to or in the employment of the Dutch. The savages
rushed in thousands upon the kraals and single huts, setting the roofs
on fire and massacring old people, women, and children who could not
escape. They deliberately tortured to death about a score of old men,
killed in the most brutal manner at least fifty women and an equal
number of children, while they left several young women fearfully
stabbed with assegais. All this took place within five miles of the
fort; and as fire-arms were not employed, the attention of the sentries
was not aroused. Early in the morning one of the wounded managed to
effect his escape, and brought this terrible news to the laager, and
measures were immediately taken to follow and punish the band. Patrols
were ordered out, and the utmost diligence exerted to overtake the
enemy, who, it was known, was overladen with spoil. Before the Tombe
river was reached, the leading patrol came up with a portion of the
enemy's rear-guard, and a very pretty fight took place. The Zulus
numbered about 450, but they were embarrassed by the cattle they had
charge of, and this did not allow them to make a good stand. The
consequence was that the Boer patrol killed twenty of their foes, put
the remainder to flight, and won back a number of the stolen cattle. The
rest, however, managed to escape over the Tombe, and the patrol were
wisely ordered not to pursue. These raids were principally due to the
activity of both Umbelini and Manyanyoba, and were the immediate cause
of the expedition to attack and burn the kraals of the chiefs on the
Intombe river. It should be mentioned that Umbelini was a Swazi refugee,
and not even a legitimate chieftain of that tribe, but was regarded by
the real headmen as a mere adventurer and pretender. Manyanyoba's
people, again, were not Zulus, but the _debris_ or remnants of various
tribes conquered by Chaka and Dingaan. They wandered about in a starving
condition, landless, and without flocks or wealth of any kind, until
Cetywayo, from compassion, allowed them to settle north of the Pongolo,
and on the banks of the Tombe river. This very land was mentioned in the
ultimatum sent by Sir Bartle Frere to the king, who had no right
whatever to cede any portion of it.

Wood next moved his camp to the Kambula Kop, and there entrenched
himself in a position of great natural strength. There now occurred an
event of considerable importance. Oham, brother of Cetywayo, had always
declared himself opposed to war, had openly stated his opinion in Zulu's
councils, and had ever since the outbreak of hostilities been making
overtures of friendship to the British. These, however, had been but
lightly treated, as suspicions of their honesty were entertained by the
powers that were. How groundless were these suspicions the event proved.
On the 2nd inst. Oham came into the camp of Captain M'Leod, the
political agent on the border of Swaziland, arrived at Derby on the 4th,
and came on thence to Wood at Kambula a couple of days back, and
declared his complete submission to her Majesty's Government.
Immediately before leaving his kraal in Zululand the chief took the
precaution to try and save some of his best cattle, and he subsequently
sent a thousand head of his finest herds into the Swazi county; but they
fell into Dutch hands, and some of the Boers, obtaining possession of
them, had the audacity to brand them as their property before M'Leod
could arrive to claim them. Oham had with him between 300 and 400 of his
people, and was accompanied by his eldest son, an intelligent lad of
fifteen, who soon made himself an object of great interest in Wood's
camp, and a favourite with the soldiers. Immediately on his arrival he
had an interview with, and was received with great respect by Colonel
Wood, who was informed by him that he would have surrendered some time
back but for two reasons. In the first place, he was under a system of
espionage by the orders of the king, with whom he had never been on good
terms since he openly, before the Indunas, spoke against the warlike
attitude and aggressive tone of his brother; and, secondly, when he did
make his first overtures for submission, he was told that he was not
believed by the English, and would be cast into prison, and sent to
Robbin Island as a convict.

Oham was a black ikehla (head-ringed man), resembling both his father,
the late Mpanda, or Panda, and his brother Cetywayo, and although a
large man, his body and muscles were firm, not flabby like those of so
many other big Zulus. After the usual salutations he thus opened his
interview with Wood:--

"Sir, chief, and great warrior, whom I respect, because you fight
against men, and do not kill women or children, I came here to your camp
from a desire to see you, and to ask you to intercede for me and my
people, who have never wished to make war upon you, but to live in peace
and goodwill, and hunt the wild deer together. I have left more than two
thousand of my people ready and most anxious to come in and submit to
you, surrendering their arms and cattle, and giving their sons as
hostages, if you will guarantee their safety."

The chief, who had a dignified manner and an honest expression of
countenance, was then informed that he and his people should receive
every consideration, and as much protection as was consistent with the
safe advance of the English troops into Zululand. He then assured Wood
that the Zulu army was considerably demoralized, and that, the people
having gone back to their kraals, Cetywayo found it no easy task to
collect a really effective fighting force. With some difficulty,
indeed, the king had managed to get together a strong impi, composed of
the Udhlambedhlu, or "Ill-tempered" Regiment, whose kraal was at
Udhlambedhlweni, about six miles east of the Usixepe, to exercise a
surveillance over Oham and his people. This corps, however, was formed
originally from a clan, or tribe, which were Dingaan's chief and
favourite regiment, and although in a measure loyal to their then ruler,
they were somewhat indignant at the duty imposed upon them, when they
would infinitely prefer the chances of raiding and plunder, which the
present unsettled state of the border presented. Now, when Wood was at
Utrecht the previous autumn, a letter was sent by the Landdrost Rudolph
to the Secretary for Native Affairs, in which he mentioned the arrival
of Gwegwana, the favourite messenger of Uhamo or Oham, with letters from
that chief to the following effect, which Oham now repeated to Colonel
Wood:--"I am sent back by Uhamo to hear what answer his father, Somtseu
(Sir Theophilus Shepstone), has sent to his message brought by me on the
10th October last. Uhamo is very anxious to know what is going to take
place in the land now that Cetywayo has called the whole of Zululand
together, and Uhamo has refused liberty to his people to assemble at
'Ondi,' and will openly tell Cetywayo that if he (Cetywayo) makes war
upon the English, he (Uhamo) will not join him, because Cetywayo's
people, Sirayo and Umbelini, have, by their overt acts, brought the
country into its present state of trouble and disgrace. Moreover, the
building by Cetywayo's orders of a military kraal on the Pongolo, and
the claims made by him of a portion of the Transvaal beyond the Blood
River, which had been, as Uhamo repeatedly told Cetywayo, ceded many
years ago to the Transvaal people, and other acts, had never received
any countenance from Uhamo, who now asks, Why does Cetywayo want to
quarrel with the English, who have ever been his friends, and who,
indeed, placed him on his present throne?"

In his second interview with Colonel Wood, Oham was still more explicit
and demonstrative. He expressed himself with much indignation at his
brother's countenancing such a despicable character as Umbelini, who,
neither a pure Zulu nor a Swazi, had all the vices and none of the good
qualities of either; and he added that the degradation which his brother
had brought upon the race of Chaka by such an unworthy alliance has
caused him to lose much of his former popularity. Oham also added that,
in case of the continuance of the war, rather than be compelled to fight
against his old friends the English he would at all hazards bring his
people bodily over to that Government, and under these circumstances
claim their protection. "Uhamo loves peace as his father Panda did,"
said the chief in conclusion, and his open and honest-looking eyes
seemed to corroborate this expression.

We now come to another sad event, which though less in magnitude, is in
many points similar to the Isandhlwana disaster. Major Tucker, the chief
officer at Luneberg, gives this account of the affair:--Captain
Moriarty, with a company of the 80th, was ordered to march from Luneberg
on the 7th March, for the purpose of bringing in twenty waggons from
Derby, variously loaded, which had arrived at the Intombi Drift.
Earlier in the month Major Tucker sent down to the Drift, which was not
more than four miles off, a small escort to await the arrival of these
waggons. Believing, however, the position a perilous one, owing to the
proximity to Umbelini's kraal, on the 5th he ordered it to return. On
the 7th, however, the waggons, which had all but been captured on the
way down, did arrive at the Drift, and Moriarty was again sent with
seventy men of his company to act as escort and assist in getting the
convoy across the stream, which was considerably swollen by the
continued rains. The Drift was only four miles from the stronghold of
the renegade Swazi freebooter, Umbelini, who had of late given so much
trouble, and Moriarty had orders to neglect no precaution, and above all
to laager his waggons and keep an incessant and vigilant look-out. It
was ascertained from survivors that the waggons were actually parked,
but in a somewhat loose and careless fashion, and that no earthworks
were thrown up around the camp. For several days the river continued in
strong flood, and consequently no crossing could be effected. On the
11th it was reported by the native waggon-drivers that Umbelini's people
were gathering in the neighbourhood. The camp was pitched in a most
dangerous position, with its face towards some high ground, covered here
and there with dense bush, while its rear was resting upon the swollen
river, across which Lieutenant Harward and thirty-four men were posted.
No particular precautions appear to have been taken, with the exception
of a sentry being posted about fifteen paces from the front of the camp,
on the Derby side. When first warned by the drivers, Moriarty ordered
the men to stand to their arms, but only for a short time. On the
morning of the 12th, at four o'clock, a shot was heard from the
unfortunate sentry, who had barely time to call "Guard, turn out!" when
dense masses of the savages were seen not more than two hundred yards
from the camp. Their front extended for several miles, and they could
not, by the lowest estimate, have been less than 4000 or 5000 strong.
Lieutenant Harward, who had been on the _qui-vive_, and who had
carefully placed his thirty-five men under cover of his solitary waggon,
at once called his detachment to arms, and made what dispositions he
could to open fire upon the enemy's flank. In less than ten minutes,
however, the whole valley was swarming with the savages, who at once
proceeded in their usual manner to surround and overlap the camp and
waggons. In less time than it takes to tell, the camp was in their
hands, and the majority of the soldiers were assegaied, many of them
before they could leave their tents. The fight, or rather butchery,
which ensued was soon over, and, in spite of a well-directed and
well-sustained fire from the Luneberg bank of the river, the enemy
followed up the men, and assegaied them as they endeavoured to swim the
river. Harward, seeing the enemy crossing the river in large numbers,
gave the order to his men to retire slowly. Then, jumping on the back of
his horse, he galloped away at full speed to Luneberg, where he reported
what had happened. The savages continued to cross the stream, and coming
on in dense masses, for a short time a hand-to-hand fight took place,
ending however in the little band being broken up.

Eight men, and the sergeant of Harward's detachment, by taking advantage
of shelter afforded by an old and dismantled kraal wall at some little
distance from the stream, and by their cool and determined shooting,
succeeded in saving their lives and getting to Luneberg. Ten men only
were saved from Moriarty's party, while he, with a civilian, Surgeon
Cobbin, was slain.

The camp was evidently wrongly placed, and was clearly taken by
surprise. Major Tucker went out from Luneberg in person, with a small
party of horsemen, followed by 150 of the 80th, to see what could be
recovered, and the bodies of the dead were brought over the river and
buried, while twenty-five of the enemy's dead were discovered, and a
couple of wounded taken prisoners. From these men it was ascertained
that Umbelini himself was in command, having with him some men belonging
to our old antagonist Manyanyoba. Mcame, a powerful induna, had been
asked to join in the foray, but refused. When Tucker and his handful of
horsemen arrived on the banks of the river, the enemy were seen to be
retreating, but they could not be followed until the infantry came up.
Curious to remark, the waggons were not taken, and many of them were
only half plundered by the savages, who seemed most anxious to decamp
with what spoil they had secured.

For his conduct in this affair Lieutenant Harward was subsequently tried
by court-martial. The ground of complaint was his having galloped off on
his horse--the only one present on the scene--leaving his men engaged in
a desperate engagement. The loss of the camp, or anything of a similar
nature, was in no way charged against him. His defence was that he had
ridden off to obtain assistance from the nearest point--that this was
his duty--and that he could not send a soldier in his place, as none of
them could ride. In the event the Court acquitted him. But in May of the
ensuing year (1880), the Field-Marshal Commanding-in-Chief issued the
following special general order relative to a court-martial recently
held on an officer in South Africa:--

"At a general court-martial recently held, an officer was arraigned upon
the following charges,--First. Having misbehaved before the enemy, in
shamefully abandoning a party of the regiment under his command when
attacked by the enemy, and in riding off at speed from his men. Second.
Conduct to the prejudice of good order and military discipline in having
at the time and place mentioned in the first charge, neglected to take
proper precautions for the safety of a party of the regiment under his
command when attacked. The Court recorded a verdict of 'Not Guilty' on
both charges. The main facts of the case were not in dispute. The
officer rode away from his men to a station distant four and a half
miles, at a moment of extreme danger, when to all appearance the small
party under his command were being surrounded and overwhelmed by the
enemy. The charge alleged misbehaviour--that is, cowardice in so doing;
the defence averred that it was to procure reinforcements, and either by
their actual arrival, or by the imminence of their arrival, to ward off
destruction. In acquitting the prisoner, they have found that he was not
guilty of cowardice. The proceedings of the Court were submitted to the
General commanding, who recorded the following minute:--'Disapproved and
not confirmed. Lieutenant ... to be released from arrest, and to return
to his duty.' The confirming officer has further recorded his reasons
for withholding his approval and confirmation in the following
terms:--'Had I released this officer without making any remarks upon the
verdict in question, it would have been a tacit acknowledgment that I
concurred in what appears to me a monstrous theory, viz., that a
regimental officer who is the only officer present with a party of
soldiers actually and seriously engaged with the enemy can, under any
pretext whatever, be justified in deserting them, and by so doing
abandoning them to their fate. The more helpless the position in which
an officer finds his men, the more it is his bounden duty to stay and
share their fortune, whether for good or ill. It is because the British
officer has always done so that he occupies the position in which he is
held in the estimation of the world, that he possesses the influence he
does in the ranks of our army. The soldier has learnt to feel that, come
what may, he can, in the direst moment of danger, look with implicit
faith to his officer, knowing that he will never desert him under any
possible circumstances. It is to this faith of the British soldier in
his officers that we owe most of the gallant deeds recorded in our
military annals; and it is because the verdict of this court-martial
strikes at the root of this faith that I feel it necessary to mark
officially my emphatic dissent from the theory upon which the verdict
has been founded.' In communicating to the army the result of this
court-martial, the Field-Marshal Commanding-in-Chief desires to signify
his entire approval of the views expressed by the confirming officer in
respect of the principles of duty which have always actuated British
officers in the field, and by which his Royal Highness feels assured
they will continue to be guided. This general order will, by his
Highness's command, be read at the head of every regiment in her
Majesty's service.--By Command, H. ELLICE, A.-G."

It was about this time that Oham, whose actions had now clearly proved
his sincerity, and the value of his friendship to the British, having
made an earnest request to Colonel Wood that his wives and family might
be rescued from the power of Cetywayo, the colonel sent off about twenty
of the chief's men to collect them. To carry out the remainder of the
project, some days after, (on the 14th), a strong detachment of Buller's
men and the Burghers under Piet Uys, with 200 of Oham's people, left the
camp at daybreak, and guided by James Rorke and Calverly, marched to the
caves of Nhlangwine, which were situated rather more than twelve miles
east of the source of the Unkassi, and not less than forty-five miles
from Kambula. The caves were reached at 9.30 p.m., the last of the march
of seven miles being very difficult travelling, and taking three hours
to surmount. A few Zulus in charge of cattle were shot, and the animals
which had belonged to Oham were taken possession of. As has been said,
it was scarcely daybreak when the little column started. They rode along
for a considerable time in complete silence, the men being allowed to
smoke their pipes, but not to speak above a whisper. At first they
followed the spoor of some cattle, which indicated the road by which
Oham and his people had come to the camp, and then turning more in a
northerly direction, followed the course of some small streams which
flowed from the hills upon the left. The moon shone brightly, and
enabled them to see clearly for some distance before them. Many strange
sounds were heard, the growl of some beast of prey or the scream of the
night-birds disturbed by the clank of the horses' hoofs, or the
occasional rattle of a chain. The rapidity with which the column
cantered over the soft and springy veldt, the dead and ominous silence
maintained by all hands, and the steady and business-like mode in which
they pursued their course, neither turning to the right nor the left,
gave the journey a singularly weird character. As soon as the first
morning's light began to appear the guides, who rode in front, turned
into a ravine covered with dense brushwood and trees, and, having
ascended this for about three miles, they found it was possible to ride
out of it in three different directions, besides the one by which they
had entered, and thus a retreat could be effected if any attack were
made. Here it was decided to make the first off-saddle and partake of
breakfast. At a signal from their leader, and without any word of
command, the horsemen dismounted, slackened girths, and took off
saddles, while the bits were removed from the horses' mouths and the
animals allowed, Cape fashion, to take the customary roll in the grass.
This luxury to a Cape horse seems indispensable, and without it he will
rarely enjoy his grass or corn. No sooner, however, had the steeds
rolled than each was again saddled, and, with the exception of the still
slackened girths, was ready to be mounted in half a moment. Rifles and
revolvers were carefully examined, to see whether the night dew had done
any mischief, and then, having made a careful sweep round the horizon
with his field-glasses, the commander gave the order for the morning
meal, which consisted of a little cold tea, some bread, and "beltong"
(sun-dried game).

After half an hour's rest they again started as silently as before. The
day had broken with all the splendour of an African morning. The day
before had been rainy, and the showers had refreshed the ground and
filled the various pools with water, and all kinds of wild animals were
busy and cheerful in the plains. A number of parrots and monkeys were
screaming and chattering with content, and the sportsmen of the party
were much exercised at hearing the pleasant double whistle of the quail
sounding from various patches of long grass. Figures which it was first
thought were Zulus were seen on the summits of the rocks, but Piet Uys
declared that they were merely baboons, whose early morning custom was
to come from the heights to search for and dig up roots, which seemed to
grow here in abundance. Vultures, sweeping aloft, were circling in the
air above where there had evidently been a skirmish, for the carcasses
of some horses still remained uneaten and poisoning the pure air. Here
and there a black-breasted and magnificent eagle sat on some withered
branch, and, seeming quite indifferent to the soldier's presence,
scanned the ground below him as if to select the daintiest morsel for
his morning meal. Mounting to the head of the kloof the party came to a
splendid prospect and panorama stretching out below. The plains seemed
to roll away to the north-east as far as the eye could see, while the
bright, glowing tints of the rugged foreground were mellowed away into
the middle distance, until, quite far away, the bold outlines of the
mountains assumed, not a purple, as in Europe they would have done, but
a rich blue tint, yet standing out in fine clear relief against the
distant sky, the dry atmosphere failing to give the subdued effect of
distance usually observed in other climates. These mountains were the
Tobomba range, which run northward, and almost parallel to the
coast-line. Amidst small groves of what seemed in the distance to be
acacia, and near the banks of many tiny streams that wound along the
plain, were groups of game. Herds of various kinds of bok were there,
and here and there some solitary and not gregarious animal was to be
seen, now bounding away from some imaginary danger, and now calmly
browsing on the sweet veldt. What a place for an encampment!--wood,
water, cover, commanding heights, which, properly occupied and
entrenched, could be held against an army; and a climate where fever
could scarcely penetrate, so pure and bracing was the air. Away up a
smaller valley on the right lay the path that had to be followed, and,
leaving the bright and smiling landscape in front, the column once more
plunged into the gloom of the bush. Two more outspans brought them to
sunset, and now precautions had to be redoubled, as they were nearing
most dangerous ground. The chances were more than probable that
Cetywayo, on hearing of his brother's defection and flight, had sent a
party of his warriors to take possession of his wives and cattle, both
vendible commodities in the land. If this were the case, it would
inevitably result that a vigilant watch would be kept to prevent their
escape to Oham. Strange to say, these anticipations were only partly
verified, for as the troops neared the caves they could see that they
were watched, but only by scattered and weak bodies of Zulus. These
fellows had evidently discovered that the white man's intention was
hostile, and they probably thought his object was cattle, and not to
recover or rescue Oham's wives and children, for they ran rapidly along
the heights above, taking no precaution for concealment, and seeming
only anxious to drive away their herds. As the horsemen approached the
caves at a canter, flankers were extended on either side to prevent
surprise. The excitement of Buller's men could hardly be restrained,
while the calm and stolid Dutchmen, who glided silently and grimly on,
offered a wide contrast to their more hot-blooded comrades. As they came
nearer and nearer the place seemed inhabited, and it was evident that
the natives sent on a few days previously had apprised the people of
Buller's advent and friendly intentions. Then Oham's people came
crowding out of their caves, jostling each other in their anxiety to
greet the English soldiers, grasping their assegais, and giving vent to
a succession of guttural clicks, which it would baffle any known
combination of vowels to reproduce. They did not cheer; such was not
their custom, but they waved their spears aloft, as if they felt them
entering the enemy's body.

Rorke, having now been sent on with a small escort to explore the
caves, was not long in reporting that all the women and children had
been collected, and a bivouac having been formed, with outlying pickets
in every direction, and sentries posted, that night was passed without
molestation. At nine a.m. the following morning a compact column was
formed, consisting of the rescued allies or prisoners, the few cattle
collected in the centre, and the whole party started for the homeward
march. It could scarcely have been hoped that the retreat would have
been unmolested, yet only at the Inklepgwene, a difficult defile, were
they fired upon by a body of Zulus, evidently hastily collected, and
numbering some thousand men. The detachment reached the camp, with the
rescued families, at one p.m. on the 16th.

Wood had for some time purposed taking the initiative against Umbelini,
and from information obtained from Oham's people came to the conclusion
that Umbelini's place on the Mhlobana Mountain, which was not more than
five and twenty miles from Kambula, was capable of being successfully
surprised. He had heard from headquarters that Lord Chelmsford would
probably start for Pearson's relief on the 28th, so he determined to
take that opportunity of making a diversion towards Mhlobana.

On Wednesday, 26th March, Colonel Buller and Piet Uys were summoned to
Colonel Wood's tent, and told that information had come in to the effect
that a large quantity of fine cattle had been seen on the Zlobani range
of mountains, some ten or twelve miles from Kambula. This Zlobani range
could be seen from the camp, and in most places was steep and
precipitous, well wooded, and full of large caves, places of
concealment, and natural fastnesses.

Several reconnaissances had been previously made by Colonels Wood and
Buller, who had both made themselves well acquainted with its natural
features and its various difficulties of attack. It was well known that
scattered bands of predatory Zulus, guarding large quantities of cattle,
had been for some time concealed in these rocky recesses, and that, in
compliance with the king's orders, these bands had been consolidated and
reinforced by regiments sent by Cetywayo from Ulundi. Colonel Wood had,
however, other information, from some of Oham's people, that all the
regiments indicated had not yet come in, and that want of ammunition was
detaining them in their own kraals. This, as it turned out, could not
have been quite correct. After some conversation, Colonel Weatherly and
Commandants Raaf and Schermbrucker were also summoned to the colonel's
tent, and it was unanimously decided that it would be advisable to take
the initiative and strike a blow before the Zulus concentrated to attack
the camp, as Wood was on all hands assured they would do. Before any
operations on the Zlobani are described, it should be mentioned that
Wood had been enabled from the additions to his column to establish a
chain of communications between Kambula, Utrecht, and Dundee. He had
also organized a strong outpost between his camp and the Transvaal
border, and another at Doornkop, or Thorn-hill. To this place Captain
Schermbrucker and a party of his men were sent, but had been temporarily
recalled to assist us at Kambula.

After the council of war held by the colonel on the 26th, arrangements
were at once made for the reconnaissance to the Zlobani. The force
selected for this expedition consisted of the Imperial Mounted
Infantry, 150; the Frontier Light Horse, 125; Raaf's Contingent, 50;
Piet Uys's Boer Contingent, 50; Weatherly's Horse, 80; and
Schermbrucker's Horse, 40, making a total of 495; and each man was
supplied with three days' rations and 100 rounds of ammunition.

All the horses intended for the expedition were carefully inspected on
the 26th, and the colonel rejected several that did not seem in good
form. They did not, as a rule, average more than fourteen hands two
inches in height, but all were stout, short-backed, well ribbed up
animals, and up to far more weight than their appearance would lead a
novice to suppose. All these animals were trained to remain perfectly
quiet when the men dismounted to fire, and many of them would actually
come to their rider at a whistle. Piet Uys's men were especially well
mounted, and it was necessary that they should be, as your Dutch Boer
is, as a rule, by no means a feather-weight, being usually over thirteen
stone. They are also very powerful men, and until forty or forty-five
not unwieldy. After that age, they generally get heavier. Most of the
old-fashioned Boers still retained the long "roer" or smoothbore, but
all the younger generation had taken to the latest pattern rifles. A
revolver and stout cutlass also formed part of their equipment, and a
single blanket strapped in front of the saddle carried all their kit.

At three a.m. on the 27th, the first little band of gallant horsemen
under Colonel Russell were quietly paraded in the moonlight, and after
being carefully inspected were addressed in a few well-chosen words by
Colonel Wood, who had finally decided to accompany the party. The whole
party made up altogether 495 sabres, every one of whom was a good
swordsman and a picked marksman. The horses, although somewhat rough in
the coat, were in good wind and excellent condition, and every one of
these animals was well trained to stand fire. They moved off quietly
from the camp, and passing along the track, which descended towards a
sandy and deep nullah with most precipitous sides, debouched into an
open space, from which the Zlobani range could be seen in the intervals
of moonlight, now and then obscured by the passing clouds, which seemed
to foretell a stormy day. The track in many places crossed difficult
spruits, and in parts was obliterated by thorn-trees and bush. It was
frequently commanded by projecting spurs and bluffs, from which an enemy
could have seriously annoyed the advance. At five o'clock the column
halted, and after a careful reconnaissance, off-saddled for half an
hour, while the men partook of a ration of cold tea and beltong. This
halt was made near a large dried-up, sandy watercourse, in parts of
which the sand was moist, and by digging holes water was found in
sufficient quantities for the horses to wash their mouths. The
surrounding country was totally denuded of fodder, and as far as the eye
could reach the most wild and barren prospect was to be seen. Another
advance of about five miles changed the aspect of the scene, and brought
them to a slightly wooded ravine, amidst the rocks of which ran a clear
stream, over a grassy or pebbly bed, behind which loomed a range of
rocky hills, the summit of which seemed crowned by immense boulders,
looking in the distance like huge slabs placed by giant hands in their
present position. Away to the left was an undulating plain, upon which
were detached clumps of bushes and trees. Over this plain small mountain
streams flowed in various directions, winding amongst trees, shrubs, and
ferns of different variety. Here and there antelopes were grazing,
ostriches were stalking, and now and then vultures were seen grimly
circling round in seeming anticipation of a morning feast. A couple of
miles further on they came to a large cultivated flat terminating to the
right in a long, dark, and winding gorge, black with bush and skirted by
huge precipices of sandstone and granite. They turned into this, and
proceeded silently but quickly along the banks of a small rivulet, until
they came to the foot of the mountain, and, after some little time,
discovered a steep path, which seemed cut out of the solid cliff, and
wide enough only for one horseman to pass. They were more than
three-quarters of an hour scaling this path, which was most dangerous to
horsemen unaccustomed to such tracks, and suited more to the bush bok
seen here and there as the horsemen ascended higher and higher.

On nearing the top of the krantz the view was magnificent. Away to the
extreme right was the purple range of the Ingive Mountains, behind which
the sun was fast rising. The Ingonyama came next, and joined the
Ntabatulu and Ingoma ranges, the latter of which overhangs the left bank
of the Black Umfolosi, all along which are the most extensive forests
and inaccessible kloofs and krantzes. The head of the column had no
sooner gained the summit of the last ledge than the leading files
noticed a large number of cattle grazing on the plateau. These were
guarded by about 150 or 200 armed Zulus, who, however, did not see the
advancing troops. The range upon which the English party now found
themselves extended about seven or eight miles, and was accessible only
by a few most difficult footpaths leading from the plains below. Huge
masses of scrub and boulders, krantzes, terraces, and ledges of rock,
caves and immense fissures in the sides of the mountain, formed a
retreat for the cattle, which, upon an alarm being sounded, were quickly
driven from the grazing-ground above. The northern face of the mountain
was a sheer precipice, perfectly bare of all bush or shrub. They were
now halted, and ordered to bivouac. At about seven in the evening
Colonel Wood rejoined them, having with him his usual small staff and
personal escort, consisting of Captain the Hon. Ronald Campbell, his
staff officer; Lieut. Lysons, 90th Light Infantry, his orderly officer;
Mr. Lloyd, political agent (son of General Lloyd, of the Natal
Legislative Assembly); eight mounted men of the 90th Light Infantry, and
six stalwart natives under Umtongo, one of Pondo's sons. Umtongo had by
some means or other obtained information that the regiments named
Naxeane, Umdomandi, Ucaridanburg, Macalsiene, Udmine, Ekotsamaclooser,
and Macalvoore, under the Indunas Umgongo, Umsimoyao, and other noted
chiefs, had left Ulundi three days before, on the 24th, and Umtongo was
consequently most anxious that the column should at once return to the
Kambula. This advice, however, could not have been followed without
exposing Colonels Buller and Weatherly and Piet Uys, who were in front,
to be cut off and surrounded, so that it was decided that a junction
must be made with them at whatever risks.

At half-past three a.m. the commanding officer ordered the word to be
quietly passed round for the men to stand to their horses and prepare to
march. An occasional and straggling ray of moonlight helped them to
follow the faint tracks of those who had gone before them, and before
going very far they came upon unmistakable evidences of the advance
having been opposed. A distant shot was now and then heard, away towards
the bluff of the mountain on the north-east side; and soon after these
indications of fighting was heard the sound of horses, and Colonel
Weatherly, with his son, and about eighty of his troopers, met Colonel
Wood, bringing him the news that on the previous night he had been
unfortunate enough to miss his road. As the morning was now breaking,
and the warm sun commenced to light up the scene, Colonel Wood noticed,
here and there on the path, a broken assegai, a damaged shield, rent
with a Martini-Henry rifle-bullet, and further on the bodies of some
Zulus and the carcass of a dead horse. These signs marked where Buller
had passed and had been attacked. Campbell and Lysons therefore ascended
the rocks above a huge cave, and, taking every precaution to screen
themselves from observation, scanned the surrounding horizon with the
field-glasses. Far away, almost upon the summit of an apparently
inaccessible and gigantic cliff, the van of Buller's column could be
seen slowly advancing, and driving some dark masses of cattle and Zulus
before them. These officers came down at once to report, and Colonel
Weatherly requested permission to lead his men on to Buller's
assistance, while Colonel Wood followed with the remainder of his
horsemen. This permission being granted, Weatherly moved on by a
terribly difficult path to the right, while the remainder kept to what
seemed to be the main track. About half a mile farther on this party
saw, a few hundred yards to the left, about 200 Zulus, who appeared to
be armed with rifles. They were moving rapidly across the English front,
stopping occasionally to take a shot at the leading files, who had, on
account of the difficulties of the road, been compelled to dismount and
lead their horses. The object of this detachment was now evident, it
being their intention to get between the main column and Weatherly's
little band. It was noticed that half a dozen gigantic warriors, each
armed with rifle, shield, and bundle of assegais, led the main body of
these Zulus. These men took it in turns to run in front, and were
evidently acting as guides, often enabling the rest to make short cuts,
and thus to get over the ground more quickly. They paused, however, now
and then, as if to examine the spoor of the horses, on which the
previous night's rain had fallen, and from this Colonel Wood concluded
that some of his people were in the same direction. By means of some
wild vine and creepers Lysons and one of the escort now descended from
the opposite side of the plateau on which was the cave, and running
rapidly along the top of the next ridge, made their way unseen to the
edge of the bush. They thus commanded the plain below, and the
serpentine pathway by which Buller had found his way to the summit of
the cliff. From this point Buller and his men could be seen scouring
the mountains beyond the intervening kloof, and about halfway up the
opposite ascent were observed a strong party of Zulus working forward as
if to cut off the horsemen above. As Weatherly and Colonel Wood were now
separated by a deep and impassable ravine, they could only hope that
they should be able to effect a junction with Buller by different
routes, and, if possible, in time to give effective help. Crouching down
so as not to be seen by the main column were a few of the enemy on a
narrow ledge of rock, about a hundred yards above their heads. Where
these fellows had come from it was not easy to imagine, but they
immediately opened a hot, but ill-directed fire, which the English
troopers did not at first return, as they were too much occupied in
guiding their horses over the dangerous places, where a single false
step would have sent them to the valley below. Meanwhile Umtongo and two
of his men had climbed round by a higher portion of the cliff, and,
guiding some of the English marksmen, they opened a fire upon the Zulu
scouts, which soon cleared them from the path. Another half-hour's
toilsome march brought Wood upon Weatherly's track, and they then could
see the rear of Buller's column high above them to the right.

It would be difficult to describe the marvellously rugged and weird
nature of the rocks around, and the ghastly features of the sheer
precipices gaping on either side. Killed and wounded horses now were
seen at every turn of the road, showing how stoutly the enemy must have
held their ground, and how difficult an operation Buller had performed.
Sending fifty men round to work on our right flank and to endeavour to
take the Zulus in the rear, Colonel Wood kept his men for a few moments
under cover of a friendly ledge of rocks to look to their rifles,
girths, and ammunition, and then ascended rapidly to the front, passing
the Border Horse, who had by this time got off the track. The scene was
at this moment intensely exciting. The firing was almost continuous, and
the yells of the savages were re-echoed back by the loud and
heart-stirring cheers of their gallant comrades, who had seen Wood's
column coming and gave them this encouragement. It was not long before
they came under more direct fire, and at this juncture Colonel Wood, who
had been keeping his men cool and steady by his own presence of mind and
good-humoured encouragement, left Colonel Russell in charge, and jumping
upon his horse, as the ground was now practicable for riding, trotted
through the skirmishers, and, closely followed by his staff and escort,
pushed rapidly to the front. This party, with a dozen of the Border
Horse, galloped to within a hundred paces of the summit of the cliff,
where they saw that they were in the thick of the fire, raining upon
them both from front and flank, and proceeding from a mass of Zulus
skirmishing in the most artistic and workmanlike manner from their
caves, crevices, and enormous boulders which formed the natural
fortifications of the mountain plateau. At this moment Weatherly, with
his gallant and noble-hearted boy, aged only fifteen, and who insisted
on fighting by his father's side, were cheering on their men, dashing
boldly into the caves, and closing in mortal strife with the Zulus.
"Take a dozen men over to the cave to the right front, and rattle out
the fellows who are firing so well, Colonel Weatherly," said Colonel
Wood, as his horse staggered under him from a deep assegai wound in the
chest, and a savage from behind a boulder fired at that officer at ten
paces' distance. The bullet missed him, and Llewellen Lloyd, seeing the
man loading quickly again, at once rode to cut him down, and was shot
through the head. Wood, seeing this officer fall, dashed spurs into his
wounded horse and galloped up to catch him, closely followed by Ronald
Campbell. Two other Zulus from the cave now fired simultaneously at the
colonel, whose horse at this moment was again struck, and fell upon him.
The colonel was upon his feet in a moment, and assisted Captain Campbell
and his orderly to carry Lloyd's body to a ledge more out of the way.
The shot which killed poor Llewellen Lloyd tore Colonel Wood's sleeve
underneath his arm before reaching its mark. As Colonel Weatherly's men
were engaged with several Zulus at close quarters, some little delay
occurred in their advance upon the cave, whence the fire was most
galling; and Ronald Campbell, calling on Lysons and some of the escort
to follow him, dashed at the opening, having first cleared a sort of
breastwork at the entrance. Poor Campbell fell, shot through the head;
and Lysons and a brave fellow, Corporal Fowler, following closely upon
the footsteps of the brave young guardsman, killed the two remaining
Zulus within the cave, while another, severely wounded, managed to crawl
away through a narrow crevice in the rock. Having ascertained that the
enemy were retreating before Buller on the summit, Colonel Weatherly was
sent to make a small circuit lower down the cliff, to endeavour to hit
off the path by which the former had so successfully ascended, and
which the others were unfortunate enough to miss. Buller, in the
meanwhile, was not only driving the Zulus' cattle before him, but was
able to assist his comrades by his fire from his vantage-ground above.
The enemy in front and flank retired, disputing every available spot,
while Weatherly was most skilfully working round to their left rear. His
disposition of his men was most judicious, and he rendered very material
help to Wood's portion of the force, intercepting and driving back a
strong party which were coming up to assist the body they were engaging.
These, however, eventually took up a formidable position in some caves
in a deep kloof, from which they kept up a constant and dropping fire.
Amongst Wood's party they had up to this time but few casualties, though
the loss of such splendid and noble-hearted soldiers as Campbell and
Lloyd was a terrible blow to their chief, whose right hand men they
were. Colonel Wood, in spite of the galling fire still maintained by the
entrenched Zulus, assisted the party told off to carry the bodies of the
dead to a place about half way down the first hill, where, in disregard
of the bullets which kept rattling round, these noble young heroes were
buried in a soldier's glorious grave, the funeral honours being
discharged over them by the rifles of friend and foe.

Colonel Wood now made a flank movement with a portion of the column in a
north-westerly direction, to see if a junction could be effected with
that portion of the men which had been left in the charge of Colonel
Russell. In effecting this change of position Wood had to pass under the
steepest cliffs of the Zlobani Mountain. Umtongo, true to his Rob Roy
and predatory instincts, had utilised his opportunity by a little
cattle-lifting, and, in spite of the rather hot time he had been
experiencing, was engaged in driving, with the aid of his people, a herd
of sheep and goats abandoned by the foe. As Wood's party were carrying
their wounded men, and now and then halted to give them stimulants,
their progress was necessarily slow, and this delay led to serious
consequences, for the large reinforcements they knew might arrive from
Ulundi later in the day had, without their knowledge, actually arrived,
and were marching parallel to their right front, and concealed from
sight. Umtongo was the first to discover the proximity of this hostile
array, and, although without an interpreter, Colonel Wood understood
enough of his language, aided by signs, to comprehend the gravity of the
situation. The colonel, having obtained a fresh horse, cantered across
some very broken ground to a high bluff just under the Zunguin's Neck,
and, guided by some of Oham's people, managed, not without considerable
difficulty, to reach a point upon a ledge of rock whence he could,
without a glass, see the movements and exact formation of the enemy's
force. The column was evidently the reinforcements expected from Ulundi,
and had a portion of the English column not missed its way on the night
of the 27th, it is tolerably certain they would have effected the object
of their raid and retreated to the shelter of the camp without much
loss. Wood knew of the despatch of this army on the 24th, but did not
calculate that it could have compassed the distance it marched in three
days. As matters stood, however, the colonel and his staff could see
from their coign of vantage that the Zulu army from Ulundi were
marching in a line of five contiguous columns, with a line of
skirmishers thrown out in front and on flank, forming the usual horns
and chest. From subsequent description given by Buller, it appears that
the first part of his task was successfully carried out; that the track
up the Zlobani was correctly hit off, the Zulu entrenched caves
triumphantly carried by storm, and a large quantity of cattle taken and
driven off. Had Wood's portion of the attack and that commanded by
Weatherly appeared on the scene of action in time to support Buller's
splendid onslaught, all would have gone well, but the delay caused by
their missing the track enabled the Zlobani followers of Umbelini and
Manyanyoba to hold their own ground until the arrival of the Ulundi
army. Buller did all that a skilled general could effect to bring off
his men with small loss, but from the nature of the ground it was in
this instance almost impossible for cavalry to work with any degree of
celerity. The mountain having been carried soon after daybreak, a long
off-saddle to feed the horses and an unavoidable delay of four hours
were made, to enable the main division to come up. Suddenly the immense
force of Zulus, seen by Wood from the Zunguin's Neck, was observed by
Colonel Buller and Oham's scouts. An immediate but orderly retreat was
commenced, but could not be effected without the most desperate fighting
and severe loss. The enemy had massed themselves on three sides of the
mountain, and only one terribly steep path was left to descend. This was
thoroughly blocked by the Zulus, who, under cover, rained bullets and
assegais upon these devoted men, and then, when the moment came for
close fighting, dashed in dense masses upon their thinned and weakened
files. Halfway down this fearful gorge the road was so narrow and so
steep that it was nearly closed up by the proximity of the tall cliffs
on either side. These hills seemed to be formed of smooth and slippery
ledges, over which many wounded men and horses fell, coming down upon
the points of the assegais waiting below to receive them! Caves, with
natural breastworks, like casemated batteries, were on either side of
the path, wet and slippery with blood. Colonel Wood was of opinion that
the Ulundi army did not follow up Buller's retreat for two reasons:
first, because its wonderful three days' march had in a great measure
exhausted the men, who came in such haste as to dispense with provisions
and spare ammunition; and secondly, on account of the powerful
demonstration the main or second division made on their flank even at
the eleventh hour. To the cool valour and devoted courage of Colonel
Buller the safety of those who came back to camp was due. He fought at
the rear of the retiring column, assisting the wounded, charged
desperately at the dense masses of fiery Zulus who were pressing on with
the thirst of blood, and not until he saw the last of his band through
this terrible kloof did he turn his horse to follow his men, or to think
of his own safety.

Seeing that nothing more could be done to help Buller in his retreat,
Colonel Wood despatched a messenger to Colonel Russell, who by this time
had commenced the ascent of the extreme westerly point of the range, to
retrace his steps eastward, and to cover the retreat of the native
allies upon the camp. Russell lost no time in carrying out these
instructions, but before he could arrive several natives had been
overtaken and speared. The Kambula camp was reached by the column about
7.30. Buller, on learning that our gallant young friend Barton had not
returned, and was away on foot with the survivors of the Border Horse,
some ten miles off, at once obtained permission from Colonel Wood to go
in search of the party. The evening had set in stormy, and torrents of
rain were now coming down. Buller had been in the saddle for forty-eight
hours, was severely contused, and had escaped death by almost a miracle;
but setting a noble example, he obtained a party of volunteers, and
taking led horses, started on his expedition. Seven men, who would
probably have never reached the camp, were brought in by this gallant
act, and these were the sole survivors of Barton's Horse. It would seem
that in attempting to follow Wood's track in retiring they were
overtaken and cut off. They then attempted to retreat by the north and
the Hyntecha Kloof, where the majority died fighting gallantly to the
last. Splendid, manly, honest, simple, and taciturn Piet Uys, whose
father, uncles, and cousins fought and fell in the old wars with
Dingaan! On the evening of the 17th, after the conference in Wood's
tent, he spoke in the most feeling terms of his children, of whom, like
all Cape Dutchmen, he was passionately fond, and Colonel Wood, with that
thoughtful kindness for which he is so well known, at once said that,
should anything happen to the father, he would interest himself with the
Government to provide for the orphans. Piet Uys could have easily
escaped, but, like Buller, he would see the last of his men clear before
turning rein. He was last seen with his back to the cliff, standing
across the body of his favourite "mooi paard" (grey horse), with six
large Zulus lying dead in a circle round him, his empty revolver in his
left hand and his body pierced by two assegais! Colonel Weatherly's
Horse went into action about eighty strong, and of these brave fellows
forty-five were dead, including the gallant colonel and his brave,
intelligent, and handsome son, a lad of fifteen, who, at an age when
many an English youth is celebrated only in the cricket-field or on the
river, had seen more of real fighting than many a veteran in the
regulars. Nothing could be more sad than Weatherly's death. At the fatal
hour when all save honour seemed lost, he placed his beloved boy upon
his best horse, and kissing him on the forehead, commended him to
another Father's care above, and implored him to overtake the nearest
column of the English horse, which seemed at that time to be cutting its
way out. The boy clung to his father, and begged to be allowed to stay
by his side, and share his life or death. The contrast was
characteristic. The man, a bearded, bronzed, and hardy _sabreur_, with a
father's tears upon his cheek, while the blue-eyed and fair-haired lad,
with much of the beauty of a girl in his appearance, was calmly and with
a smile of fond delight loading his father's favourite carbine. When the
two noble hearts were last seen, the father, wounded to death with cruel
assegais, was clasping his boy's hand with his left, while the right cut
down the brawny savages who came to despoil him of his charge.

       *       *       *       *       *

Though in all these operations of which mention has been lately made
Lord Chelmsford never once appears, it must not therefore be supposed
that he had rested from his labours. On the contrary they were more
incessant and arduous than ever. When the news of Isandhlwana first
reached the colonies, it caused the utmost excitement and wildest
apprehensions. Nothing less, it was averred, was about to happen than an
immediate and overwhelming invasion of Natal by the Zulus. The black men
were on the point of sweeping the whites into the sea. Lord Chelmsford's
first duty, after an urgent application to the home authorities for
reinforcements, was to render these alarms groundless. To organize of a
sudden the defence of so extended a frontier was no easy task. How
thoroughly and conscientiously it was performed the result testifies.

Another duty scarcely less urgent was the rescue of Colonel Pearson. And
in this project he received aid, as valuable as unexpected, from the
Governor of St. Helena. No sooner did that official hear of Lord
Chelmsford's urgent need, than he at once assumed the responsibility of
sending on the garrison of his island--in all 160 soldiers--to the
rescue. Captain Bradshaw, of H.M.S. "Shah," chanced to be lying in the
harbour, homeward bound, after a period of foreign service, but he
hesitated not one whit more than the Governor. He embarked the garrison,
and on February 19th had anchored at Durban. There a naval brigade of
400 men was furnished from his ship; and thus it came about that long
before reinforcements from England could arrive, and on the day that
Zlobani was fought, Lord Chelmsford was already well on the way to
deliver Pearson from his captivity.




CHAPTER IV.

  Effects of Zlobani--Description of Kambula Camp--Desperate Zulu attack
    thereon--Description of the battle--Deaths of Lieutenants Bright and
    Nicholson--Gallant rescue by Captain Woodgate--Force and commanders
    of the Zulu attack--Their losses--The English losses--Fortifications
    at Kambula Kop--Block House--Arrival of despatches--Exciting scene.


Before Lord Chelmsford set out on his march, Colonel Pearson had sent
messengers to warn him that not less than 35,000 Zulus were lying in
ambush between the Tugela and Ekowe, in order to assail him as he
advanced to the relief of that post. Orders were therefore sent to
Colonel Wood to make an attack on the Zulu flank, and so to create a
diversion in favour of the relieving column.

Accordingly, Wood advanced from his entrenched position at Kambula Kop
to the Zlobani mountain, where Umbelini's chief stronghold and kraal was
situated. This Wood assailed, and though after a sharp engagement, which
has been previously described, his forces received a decided check, yet
he may be said to have achieved a success, inasmuch as he undoubtedly
drew away a large part of the force that was intended to operate against
Lord Chelmsford. Another result of this battle was that it gave the
enemy sufficient encouragement to induce them to attack the English
troops on the following day in their position at Kambula, thus enabling
Wood to obtain a solid and decisive victory.

From various incidents that came under his observation Colonel Wood
formed an opinion, subsequently verified by the event, that an attack
upon Kambula would not be long in following the check at Zlobani; a
vigilant look-out was therefore maintained during the whole of the night
of the 28th. The rain came down heavily during the early part of the
night, and shortly before dawn Captain Raaf was sent out with
twenty-five men to reconnoitre, and, if possible, pick up any wounded or
straggling. Zulus, who would give any information as to the movements of
the strong impi known to be in the immediate neighbourhood. About ten
a.m. Raaf sent in one of Oham's people--a most intelligent and witty
fellow--who gave a graphic account how he was captured when left behind
with the recovered cattle taken from Umbelini. Having taken off his
distinctive head-badge, although he was recognized by a friend, the
Zulus were not aware that he was one of Oham's people, or that he had
joined the English cause. On this account, therefore, he was allowed to
accompany the Zulu impi as far as Umsedosi. While with the enemy he
obtained a tolerably correct notion of their strength, and was
intelligent enough to remember the names and titles of the various corps
sent from Ulundi, and, indeed, of those which were retained by the king.
Cetywayo, he said, had divided his entire military available force into
three formidable columns of four regiments each. One of these,
consisting of the Naxeane, the Umdomandi, the Ucaridanburg, and the
Macalsiene, was sent without commissariat, and by forced marches from
Ulundi on the 24th March, and part of this column, but not all, was
engaged with Umbelini against Wood at Zlobani on the 28th. This column
numbered at the least 20,000 men, and was well supplied with arms of
precision. Four regiments were retained at Ulundi as a bodyguard and
garrison to the king, and the remaining four were told off to attack
Lord Chelmsford at or near Ekowe. Very early on the morning of the 29th,
Oham's friendly Zulu, feeling anxious about his own safety, persuaded
some of the Zulu braves to accompany him some distance from their camp,
under the pretence of obtaining them some drink. Taking a favourable
opportunity, however, he managed to elude their vigilance and give them
the slip, when he made the best of his way to Raaf's party, who at once
sent him on to the Kambula camp, with the information given above. This
fellow gave an admirable account of the state of feeling in the Zulu
armies, and his opinion was that great numbers of the men were now
serving entirely against their will, as they found that, instead of
getting plenty of booty in the shape of cattle, stores, arms, and
ammunition, they were the losers, as during their absence with the army
the English attacked their kraals, and carried off their oxen, sheep,
and goats. This man, although quite a chief at Oham's kraal, would seem
to be a sort of headman, and to be in the habit of conversing familiarly
with those in authority; for, he added, that it was rumoured that
Dabulamanzi would, if another reverse fell upon the Zulu arms, in all
probability follow Oham's example, and proffer submission.

On receiving the intelligence of the Zulu advance, Colonel Wood had few
preparations to make, for in the camp at Kambula each corps, each
company, each subdivision, each section, and each man had a place
allotted, and had been taught to be in that place at one sound of the
bugle. The little fort was in an exceptionally strong position, being
laid out upon an elevated and narrow ridge of table-land. A complete
precipice, perfectly inaccessible to a white man, even though a born
cragsman, guarded the right flank. On the left a succession of steep
terraces had been utilised, and carefully entrenched with lines _en
cremaillere_, or outworks, each successive line defilading its
neighbour. In front there was a narrow slip of land, hemmed in by ledges
of rock, and swept by two 7-pounders, while immediately in rear, upon an
eminence about 120 feet above the fort was a small _lunette_, with open
gorge, and armed with two guns. The camp at first consisted of one
laager, but an outer defence with a hundred waggons, and an inner one
with fifty, had been subsequently added. Deep and wide ditches flanked
by _caponnieres_ protected the outer boundary, and were traced in the
form of an irregular hexagon. As soon as Oham's Zulu had made his
report, the garrison were called to arms without the slightest fuss,
excitement, or confusion, and messengers were at once despatched to
order the return of a fatigue party which had been sent out in the early
morning wood-cutting. These men reported on their return that they had
seen Zulus scouting about five miles to the west, and had they not been
recalled they would have stayed to get further intelligence. As soon as
the men of the various corps were at their posts, Colonel Wood rode
round to give them a few final words of encouragement, saying in
conclusion, that he knew they would hold the fort while a man was left
to fire a shot. The tents were then struck, and the men lined the
shelter-trenches. The horses stood to their bridles, and the ammunition
was served out by fatigue parties told off for this duty. Most of the
waggon-drivers had been taught to use the Martini, and a few were served
out to each face of the laager.

It was now nearly eleven a.m., and shortly after that time the Zulu
battalions were seen on the base of the hill. Here they halted for a
considerable time, and apparently a council of war was held. Their
movements were evidently not so decided as on former occasions, and it
was more than an hour before any forward measure was taken. The cattle
had been brought into camp, with the exception of about 220 which had
strayed away towards the enemy, and it could be seen that the Zulu chief
had detached a portion of his men to secure these animals. On this
movement being noticed, Colonel Buller was ordered out to reconnoitre,
and to see if any opening offered for a charge upon the detached body of
the enemy, but no chance presenting itself, the cavalry retired, and
took up an excellent position on the north front of the camp. A flanking
movement was now made by a body of Zulus, numbering about 7000 men.
These regiments broke from line into column, and ran at a tremendous
pace along a ledge situated at the commencement of the cultivated land.
As the object of this man[oe]uvre was evidently to entice the cavalry to
attack upon broken and difficult ground, Buller and Russell very wisely
restrained their men from attempting any sortie. The Zulus were in range
by this time, but it was thought desirable to reserve all fire until
they were massed in closer order. It was nearly half-past one when the
action actually commenced, and it was opened by a cloud of skirmishers,
who, fed by supports and reserves, began to scale the north front of the
English post. Here, behind the outermost line of entrenchments, Buller
and Russell dismounted a portion of their men, and each trooper being
cautioned to select his object and fire steadily, some excellent
rifle-practice was made. No sooner did a head or a shield appear above a
rock, a boulder, or a tuft of grass, than the "ping" of the deadly
Martini-Henry rang out, and in nine cases out of ten there was an enemy
the less to encounter. Some portion of the band of the gallant but lost
Piet Uys, had been sent to reinforce Buller's attenuated squadron, and
these men particularly distinguished themselves as highly-skilled
marksmen. Many of these Boers still retained their old national weapon,
the long single-barrelled _roer_, carrying an enormous bullet, suited
for the destruction of big game. There is no doubt that, in the hands of
a South African Dutchman, this is a terrible weapon. The conical bullet,
perhaps, has a greater power of penetration, but the larger ball of the
old-fashioned fire-arm, which in appearance is not unlike a huge
duck-gun, inflicts a wound which rarely fails to kill. These splendid
Dutchmen shot with all the skill that hatred of the savages and a desire
for vengeance for their late leader could teach, and there could be
noticed on the countenance of each a sterner expression and a more
deadly resolve than usual. From the little fort a gun was now brought
to bear upon the advancing line, but without much effect, as an
intervening spur gave shelter to the foe. The attack was now renewed on
the north side with redoubled vigour; the lines of skirmishers fell
back, and were replaced by a more solid line, supported by the usual
dense column in its rear. Buller saw that it became necessary to remount
his men, and this movement of course weakened the effect of his fire. He
retired, however, slowly, halting now and then, and sending a volley
into the masses which kept pouring up the slopes. Major Russell, at this
juncture, executed a brilliant dash at a body of Zulus who were running
in an easterly direction to gain possession of a ledge of rock, and,
catching them on a favourable piece of ground, with about a score of his
men managed to sabre a great many without the loss of one trooper. This,
however, did not suffice to check the steady advance, and orders were
sent for Buller and Russell to retire slowly within the laager, their
retreat being splendidly covered by Colonel Gilbert and four companies
of his fine regiment, the 13th, who were posted on the right rear of the
laager. One company of the 13th, under Captain Cox, an officer of former
Cape experience, held the cattle laager, which gave a splendid flanking
fire along the front, and these men waited until the Zulus were within
300 yards, and then commenced an independent file firing at the same
time that Gilbert's men delivered a withering volley. As Cox and his men
could not see the right rear, to which point the principal Zulu attack
had now changed, a skilful counter-attack was ordered by Colonel Wood,
who directed Major Hackett to take a couple of companies of the 90th
Light Infantry to advance over the slope, and open a cross-fire upon the
enemy. This movement was magnificently carried out by Hackett, whose men
moved out into the open as if on parade, and with a steady advance, such
as British troops are proud of, marched on to the rear of the cattle
laager, taking the Zulus completely by surprise. Nothing could be better
than the calm and deliberate firing of these men. Every shot told with
deadly effect, and dark bodies and shields soon began to dot the ground.
Still, however, the living stream rolled on, and as one warrior went
down in the death-struggle, another, with a shout of vengeance, sprang
into his place.

It was now a little after two o'clock, and while this attack upon the
left rear had been progressing, another strong body of the enemy had
succeeded in gaining an eminence from which, although at a long range,
they were enabled to keep up an effective fire and inflict considerable
loss upon the British troops. Captain Woodgate, of Ashanti fame, who had
been sent to support Major Hackett, together with his lieutenant
(Strong), here behaved with conspicuous coolness and valour. These three
officers advancing well in front of their men and waving their swords
above their heads, showed such an example to their men that the Zulus
were driven back on that side, the ground intervening being strewed with
bodies of Zulus. A difficult and brilliantly led flanking attack was now
effected by the Zulu general, who, having retired a body of his best
marksmen from his right along his rear, suddenly opened a galling fire
upon the left flank of the 90th companies, who, having accomplished
their task, were now ordered to retire. In executing this difficult
movement Major Hackett was badly hit, and had to be carried out of fire.
Lieutenant Bright, also of the 90th Light Infantry, was here mortally
wounded, and shortly afterwards died. Bright was a clever, cheery
fellow, a capital artist, a good musician, and a most accomplished
officer. It was in running forward to pick up Hackett that poor Bright
received his death-wound. Meanwhile, from the lunette on the height,
Nicholson's two 7-pounders did capital execution. The Zulu main body had
now come within range, and grape and canister were poured into their
masses until the slopes over which they were advancing became slippery
with blood. Standing on the parapet, Nicholson was, field-glass in hand,
directing the pointing of his guns, when a chance bullet struck him in
the temple, and he fell upon the weapon he was directing. The loss was
observed from the laager, and Major Vaughan was at once sent to replace
this gallant young fellow. Colonel Wood, not to expose unduly the horses
of the artillery, had retained under the shelter of the laager four guns
in reserve. These were under charge of Major Tremlett, R.A., who, with
his subalterns, Lieuts. Bigge and Hughes, waited until the Zulus were
within a thousand yards, and then making a dash to a small open space of
rising ground outside the laager, worked his battery with immense
effect. The guns did not return to the laager, but were shifted from
time to time as the movements of the enemy warranted, and to their
splendid service much of the victory was due. The enemy had now varied
his attack a second time, and nothing could exceed the bravery and
skilful man[oe]uvring of his regiments. While the 13th and 90th vied
with each other in noble rivalry, and beat back the hordes of the Zulus
upon the two most exposed flanks, the mounted men under Buller and
Russell were occasionally led forward at a gallop by Colonel Wood, who,
whenever he saw an opening for a charge, swept down and drove the
skirmishers on to the main body. These brilliant charges became more
frequent as the day advanced, and their effect upon the savages,
unaccustomed to cavalry, was beyond all expectation. At three o'clock a
hot cross-fire was opened upon a company commanded by Captain Woodgate,
who had been holding a point which was in a measure the key of the
position, as it commanded the only practicable road to the upper
lunette, which, as has been explained, was open at the gorge. The enemy
still held the range which they had occupied during the earlier portion
of the day, and Woodgate was ordered to retire under cover of the fire
from two of Tremlett's guns, which had now taken a favourable position
for shelling the height. After one or two shots had been fired, a shell
was dropped into the midst of the party holding this position, and this
had a most useful effect, for the other gun coming into action at the
same range, drove the enemy's skirmishers to ground much farther off.
For another hour and a half the troops continued to be hotly engaged
with the enemy, who, when dislodged from one flank, swept round in the
most perfect order, and swarmed in masses upon another side. A message
now arrived from Colonel Gilbert, to the effect that he could spare
Captain Cox and a company from his flank, as the enemy's fire was
slackening, and they were gradually extending their line to the right
rear. Cox had been hit early in the action, but refused to leave his
men, and led them on gallantly till the day was won.

At half-past four the Zulu general seemed to concentrate his principal
attention upon the northern side held by the 13th, and some desperate
rushes were made almost up to the muzzles of the English rifles. Colonel
Wood rode up, and complimented Colonel Gilbert upon the splendid firing
of his men, and he was at once greeted with a ringing cheer, which was
heard by the enemy. All sides of the laager had been in turn attacked,
and soon after half-past four a simultaneous advance was made on the
north and north-east face. An enfilade fire, however, was made by a
couple of Tremlett's guns, and the 7-pounder directed by Bigge did great
execution at 800 yards. Some of the bodies afterwards examined on the
north-east face were found to be literally blown to pieces. The Zulus at
this time were working round from the right-hand hill, and here,
unfortunately, a few large boulders gave them cover. The soldiers were
here almost on a line with the enemy, who in other places were below and
above them. They had therefore to keep a sharp look-out that the enemy
did not break through the line and penetrate the laager. They therefore
kept pouring in a heavy cross-fire upon them at 200 and 300 yards, while
the guns were defilading them on the right. The enemy could not stand
this treble fire, and, though disputing the ground step by step, began
reluctantly to retire. Colonel Wood at once sent messengers to the
lunette, to open upon them as they passed underneath. At this period
Lieutenants Smith and Lysons, seeing some Zulus advancing to assegai a
wounded soldier of the 13th, who was lying under fire in the open,
rushed out, and, led by Captain Woodgate, carried the man under shelter.
In performing this gallant action Smith was badly wounded, and
Woodgate's helmet was smashed by a bullet. Surgeons O'Reilly, Brown, and
their staff, one and all exposed themselves freely in attending to the
wounded who could not be moved out of fire. Soon after five o'clock it
became evident that the Zulu fire was beginning to fail, and the English
commander at once led a company of the 13th to the right rear of the
cattle laager, where the cattle had been for some time exposed to the
fire from the hill. A little later on Captains Cox and Persse were taken
by Colonel Wood to the edge of the krantzes on the right front of the
cattle laager, where the discomfited and disheartened Zulus were
retiring from the direct fire. Cox extended his men along the slopes,
while Persse occupied a higher ridge, and thus a double-banked and
deadly fire was opened upon the retiring enemy. Having driven the Zulus
over the edge of the hill, the two companies followed them up in a
splendid manner; Cox, although suffering greatly from his wound and loss
of blood, leading on his men in the most gallant style to the best
points for continuing the fire. Word was now sent to Buller and Russell
to mount their men and pursue; and the mule battery opened "action
deft," and played upon the devoted Zulus, the regiment of Macalooroo,
under Umlinoya, suffering most. Buller's gallant fellows nobly avenged
their slaughtered comrades of the previous day, and for more than seven
miles the broken Zulu army was chased like a flock of sheep.

It was subsequently ascertained that the attacking Zulu force consisted
of nine regiments sent from Ulundi--making a force of 23,000--and of
Umbelini's mercenaries; together forming a total of not less than
25,000. Tyangwayo was in chief command, whilst Umbelini held the next
rank. The latter having retreated in the direction of the Upper Pongolo
Drift, was subsequently pursued and killed by a patrol under the command
of Captain Prior, of the 80th Regiment. A wounded prisoner of some
importance, by name Waishlahla, who was brought into camp on the 2nd,
pointed out to Colonel Wood the bodies of Mubalawa and Maheitjesa, sons
of Mnyame, killed on the 29th; and this man said that he knew that
Mabuna, son of Umbangasita, Makweli, son of Umlandela, Ummensododo, son
of Umfoonsa, and Tyangwayo, his brother, were also killed on that day,
together with, according to the Zulu estimate, above 3000 of the king's
bravest and best men! There is little reason to suppose that these
figures are exaggerated; for 1500 bodies lay about the vicinity of the
camp on the night of the 29th, though in the morning many were gone.

The sad duty of burying their own dead and the bodies of the enemies
occupied the troops nearly the whole of the week following upon the
attack upon the Kambula camp. During the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd of April
above 800 Zulus were buried, while others were subsequently found in the
caves and krantzes near. There were also 326 fire-arms picked up,
amongst which were recognized one Snider belonging to the Artillery,
and 16 Martini-Henrys belonging to the 24th and 80th Regiments. Lieut.
Bright, 90th Light Infantry, Lieut. Nicholson, R.A., Mr. Ferreira,
interpreter, seven privates 13th Light Infantry, ten privates 90th Light
Infantry, and one colour-sergeant, two Frontier Light Horse, and one of
Buller's Horse were interred on the day following the attack, the
service being read in the most impressive manner by General Wood.
Wounded Zulus were for some days continually brought into the camp; and
these men, as soon as they found that their wounds were attended to, and
that the soldiers were kind to them, became most communicative. They
said that Cetywayo had sent all his available men, with the exception of
two of his favourite regiments, retained as a bodyguard. These prisoners
also all agreed in setting down the Zulu losses on the 28th and 29th at
3000 men.

When such individual and numerous acts of bravery were exhibited, it
seems superfluous to pick out any special cases; but it would be wrong
not to particularly mention the name of Captain Woodgate, whose
gallantry and _sang-froid_ were the theme of the whole garrison. During
the whole of the action, and while carrying orders from the camp to the
fort, he was more exposed than any other officer, and on more than one
occasion he deliberately risked his life to save wounded men from being
assegaied. To Colonel Buller also the same praise must be accorded for
his self-devotion at Zlobani and the heroic manner in which he exposed
himself in carrying off wounded men from the very midst of the enemy.

The situation being in every way so admirably adapted to military
requirements, it was now resolved to make a permanent station at the
Kambula Kop; and new works were day by day added to those already
completed. Four well-constructed magazines were built in hollow and
sheltered spots, yet close to the guns. Each magazine was lined with
wooden frames, with splinter-proof timbers to cover the top, while
sheeting planks were placed round the sides and passages. These frames
were all perpendicular to the length of the passage--that is to say,
across its breadth and about two feet apart. Eight feet thickness of
earth was placed over the roof of each magazine, while a stout tarpaulin
was stretched over the splinter-proofs to guard against the wet. Gabions
were sunk to act in the place of cesspools, and receive the drainage,
while a small parapet guarded the entrance to the passage, with a small
hole through which ammunition was handed out. Twenty men, in relays,
were detailed for this work--that is to say, for each magazine--and
although they were to a certain extent unskilled labourers, the officers
taught them in such an excellent manner that the four magazines were
completed in twenty-four hours. The ditches round the fort were so deep
that bridges had to be made, part of which was permanent and part
movable. Four entrances into the fort were left, seven feet wide, so as
to admit the guns and waggons when supplies arrived. These entrances
were closed by rifle-proof doors and gates made of strong planks,
strengthened by cross-beams, and lined inside with thin sheet iron and
raw bullock hides. These hides formed an admirable substitute for sheet
iron, as they were quite bullet-proof and not liable to be set on fire.
Two more ditch _caponnieres_ were also added, to give increased flanking
fire. The _terreplein_ of each of these works was sunk, so that the
loopholes were within one foot and a half of the level of the ditch.
This method had many advantages, and provided for the trick adopted by
the Zulus of lying down in the ditches and counterfeiting death, until
an opportunity is afforded for rushing at the parapet. A large supply of
brushwood was usefully employed to improve the drains under the
parapets, which suffered severely from the continued wet weather. During
spare hours the men were never idle, and from the brigadier downwards
every officer was encouraged to employ his leisure in instructing the
men in every species of field-defence. Gabions for revetements,
fascines, hurdles, sandbags, sods, pickets, _chevaux-de-frise_
palisades, and small shell _fougasses_ occupied the surplus hours not
devoted to drill, recreation, and rest, and the few engineers belonging
to the garrison declared that as pupils the volunteers at this work were
beyond compare.

As in the last action it was found that the enemy were enabled to
considerably annoy the troops by occupying some neighbouring eminences,
the interior works were strengthened with considerable skill. The
parapets were raised, extra traverses erected, and the _terreplein_
sunk. The faces of the work were also made more nearly perpendicular to
the enemy's possible fire. Shelter-pits for skirmishers were dug in all
directions. These trenches being only required upon sudden emergencies
were not made large, being only two feet wide by a foot and a half deep,
and with a parapet built so as to reach a height of a foot and a half.
These gave room and partial shelter to a couple of men, and to each spot
the best marksmen were told off. Horse trenches were also constructed,
so that these animals could be sheltered from musketry fire. These were
twenty-four yards in rear of the line of the infantry trench, and were
five feet long, three feet wide at top, and two feet wide at bottom,
with ramps, with a slope of one-half at each end. The parapets of these
trenches were three feet high, with a thickness of two feet at the top.
Half a dozen men could make such a trench in half an hour. These
shelter-trenches were not so neatly dressed as the models to be seen at
Chatham or Portsmouth, but they were pre-eminently workmanlike. They
followed the contour of the rather broken ground, and were so made that
cavalry could easily advance over them. At the intervals for this
advance each trench overlapped its neighbour.

In contemplation of the removal of the waggons as soon as the advance
should be made, roughly-built block-houses, made of contiguous logs
placed vertically and quite bullet-proof, were constructed to substitute
the shelter afforded by the former. The logs were twelve feet long, and
three feet of this were buried in the ground, the buried ends being
spiked into transverse beams; roughly-hewn beams formed the roofs, and
over these was placed brushwood covered with four feet of earth. Green
timber, of which there was an undiminished supply, was used, and, when
necessary, this was covered with raw hides to prevent danger from fire.
Now, as the enemy had no artillery, and was not likely to understand its
employment, even if provided with the guns captured at Isandhlwana, no
defence could be more suitable. An ordinary work could, it was found, be
often defiladed from a neighbouring height, while a well-made
blockhouse, with carefully prepared roof, was, in every case,
impregnable to rifle-fire. The plan for the roofs was as follows:--The
young trees or branches were placed with the roots and thick ends
inwards, while the smaller ends, sharpened and shaved down thin, were
allowed to project over the walls of the building till they reached to
within three feet of the ground. These boughs, if thin and with smaller
branches between them, would not allow the means for climbing on the
roof, should the Zulus attempt it, as they would not bear the weight of
a crowd of men. In positions where the blockhouse could not be commanded
by any neighbouring height, the roof was made flat and surrounded with a
parapet of earth, so as to afford a second tier of fire.

Whilst these works were in progression, and some few days after the
battles of Zlobani and Kambula, some officers sitting upon a coign of
vantage at an elevated part of the fort, suddenly descried three dark
figures with shields and assegais coming at a rapid trot towards their
southern front, along the hunting-road which leads from the Blood river
and the Buffalo. At first they seemed steadily progressing, as if
wishing to make a quick journey, but under no apprehension of pursuit.
As they moved quickly on they were lost sight of in the bush, and as the
surrounding country was made up of wooded krantzes and dark ravines, in
which an army might lie concealed, it was not likely that they would be
seen again for some time. Away, however, a little to the right of where
these men had passed, was quickly seen a larger party, consisting of
about a score of savages, evidently in pursuit of the first-named
runners. Their shields were flourished aloft, and their assegais waved
in triumph as they followed the spoor of the first party, who had
evidently taken to the bush as the most effectual way of escaping the
keen eyes of their pursuers. Finding no traceable spoor which they could
with certainty follow, they became suspicious, and commenced retracing
their steps; and while this was being accomplished the three runners
were seen to emerge cautiously towards the crest of the left krantz, now
holding a good start of the pursuing party. While they came steadily on
in the direction of the camp, however, a keen-sighted scout, who had
taken the precaution to climb a huge rock which jutted out above the
gorge, saw the quarry, and announced his success by discharging his
rifle, and waving the assegai in the direction of the fugitives, whom it
was now believed were messengers bringing despatches.

The Zulu, it should be borne in mind, is a born athlete; usually until
forty or fifty, and rich, he is a spare man, with scarcely an ounce of
superfluous flesh about him, and kept in continual training by constant
exertion and no excess of food. He can, as a rule, at a moment's notice
take a letter or small packet and run his eight or ten miles, or even
walk his seventy or eighty, without breaking down. The ground over which
the pursued were running was grassy veldt, while that upon which were
the pursuers was sprinkled with low thorn-bushes, mixed with rocks and
gravel. The pursuing party, however, were evidently the fresher of the
two, while the messengers looked like men who were at the tail of a long
journey. The foremost party came struggling on until they reached some
clumps of thorn-trees, which, affording cover, were taken advantage of
to recover breath and observe the enemy's proceedings. The chase was now
getting most exciting. Both the chased and the chasers were plainly
visible to those in the camp, while the former only could observe their
enemies. Noting here and there a footprint, which served to show them
that they were on the right track, the Zulus in pursuit dashed down the
ravine and some distance beyond where the three had doubled. The whole
party went nearly 300 yards before the leaders halted in consequence of
finding no spoor, and they then spread out like hounds in a fox cover to
find some signs of their quarry.

It was really wonderful, the rapid and dashing manner in which these
human bloodhounds strove to hit off the trail, while, having regained
their wind, the pursued trio moved on, not in great haste, but quietly
and with a considerable amount of care, that they might not be seen by
their enemies. For this purpose they now moved with the utmost caution
over a ridge, and entered the wooded valley which lay at the foot of the
kop, whereon stood the fort, being there completely out of sight of the
pursuers, who were still puzzling over the spoor. The messengers--aware
that they were encountering a double risk, as they knew that the wood
into which they had gone would probably contain Zulu scouts sent to
watch the fort, and who might have seen and laid in ambuscade for
them--therefore trotted quickly across till they came to a somewhat open
plain, with a line of willow-like trees, evidently denoting the banks of
a stream. Knowing that the pursuers in rear would be only temporarily
puzzled by the loss of spoor, they therefore decided that the least risk
would be incurred by making a final rush across the open road. Waiting
for a moment to decide for what part of the stream they should make,
they took a rapid glance around, and then made a sudden bolt for the
plain. Scarcely 200 yards had been crossed when a terrific yell broke
out from the pursuers, denoting that the pursued had been discovered by
the Zulus in rear, who immediately sent a couple of scouts to the
heights, the better to watch which side of the plain the messengers
would make for. These scouts at once shouted to the party below, and,
joining them, the whole body was quickly in pursuit. The messengers had,
however, almost 500 yards' start, and had obtained their "second wind."
They knew, therefore, that, if not lamed by a chance shot, they would
probably get over the river and under the guns of the fort before they
could be overtaken. How or where to cross the river they seemed not to
know, as in some places it is deep and wide, and in others shallow, with
marshy banks and long weed-like grasses. Here and there, also, the
stream bubbles and boils through deep gorges where only a baboon could
ascend or descend. Seeing the willow-looking trees, the stout runners
fortunately concluded that the water would be deep where they grew, and
they wisely chose another part where low bushes prevailed, and where
there were indications of a rapid slope in the ground, which would give
them shelter in crossing. The pursuers were about 350 yards behind when
the runners reached the bank, which they found steep and rocky, the
stream itself running rapidly over a stony bed. Although, like most
Zulus, these messengers could swim well, they could not swim safely
encumbered with a heavy gun, a bunch of assegais, a shield, and a heavy
leathern mailbag, nor could they calculate on reaching the opposite bank
without being shot at while so encumbered. On examining the bed of the
river, they decided that it could be waded, and that if not, drowning
was a more preferable death than torture in the king's kraal, which, if
found with letters upon them, was sure to be their fate. They instantly
decided, therefore, to cross.

Meanwhile those in the camp had not been idle, for half a dozen of
Buller's men, known marksmen, were despatched to a point where they
could command the drift and catch the pursuing party _en flagrant delit_
if they attempted to follow too closely. A few minutes' interval and a
smart canter brought eight rifles in all to a favourable spot, where,
unseen by the enemy, they could watch the proceedings of both friend and
foe, and materially assist the crossing and escape of the former.
Quietly dismounting, and placing two men, both as vedettes and in charge
of the horses, the remainder took up position and waited for the
_denouement_ of this somewhat exciting little episode. Not long indeed
had they to wait. As the quick-scented harrier changes from scent to
view, and gives melodious tongue as the quarry is in sight, so dashed on
the pursuing white shields right up to the banks of the stream, and
looking for a moment at the troubled waters, seemed to hesitate what
course to pursue, imagining perhaps that some ambush was intended.
Meanwhile the messengers had effected the crossing in safety, though not
without difficulty. Taking up more tightly the straps that bound the
mailbags to their naked bodies, and with their rifles in one hand and
shields and assegais in the other, they scrambled like cats down the
bank, selecting those points where most ripples appeared upon the water,
and managed thus to wade to the opposite bank. The depth was in no part
greater than to cover them above the waist, although the rush of the
stream was so rapid as to render a foothold difficult. As soon as they
found themselves all in the water, they linked arms in some peculiar
manner and thus opposed a successful barrier to the current, which
otherwise, and if taken singly, would have been too much for them. Half
a dozen Zulus who had outstripped their comrades were the first to enter
the stream in pursuit, which at the point where they took it was not so
favourable, and about fifty yards in width.

Though magnificent specimens of their race, burly and brawny, of immense
chest depth and breadth of shoulder, the men in the stream could only
advance at a slow pace in consequence of the slippery nature of the
rocks and stones on which they had to tread, and on account of the rapid
nature of the stream. So entirely were they absorbed in the excitement
of the chase that they seemed to have no idea of encountering any risks
as they ventured into the river.

The main body of the pursuers meantime lined the banks, lustily cheering
on their more adventurous comrades. Suddenly there rang out the
simultaneous reports of half a dozen rifles, and as the smoke cleared
away two or three arms raised above the blood-dyed waters of the
torrent, which whirled the bodies of the baffled Zulus down and away
from view, testified to the skill of the marksmen. As the surviving
savages regained the opposite bank they gave a yell of defiance, which
was answered by a volley which rendered several others _hors de combat_.
The horsemen then mounted, and rode down to meet the rescued runners,
who turned out to be messengers from headquarters, and the bearers of
most welcome despatches from the Commander-in-Chief to General Wood, in
which his lordship, in the most cordial, kind, and flattering manner,
sent his congratulations and thanks to the latter, and those under his
command, for the manner in which his camp had been defended in the last
attack. A general parade was at once ordered, and the commander having
formed up the entire force--horse, foot, artillery, and native
contingent--read out in firm and ringing tones the welcome and
honourable terms in which his lordship had expressed himself. By
permission of the commandant three ringing cheers for the Queen were
then given, followed by three as hearty for the Commander-in-Chief.




CHAPTER V.

  Organization of column for relief of Ekowe--The march--Heliographic
    signals--Camp at Ginghilovo--Disposition of the troops--Zulu
    advance--The battle--English victory--Death of Colonel
    Northey--English losses--Zulu force and loss--Relief of
    Ekowe--Meeting of Pearson and Chelmsford--State of Ekowe
    garrison--Barrow's cavalry raid on Dabulamanzi's kraal--British
    sentry firing on British troops.


We must now turn attention to Lord Chelmsford and his plan for the
relief of Ekowe. Tenedos was the base from which he purposed starting;
the distance between this and Ekowe, even by the short route discovered
and improved by Pearson, is a good thirty-three miles. To accomplish
this distance in wet weather and with almost insuperable difficulties in
the way of transport was no light task. However, by the 27th of March
all was ready for a start, and the relieving column set out in the
following order. The vanguard was composed of the Naval Brigade, formed
of the seamen and marines of her Majesty's ships "Shah" and
"Tenedos"--640 men and two Gatlings; the 91st Regiment (ten companies),
900 men; 99th Regiment (five companies), 400 men; 3rd Buffs (two
companies), 180 men; Mounted Infantry, 150 men; Mounted Native
Contingent, 200 men; Native Infantry Contingent, 1600 men--making a
total of 3720 infantry and 350 cavalry. This leading division was
commanded by Colonel Law, R.A. The second or rearward division, under
the command of Colonel Pemberton, was composed of the bluejackets and
sailors of the "Boadicea," 200 men and one Gatling; 37th Regiment, 900
men; 3rd battalion 60th Rifles, 900 men; and two troops of mounted
natives--thus giving a total of 2060 infantry and 190 cavalry--the two
divisions making a grand aggregate of 6320 men, with 9-pounders and
rocket-tubes. The convoy was made as small and compact as was compatible
with the necessary carriage of supplies for the Ekowe garrison, and no
tents were taken, each man being allowed only a blanket and a waterproof
sheet. Still the waggons numbered 113, and there were also fifty Scotch
carts on two wheels, and fifty-six pack-mules. Each waggon was strongly
spanned, having twenty oxen instead of the usual eighteen. Two hundred
rounds of ball cartridge per man were issued, each soldier carrying
seventy rounds in his pouches, and the remaining 130 being carried in
reserve by the pack-mules. These waggons and pack-animals marched in the
closest possible order, and were capitally flanked and guarded by
Nettleton's Native Contingent on the right, and that commanded by Barton
on the left. In spite of the comparative smallness of the convoy, Lord
Chelmsford managed to bring with him not only full supplies for the
fort, but twelve days' complete rations for his own column. Most of the
baggage was brought across the Tugela on the 28th, and, in spite of the
flooded state of the river; no casualty occurred. The rain did not cease
till daybreak on the 29th, when the passage was completed. It must be
borne in mind that the Tugela at Fort Pearson, where the column
crossed, is more than 600 yards wide, and it is then possible to
estimate the difficulties encountered at the outset and before the
journey could be fairly said to commence. But there were willing hands
and zealous hearts to carry out Lord Chelmsford's minute and ever
thoughtful instructions. No detail, even of the smallest, was omitted or
forgotten by him, and with such men as Commissary-General Strickland,
Surgeon-Major Tarrant, and his dozen assistant-surgeons, as well as
Commissary Walton and Transport Officers Lawrence and Findlay, things
were bound to go well.

The first plan was to force a passage through to Ekowe with all possible
despatch consistent with the safety of the column and its convoy, and
then, having exchanged the garrison and having provisioned the brave
little fortress for a month, to form another and corresponding post on
the Inyezani hills, leaving the latter munitioned for a similar period.

But this plan was afterwards considerably modified. On the first day's
march no difficulties as to enemy or transport were experienced, the
weather had cleared, and the road from the Tugela to Amatikula was far
better than expected. Giving up all idea of the road by which Pearson
had originally advanced when he first marched inland, Lord Chelmsford,
following Colonel Pearson's advice, determined to move by the coast
road, which crossed much more open country, was far more adapted for
wheeled transport, and, indeed, for the march of all three arms, while
it afforded fewer opportunities for the Zulus to attempt surprise. So
satisfactory was the road on the first day's march that the only wonder
was that it had not been previously destroyed by the Zulus. In fact, the
column had made good more than half the distance before any serious
difficulties began. It will be seen in the map that at the villages of
Inyoni and Amatikula their respective rivers cross the old road. Now,
these rivers cross the coast road as well as the main road, flowing from
west to east, and several halts at these two places are mentioned; it is
not intended to refer to these villages, but simply to the encampments
on the banks of the rivers of the same name.

On the arrival of the column at the Inyoni and Amatikula rivers the
waggons were carefully packed in laager, and a well-made ditch and
parapet formed around the camp. Sentries were posted at the various
angles, and outlying piquets thrown well forward. No noise, or even loud
talking was allowed, and the bivouac, for it could scarcely be called a
camp, was each night as silent as a grave-yard. Two miles beyond the
Zulu bank of the Tugela good camping-ground was passed, but the troops
pushed on without any difficulty to the Inyoni river, finding the road
very good, although a little heavy for the waggons, from the rains. They
were so lightly laden, however, that the drivers managed to get the oxen
along at a fair pace, the waggons marching four, and sometimes six
abreast. Scarcely any water was met with, but numerous Zulu kraals were
passed, so streams or wells must have been in the neighbourhood. The
country through which the column passed was very open, affording no
cover, except between three miles south of Inyoni and the banks of the
river, where there is a gully with thick bush, which scouts carefully
explored before the main body came up. The water of the Inyoni was found
so brackish that the horses would scarcely drink of it. The Umsundusi
and Amatikula rivers are very sweet, the latter particularly so.

Leaving the Inyoni, the next river passed is the Umsundusi, which runs
into the Amatikula, north-west of which lies the thorn country. The road
thence to Ingesani is good, but there is a mud gully to the south of
that place almost impassable after heavy rain. The column now marched
more to their right, where the country was still open, although there
was considerable cover in places, and kraals were seen around. Near the
Umkukusi is a hill, which was occupied for a time, but from which
nothing could be seen in the shape of an enemy. Keeping in a
north-easterly direction they now reached a lower portion of the
Inyesani, and then bore westerly for Ginghilovo, where on the afternoon
of the 1st they encamped. Here a parley was held with the besieged, from
Pearson's lofty signal-tower at Ekowe, and signals were made warning
Lord Chelmsford of the impending Zulu attack.

A few words of digression may here be allowed to the system of signals
which proved of such use to both Pearson and Chelmsford at this
juncture. When Lord Chelmsford came first to Tenedos and Fort Pearson,
it became evident to him that Pearson was so completely blockaded that
runners could rarely get through. It was at the same time most essential
to his plans that the General should know exactly how the colonel's
resources were lasting, and the exact time to which his garrison could
hold out. In this emergency Haynes, of the Engineers, was sent for, and
asked if he could not do something with the heliograph, and bring the
rays of the sun into requisition for the transmission of messages. The
General was at once seen, and although by no means sanguine, he gave
every facility for the attempt. The difficulties were by no means light.
In the first place there were no proper mirrors, and a most diminutive
chamber looking-glass had to be employed. Then again there were no
skilled or mechanically-trained workers for the improvised apparatus,
and all appliances were of the most primitive nature. Another and, as
was feared, the most fatal difficulty was that there was no way of
attracting the notice of the Ekowe garrison, which from the nearest
vantage-point, was fully thirty miles as the crow flies. Nothing
daunted, however, by these obstacles Haynes persevered, and knowing that
the lives of many gallant soldiers were dependent on success or failure,
redoubled his exertions, which after long anxiety and delay were crowned
with success. The most sanguine hopes lay in the fact that the Naval
Brigade were with Pearson, and that some of them would undoubtedly be
trained to mirror signalling. After much delay in getting everything
ready, Haynes chose a bright sunshiny morning and went to the top of a
hill about five miles from the fort and commenced his flashing, but
without the smallest success. The church tower at Ekowe could be plainly
seen, but there was no response, and it was evident that the attempts at
communication were not noticed, or, if noticed, not understood. Nothing
discouraged, although a little chaffed by his comrades, the young
Engineer continued day by day, whenever there was a gleam of sunshine,
to attend the hill and work his mirror. At length, after a whole week
had passed before any indication from the garrison at Ekowe had been
made, another thought struck Haynes, and this was to flash occasional
whiffs of gunpowder to attract notice. To his intense delight, after a
few attempts, this plan succeeded, and when a gleam was once flashed
from the beleaguered fort in return the rest was all plain sailing.
Another week, however, elapsed before a perfectly intelligible answer
was received, and then it was found that Haynes's messages had been read
from the beginning, but that they could not get the Ekowe answers at
first to work. It is hardly necessary to mention how pleased Lord
Chelmsford was, and that Haynes was sent for and thanked in the most
flattering manner for his ingenuity and perseverance.

As has been said, Pearson informed Lord Chelmsford of the imminent Zulu
attack; he also added that his last raid had been successful and that
some cattle had been captured; and that the road he had cut under fire
through the bush southwards would shorten the advance or his sortie by
at least five miles, and that his people were under no apprehensions of
famine or assault for some days. He had improved his defences, his
parapet having a command of six feet, flanked by a couple of well-made
_caponnieres_ on the northern and southern faces, with a loopholed
building on the north-west and a sunken stockade in the south-west
angle. His four guns--two Gatlings and two rocket-tubes, in addition to
his Martini-Henrys--he considered sufficient to render his fort
impregnable to everything except hunger, and should the latter come on
through Lord Chelmsford's inability or delay in coming, he purposed
making a final and desperate sortie for life and liberty. This message
was committed to writing, and read out to the men, who answered it with
cheers of delight and enthusiasm.

At four a.m. on the 31st ult., in the early dawn the troops paraded
outside the laager on the Inyoni. For the first day the march had been
without impediment or opposition; progress here and there, it is true,
was slightly impeded by portions of swampy ground; but so eager were the
men to get forward that the waggons were pushed vigorously through the
mud by willing hands. The 57th Regiment, which had only lately arrived
from Ceylon, were a little out of condition, and the fatigue and wet had
told upon them in a greater degree than the regiments arrived from
England. After a pleasant march, the Amatikula river was reached, where
the camp was formed with the waggons as usual in laager, and
shelter-trenches formed at fifteen paces beyond. The night passed
without any alarm, and at six the column marched for Ginghilovo.

The drift on the Amatikula was so swollen that a long time was occupied
in getting the waggons across it, and the result was that on Monday very
few miles were made. Soon after the troops had crossed, outlying bands
of Zulus were seen by the scouts hovering on the flanks, but no attack
was attempted. The largest body of these Zulus kept moving in a line
parallel with the English march. Towards the afternoon of this day
Barrow's Horse was directed by Lord Chelmsford to make a reconnaissance
in the direction of the kraal of Makuendo, another of Cetywayo's
innumerable brothers, and they returned with the news that they had
surprised and fired it. On the previous day Barrow had made a
reconnaissance away to the north-east, at least seven or eight miles
off, without falling in with any Zulus, whose power of concealment is
certainly marvellous. At three o'clock on the 1st of April it became
dark overhead, and a severe thunderstorm broke over the laager, wetting
nearly every one to the skin. The night of the 1st of April will long be
remembered by those who were with Lord Chelmsford on that occasion. Not
a sound was heard in the camp, but outside the howls of the wandering
jackal and the pariah dog were occasionally echoed by the hoarse scream
of the foul birds which hover near a probable battle. At intervals were
to be heard the patrols going their rounds in the fitful gleams of the
moonlight, which were succeeded by black and rolling masses of cloud
chasing each other in the sky, still thunder-laden and lurid. The
whispered "Who goes there?" and the almost inaudible countersign, told,
however, that the utmost vigilance was awake, and that all felt that
England's honour was at stake. At two a.m. Lord Chelmsford, with two of
his personal staff, went quietly round. This tour of inspection lasted
till three o'clock, as here and there trifling details had to be changed
and plans to be explained to the various officers who held the most
important points of defence and danger. In front of the camp, but
sheltered behind trenches and abattis, were that glorious and
time-honoured corps, the 60th, who have no colours on which to record
their proud deeds, but whose escutcheon is emblazoned with some of
England's hardest-won fields. The General warmly eulogized the neat and
workmanlike trenches made by his favourite greenjackets, and passed on
next to Brackenbury, of the "Shah," who, with his "little bulldogs," as
the bluejackets term the Gatlings, held the right angle of the
entrenchment.

Next to Brackenbury and his stout fellows came Clarke with his
detachment of the 57th, and at the second corner were two 9-pounders
excellently placed and guarded by their watchful gunners, eager as
greyhounds held back in the leash. Round to the rear, but by no means a
post of less honour, came the gallant old 91st, whose former Cape
services have long been their pride and distinction. Four companies of
this fine corps were here, and although the ranks were made up by drafts
from many other corps, the men had wonderfully soon assumed the
peculiarly smart bearing of their new corps. At the next angle were two
more Gatlings, and prolonging the faces were posted two companies of the
91st, then three companies of the Buffs, and the 99th. As nearly as
possible in the left rear face Lieutenant Cane, of the "Shah," had
charge of the ship's rocket-battery.

Lord Chelmsford expressed himself extremely satisfied at the manner in
which all his arrangements had been worked out, and the low murmur of
gratification, which even discipline could not repress, showed how much
his men were devoted to their chief.

It was as nearly as possible a quarter past four when the welcome news
was passed from man to man that the Zulus were seen in skirmishing
order, supported by dense masses, away some miles off on the right
front. It was nearly six o'clock, however, when the enemy's plan of
attack appeared to be decided, and this delay, it has since been
ascertained, arose from the fact that they had heard that the troops
were about to inspan and march in the early morning, and the Zulu
general anticipated catching them in all the confusion of starting. At
six a.m., then, somewhat favoured by the long grass and weeds which want
of time had not permitted the soldiers to cut down, the Zulu array was
hurled upon the laager. The regiments which came on in front were the
Unembomanaba and Unemsilya. These were in extended order, but much
closer than skirmishing order; in fact, somewhat akin to the Prussian
infantry first attack. These corps were flanked by the usual horns or
wings, composed of the Nokene and Nodwen regiments, formed in respective
columns right and left. In the rear, as the body or heart of the
formation, were the Monamonosi and a favourite corps of the king's
called Zwawani. Somapo was in chief command, while his lieutenant was
Dabulamanzi.

The British front enticed the Zulu force, as easy of attack, as the
green-coated rifles were lying down in their shallow trenches, and their
strength could not well be seen by the enemy. Nothing could have fallen
out more fortunately, as the fire from those deadly tubes was doubly
fatal in consequence of each man being enabled to have a firm rest for
his weapon. There could not be a grander sight to a soldier's eye than
to watch these magnificent specimens of savage pride coming on in their
mighty strength to sweep the sturdy little riflemen from off the earth.
Their white and coloured shields, the crests of leopard skin and
feathers, and the wild oxtails dangling from their necks, gave them a
terribly unearthly appearance. Every ten or fifteen yards their first
line would halt, and a shot would be fired, and then, with an unearthly
yell, they would again rush on with a sort of measured dance, while a
humming and buzzing sound in time to their movement was kept up. When
the first line of skirmishers came to within 300 yards, a terrible and
deadly sheet of flame flashed from the shelter-pits, and a great number
of the Zulu warriors reeled howling to the earth. This only seemed to
incite the main body to renewed exertion, for they came up hurling
themselves through the skirmishers, and not even allowing them to get
out of their path, but dashing them to the ground in their rage to close
with the main array. A perfect _feu d'enfer_ was now rained upon the
denser masses of the Zulu main body, and this was maintained for at
least twenty minutes, the savages coming on, still fed by columns from
their rear, which deployed in excellent order as they reinforced the
first line, and alternately halted, fired, and advanced, beaten back
some scores of times, and returning as desperately as ever to the front.
About half-past six this front attack and onward rush was checked by the
gallant 60th. Lord Chelmsford on several occasions rode along their
line, giving an occasional kind and complimentary word when a
particularly good shot was made or an especial coolness was observed. A
sudden and wonderfully well-executed change of front was now made,
without the smallest confusion or delay, and the masses of Zulus in
front faced to their right and ran round in column to the face held by
the 57th and 91st. Here their courage was, if possible, more pronounced,
and their welcome was as hot. The 91st had not so many good marksmen in
their regiment as the colonel could have wished, as many of his best
shots were taken to supply Indian reliefs; but even the youngest
soldiers seemed to gain skill and inspiration from what they had seen
performed by the 60th. The 57th ably fulfilled their share of the duty,
and the torrent of lead poured upon the enemy from the murderous tubes
of these seemed to literally plough through the hostile ranks.
Notwithstanding this deadly hail, the Zulus came on with what was now
the mute valour of despair. They had ceased to shout and only seemed
anxious to dash upon the British bayonets. Twice, three times, a fourth,
they literally swarmed up to the entrenchments, and if one break in the
ranks had taken place the English loss must have been terrible. At one
moment, about a quarter before seven, it seemed as though they would
have forced their way in, and upon several occasions wounded Zulus were
noticed taking aim from behind the cover of the bodies of their dead
comrades as they lay in pools of blood in the open. Now that they were
within easy range from the tops of the waggons, an effective and galling
fire was opened upon the Zulus by the native contingents, who were not
allowed in the first line. This double tier of fire was of great help,
and so far thinned the assailant ranks that the second attack was after
a time renounced as hopeless. Once more, however, a shorter, more
desperate, but, as it proved, final rush was made by Cetywayo's doomed
and devoted troops. This time it was upon the left of the laager that
they delivered their last and supreme effort. They came up on this
occasion to within ten or fifteen feet of the muzzles of the men's
rifles, and, indeed, one or two of their chiefs seized the hot barrels
with one hand, while they stabbed at the men with their shortened or
broken assegais. It was curious to remark the three separate lines of
Zulu corpses which marked the respective ranges at which the
death-dealing Martini-Henrys had swept their ranks. At 300 yards a thin
boundary of black bodies and white shields might be traced; at 200 and
100 yards from our lines their walls of dead were more thick, and even
up to the trenches wounded men had staggered to receive their _coup de
grace_. In spite of all their efforts, the Zulus, however, never
succeeded in bringing matters to a hand-to-hand struggle, though, if
they had done so, Lord Chelmsford's admirable formation would have
doubtless saved the camp, although no doubt with more than treble loss.
The last attack, and perhaps the boldest--for it was evidently the most
desperate--was led most heroically by Dabulamanzi in person, who, with
voice and gesture, came on a dozen yards in front of the leading files,
as Ney led on his Guard at Waterloo. As on that occasion the French
horsemen, so now these stalwart warriors could not stand against the
calm, steady, and unflurried _mitraille_ of English infantry fire, and
at seven o'clock the flower of Cetywayo's warriors were scattered and
broken on the plain they had so magnificently fought and drenched with
their blood. Lord Chelmsford saw the moment had come; Barrow, who had
already mounted his men in anticipation, scarcely waited for the orderly
to repeat the permission to dash forth. Away charged the little band of
sabres, and the mounted infantry came at the flying groups like a
whirlwind, their sabres flashing bright in the morning sun, but soon
dyed crimson with the best of the Zulu blood.

During the attack 1200 rounds were fired from the splendidly served
Gatlings, and about 40 rounds of case and shrapnel from the 9-pounders,
which subsequently shelled the bush as the Zulus fled for cover. Colonel
Crealock, military secretary, and Captain Molyneux, of Lord Chelmsford's
staff, had their chargers shot under them. Poor young Johnstone, of the
99th, was killed at nearly the commencement of the fight; and Colonel
Northey was badly hit early in the action. He at first could not be
induced to leave his men, but at last was reluctantly compelled to do
so, as he fainted from loss of blood. At the close of the action,
however, and when he was aroused from his state of insensibility by the
ringing echoes of the British cheers which proclaimed the flight of the
enemy, he suddenly raised himself on one hand from under the waggon
where he was lying, and joined in the shouts of the men, thus bursting
the bandaged wound and causing violent hemorrhage to recommence. This
gallant and valued officer subsequently died, on the afternoon of the
6th, having lingered in considerable pain for four days. The entire
English loss was wonderfully small, being but 2 officers and 4 privates
killed, and 3 officers and 34 privates wounded! The Zulu loss, on the
contrary, cannot altogether be set down at less than 1000; for the
English troops buried between 700 and 800 Zulu corpses; and about 300
rifles, which they discarded in their flight, were subsequently picked
up. Zulu prisoners stated that there were 180 companies present with
Somapo and Dabulamanzi on the 2nd, and allowing each company to be
composed of 60 warriors, the actual fighting array must have been about
11,000. Information was also shortly afterwards received that another
impi of about the same strength was despatched the day after Dabulamanzi
marched from the king's kraal at Ulundi, and this latter force, misled
by erroneous information, was unable to effect the intended junction
with the force defeated. These prisoners also maintain that neither
Somapo nor Dabulamanzi was aware of Lord Chelmsford's march for Ekowe
till the day before he was assailed. Barrow's admirably planned and
executed reconnaissances and raids on the 30th, 31st, and 1st
undoubtedly had much to do with hoodwinking the Zulus, and it is
tolerably certain that the military promenade made by him on the 31st
towards the Ingoya led them to believe that the whole force was likely
to operate in that direction.

On the following day, the 57th, 60th, and 91st were formed into a flying
column, taking with them nothing but some light Scotch carts and three
days' rations, together with the mounted men and some of the Naval
Brigade, and started _en route_ by way of the coast road for Ekowe. The
portions of the Buffs, 99th, and a detachment of the "Shah's" men were
left behind to garrison Ginghilovo, under the command of Major Walker.
The heliograph was set to work, and Pearson replied that he should
certainly come out to meet Lord Chelmsford and his party. At daybreak,
therefore, Barrow went on with his horsemen to reconnoitre, and to see
if any remnant or fresh portion of the Zulu army lay between Ekowe and
its relievers. The line of country to be traversed was known to be more
difficult than that passed, and it was thought that the Zulus might have
had sufficient tenacity of purpose to make one more effort to stay the
general's purpose. The first part of the journey was anything but
pleasant; swamps, morasses, bogs, watercourses, nullahs, spruits,
boulders, and all the disagreeable features of South Africa were in
abundance; progress, consequently, was very much impeded, and at one
time it was thought the troops would have to encamp on the way, and make
a two days' march of the journey. Several small but awkward streams had
to be crossed, and the General very wisely served out an extra ration of
grog after the passage of these places.

After travelling about five miles, a halt for breakfast was called, and
here Barrow rode back to report that all was clear in front, and that
not a single Zulu could be seen, although the plains and bush had been
most diligently scoured. Barrow reported that in the direction he had
been, assegais, shields, feathers, ear and head ornaments, skins, furs,
blankets, and even guns were lying about in profusion, evidently cast
away in the hurried and headlong flight of the Zulus to their kraals,
but that no bodies, however, had as yet been seen by the scouts.

The shrill notes of the bugles sounded the halt, and soon after the
"Prepare to dismount," and "Off-saddle." Although no precaution was
neglected to guard against surprise, a certain amount of latitude was
now allowed, which on the previous three days' marches had not been
sanctioned. Piquets, as usual, were thrown out on the neighbouring
heights, and a chain of vedettes posted, which commanded ten miles of
country in every direction. This being effected, the infantry formed up
and piled arms, the cavalry off-saddled, and the horses, having first
been allowed their usual roll in the dusty veldt, were turned out, under
the protection of a guard, to enjoy a short graze, having, of course,
been previously knee-haltered. This knee-haltering process is universal
throughout all the Cape Colonies, and is effected in the following
manner: by simply taking a couple of half-hitches round the horse's
fore-leg with a strong rein or reim attached to the neck-strap, which
brings the animal's head towards the ground, and effectually prevents
his running away. This is the simple precaution adopted by all
travellers in South Africa. The men now were told off in sections to
draw water and collect wood to make fires for their morning or midday
coffee. The officers collected in groups, and compared notes and
exchanged anecdote and repartee.

After an hour's rest, which men and horses required after their severe
four days' work, the bugles again summoned all to the ranks, and they
started anew to complete the journey.

From this halting-place the road had a rather dangerous appearance, and
every precaution was taken, lest Dabulamanzi should have received any
reinforcements, which would enable him to attack the somewhat weak
column at a disadvantage. The road over which they were passing was in
itself open and fairly easy of transit, but not far to the left, and
running parallel to the waggon-track, there were patches of bush so
dense that horsemen could not enter, and they had to be examined with
the aid of an infantry contingent, a few of whom had fortunately been
brought in case of an emergency of this sort. Not far from the foot of
one of the ascents to Ekowe on the left of the column lay the spot where
Pearson was attacked on the 22nd January, and which, although called the
battle of Inyazani, is some distance from the banks of that river. Some
cavalry were taken over by Barrow to explore, but nothing marked the
locality of the action except a large mound and a roughly carved cross
where the dead were laid. On this cross were roughly cut the names of
those who lay at rest below. Leaving at length the bushy country, the
column now came to some steep and broken ground, and here were seen the
remains of some of the waggons which had to be abandoned from Ely's
convoy. Strange to say, some of the contents, tins of provisions and
other stores, were still intact; but no arms nor ammunition had been
left behind. Seven miles from Ekowe the troops came to a plain from
which they were divided by a broad and well-worn watercourse. Here they
faced the steep and scarped sides of a mountain, and in the distance
could see a long unbroken range over which the sun was beginning to set.
At this spot the Zulus had evidently attempted to impede the advance, as
part of the road had been cut away. Engineers, however, soon remedied
the damage, and they were enabled to push on; although it was fortunate
that they had no waggons, as it was not without considerable effort they
managed to get the two-wheeled carts across. As soon as this spot had
been passed, the whole character of the landscape changed as if by
magic; and as the wind freshened and carried away some misty clouds, the
remnants of the late rains, a splendid prospect was seen, as the column
wound its slow trail along a steep and rugged kloof leading into a fair
and fertile valley beyond. Here, however, was a position that might have
been held for some considerable time had the enemy chosen this spot to
oppose the march. A sheer precipitous rock frowned on the right, and the
only possible track lay exactly under its base, where with a few
resolute savages above, huge boulders and masses of rock could have been
hurled upon the column as it passed. On the left was a spongy swamp
perfectly impassable to wheels, and not particularly easy to troops or
human feet. Here a short way up the mountain farther on were seen the
remains of a ruined kraal, and of some huts apparently not long vacated.
These dwellings were formed, as usual, of rudely twined canes wattled
and filled in with clay, and they had somewhat the appearance of a
cluster of huge beehives.

As the leading files quitted the low ground, signals were made by the
advanced patrols that cavalry were in sight, and the General and several
of his staff at once galloped past the column to the front. All
anxieties were briefly at an end, for, mounted upon an exceedingly
handsome charger, and attended by a numerous cavalcade, coming towards
the column at a smart canter was the gallant soldier who had held his
inhospitable guard at Ekowe for more than seventy days.

Lord Chelmsford at once spurred forward, and warmly grasped Colonel
Pearson by the hand, whilst discipline for once gave way, and the
respectful silence of the General's escort was broken by a cheer such as
only English throats can give, waking up every echo of the Zulu caves
and valleys.

Colonel Pearson brought with him, according to his promise, about 500
men, and his staff, consisting of Colonel Walker and Captains M'Gregor
and Knight. A long conversation at once took place, and the General
informed Colonel Pearson that, anticipating the evacuation of the fort,
he had left part of his force to entrench Ginghilovo, and make it a
permanent station. The reasons for this were manifold. In the first
place the approaches to Ekowe were easy to the Zulus, unencumbered with
baggage or other _impedimenta_, but most difficult and trying to a
European force. Ginghilovo or its neighbourhood answered every purpose
as a link in the line of communications, while a site could be chosen
equally as formidable in a defensive point of view. The column did not
reach Ekowe fort till nearly eleven p.m. Here the welcome of comrades,
fellow-messmates, and men of the same ships and corps, was a happy and
fitting sequel to the _rencontre_ of the reliever and the relieved.

It was a pleasant surprise to the General on arriving at Ekowe to find
that matters had been made much worse by report than they were in
reality. No gaunt and famine-stricken faces greeted him, but, on the
contrary, there was a look of plumpness about most of the privates that
savoured more of want of exercise than want of beef. In fact, the
medical officer stated that the meat ration had never been diminished,
as it was considered just as advisable to kill and consume the trek oxen
as to see them die for want of forage. Now a trek ox in the best
condition is not particularly tender, or even when fed upon the best of
food, but when kept short of fodder, and without proper shelter from the
sun and rain, he cuts up anything but well for beef. Tobacco was the
article most wanted by both soldiers and sailors, and the most agreeable
gift that could be made by the relievers to their lately besieged
comrades was this luxury in any form or shape. The health of the
garrison at first was good, but gradually the want of vegetables and
useful medicines filled the hospitals, and made the cemetery more full.
Anxiety, doubtless, had much to do with the sick-roll, and until
communications with St. Andrew's Mission had been established a certain
amount of uneasiness was felt as to how the war was going. Thirty deaths
occurred during the seventy days the garrison were shut up, but several
of these, it must be remembered, were cases of wounded men from the
fighting at the Inyezani. At Fort Ekowe the hero of the scouting parties
was undoubtedly young Rowden, of the 99th, who was detailed by Colonel
Pearson to form a mounted infantry corps similar to Barrow's, from
volunteers from the Buffs and his own corps. It is no secret that one of
the great advantages we possess in our service is that we are never at a
loss, when we can get horses, to find riders. Most of our youngsters in
the service would rather have a stigma on their morals than on their
knowledge of horseflesh and of horsemanship, and herein lies the secret
of our bearing up against our first reverses in Zululand. Every officer,
serving in South Africa, whether cavalry, infantry, artillery,
engineers, medical staff, or commissariat, gets rations or allowances
for horse or horses, according to his rank. This is one of the secrets,
combined with the sport and shooting, why South African service is so
popular. Now both the 99th and the Buffs vied with the 13th and 90th in
their equestrian proclivities, and, in default of regular cavalry, a
large body of mounted infantry was raised, and in a great measure
mounted from the horses belonging to the officers of their respective
regiments, lent or sold to Government for the purpose. Rowden's patrols
were literally the "eyes and ears" of the garrison, and ably fulfilled
all the onerous duties of light cavalry. In short the great value of
their services may be gathered from the frequently and openly stated
opinions of Colonel Wood and of Colonel Pearson, that all infantry
regiments serving at the Cape should have at least one Gatling and one
mounted company.

The great event of the camp life in Ekowe was the discovery of certain
queer flashes of light on the white walls of the church tower. These,
after puzzling many of the officers and soldiers, were at length brought
under the notice of an officer of the naval brigade, whose education in
the use of the heliograph enabled him at once to explain the apparent
mystery. Three days of unpleasant suspense, however, elapsed before the
first message could be clearly made out, and then three more before an
apparatus could be rendered workable to reply. Fortunately an old mirror
was found, and this, with an empty wooden cartridge case, sufficed.
Within the week, therefore, conversation was opened, and its effect on
the imprisoned garrison was seen by all to be more beneficial than all
the tonics the hospital could afford. The next great event was,
perhaps, the construction of the road from the fort to the lower coast
trek, and the consequent excitement of having to work with the chance of
feeling an assegai or Zulu bullet whizzing into the party. But the long
days and longer nights were not at all devoid of recreation. Lawn
tennis, bowls, ninepins, and quoits were devised. Concerts were
organized, and dramatic recitals on a modest scale were improvised.

A cavalry raid had been, it will be remembered, made some time back upon
Dabulamanzi's kraal, which was shelled and burned by Pearson. Some
cattle and sheep were captured, and a desultory and running fight was
kept up between the discomfited chief and the English patrols, which
resulted in no casualty to the troops, while several Zulus were killed.
This attack did not, however, extend to Dabulamanzi's private
habitation, as its approaches were considered too far off and too
difficult of access. No sooner, however, had Lord Chelmsford arrived at
Ekowe than he determined to complete the blow already commenced. It was
decided to effect this raid with Barrow's horsemen. The whole affair was
promptly and admirably organized, and at eight o'clock on the morning
after Lord Chelmsford's arrival a group of officers might have been seen
on foot conversing, while their horses were led up and down by the
attendant orderlies. First of all there was the Commander-in-chief, and
with him his military secretary, Colonel Crealock, whose recent wound
did not even place him for one day upon the sick report. Major Barrow
was there in his workmanlike dress, a Norfolk shirt patched with
leather, high untanned boots, and a stout sabre at his side. With him
were John Dunn, Lieutenants Sugden, Rawlins, and Courtenay, Captains
Addison, M'Lean, and Ganz.

The entire force consisted of 50 mounted infantry under Barrow, 55
volunteers under Addison, and 120 volunteers under Ganz and M'Lean. At a
quarter to nine the cavalcade had been inspected by their respective
commanders, and in sections of fours moved off, amid the smiles and
congratulations of the garrison. The road was as usual over that
sweet-smelling and springy turf which makes walking an impossibility,
and any pace but a canter impossible to man and beast. A little more
than half an hour, or about a four-mile spurt over the elastic veldt,
brought them in sight of Dabulamanzi's "great place." A rolling grassy
plain, leading to some easy and gentle slopes, was presented to view,
and evidently to the astonishment of most of the party, who had been
accustomed to the rude and rocky fastnesses in which these kraals are
usually built. Beyond these smiling and inviting hills the kraal itself
could scarcely be seen, but its locality was indicated by half a dozen
Zulus running away with some cattle at full speed. Their measures were
quickly taken, as their information forbade them to imagine that any
trap could be laid, and they knew that the chances were ten to one
against the chief having any force near enough to make a stand against
them. Lord Chelmsford paid Major Barrow the high compliment of allowing
him to take an independent command of the whole party, and remained more
as a spectator than as an active official on the scene. Barrow at once
detached mounted portions of his men right and left, while he led the
way direct at a smart canter at the kraal. The combined movement
answered admirably, and the place was surrounded as if by magic, without
any resistance or a shot being fired. Rawlins, and a few of Barrow's
men, were now ordered to dash into the kraal, and as soon as they had
assured themselves that there were no women or children or sick people
there, to fire it in various places. They had scarcely galloped off to
carry out this order when the silence was broken by the well-known
"ping" of a rifle, sounding from the near vicinity of the kraal; and on
looking in the direction from which the sound came the General and his
staff could see a small group of Zulus taking deliberate aim at them.
The distance was about 1200 yards. But the General still moved on,
although the bullet had been well aimed, for it whizzed just over the
head of one of his aides-de-camp; and John Dunn, putting up his glass,
declared that he recognized Dabulamanzi by his head-dress and peculiar
method of walking. With the utmost nonchalance John began to load his
weapon, and remarked to the General, "See what will happen!" One of the
Zulus at this moment was coolly making a rest for his rifle upon a ledge
of rock behind which his chief had retired, and Dunn, taking a long and
careful aim, fired, and evidently wounded his man, who slipped back into
the arms of a comrade. As the party sent to fire the kraal emerged from
its outer enclosure, a heavy cloud of smoke betokened that their mission
was accomplished. This white column hid the horsemen from the natives,
who finding themselves in danger of being surrounded and captured by
Sugden and his detached party, made a hasty and somewhat undignified
retreat. The General now moved round to the right, and found that the
detached party under Nettleton were coming back with a fine young Zulu,
whom they had overtaken and captured on the left of the kraal. They had
secured him with some buffalo-hide girths, and he readily--too readily
for belief--answered John Dunn's questions, informing him that the
cattle, women, and children had time to escape from the kraal, as the
horsemen were discovered cantering across the open. He added that had
they advanced a little faster they would have captured them. But this
was not their object, and they were rather glad not to have the
encumbrance of prisoners, remembering the trouble Oham's wives and
relations gave at Kambula.

The return to Ekowe was accomplished without further incident. On the
following day, having destroyed as much of the fortifications at Ekowe
as time would permit, they started upon the return journey to the camp
at Ginghilovo. They overtook Pearson in laager after having marched
about six miles; and while he and his column moved on later in the day
to his destination on the Lower Tugela, Lord Chelmsford and his division
halted and laagered camp at about two miles north of Inyezani, and about
five from Ginghilovo. Here an unfortunate disaster occurred. A young
sentry of the 91st fancied he saw Zulus in the bush. He at once, without
challenging, as he should have done, fired. The picket to which he
belonged at once retired, and as Dunn's scouts were out reconnoitring,
they ran in upon the next picket to the camp, composed also of young
soldiers of the 60th, who, mistaking them for Zulus charging upon the
laager, recklessly opened fire, by which four of their own men were
wounded and one killed, while nine of the unfortunate scouts were badly
wounded. The officer commanding the picket did all he could to steady
his men, and did not even retire with them, so he was quite blameless.
On the 24th April they reached the entrenchments at Ginghilovo, which
were about two miles from the former laager, and Lord Chelmsford, having
given the fullest instructions in regard to strengthening and guarding
the camp, started on the following day for Fort Tenedos, _en route_ for
Durban, to reorganize an immediate advance.




CHAPTER VI.

  End of first period of the Zulu war--Organization of fresh
    advance--Reinforcements from England--Scene in
    Durban--Disembarkation of troops--Cavalry camp at Berea--Lord
    Chelmsford's arrival at Durban--His reception--Review of Lancers and
    King's Dragoons at Cato Manor--Plan of new campaign--Composition of
    No. 1 column--Composition of No. 2 column--Cask bridge over
    Amatikula--Forts Crealock and Chelmsford--Wood's reconnaissance to
    Blood River--Description of Blood River and its scenery--Appearance
    of Buller's Light Horse--Removal of Wood's Kambula camp--Grandier's
    capture and escape--His tale--Description of Dabulamanzi and
    Cetywayo--Death of Dabulamanzi.


The relief of Ekowe, and the Zulu defeats at Ginghilovo and Kambula,
mark in a most unmistakable manner the conclusion of the first period of
the Zulu war. All fear of an invasion of Natal was now completely
dissipated, and the only task that remained to be accomplished was to
organize a force to carry an offensive war into the heart of Cetywayo's
kingdom. Kambula and Ginghilovo had neutralized the disastrous results
of Isandhlwana--the winning blow was still to be struck. It will be
remembered that after the fatal field of Isandhlwana no time had been
lost in applying to England for large reinforcements, and the home
authorities were in no way slack in acceding to this urgent appeal. Lord
Chelmsford on his part was no less active in preparing and getting
these forces to the front, and though to the ordinary observer there
might seem to be a period of inaction and sloth, since there was indeed
a necessary lull in active operations, yet in reality no cessation of
labour really occurred in any of the military departments. Within one
month seventeen transports brought from England and landed on the shores
of South Africa more than 9000 troops and 2000 horses, and all the
munitions and stores, not only for the maintenance of such a force, but
also for other regiments at the front. As each ship arrived at the outer
anchorage, she was discharged without difficulty, and in no case were
the troops kept on board an unnecessary hour, while in no instance was
any damage, accident, or loss sustained during the process of
disembarkation. To the enterprise, energy, and forethought of the
contractors was due this satisfactory result; and the timely engagement
of all the available steam-tugs by these authorities enabled them to
carry out their undertaking in a manner beyond the most sanguine
anticipations. In addition to the employment of the tugs "Union,"
"Somtsen," "Adonis," and others, the hulls of two fine schooners were
prepared and specially adapted for the accommodation of horses, and
these being lashed alongside the transports, with the aid of
steam-cranes and excellent wharves, the rest was not a matter of
difficulty. The weather, most fortunately, was generally favourable,
while the equinoctial gales were so slight that the dreaded bar was
never quite impassable. There were at this time no less than sixteen
magnificent steam-transports, some of them the largest afloat, lying at
the outer anchorage. Twenty-three vessels were in the inner harbour,
and there were, irrespective of local tenders and tugs, at least thirty
vessels in the roads. Such a sight had never been seen in the colony,
and Durban will never again exhibit such a martial aspect. While from
time to time returns were issued of the reinforcements as they arrived,
no complete field state was made out till April 16th. It will be well
here to give a brief _resume_. In the "Egypt" and "Spain" were embarked
at Southampton the King's Dragoon Guards, whose muster-roll gave 31
officers, 622 men, 91 officers' chargers, and 480 troop-horses. In the
"France" and "England" were the 17th Lancers, numbering 31 officers, 622
men, 91 officer's chargers, and 480 troop-horses. These embarked at
Blackwall and Southampton. The "Manora" and "Olympus," from Southampton,
brought M and N Batteries, 6th Brigade Royal Artillery, with 10
officers, 536 men, and 161 troop-horses. The "Palmyra," from Chatham,
came with the 30th company Royal Engineers, composed of 6 officers, 196
men, 2 officers' chargers, and 44 troop-horses. The "City of Paris,"
from Queenstown, brought the 21st Royal North British Fusiliers, with 30
officers, 906 men, and 7 officers' chargers. The "Russia," from
Portsmouth, embarked the 58th Foot, consisting of 30 officers, 906 men,
and 7 officers' chargers; while the same vessel brought the 3rd
battalion 60th Rifles, with 30 officers, 906 men, and 7 officers'
chargers. From Ceylon came the 57th Foot, which, with drafts from
England, made up 30 officers, 906 men, and 7 chargers. The "China," from
Southampton, brought these drafts, calling at Ceylon for the 57th. The
same fine and roomy ship brought also from Southampton the 94th Foot,
with 30 officers, 906 men, and 7 chargers. The "City of Venice," from
Queenstown, brought the 3rd and 4th companies of the Army Service Corps
(transport branch); while the "Queen Margaret," from Woolwich, brought
No. 5 company of the same, the whole making up 19 officers, 550 men, and
480 horses. The "Palmyra," as well as the Engineers from Chatham,
brought 4 officers and 140 men of the Army Hospital Corps from
Portsmouth. The numerical strength of these reinforcements was
therefore, according to return, exactly as follows:--Cavalry, two
regiments, making 1250 sabres; artillery, two batteries, 12 guns, and
540 men; engineers, one company, 190 men; infantry, six regiments, 5320
bayonets; Army Service Corps and drafts, 1200; total, 8500 men and 1871
horses. The two batteries of artillery were not armed alike, the one
being equipped with the usual 9-pounder field-gun, and the other having
the six new 7-pounders similar to those employed in Abyssinia, but
mounted, owing to the advice of General Sir John Bissett, K.C.B., upon
the tall and special Kaffrarian carriages recently introduced into the
service. These carriages are totally different from the small 7-pounder
carriages with which the Abyssinian guns were fitted, as they are raised
upon wheels five feet in height, the carriage, although lighter, being
exactly the same as to size as that used for the 9-pounder of eight cwt.
These little guns, however, weigh only 200 lb., and have rather a queer
dwarfed appearance mounted on their long axles, between their tall
wheels; but the plan was found in many cases successful in this and
late Kaffir campaigns, owing to the obstacles presented to the dwarfed
carriage by the long grass so abundant in all parts of the colony. Mules
had also arrived for these guns from Malta and Gibraltar. Most of the
regiments brought out their own equipment complete and ready for the
field--tents, waterproof sheets, cooking utensils, barrack and camp
stores--which enabled them to be ready at once for the forward movement.
This arrangement was not fully carried out by the Royal Artillery and
Army Service Corps, as they had a long train of carriages to take to the
front; but the company of the Army Service Corps which came in the
"Queen Margaret" from Woolwich brought 100 splendid waggons, light yet
of great strength, and others came from Queenstown in the "City of
Venice." As the transports engaged for the infantry regiments had a
considerable quantity of spare room for cargo, all the available space
was utilized for stores, munitions, and supplies. Preserved meats,
preserved vegetables, and other victualling stores were landed in
quantities of an almost alarming nature, while about twenty tons of
7-pounder shells had arrived by the "Donald Currie," "Duart Castle," and
other hired transports.

Undoubtedly the most interesting event to both civil as well as military
circles in Durban was the arrival of the two cavalry regiments destined
for the front. The absence of cavalry was indeed one of the great
defects in our army, and had there been previously a couple of regiments
of real light cavalry the progress of the campaign would doubtless have
taken a far more favourable turn, while some of our misfortunes or
disasters would never have happened. The value of cavalry was so
abundantly manifested by the services of Piet Uys, Colonels Russell and
Buller, Major Barrow, and Captain Rowden, that it would be idle to dwell
upon the subject. In the expedition, again, to Ekowe, how completely was
the value of this force shown by Major Barrow's horsemen! This officer
had not more than 200 sabres with him, while at least half of these were
natives; but the completeness of the success achieved by General
Chelmsford was attributed in a great measure by his lordship to the
services of this contingent, who were literally the eyes and ears of the
main column. They were, during the march, effectually scouting the
country around, ahead, and in rear, and so constantly did they perform
this work that the Zulu spies, who swarmed around, could not by any
possibility get close enough to learn the real strength of the column.
Again, until Zlobani, all or nearly all Wood's most brilliant successes
were gained by his mounted men, and he himself never ceased deploring
the absence of a stronger body of horsemen. The "Spain" and "Egypt,"
which brought out the King's Dragoon Guards to their first South African
service, two as fine-looking vessels as ever floated in African seas,
both arrived and anchored in the outer roadstead on Sunday morning, the
13th. The "Spain" made a most successful voyage, having left Southampton
on the 27th of February, touched at St. Vincent on 16th March, and
arrived at Capetown on 5th April. She had on board 312 troops and 286
horses. There was scarcely any sickness at all on board during the
voyage, and all the horses, both officers' chargers and troopers, were
landed in a very fair condition. The horses submitted to the slinging,
almost without an exception, with the greatest docility, and the whole
of them were landed in a wonderfully short space of time, considering
the distance and the state of the weather. The whole of the left wing of
the regiment was on shore by half-past five, and was at once marched to
the 17th Lancers' encampment at the foot of the Berea. The "Egypt" was a
trifle less in tonnage than the "Spain," but the difference would not be
noticed by an unprofessional eye. She had on board 20 officers, 300
troops, and 300 horses. Her horses were also in excellent condition, and
were all landed on the 14th. By the 16th the men had quite settled down
in their new quarters at the cavalry camp at the Berea, and everything
was in the most admirable order. The ground was admirably chosen for the
1250 horsemen who were there under canvas, and the considerations of
water, wood, health, and position were all carefully thought of and
provided. Each regiment was formed in column of troops, occupying 172
yards of front and 130 yards of depth. From the centre to centre of
tents was ten yards, and each horse picketed was allowed four feet by
twenty feet. In front of the camp was a fine open space of level parade,
which was employed as a parade-ground for duty, and an agreeable lounge
and sort of out-door club after stable-hours. The hours for _reveille_
and tattoo, the time for the promulgation of orders, the arrangements
for rations and forage, the position of the brigade office, commanding
officer's tent, headquarters, commissariat depot, hospital and guards,
the postal arrangements for letters and telegrams, the arrangements for
water for men and horses, the police arrangements, the detail for guards
and pickets, the detail of other duties, and the statement of returns
required, were all noted in daily orders, and printed for circulation
amongst men and officers. By this means a system of discipline was
established as strict and regular as if in presence of an enemy, and
every officer and non-commissioned officer was made acquainted with the
usual system of encampment in his branch of the service, and the
principles which govern such arrangements, in regard particularly to
quickness of change and means of transport, compactness, and safety from
an enemy's attack by day or surprise by night. On April 12th General
Lord Chelmsford and staff arrived back at Durban by special train from
the Lower Tugela, _via_ Jaccharine, at 6.45. With him were Colonel
Crealock, military secretary, Commodore Richards, and Lieutenant Milne.
A very large crowd was at the station to greet the General.

Not the least notable figure among the brilliant group who waited to
receive the Commander-in-chief was that of the Prince Imperial of
France, whose bright, intelligent face, as he conversed with Sir John
Bissett, was lit up with the anticipation of a possible campaign.

Besides General Sir John Bissett and the Prince Imperial, there were
present at the railway station Major-General Newdigate, Major-General
Marshall, Major-General Clifford, V.C., Colonel Bellairs, D.A.G.,
Colonel Riley, Major Huskisson, Captain Somerset, Hon. W. Drummond,
Captain Granville, and many others.

The 19th of April was a day that will long be remembered in Durban; for
then was seen a sight such as had never before been beheld in that town,
and probably will never be repeated. On that day Lord Chelmsford
inspected the two lately arrived regiments of cavalry, the 17th Lancers
and the King's Dragoon Guards. As each regiment passed before the
General, it was noticed that its rear squadron had attached to it half a
company, and its usual complement of store and supply waggons. These
consisted of four waggons, carrying three days' supplies of food, and
one day's oats for the horses, four waggons for squadron equipments,
such as tents, blankets, and cooking utensils, together with one
headquarter waggon and one quarter-master's stores waggon, making ten
vehicles in all. Each of these waggons was drawn by four horses, while
the armourers' forge waggon was drawn by six horses, and the ambulance
waggon by six fine mules. Both regiments were in full dress, but in the
lightest possible marching order, but even in this, the men's average
weight was not less than 18 stone. The regiments were both encamped at
Cato Manor, which is admirably suited to cavalry purposes, having good
grass and plenty of wood and water. The column extended a long distance,
and wound its way along West Street, Abnel Street, Smith Street, past
the Royal Hotel and the new club, and _via_ Field Street back to the
Manor, where the inspection and march past were held in the presence of
the General-in-chief. The top of West Street was reached at half-past
seven, and here the largest crowd was assembled. At the corner of
Gardner Street the column was joined by Lord Chelmsford, who was loudly
cheered, while handkerchiefs were waved from every carriage and window.
Outside the town gardens a number of private carriages were drawn up,
and each of these was fully occupied by ladies in full toilette, who
seemed delighted at the novelty of the spectacle. Such a sight as six
hundred British cavalry seemed to raise the enthusiasm of the
townspeople to a great pitch, and on all sides expressions of delight
and gratification at the fine and imposing appearance of the two corps
were freely vented. The entrance to the picturesque grounds of the manor
is situated within easy walking distance of the town, but in Natal few
people ever think of pedestrian exercise, so that the cavalcade was
supplemented by almost an equal number of mounted spectators of both
sexes. The cavalry brigade was, as soon as it entered the manor, wheeled
into line, and after receiving Lord Chelmsford with a general salute,
was minutely inspected by his lordship, who expressed himself in the
most flattering terms to both Colonels Lowe and Alexander, remarking
particularly the excellent condition of the 17th's horses. The Dragoons
and Lancers quitted Durban for Helpmakaar on April 24th, and every
precaution was taken by easy marching at first to avoid sore backs and
girth galls. Lord Chelmsford also left Durban, and proceeded to
Maritzburg: thence he travelled on to Dundee and Utrecht, and then on to
Wood's camp at Kambula, where he arrived on May 3rd.

The main features of the plans for the fresh campaign were, roughly
speaking, as follows.

Two principal forces, operating from separate bases, the one at Utrecht,
and the other at Durban, were to be held in communication by Wood, with
a flying column, and by Marshall's cavalry. The common objective of
these four columns was to be Ulundi, the king's chief kraal. To keep up
communications with these two flanks, to make occasional raids and
dashes forward into the enemy's country, and at any favourable moment to
convert a feigned into a real rush upon Ulundi, Wood was to retain his
separate and independent command. His force, however, was to be largely
reinforced, and more troops, if possible cavalry, sent to him. The first
column, as it was called, under Major-General Hope Crealock, C.B., was
to advance rapidly by the coast road, having as its respective bases of
operations Durban, Fort Pearson, and Ginghilovo. The other column, under
the personal command of Lord Chelmsford, with Utrecht as its principal
base on the extreme north, was to move also upon Ulundi. Meanwhile Wood,
who had been strongly reinforced, while nominally forming part of Lord
Chelmsford's headquarter division, practically retained his independent
command, and formed a sort of flying column connecting the two flanks
with each other. No. 1 division, then preparing for advance from the
Lower Tugela, consisted of three fine brigades. The First Brigade,
commanded by Colonel Pearson of Ekowe fame, consisted of the 3rd Buffs,
the 88th Connaught Rangers, and the 99th Foot, each of these corps
averaging 800 bayonets. The Second Brigade, under the command of Colonel
Pemberton, had in it the 57th, the 3rd battalion 60th Rifles, and the
91st Highlanders; while the Third Brigade, under Colonel Law, had a
battery of Royal Artillery, the Naval Brigade from the "Shah" and
"Boadicea," at least 800 strong, with four guns and two Gatlings,
Barrow's Horse, and a Native Contingent. Before the final advance was
made, it was determined that posts of communication should be
established at the Amatikula and the Inyezani rivers, over which pontoon
bridges were to be constructed. Meanwhile for temporary purposes there
was constructed over the Amatikula stream a cask bridge, by laying two
slings, with eye splices at one end, parallel to each other, at a
distance in proportion to the length of the casks. On these ropes were
placed as many casks as required, bungs uppermost, and side by side.
Across the upper surface of the barrels balks were laid parallel to each
other, and the ends of the slings at each end of the row of casks were
brought up and fastened to the ends of the balks. A small rope with an
eye at each end was fastened to each sling between each pair of casks.
These "braces," as they are technically called, were then carried once
round the nearest balk, and afterwards passed over to the other side,
carried round the opposite braces, returned to its own side, and finally
made fast to the standing part of the brace close below the balk by the
assistance of two half-hitches. Each pier of casks made in this fashion
can be completed in a marvellously short time by skilled engineers, and
in a reasonable period by infantry who have been exercised at such work
under the supervision of their scientific comrades. Transoms or beams
connect each pier with its neighbour, while chesses and outriggers can
be laid down as in a regular pontoon bridge. When crossing these cask
bridges great care, of course, has to be taken by officers in charge of
waggons and supplies to see that no undue weight is carried beyond what
must be theoretically allowed by the practical methods of calculating
the relative buoyancy of the casks. In addition to the redoubts thrown
up to protect the laagers at Amatikula and Inyezani, _tetes-de-pont_, or
bridge-heads, were also constructed to form a safeguard for pontoons.
The position on the Amatikula was admirable. It was not too steep,
having a hill which formed as it were, a sort of natural glacis, with a
slope of not more than 10 deg., which is about the most favourable for
infantry. The post could not be overlooked at any point by the enemy,
while the ground in front, being duly cleared, gave no cover. The flanks
rested upon natural obstacles easily strengthened. The post on the
Inyezani was situated upon an eminence which fell away to the rear, so
that its second line and reserves could be placed almost entirely under
cover. A lake on one side and a ravine on the other, both perpendicular
to the position, gave additional security to the fort, and these were
strengthened by every means at disposal. In the armament of these works
the guns were placed _en barbette_, as being more suitable to distant
fire, and as our antagonists had no artillery with which they could
reply, no anxiety was entertained as to their being dismounted. Guns, of
course, which are fired over a parapet instead of through an embrasure
have a far greater lateral range, and as the Zulu mode of attack
invariably includes rapid changes of front and frequent flank movements,
this mode of armament was calculated to prove the most effective, as
fire could be brought to bear in all directions. A further advantage is
not to be lost sight of, and this is, that guns fired over a parapet, or
_en barbette_, are higher, and could therefore plunge into such hollows
as the Zulus invariably made for when exposed to the rifle fire.
Gabions and screens of sandbags, to save the men from undue exposure,
were placed on each side of the guns. While No. 1 column was thus
employed in fort-building, Lord Chelmsford was moving from Utrecht to
Kambula and Durnberg, where the following corps were being concentrated,
to form his column:--General Newdigate's division, a formidable body,
consisting of the 2nd battalion 21st Fusiliers, the 2nd battalion 24th,
the 58th and 94th Regiments, with M and N batteries 6th Brigade Royal
Artillery: Brigadier-General Evelyn Wood, V.C., who had now with him the
13th and 90th Light Infantry Regiments, Tremlett's battery of Royal
Artillery, and Buller's Light Horse, strongly augmented. Major-General
Marshall's cavalry brigade was also attached to Lord Chelmsford's
command, and was composed of the King's Dragoon Guards, the 17th
Lancers, and Russell's Horse, lately augmented. Finally Major-General
the Hon. Hugh Clifford, V.C., C.B., whose former South African services
go back to 1846, remained in command of the base, depot, and reserves at
Durban, with Major T. Butler, C.B., of Red River and Ashanti fame, as
chief of his staff.

It has been stated that one of the points at which Crealock was to
concentrate his forces was Ginghilovo; but by the advice of high medical
authorities, Lord Chelmsford ordered the camp at Ginghilovo to be broken
up and shifted to a more favourable site near the Inyezani. The
Ginghilovo camp, as far as strategical position was concerned, was all
that the most fastidious engineer could desire, but upon sanitary
grounds it was decidedly defective. It was favourably sheltered in a
sort of hollow having defensive heights, which were to have been
entrenched on either side, but want of good water and other reasons
made it desirable to abandon the idea of converting it into a permanent
post. Two strong laagers were now, therefore, constructed, the first
about seven miles beyond Tenedos, and the other on the Inyezani river, a
few miles from where Pearson's first battle took place. The former of
these was called Fort Crealock, the latter Fort Chelmsford. As far as
position, and indeed construction, Fort Chelmsford had many advantages
not possessed by Fort Crealock. The nature of the soil upon which the
latter had been built had much to do with this; but there was but little
choice in the matter, as it was absolutely necessary that a strong post
should be built in this particular neighbourhood. The soil from which
most of the works had been thrown up was unfortunately of a light, sandy
nature, and of that particular unbinding description so disliked by
engineers. The high winds and rain which prevailed also quickly found
out the weak points in the armour of the fort, and working parties were
constantly employed in restoring what had been blown down or washed
away. Fort Chelmsford, on the contrary, had the advantage of a fine firm
soil, neither too heavy nor too light, while some quarries which had
been found within easy distance were of great assistance in supplying
the revetements, galleries, and platforms.

The fort itself was situated in a most picturesque part of the country.
The pass leading into the valley through which the river runs was most
romantic, winding through a delightful parklike country, crossed by
rapid streams of clear, ice-cold water, and, as it narrowed became quite
precipitous, the road dwindling to a mere footpath, so narrow that
mounted men could not ride more than two abreast. The kloof was flanked
on the precipice side by loose masses of rock, intermingled with trees
and bush, and tangled with monkey-ropes and creepers of all kinds. The
lower side sloped suddenly with a fall of about sixty feet to the bottom
of the valley, where a rapid mountain stream, gurgling as it rushes over
its rocky bed, fell soothingly upon the ear with a most dreamy yet
refreshing sound. The other road to the fort passed through a still more
beautiful valley, leading to the Inyezani kloof by a path cut in the
precipitous face of the hill, whose sides were clothed with "spekboem"
(elephant bush) and all kinds of flowering shrubs. The road looked down
a declivity of some 200 feet, and was worn in places into a perfect
staircase of boulders by successive torrents of tropical rain, and would
be quite impracticable for any other species of vehicle than a Cape
waggon. The edge facing the precipice had no kind of parapet, and the
dangerous nature of the pass was brought into still greater prominence
by the _debris_ of an ox waggon still lying broken up in minute
particles at the bottom of the valley, where it had evidently gone down
bodily with its span of oxen. The pass was, however, in spite of its
danger, very beautiful. Convolvuli ran over the bushes in rich clusters,
the star-shaped jessamine, with its pink undersides, and the magnificent
specimens of mesembryanthemums, or fig-marigolds, of which there are
hundreds of different species, having little transparent pellicles,
containing pure liquid, scattered over the leaves, giving them the
appearance of being sprinkled over with ice, and scarlet geraniums,
attaining a height of ten or twelve feet amidst the thick bush, glowed
on every side.

Meanwhile General Wood had been no less busy in and around his camp at
Kambula. On April 17th he made a reconnaissance, at Lord Chelmsford's
suggestion, to the Blood river, where a site had been chosen for a
permanently entrenched camp, to serve as a large depot for the main body
of the army. The ride was about fifteen miles, and the General and his
party passed through some beautiful valleys, and through a path cut in
the precipitous face of a pass whose sides were clothed with "spekboem"
(elephant bush) and various other flowering shrubs. After four miles'
cantering, they came to a part of the road which looked down a declivity
of some 200 feet. The scene was, however, most picturesque. Convolvuli,
the star-shaped jessamine, and the magnificent Strelitzia Reginae
flourished around, while scarlet geraniums attained to a height
unthought of in England. Two excellent sites for outposts were selected,
by which communication could be kept up with the large depot and
Kambula. These had commanding positions, and subsequently stone
buildings were solidly constructed, square in form, but loopholed and
flanked by ditch _caponnieres_, while each fort contained accommodation
for mounted men and a detachment of infantry. The Blood river, like most
South African streams, is subject to great fluctuations. At that period,
owing to recent rains, it was in flood, and in many places twenty and
thirty feet deep, running with a powerful current that rendered it most
dangerous to cross. The banks in most places are dangerously high, and
the sides are steeply scarped by the force of the stream. Fording-places
only occur at long intervals, so that when crossing in a flood, it is
not at all easy to hit them off, while if once carried down by the force
of the current the traveller has very little chance of escaping an
accident. The best way of crossing a flooded river, and that which was
adopted by regulation in Wood's column, is the Kaffir plan of taking off
some way up the stream, and so making a good allowance for driftage. Old
settlers and Boers often undress themselves completely before mounting
their horses, and carry their clothes and arms in a bundle on top of
their heads, in case of a capsize. The stirrups should, of course, be
crossed over the pommel of the saddle, and the horse allowed to have his
head, the rider guiding him by the snaffle, while in difficult cases it
is better for him to relieve his animal of weight altogether by floating
alongside and guiding his head in the proper direction. The Blood river
flows through some fine scenery, bordered, however, at times by
impenetrable bush and tangled vegetation of all descriptions, again
winding under lofty mountains of basaltic rock, beautifully variegated
with foliage, the thickets affording shelter to swarms of animal and
insect life, giving rise on a still evening to a perfect babel of sound,
amidst which the plaintive coo of the ringdove, the incessant chirp of
the cicala, the twittering of many-plumaged birds, and the hoarse
challenge of the bull-frogs are pre-eminent. Conspicuous among the birds
are to be noticed especially the little crested kingfisher, showing a
perfect gem of colour, several varieties of sugarbird--a species
somewhat allied to the hummingbirds, or "hoverers," which are
constantly to be seen flying restlessly over the aloe blossom--the
orange-throated lark, the blue jay, and the Zulu finch, whose black and
white plumage and red throat are set off by his long, streaming tail,
the feathers of which are so prolonged that when flying they nearly
overbalance him. The sandy plain on which the first fort was built was
covered with stunted karoo bush, and was full of Duyker gries-buck and
bush-buck, while two kinds of hares frequented the plain, the larger
kind grey-furred like the English rabbit, and a small red mountain
species, much better eating than the former, but which is scarcely
considered fit for the European table, on account of its scavenging
propensities.

Colonel Buller's Frontier Light Horse was also largely reinforced, its
last augmentation being Captain Marshall's new troop of eighty
well-armed and well-mounted men. A corps of Natal Mounted Kaffirs,
principally recruited from the Edendal Mission-station, had also been
added to this command, and they were found most trustworthy and
intelligent. They were armed with the short Martini-Henry carbine, and
drilled with equal steadiness to the European troopers.

Buller's Light Horse were destined to play so important a part in the
final advance on Ulundi, that a short description of their appearance
and equipment will not here be out of place. The first requisite was a
well-built, sober, and intelligent horseman, who in addition to being
able to shoot with the Martini-Henry, knew also how to groom, saddle,
and nurse his horse. This was required to be an animal neither leggy,
long-tailed, nor showy, but a clever, cobby sort of quadruped, who
could climb like a cat, and obey its master like a well-broken spaniel,
endued with a sound constitution, stout and wiry, and with a good turn
of speed. The saddlery was, as far as possible, of a uniform pattern,
and selected with considerable judgment and care. The great points were
that the tree should be wide enough in the fork not to pinch the
shoulders, but yet not so wide as to let the saddle right down on the
withers, with the seat long enough to sit in comfortably and to spread
the weight to some extent over the horse's back. As many of the Cape
horses are buck-jumpers, slightly-padded flaps were in vogue, although
not insisted upon. They are a great protection to the knees in riding
through bush. The saddle, of course, was provided with wallets in front,
which contained a couple of pairs of socks, one flannel shirt, a
tooth-brush, towel, and piece of yellow soap. Saddle-bags were worn only
when going on distant expeditions, but a tin mug, knife, fork, and
spoon, revolver, and flint and steel formed the invariable equipment of
these troopers, and with a cloak or blanket _a discretion_ made up the
weight carried by the horse. Although the mounted infantry were
volunteers drawn from various line regiments, there was sufficient
leaven of the cavalry element to insure efficiency in the mounted
duties. When the corps was first raised any kind of dress was worn, but
fashion subsequently exerted its sway, and a rather picturesque "get-up"
became almost universally adopted. Broad-leaved felt hats, with coloured
puggarees, brown cord breeches, "baggy" to the last degree, and so
patched with untanned leather that the original material had almost
disappeared; a sort of patrol jacket, all over pockets, dyed mimosa
colour, and also patched with leather of any colour on the shoulders and
wherever the gun was accustomed to rest, brown laced gaiters, coming
high up the leg, and even thighs, and a rough coloured flannel shirt,
entirely open at the neck; such was the most usual costume. The rifles
were of various patterns--long Martinis, Martini-Henry carbines, some of
Sharpe's old-pattern Sniders, and Snider carbines. No bucket, however,
was ever used, as it was considered better that a man unencumbered with
a long sabre should have his weapon slung to his body, and not to his
horse.

Another business that had also engaged Wood's time and attention was the
shifting of his camp. In point of fact, in spite of every precaution
taken, it was impossible to disguise the unpleasant fact that the very
air around the Kambula camp was tainted with blood and putridity, while
in the crevices and amidst the long, dank grasses which concealed the
bodies of those who after the battle crawled away to die unseen, lurked
the unmistakable odour of human decay and putrefaction. These were the
principal reasons which induced our chief to consult with the medical
authorities upon the advisability of moving away to fresh ground, and
this determination arrived at, its execution was not delayed for an
hour. In point of position, the site of our present laager was
preferable to the one quitted. The move was commenced and finished on
the same day, the 14th, and there was every reason to be satisfied with
the change. For beauty of site, as well as strategical considerations,
the position could scarcely be surpassed. It was as nearly as possible
a mile and a quarter west from the old camp, and towards the north-west
the view was indeed splendid. In front, and across the river, lay a
grassy plain, dotted pleasantly here and there with mimosa and
camel-thorn. This plain is hemmed in by the Zlobani mountains, on the
right by the spurs of the Inhlomiga, and away to the left by the
towering heights of the Makamba, rising to 4000 feet above the sea
level. The plain narrows backwards between the ranges into a "poort" or
valley, which, as it recedes away from the fort, presents a gloomy and
terrific aspect of solitude. Through it, and winding in and out amongst
tall boulders of rock, and under dangerous precipices, past wild and
gorgeous hollows, rank with the semi-tropical vegetation so peculiar to
this part of the country, runs a small footpath, by which, through heavy
clumps of thorny bush and over naked rock-bound ridges, the explorer
reaches the fertile valley, over which till lately frowned the
stronghold of Umbelini. To the north, and trending northwards ten or
twelve miles, spread the Elandsberg mountains, the lower portion of
whose sides are clothed with bush, presenting a sombre aspect, but the
upper portions of which, formed of huge crags and scarped walls of
granite and porphyry, glitter grandly in the sun, affording a glorious
and ever-changing panorama, stretching out for miles to where the range
terminates near the Pongolo river.

The new fort was not so elaborate in its design as the last, though,
perhaps, as a defensive work more formidable. It was a six-angled
enclosure, about sixty yards wide, having a wide and deep ditch,
drawbridge, and platform. From its eastern angles projected two long
curtain walls, which enclosed a roomy and well-guarded "kraal" for
cattle and horses. These curtain walls were protected by the fire of the
angles from which they sprung, and the cattle enclosure did not in the
least interfere with the _enceinte_, as it had its own gateway and
drawbridge. At the end of the kraal furthest from the fort was a sort of
irregular redoubt, with a deep ditch and earthen walls revetted with
gabions, and defended by a formidable lot of cactus and thorns laid
along the parapet. This constituted the fort, which was situated on a
flat plateau overhanging a sharp bend of the river, which, being
commanded by the guns, afforded a fine supply of water and an excellent
bathing-place for the officers and men. This change caused a great
improvement in the health of the division generally, and especially
amongst the invalids in hospital. The deaths reported up to this period
were the following: the Hon. Rudolph Gough, from dysentery; Lieut.
Alderton, drowned; Captain Sandham, of the 90th, and Assistant
Commissary Phillimore, of fever; Privates Achmuty and Moone, 13th Light
Infantry, of wounds received at Kambula.

On the 16th April there occurred an event that caused a great sensation
in the camp, the history of which throws into the shade so many tales of
romance and fictions of adventures in savage lands, and narrow escapes
by flood and field, that it deserves to be recorded at length.

Among the fifty horsemen who rode under the command of poor Weatherly
there were no better soldiers nor more popular comrades in their corps
than two young Frenchmen, named respectively Ernest Grandier, a
well-made, athletic, and powerful trooper, and Cramazan Baudoin, a stout
and equally stalwart fellow. Both these men were natives of Bordeaux,
and had come out to the colony together about five years before with the
intention of trying their fortunes in the wine trade. They had both
served their time in the French army, and when the present war commenced
could not resist the temptation of seeing service under such a gallant
commander as Weatherly, whose knowledge of France and the Continent
generally obtained him many excellent French and German recruits. On the
day of the Zlobani attack, owing to a thick fog which suddenly came on,
Colonel Weatherly's troops missed their road and were unable to effect
the junction with Buller ordered by Colonel Wood. The Zlobani mountain
was successfully carried by Colonel Buller and his horsemen at daylight
on the 28th March, and Colonel Wood, who was with Russell's horsemen a
few miles to the west, pushed forward on the same morning with his usual
small escort of the 90th mounted men and overtook Weatherly, who had
been all night trying to find the path. After the summit of the mountain
had been gained, under a heavy fire, during which Captain Ronald
Campbell and Mr. Lloyd were killed, Colonel Weatherly was ordered to
move round to the other flank, and make good his retreat by the eastern
side of the mountain. In endeavouring to effect this movement they
became surrounded and cut off by Zulus in front and rear. Weatherly was
killed in the endeavour to save his son; a few of the troopers managed
to cut their way, under the most terrible difficulties, through the
bloodthirsty hordes hemming them in on the far east of the mountain;
and Grandier and his friend, who had promised to keep together, found
themselves, with a couple more of their comrades, in the midst of about
a hundred yelling Zulus, while the bodies of their slaughtered friends
were being hurled over the rocks on every side. Grandier, although
slightly wounded in the side and wrist, was still mounted, but Baudoin's
horse had been shot early in the day, and he was, bruised and blown,
about to fall into the hands of the pursuers, when his gallant comrade
sprang off his stout little horse and placed the fugitive upon the
saddle, intending to mount also as soon as more favourable ground could
be reached. He saw, besides, that two of his comrades were not far in
front, and twice called upon them to turn and make a stand.
Unfortunately, the shouts of the Zulus and the clang of the conflict
drowned his voice, and they rode on, while Baudoin in the meanwhile was
compelled by a fresh rush of Zulus to turn up another path. Grandier now
endeavoured to follow the two horsemen on foot, and being tolerably
fresh he managed for some little time to keep on his legs. Passing some
large rocks, however, which jutted out half across the pathway, a large
piece of stone was hurled at him from above, and felled him to the
ground, and while half-stunned and insensible, he was overtaken by
half-a-dozen savages, and after receiving several severe blows from
knobkerries, was seized and pinioned with thongs. Even as they lifted
him, he could see in the distance that Baudoin had managed to gain the
troopers in advance, and the three seemed to have some chance of escape.
Umbelini's "big place," or kraal, is on the south side of the Zlobani,
and rather more than half way up from the valley. To this place, with a
considerable amount of abuse, Grandier was led. Wounded as he was,
beaten, bruised, and footsore, the prisoner was dragged round the slopes
of the mountain, and forced by assegais to keep up with his escort, who,
like all their countrymen, went at a sort of double stride or trot until
the outskirts of the kraal were reached. The sun was still high over the
mountain when they reached Umbelini's stronghold, and he was at once
placed under an escort in one of the Zulu huts, which formed part of the
outer circle of the defences. It was constructed of strong wickerwork,
and thatched with reeds and long grass, the door being merely a small
matted hurdle, which did not so entirely block the doorway as to prevent
those outside from looking in--an advantage of which the crowd of men,
women, and children did not fail to avail themselves to the fullest
extent. The walls were so thin that voices and conversation, even though
carried on in a moderate tone, could be distinctly heard from hut to
hut. After having been kept without food or water for some hours,
Grandier was brought the same evening before the chief, Umbelini, whose
appearance he described as at the same time villainous and ferocious in
the extreme. The interview was certainly an interesting one. The name
and power of the ex-Swazi chief were known and renowned all over
Zululand. The recent favour shown to him by Cetywayo, and his position
being now considered as more that of an ally than a vassal, gave to his
authority and prestige an influence they had never before possessed. So
blindly did his people believe in him, that it is more than probable
had further success crowned his efforts, he would have been found a
dangerous rival for the Zulu throne. Umbelini sat in front of the
principal hut, surrounded by about fifty of his favourite warriors,
while large numbers of savages appeared to be leaving the kraal in
different directions. Masses of natives, evidently belonging to outlying
tribes, were continually arriving, and reports were brought from time to
time to the chief, who gave his orders rapidly and without hesitation.
Upwards of a hundred principal men appeared to be in conference with
Umbelini, and the number seemed rapidly increasing. Many of these men,
Grandier had reason to believe, were ambassadors from Cetywayo, and
officers belonging to the force he sent to assist in Wood's destruction.
A covering of skins was fastened round the waist of each, and broad
rings of copper were worn round the ankles and arms of those of the
highest rank. Plumes of feathers adorned the heads of others who were
more scantily clad, and who were evidently dressed for battle; while
others again wore, something after the fashion of a Hungarian pelisse,
skins of panthers or other striped animals. The array of dusky savages
was certainly imposing, and it was doubtless arranged with a view to
effect. Each left hand supported a shield of tanned buffalo hide,
surmounted with plumes of ostrich feathers. The same hand grasped a long
bunch of assegais, while the right held the short stabbing-spear. Round
the necks of those of high rank was usually a necklace, made of some
wild animal's or possibly human teeth, from which hung a long knife or
dagger. About half of these warriors carried fire-arms, which were,
however, of every conceivable make and pattern. The enclosure into which
the prisoner was conducted, or rather hurled, was formed of the branches
of the mimosa, strongly and tightly interlaced, and from the height at
which it stood a splendid view could be obtained. All round were
situated the huts of the tribe, looking like large-sized beehives, while
close to each was a little walled space, in which the family wealth,
consisting of oxen and other cattle, was kept. Umbelini, in spite of the
sinister and ferocious aspect he wore, was not without a certain savage
dignity which evidently impressed not only his own people, but also the
indunas from Cetywayo. Perhaps the consciousness of their presence, and
the knowledge that this scene would be reported to headquarters, gave an
increase of grave majesty to his manner, and rendered him less repulsive
in his action and speech. There was a certain air of thought, and even
command in his face, which was in striking contrast to those around him.
His hair was plastered with the usual circlet of red clay, but his
forehead was encircled with a fillet of young ostrich feathers,
terminating in a single plume hanging behind. Heavy rings of polished
metal spanned the thick part of his arms, and lighter ones of the same
material were round his waist. The neck, thick, massive, and bull-like,
was adorned with a necklace formed of human teeth, from which hung the
usual knife, while over the broad black and hairy breast swept a
splendid ostrich feather. In the right hand he held his only weapon, a
kind of short but deadly knobkerrie, while his left hand rested upon his
naked knee. But for the low forehead, the large mouth, and the enormous
under-hanging animal lip, Umbelini might be described as a fine, indeed
splendid specimen of the South African warrior.

A chief named Nyamba, who had spoken a few words of English to Grandier,
now explained to Umbelini who the prisoner was, and under what
circumstances he had been taken, and at his suggestion a Zulu named
Nicohlomba, who was known to have once lived in Natal, was brought into
the enclosure as an interpreter. "What have your English dogs done with
the traitor Oham?" was the first question asked by the chief. "I hear
the English are going to make him king in our land." Grandier, with
composure, replied he knew nothing of Oham or the intentions of
Government. "What has become of Somtsen (Shepstone)?" was the next
query, and then, when the prisoner said he was equally ignorant on that
point, a whispered conversation took place between the two chiefs, who
ordered Grandier to be taken back out of earshot, while the indunas were
called up to confer. After five minutes' anxious deliberation, the
prisoner was again called up, and severely and minutely questioned as to
the numerical force at Kambula camp, and as to who was in command.
Through the Zulu interpreter, whose English was not much better than
that of the younger chief, Grandier explained that he was but a simple
trooper fighting for his daily pay, and knew little or nothing of the
questions demanded. Umbelini, who had been hitherto seated, rose up,
looked round the circle, and all at once poured forth a torrent of
words, which seemed to have a wonderful effect upon the crowd. He
seemed, as far as Grandier could glean, from the few Zulu sentences he
knew, to be a sort of welcome to some honoured arrivals (probably the
indunas from Ulundi), and when the Swazi chief had finished, a young
Zulu chief named Umlambongwenya (the Great Alligator) stepped forward
and warmly congratulated Umbelini on the battle of the previous day,
and, pointing to the prisoner, added some request. The circle of
warriors loudly applauded, striking their shields, and this brought a
large increase of numbers to the enclosure, where the applause became
almost deafening. Grandier now fancied that his hour was come, and
prepared to meet his death like a brave man; but to his astonishment, he
was taken out of the enclosure, and once more bound to a heavy log or
stump outside the hut, where he was allowed a little milk and a few
husks of maize. When the next day came, at daybreak, he was again
brought forth to be examined. A circle was now formed round the
unfortunate prisoner, who was firmly bound with thongs of raw hide to a
stout tree in the centre, while round and round the youngest of the
warriors danced, chanting a melancholy dirge, and keeping time upon his
naked body with the butt ends of their stabbing assegais. Suddenly these
proceedings were disturbed by the arrival of a new actor upon the scene.
A tall and elderly savage, almost a skeleton in attenuation, bounded
into the inner circle. This creature, who was a sort of witch doctor,
prophet, and sorcerer, commenced to execute a species of weird dance,
spinning round the circle like a teetotum, and uttering all the time
hideous and guttural sounds. All the warriors now remained silent, and
crouched down, still keeping the circle intact, and kept time to the old
savage's dance by monotonously beating the hard ground with their
knobkerries. Again did the wretched prisoner, now almost worn out by
cold, hunger, and thirst, believe that the torture was about to
commence, and once more was he agreeably disappointed, for, stopping
suddenly in the midst of his mad antics, the sorcerer flung himself
violently at the feet of Umbelini, and breaking as he did so a necklace
of human bones which he wore, pointed over his head towards the east,
where the sun was now lighting up the hills and valleys towards Ulundi,
in which direction, coming across one of the mountains some ten miles
off, could be seen, so clear was the pure atmosphere, a huge and dusky
column, marching with a cloud of skirmishers running along the terraces
of the rocks lower down. These were evidently the advanced guard of the
impi promised by Cetywayo to Umbelini for the destruction of Wood's
kraal; and as the troops came nearer and more into the sunlight, the
principal warriors round Umbelini executed a war-dance round the
sorcerer and Grandier, who had now given up all hope. The savages
yelled, leaped, threw themselves bodily into the air, and went through
all the motions of savage conflict, gesticulating, threatening,
pursuing, stabbing the fallen, and rehearsing, in fact, the performance
they soon expected to go through at the expense of the British soldiers.

The advent of the coming reinforcements caused the wildest excitement in
the camp of Umbelini, and the horror of Grandier's impending death was
infinitely aggravated by the helplessness he felt in not being able to
give any warning to his gallant chief and comrades. Still he was in some
degree consoled by the subsequent reflection that his commander at
Kambula was a most unlikely man to be caught unawares, and he therefore
resigned himself calmly to his fate. He was not left long in doubt as to
his destination, for the chief, Umbelini, considered that it would be a
compliment to Cetywayo to send him a white prisoner. While waiting,
however, to be taken to Ulundi, he could not avoid seeing the
preparations for the forthcoming attack, and, before his departure he
witnessed the march of Cetywayo's impi towards Kambula. Before
commencing the journey, his guards carefully stripped him of all his
clothes, which they divided amongst themselves and wore, and likewise
compelled him to carry their food. For four days, quite naked, with the
exception of his hat and a pocket handkerchief, which he had tied round
his waist, he was compelled by his inhuman escort to keep up with their
rapid pace. Barefooted, black and blue with bruises, and still suffering
from exposure and want of nourishment, this brave and devoted soldier
bore up against his torture. Each night he received a small handful of
green mealies, and was bound tightly with sharp and cutting thongs to a
thorn bush; and while he reposed, taking it in turns, one of his guards
always kept watch over him. Now and then a kraal was passed on the road,
and here old women and children, the only creatures who seemed left,
came out and reviled and scratched him. On the fourth day, towards
sundown, Grandier could tell, from what he overheard, that they were
drawing near to the king's kraal.

When close to the king's kraal, on the afternoon of the fourth day's
journey, one of Grandier's escort went forward to announce his arrival;
and after suffering the usual torment of being tied all night to a tree
(this time his clothes, now torn to rags, being given to him), on the
next day at noon he was brought before the king, whom he described as a
stout, medium-sized man, not so fat, however, or so tall as his brother
Oham. Almost the same questions were now put to the prisoner as he had
previously declined to answer at Zlobani, and this time the conversation
was carried on by means of a man who had the appearance of a mongrel
Dutchman, who was known to belong to Cetywayo's staff. In speaking of
his brother Oham the king seemed greatly enraged, and he vowed with many
emphases that he would mete out a terrible punishment to him and the
dogs who had dared to invade his country. Grandier, on being pressed,
saw no reason to deny the strength of General Wood's force or the name
of its commander, and he set it down at 4000 men, at which the king
seemed astonished.

Grandier described the king as having frequent interviews with him,
during which time he would have colonial newspapers, of which there were
a quantity, translated to him. This fact will probably be taken as the
means by which he had been able to learn Lord Chelmsford's movements;
and if he read the contemptuous tone in which our soldiers were spoken
of by these journals, it would, in a great measure, account for the poor
opinion he seemed, till Ginghilovo and Kambula, to entertain of our
commanders. The king made frequent overtures to his prisoner, to induce
him to join his army, and offered him wives, cattle, and land if he
could assist his half-caste Portuguese armourer in unspiking the two
guns taken at Isandula. These interviews continued for several days, and
finally, when nothing could be obtained by the offered bribes, he was
relegated to a hut, where, bound each night with painfully tight thongs,
he was watched by relays of old women--hideous hags, whose amusement was
to tear out his hair and stick pins into him whenever he endeavoured to
sleep. In the daytime, during eight days, he was regularly tied to a
tree, and beaten by assegais by every warrior whose fancy it was to pass
that way, the offers, however, being daily repeated. At last came a
messenger with the news of the Kambula battle, the Zulu defeat, and the
deaths of Umbelini and his brother; and the king's grief first, and rage
afterwards, exceeded all bounds. Grandier was then ordered to be
reconducted to Umbelini's kraal, and there to be tortured and put to
death as a sacrifice to the spirit of Umbelini, and on the following
morning, at daybreak, he was sent off, fortunately with an escort of
only two men, each armed with assegais, and one with a muzzle-loading
rifle. After ten miles' journey, the chief Inyaneme was met returning to
Ulundi, and he was informed by Grandier's escort of the fate awarded to
him. About midday on the 13th Grandier, worn out with heat and thirst,
bleeding and swollen feet, and nearly starved, sank upon the veldt, and
said he could go no further. He was then severely beaten, so severely
that he fainted; and his guards, fearing he would die in their hands,
gave him some water, and took him to a ripe mealy field to eat. Being a
man of iron constitution, he was soon revived; while, having his wits
about him, he thought that now or never was his hope of liberty. When he
had eaten a few mealies he returned to his escort, and found them
reclining--the most dangerous antagonist, the man with the rifle, being
in a sort of half-doze, while his comrade, who had just finished his
midday meal, was employed in packing away the remnants. Pretending to
totter, Grandier sank upon the ground, as near as possible to the man
with the gun, and while affecting to sleep, saw that no suspicion was
aroused. The gun could not be reached, but the assegais were not far,
and better, he thought, would be a bold struggle for life, even if he
failed and was killed in the encounter, than the agony of slow torture
he would otherwise endure. Watching his opportunity, and while the least
drowsy Zulu was turning his head to take some snuff from the little horn
usually worn in the ear, Grandier leant silently over, and noiselessly
removing the stabbing assegai from under the arm of the man with the
gun, with both his hands, for they were still tied, he nerved himself
with the courage of despair, and throwing his whole weight into the
blow, pinned the sleeping Zulu to the ground, while at the same instant
he seized the gun. The shock was fortunately so great that the thongs
were burst, and he had time to face the other savage with the loaded
weapon, and both wrists free. This spectacle so astonished the Zulu,
that, giving one glance at his impaled comrade, he darted away without
attempting to fight. Grandier, of course, saw the imprudence of risking
a shot, so first despoiling the dead man of his ammunition, he crept
away, and took refuge in the nearest bush. After the excitement of the
last hour he was not sorry to obtain some rest; accordingly he lay down
for twenty minutes or half an hour, and then thought he might venture to
reconnoitre as far as the top of the hill. He saw nothing; so, making
his way back to the bush, he remained till dark, when he made up his
mind to travel all night, finding his way luckily by his knowledge of
the position of the constellations. The next day from a high cliff he
watched a large body of Zulus quite close to him underneath, driving
cattle in the direction from which he had come, and he consequently did
not venture to move out of a cave he had found till they were well out
of sight. For two nights, and while subsisting on the small store of
mealies he had taken from the dead Zulu, he travelled, fortunately in
the right direction, but with more than one narrow escape on nearing
Zulu kraals. On Wednesday, the 16th of April, just three days after his
escape from his guards, this brave and resolute man espied, away in the
distance, what to his practised eye was a European scout. Fortunately he
was seen. As the remainder of the patrol came up to him he fell,
bleeding and exhausted, but undaunted, at the feet of some of Ralf's
Horse, who were exploring, and was by them carried back to Wood's camp,
where after some days in hospital he was able to resume duty and share
in the final attack on Ulundi.

A very few days after the battle of Kambula sufficed to clear the
neighbourhood of Zulus, though occasionally skirmishes kept occurring
farther off; and the latest news received was that Captain Prior, of the
80th Foot, proceeding with a mounted patrol from Luneberg in the
direction of the Upper Pongolo Drift, had fallen in with Umbelini's
force. Having trotted about ten miles from Luneberg he came up with
about twenty friendly natives, who informed him that a band of Zulus
were sweeping horses and cattle from the valley. Guided by these people,
he made such good use of his time that he soon came within 800 yards of
the marauders, who were driving away a large quantity of horses and
cattle. Captain Prior charged into and dispersed them, recapturing
eighteen horses and a number of cattle, and, leaving these in charge of
Lieutenant Ussher, he continued the pursuit, killing several of the
enemy, amongst whom was a younger son of Usirayo. It has since been
ascertained that Umbelini was of the party, and was so badly wounded in
the skirmish, that he subsequently died in a cave where he took refuge.
This Zulu party was subsequently ascertained to be a portion of the
force that fought at Zlobani, and one of the recaptured horses was
recognized as belonging to a mounted private of the 80th, attached to
Russell's Mounted Infantry.




CHAPTER VII.

  Lord Chelmsford with Wood at Kambula--Patrol by Buller--Capture of
    cattle--Scene from Kambula Kop--Zulu attack on patrol--Removal of
    Wood's camp to Mayegwhana--Wood's force--Scarcity of drivers and
    voorlopers--Newdigate at Conference Hill--Fort and depot at
    Conference Hill--Work of No. 1 column--Exciting incident with a
    convoy--Distribution of troops--Forts on the Tugela, Inyezani, and
    at Ginghilovo--System of guards and precautions against
    surprises--All ready for the advance--Recapitulation of military
    situation--Newdigate's forts at Landsman's Drift--Arrangements for
    garrisons in rear of advance--The Lower Tugela command--Patrol by
    Wood and Buller in direction of Isandhlwana--Second patrol by
    Buller--Zulu attack--The Prince Imperial on patrol--Reconnaissance
    in force to Isandhlwana and burial of the dead.


On the morning of May 3rd, Lord Chelmsford, with Prince Louis Napoleon,
Colonel Crealock, and Captain Molyneux, arrived at Wood's camp at
Kambula. His lordship went round the camp soon after his arrival, and
expressed himself uncommonly pleased with all the arrangements for the
discipline and internal economy of the laager, being particularly struck
with the quiet and easy way in which all the duties were carried on,
without noise, excitement, or delay of any kind. The whole force was
paraded in the afternoon for the General's inspection, and his lordship
took the opportunity of saying a few well-chosen and appropriate words
to each corps.

On the following morning (Sunday), after divine service was over, Lord
Chelmsford suggested to General Wood that it would be advisable to make
a reconnaissance in the direction of the White Umvolosi valley in view
of choosing a suitable position for an entrenched camp within easy
communication of Durnberg and Conference Hill. The day was fine and
pleasant, and Buller, who had proceeded in advance with a number of his
scouts, soon signalled back that the patrol were watched by a number of
Zulus, who now and then exchanged shots with his men from the
neighbouring hills. After riding about three miles towards the
south-east in the direction of the Zinguin Neck and Tonguin mountain,
the party entered a rugged part of the country near where the White
Umvolosi takes its rise, passing along by a winding road, flanked on
either side by the usual mimosa thorns, when suddenly was heard the
"whirr! whirr!" of a couple of leaden messengers, though as yet nothing
in the shape of an enemy could be seen. In a short time, however, Wood,
who had cantered on in front, saw with his practised eye sundry
copper-coloured bodies creeping along in the bushes below about half a
mile off. They were so intent upon watching Wood and his group of
horsemen that they did not at first see that about a score of Buller's
men had gained their flank, and almost cut them off. It was a most
exciting scene as the mounted scouts were observed looking about for
something in the shape of a path by which to descend the cliff which
formed at this part almost a sheer precipice of some 300 feet. They,
however, managed the descent by a rough cattle-path, sending down
showers of loose stones and _debris_ before them as their horses half
slid, half scrambled to the base. All this time the main body were
crossing a wide plateau dominating the White Umvolosi valley and the
river, which wound away at the base of the cliff. Looking over the
precipitous sides, they could perceive a small herd of cattle penned up
in a kraal in the centre of a little bush-covered flat adjoining the
stream. As it was thought just possible that they might capture some
prisoners, and obtain information of what Zulu forces were in the
neighbourhood, and as cattle-hunting is one of the great ends of Zulu
warfare, half a dozen of the General's escort were detached to see what
they could effect. Getting down the cliff as well as they could, and
then winding through the dense thorns in the valley, they soon found the
kraal, and, having collected the cattle, began to return. But this was
certainly a puzzle upon which they had not calculated. To ascend the
cliff by the way they had come was impossible, whilst on the other side
ran the river, wide, and apparently very deep. Undoubtedly the only way
out of the difficulty was to find a ford. They were, therefore, busily
occupied in searching for one, when they perceived a mounted scout, sent
by Buller, on the other side of the stream, who was gesticulating very
excitedly, and trying to warn them of some danger. As it was impossible
at the distance to hear what he said, one of the mounted men was sent
down to the bank, and he came back with the news that the bush behind
was full of Zulus. The warning did not come a moment too soon, for
within fifty yards of them came a crowd of naked savages, yelling and
flourishing their assegais and rifles, in evident triumph at the success
of their stratagem. Shouting, therefore, to the men who were staying
behind with the cattle, the rest put spurs to their horses and galloped
along the banks of the river, looking out all the time for any sign of a
ford by which they might cross. Fortunately this situation was seen by
that portion of the party who had gone round by the opposite bank, and
they had come down to meet their comrades, having hit upon a ford higher
up the stream. It was, however, a close shave, so close indeed that by
the time they had reached the other side of the river by the ford, which
was up to the horses' girths, and which they splashed through at a
gallop, the Zulus had actually reached the bank, and were only prevented
from capturing the two men left behind with the cattle by some
well-directed shots. The yells of baffled rage from the disappointed
Zulus were answered by a ringing cheer of triumph from the little party
as they rode up the steep which led to the column. The enemy, however,
still continued to appear at various points along the sides of the
hills, and in some places appeared to be dropping like monkeys from crag
to crag, and it was easy to see that had not these scouts been mounted
they would have been greatly at a disadvantage on such difficult ground.
In fact, part of the line of scouts was in a valley surrounded by
mountains, and from which egress, in case of a struggle setting in,
would be difficult. They, therefore, hurried to get upon ground more
favourable for cavalry movements. As they did so the rear sections had
twice to turn and drive off the enemy, who began to come closer to
their rear. Facing about, one of the sergeants charged right at them
with half a dozen men, and silenced their fire on the right. Several
more galloped to the left rear, where the fire was as close as fifty and
sixty yards, and on this occasion all had some narrow escapes. However,
in about a quarter of an hour they rejoined the main body, having driven
off the Zulus. Their horses' heads, however, had hardly cleared the
bushes when shriller yells than before arose along the mountains in
front, and they had only commenced riding into the plain when another
sharp rifle fire began crackling along the ridges of the Zinguin Neck.
As they steadily advanced this firing ceased, and the scene along the
hills, which seemed to terminate to the west in a stupendous cliff,
became more varied and interesting. Signal fire after signal fire of
grass was lighted, and broad columns of smoke rolled into the air, and
these being repeated from summit to summit, evidently showed that their
movements were carefully watched. A party of horsemen was now despatched
to scour the valley on the left front, and all along the woods, which
fringed the sides of the steep hills in front, jets of smoke marked
their downward progress. As the crackling and flashing approached the
bush where the hills met the plain, individual forms of Zulus could be
seen, and then coming swiftly towards the main body there broke out from
the dust and smoke a small mob of cattle, quickly followed by the
skirmishers galloping in. Three small kraals were found to be in flames,
fired by the Zulus as they retired with their cattle before the advance
of the English horsemen. Two mobs of oxen could be seen, numbering some
hundreds, which were being hurried away to inaccessible places. The
ground in front of the English force was of a loose and calcareous
nature, and, occupying as it did the space between mountain and river,
was torn and cut up in every direction by deep white gullies, by which
the Zulus were retiring sheltered from attack. The ridges between these
gullies afforded the enemy additional shelter, being grown over with
scrubby brush. Half the cavalry were now sent on to secure the
approaches to the river, and guard against any surprise in that
direction, and in a quarter of an hour, protected by the horsemen in
rear, the whole body had passed over in safety.

The General, with his escort, had during the morning's march passed two
of his old camps on the Kambula, and about twelve miles further on came
to a piece of elevated rock or hillock, whence they had a capital view
of White Umvolosi valley, while to the south-west they looked down upon
the Blood river, Conference Hill, and the dark shadow of the Durnberg
range beyond. The Zinguin Neck, where the White Umvolosi has its source,
stretched away at their feet, and farther behind they looked upon the
southern slopes of Zlobani, rising in ledges or bastions in the
distance. Just underneath the shoulder of Conference Hill could be seen,
in the bright sunlight, the white tents of Newdigate's division, and in
the opposite direction was a magnificent view of the precipitous
terraced ledges of the Zlobani, down which our brave fellows had been
driven on the fatal 28th of March. As soon as they reached the top of
the Zinguin they were met by Buller, whose people were actively engaged
in harassing a number of Zulus who were keeping up a desultory and
harmless fire from the krantz in front. The breeze now cleared away the
mists which hung over the valley, and away to the west could be made out
what seemed to be a village perched upon a terrace half way up the berg.
The face of this terrace presented a wild and singular appearance. What
at a distance had appeared level and almost unbroken was in reality a
sort of amphitheatre not less than 1000 feet high, crescent shaped, and
with a terrace fortified by low stone walls springing from rock to rock,
and intersected by enormous fissures or caves connected with each other,
and from which cover a dropping fire was kept up. Leaving their horses
in charge of some few of the men, some twenty riflemen dashed into these
rocks, where the cover would equally shelter them with the enemy. From
this moment the ringing of shots was incessant, and it soon became
evident that the Zulus were in force in a favourable position to annoy
the column until they were expelled. The face of the crescent seemed as
if some powerful eruption had flung from the top of the hill on to its
sides tons of black and jagged rocks and stones, which, piled in wild
confusion and irregularity on top of each other up the face of the
position, presented innumerable caves and crannies, from which, as well
as from stone walls, jets of smoke and bullets were continually issuing.
The dismounted men, meanwhile, began to swarm up the right and left hand
ridges, potting away as they advanced, while a few moved up the centre,
firing when necessary and taking advantage of what cover was afforded.
Several exciting incidents now occurred. As these sharpshooters gained
a better and more commanding position for their concerted attack, the
Zulus, finding the situation rather too hot, one by one began to escape,
and the moment a dusky form was seen gliding through the thorns half a
dozen rifles rang out, sometimes succeeded by the crashing sound of the
body of a huge savage rolling from a high rock to the stones below. It
was simply wonderful to see in what small crevices these big Zulus had
squeezed themselves. Sometimes three or four would get together in one
spot, generally a small cave almost inaccessible from above or below,
and which could only be approached by working along the sides, under the
fire of dozens of other caves and loopholes, every one of which seemed
scooped out for the purpose of creating a cross-fire. As, therefore, to
force home an attack on such positions was not the present object of
Lord Chelmsford, whose purpose and that of General Wood had already been
achieved in the survey they had made, the further retreat of the savages
was not molested, and the order was given to remount and prepare to
return to camp. As the mounted men extended to cover the rear of the
column they were greeted by yells from the few Zulus they had not
dislodged, and a few parting shots were sent after them as they
descended the slope.

On the following morning Wood's entire force paraded at daybreak, tents
were struck, waggons packed, and they bade farewell to Kambula range,
upon which they had been so long encamped in various positions, and set
out for Mayegwhana, where a fresh camp was pitched. Mayegwhana, or
Queen's Kraal, is as nearly as possible three miles north of Bemba's
Kop, on which some months ago, and before he went on to Kambula, General
Wood was encamped. In this new camp Wood had with him the following
troops:--The 13th Light Infantry, under Major England [their colonel,
Gilbert, having gone into Utrecht on a few days' well-earned sick-leave.
Of this fine corps Captains Cox and Persse, both rather badly wounded at
Kambula, were rapidly progressing towards convalescence. Poor Leet, the
other major, still suffered from his crushed foot, which was caused as
far back as February, but which accident did not prevent his saving a
comrade during Zlobani's fatal day, and for which General Wood
recommended him for the honour of a Victoria Cross]; the 90th Light
Infantry, under their own commanding officer, Colonel Cherry; the two
corps making up a compact and admirably homogeneous brigade of 1200. One
thousand men of Buller's and Russell's Horse, now in better condition
than ever, and excellently mounted, with a body of Royal Engineers and
Major Tremlett's battery of mounted guns; a total of 2000 Europeans, and
about 1200 Native Contingent, or in all about 3200 men. With this force,
and supported actively from its base, there could be no difficulty or
danger in pushing on, and it was no secret that the inactivity they were
forced to endure did not lie at General Wood's door, for he on more than
one occasion suggested substitutes for waggon transport--the cause of
the prevailing inaction. Drivers and foreloopers were what could not be
obtained. One of such is required for each span of oxen, the driver, who
stands on the front seat of the waggon and wields an enormously long
whip, and the _voorloper_, who leads in front. Ever since the day of
Isandhlwana, and on account of the panic which prevailed from that date,
due to the massacre of the natives then employed, it was found
impossible to obtain their services in adequate numbers; and even of
those still in employ numbers were continually deserting, for the
purpose of returning to their respective homes within the border.
Meanwhile Wood was not idle, but, day by day, was making the best use of
the scanty material at his disposal. The few drivers and foreloopers he
had been able to retain were sent for and paraded before the General,
who briefly explained to them that in future they should be armed, fully
organized, receive regular rates of daily and liberal pay, while their
personal safety should be looked after by the employment of strong
guards and convoys wherever they had to march. This, it must be allowed,
was much wanted, and gave some grounds for complaint, as in the earlier
stages of the campaign the waggons on too many occasions were not only
allowed to straggle, but were left to shift for themselves. Behind
General Wood's new camp, about ten miles off, and at right angles to
Bemba's Kop, was Conference Hill, at which place General Newdigate was
concentrating the bulk of his command. He had with him at this time the
King's Dragoon Guards, the left wing of the 17th Lancers, part of the
21st Fusiliers and 58th Regiments, with N Battery 6th Brigade Royal
Artillery. Seven miles away from Conference Hill was Doornkop, and here
were the 94th Regiment, three companies of the 21st, and four of the
80th. Conference Hill was within a very short time rendered practically
impregnable by works constructed by the 94th Regiment, who, under
Colonel Malthus, encamped at this spot; it also became one of the chief
depots for the supplies of Newdigate's division. This depot was formed
upon a kop, or rising ground, to the east of the larger hill, and was
protected by three exceedingly well-built forts, constructed _en
echelon_, so as to afford a mutual and most effectively-planned flanking
defence. The largest of these forts was a regularly traced bastion of
polygonal form, with the length of its lines of defence in due
proportion to the range of the weapons likely to be employed. The
exterior sides of this work were 150 yards in length, and the parapet
was sufficiently thick to resist anything but artillery fire. The flanks
were drawn at right angles to the faces, so as to give a fire which
could sweep the ditches and ground in front of the bastions. A couple of
ramps were cut in the prolongation of the ditch of the face, whose
surface passed through the crests of the flanks and lines drawn parallel
to the bottom of the counterscarp of the opposite flank, and about two
feet and a half above them. This fort was garrisoned by the headquarters
of the 94th, and the other two, of somewhat smaller dimensions, by a
company each of the Royal Engineers and the 94th. Considerable pains
were expended in the construction of these works, which did the
Engineers and the 94th the greatest credit for the workmanlike line and
scientific character of their tracing and position. The plan of these
works somewhat resembled that adopted by General Newdigate at Landsman's
Drift. The cattle laager was composed of waggons formed into square,
while at each salient angle were small forts--one of which had
artillery--and the whole were joined corner to corner, so that a
straight line drawn between their extreme points would pass through the
centre of each square. By this means a perfect flanking defence was
obtained, as each fort commanded two faces of the laager. Meanwhile the
First Division had been by no means idle, in spite of their difficulties
as to transport and the attacks of camp fever, which had been so much
more frequent with them than with No. 2 column. From their base at Fort
Tenedos a convoy was started every eight days to Fort Chelmsford, on the
Inyezani, and its regular departure did much to expedite the forward
movement of that force. On the 5th May, however, a somewhat more
exciting episode took place. A convoy of the usual description was
paraded on that day for the conveyance of stores and ammunition to the
Inyezani. Fifty waggons, not too heavily laden, with 3000 barrels on
each, were detailed under the protection of a convoy, composed of C
Troop of Lonsdale's Horse, commanded by Captain Hampden Whalley. From
the foot of the fort whence the convoy started stretches a sandy plain,
dotted with trees, and containing about 3000 acres. This, as it gets
narrowed into a gorge between the river and the mountains, becomes
broken, being intruded upon in every direction by foot-hills and
watercourses. The fort cattle were grazing upon this plain under the
charge of some of De Burgh's horsemen, when, as the convoy was passing
across the first drift over the river, about two miles from the fort,
but out of sight of the sentries, suddenly there sprang out from gully
and kloof hundreds of swarthy warriors, who set to work, some shouting
and firing, to try and drive the cattle away through the pass, whilst
others, by far the larger portion, made a combined onslaught upon the
leading and rear waggons of the train. The convoy had, therefore, a
double duty to perform--to assist De Burgh's men in recovering the
grazing cattle, and also to beat off the Zulus who were attacking the
waggons. Their object was to intercept the cattle now being run off at a
rapid pace, and to secure the waggons in front and rear, which had been
partly surrounded by the enemy. Whalley at once despatched a messenger
to the fort for assistance, and remaining himself, as in duty bound, to
repulse the waggon attack, detached about twenty of his best men, under
his subaltern, to overtake and bring back the absconding oxen. The
waggons were soon out of danger; for the men dashed at the Zulus in such
a determined manner that the attacking party, not very numerous, soon
bolted into the bush, but the other portion of the skirmishes deserves
description. After a gallop of a mile the leading troopers in pursuit
came up with the enemy and the cattle, which were now all in confusion
and involved in the broken waterworn hills at the foot of the pass, and,
on looking back, they were astonished and considerably mortified to find
that they did not appear to be followed by the rest of their party!
Undauntedly, however, the sergeant in command pushed on, firing steadily
and with fatal effect from the saddle, and, with his gaze fixed firmly
upon the leading cattle, worked his way through the frightened oxen to
the front. He was well and gallantly followed by half a dozen men, who
had managed to keep up with him in his rapid ride in pursuit, and these
fine fellows, nothing daunted by the numbers of the enemy, kept potting
away at every Zulu that showed his head from behind the rocks, to which
most of them had now retreated. Suddenly the low banks of the ravine, up
which they were now rushing, swarmed on both sides with the enemy, and
it was evident that the driving of cattle into this position was one of
the usual Zulu artifices by which they were so often successful. The
Zulus kept up a feeble and ill-directed fire from the crevices of rock
where they had taken cover, and all this time the troopers were employed
in heading and turning back the cattle, a task which would have been far
beyond their best energies had not an episode occurred which materially
changed the aspect of affairs. Alone, in the midst of a score of
enemies, the sergeant fought steadily on, loading, firing, advancing,
and driving back the cattle as if he bore a charmed life. The Zulus
seemed paralyzed, and shunned his vicinity, for when he trotted to where
a shield or assegai was seen, it immediately disappeared. He had,
however, great need of help, for he had come to his last cartridge; but
at that moment he felt a chance of life, as he heard the welcome shout
of an English cheer, and, looking in the direction whence the sound
seemed to come, he saw rapidly descending the steep krantz above the
remaining horsemen of his party, who had chosen another and easier path
up the ravine, which enabled them to take the Zulus in flank. The affair
was now over; and although no prisoners were taken, the blood-stains on
the rocks and boulders around proved that there must have been many
wounded. The cattle were all recovered, and Whalley's convoy reached its
destination without further molestation.

Great changes for the better had also been made in the distribution of
the First Division. The 88th had been shifted from their former
position on the extreme left front of Fort Tenedos to the commanding
hill in its immediate front. In like manner they had been advanced _en
echelon_ to the extreme left front, and the Buffs had been moved in
laager to the right rear of the 88th; while Lonsdale's Horse held the
hill formerly occupied by the 99th. The Naval Brigade were in camp
behind the fort, with Cook's Horse posted in their immediate vicinity,
and the Mounted Infantry upon a hill immediately below Lonsdale's Horse,
and a portion of the Artillery were on the old ground of the Engineers,
with the Native Contingent in their front. The forts also belonging to
this division on the Tugela, Inyezani, and at Ginghilovo were by this
time completed, and admirably manned. To guard against any surprise
pickets were posted in advance and on the flanks of these works, to
watch every line of approach, and especially those where the country
afforded cover and concealment. Sentries were placed at the salients of
all entrenched works, and double sentries at the entrances, while
whenever a drawbridge had been made it was carefully drawn up at sunset.
Occasional patrols during the day, and frequent patrols during the night
and in thick weather were not relaxed, and the result was that the
Zulus, seeing such activity, scarcely ever molested the working parties.
In the ditches of the four coast-line forts were placed at intervals
quantities of dry straw and brushwood, with oil and tar poured on in
profusion, to fire in case of attack, and trustworthy soldiers were told
off to fire these on the approach of the enemy. Sandbag loopholes were
constructed on the tops of each parapet, while large beams, supported
at intervals by sods of earth, were used for the same purpose.
Fire-shells were placed in readiness to be rolled into the ditch. The
distances from each parapet of all conspicuous objects was carefully
measured and communicated to the garrison, and rods with whitewashed
tops, so as to be visible at night, were erected, to mark the various
ranges.

Port Durnford also had been reported practicable, and a fort and depot
was being established there.

It was now the end of the third week in May, and all was ready for an
advance, with the exception of the dearth of transport beasts and
vehicles. It will be well, therefore, to briefly recapitulate the
military situation. Crealock, now at Fort Chelmsford, was to connect
himself with Port Durnford, and then to move along the coast with 10,000
men, supported and supplied by the Naval Brigade from Port Durnford.
This was called No. 1, or the First Column. The second division in the
north under Lord Chelmsford, his immediate subordinates being Generals
Wood, Newdigate, and Marshall, was to move from Dundee, their advanced
posts being already Doornkop, Landsman's Drift, Ladismith, Conference
Hill, and Mayegwhana. General Newdigate was now at Dundee, and had with
him the King's Dragoon Guards, under Colonel Alexander; the left wing of
the 17th Lancers, under Major Boulderson; the headquarters 21st
Fusiliers, the 58th Regiment, with N battery, 6th Brigade, Royal
Artillery. At Doornkop, about seven miles from Dundee, were three
companies of the 21st, and four companies of the 80th. Wood occupied the
most advanced point at the front, at a place called Mayegwhana, or the
Wolf's Kraal, and had with him the 13th and 90th Light Infantry, 1000 of
Buller's and Russell's Horse, a strong native contingent, and a battery
of six 7-pounder mountain guns. Again at Conference Hill were a company
of Royal Engineers and the 94th Regiment, under their commanding officer
Colonel Malthus. In addition to Colonel Malthus's regulars there were at
Conference Hill about 150 Basutos, some volunteers, and a few Natal
natives, all under Captain Birkett. Dundee and Conference Hill were the
two most important bases of General Newdigate, and convoys of supplies
were daily arriving at each. At Landsman's Drift there were three strong
forts, with an intervening space for cattle. These had been designed by
General Newdigate himself, and were constructed _en echelon_. They were
occupied by the 21st, 58th, and five companies of the 2nd battalion
Natal Native Contingent. These three entrenched field-works were
admirably constructed, so as to afford each other mutual defence. In
tracing these works great care had been taken that the angles should be
directed upon inaccessible ground, such as a krantz, a marsh, or a pond.
None of the faces were exposed to enfilade, and the longest were so
traced that they looked towards the ground over which an enemy would
most likely advance, and which could be swept by the fire of the
garrisons. These works were all somewhat in the shape of demi-bastions,
and were constructed on a square or polygon, whose exterior sides were
about 150 yards. The parapets were only breast high, but unusually
thick, and, allowing for the penetration of rifle-fire at ten yards
being twenty-one inches, the parapets had been constructed six feet,
having a base 3.1, while the interior slopes are maintained by strong
revetements. Works of this character have certain advantages, which are,
that they require less length of parapet than a bastioned fort;
although, on the other hand, there are these disadvantages, namely, that
there is on each side one dead re-entering angle, i.e., an angle
perfectly screened from fire, and that the ditches are not so perfectly
defended as they should be. Each of the battalions above named built one
of these demi-bastioned forts, and the tents of the respective corps
were pitched outside two of the faces, with advanced pickets thrown out
well to the front. In the interval between the right rear angle of the
most advanced fort and the left front of the second demi-bastion was the
cattle laager--a most important matter in Cape warfare. This arrangement
enabled the fire from the first fort to rake the ground in its front and
left faces, while the fire from the supporting work could do the same
duty for the rear and right faces. From this description it will be
understood that the works spoken of effectually covered the cattle
laager, as well as afforded perfect cover for their garrisons. These
three entrenched positions at Landsman's Drift were the delight and the
pride of the regiments who built them; for although the Royal Engineers
had been employed in general superintendence, it was well known that the
actual designs were made by General Newdigate, and the labour carried
out by the 21st and 58th.

The arrangements for the garrisoning of the posts in the rear of the
advance were as follows:--Forts Pearson and Tenedos had each assigned to
them two companies, while a reserve upon which they could draw was
placed at Stanger. Upon the Lower Drift, down as far as Kranz Kop, the
river was to be guarded by 2000 of the border natives, under Captain
Lucas, supported by 130 Natal Volunteers stationed at Thring's Post.
Thirteen hundred men of the Native Contingent garrisoned Fort Cherry, in
rear of the abandoned post which formerly covered the ferry drift, while
the border for seven miles was watched by 2000 natives, under the
superintendence of Mr. Wheelwright, at Hermanberg. Greytown was held by
a garrison of two companies. Three thousand natives lined the Umzinga
border, and Helpmakaar was held by the Natal police and Carabineers. The
defence of the new entrenchment at Rorke's Drift, now called Fort
Melville, was entrusted to three companies of the 2-24th, which regiment
was anything but pleased at the preference which had been given to the
first battalion, newly arrived from England, by allowing it to
participate in the active operations, while the second battalion was
detained in the rear. There were to be four other companies of the
2-24th, and of these one was to hold Landsman's Drift, while two were to
be left at Conference Hill. At Balte Spruit two companies, and at
Burgher's Laager, Utrecht, and Luneberg each one company, formed the
respective garrisons. It will be observed, therefore, that the line of
the Tugela was but thinly defended, but, on the other hand, there was a
strong chain of posts on the advance along the coast. The force at this
period in the Lower Tugela command may be summarized as follows:--The
2-3rd Foot, the 57th, the 3-60th Rifles, the 88th, the 91st, the 99th,
or six battalions of infantry, mustering some 5400 bayonets, with M
battery 6th Brigade, O battery 6th Brigade, 8th battery 7th Brigade, and
the 30th company Royal Engineers. To these may be added the Naval
Contingent, and with the native force the total amounted to quite 10,000
men.

But before the general advance was commenced there remained one sad duty
to be performed--the burial of those who were still lying on the fatal
field of Isandhlwana. It will be asked why this had not been done long
since? The answer is simple: want of cavalry, want of transport, and
want of opportunity. Since the day upon which the fatal surprise took
place, there had rarely been an hour to spare from the trying ordeal of
official duty, while the task of providing for the living and feeding
the daily reinforcements had left no time to attend to the dead. The
moment, however, Marshall's troopers were upon the frontier, it was felt
that something could be done, and every measure and precaution were
taken to bring about a satisfactory result. To avoid any chance of a
mishap or failure, Lord Chelmsford personally consulted General Wood
when at Kambula, and subsequently at Utrecht, and it was decided that,
previous to any formidable cavalry patrol being undertaken in force, a
series of short reconnaissances should be carried out by the
indefatigable Buller and his ubiquitous horsemen. The purpose of this
plan was twofold. In the first place, these perpetual scoutings so
harassed the natives, that the majority, and certainly the wealthier
majority, heartily wished the war was over; secondly, it was of great
importance to learn the whereabouts of the two impis which it was well
known had been for months waiting for the return of English troops to
Isandhlwana, and this information was effectually obtained by Buller's
zeal and activity. The first and most important reconnaissance was made
by General Wood in person, who ordered a night-parade of a selected body
of horsemen on the 9th May. The force on this occasion consisted of
sixty Frontier Light Horse, under Captain D'Arcy; thirty Mounted
Infantry, under Captain Brown; and forty Natal Native Infantry, under
Captain Woodgate, 4th Regiment, General Wood's staff officer. Their road
at first was an easy descent into the fertile plain that was spread out
like a map at their feet; it then wound up in a somewhat zigzag manner
by the sides of a steep hill, flanked on the one side by a ravine, and
on the other by a dense bush. Presently a black body was seen by the
advanced scouts, whom Buller always sent out as "feelers," creeping
through the bushes on the left, and in our rear came a second. No shot,
however, was fired, but a Zulu perched high above, and sheltered in the
bush, hails the passing troops in a jeering manner, and asks them to
come and see his kraal. Orders had been given to the soldiers not to
fire unless fired upon, and this act of forbearance seemed to wondrously
puzzle the native followers, who were with difficulty prevented from
"potting" the interlocutor. They had made about ten miles, when the sun
began to shine over the edge of the horizon in all the splendour of an
African morning. The dew had fallen heavily during the night, and
consequently the first rays of the sun produced a mist, which hung like
steam over the valleys. This, however, soon cleared away and left the
atmosphere clear and transparent, so that the far-off ranges seemed
within a short distance of the column, whereas they were distant at
least thirty or forty miles. This clearness of course was now a great
advantage and aid to the English party, as it enabled the scouts to
observe far ahead, and rendered surprise less possible than if the mist
and fog had prevailed. Pushing on now at a canter, they soon came to a
trek, which led them between two tall hills called Nkandi and Mhundla.
Here in the kloof were two deep spruits or streams, which, however, were
avoided by hugging the sides of Mount Mhundla, and it was noticed that
waggons could be dragged without any considerable difficulty along this
path. The sun was now well above the horizon, and General Wood decided
to halt, off-saddle, and let the men have their breakfasts. The place
selected for the "off-saddle" was a slightly wooded ravine, amidst the
rocks of which ran a clear stream over a grassy and pebbly bed, while
behind was a range of rocky hills, the summit of which was crowned by
huge masses of rock, looking from the distance like vast Titanic slabs
placed by giant strength in their present position. Before was an
undulating plain, bounded on the right by a river, and on the far left
by a dense bush.

After one hour's rest the order was given to mount, and away they went,
men and horses thoroughly refreshed and eager for the road. The bush was
gradually getting thicker, and the road wound by a deep descent into a
thickly-wooded valley. Every one of the party instinctively felt that
Zulus must be near, and bracing up the body and nerves each man prepared
for attack. The leader, too, thought the place suspicious, and made his
dispositions accordingly. Two bodies of horsemen, each a dozen strong,
were sent out to make a wide detour on either flank, while flankers were
also sent out on either side of the column. The mounted men who formed
the advanced guard closed to their centre, while those who had been
extended in skirmishing order in the rear had orders to close up to the
column when the defile was approached, ready to dismount, should it be
found impracticable for horses. It is pretty well known that the most
frequent point of attack in Zulu warfare is the rear of an enemy's
column, particularly when the attack can be made in a defile. The head
of the column is often allowed to pass unmolested by the Zulu general,
who waits patiently until the main body has gone by, and then commences
a furious onslaught upon the rear, which will perhaps be followed up for
miles. So these precautions were not superfluous. Where the column now
was could be seen the traces of burnt kraals and partly destroyed mealie
gardens, showing unmistakably that a skirmish had taken place not long
ago, and Colonel Buller at once recognized the locality as the spot
where, some ten days before, his scouts had had a skirmish with Zulus,
on the occasion when an impi was reported as being in the neighbourhood
of Balte Spruit. The anticipations of attack were soon verified, as a
couple of shots rang out from the right wall of the defile, and this was
at once followed by a tremendous shout coming from the rear. The leading
files of the little party had meanwhile reached the mouth of the gorge
without any casualty, and General Wood and his escort on hearing the
firing at once galloped back to the rear, from whence it came, and saw
in a moment that Zulus were swarming on the sides of the cliff as if to
attack in rear. The bugle at once sounded the halt, and the word was
suddenly given for twenty men to wheel about and charge back in full
force upon the unsuspecting foe, who imagined no doubt that he was going
to be allowed all the fun of peppering the rear without receiving any
punishment in return. With a hearty English shout these fellows, led by
Buller, went straight at the enemy, and bursting over rough ground and
through the high and tall grass drove the flying Zulus in panic before
them. Buller's appearance at this moment combined an element of the
heroic and the terrible with a strong infusion of the ludicrous and
burlesque. Leading his men on at a swinging canter, with his reins in
his teeth, a revolver in one hand and a knobkerrie he had snatched from
a Zulu in the other, his hat blown off in the _melee_, and a large
streak of blood across his face, caused by a splinter of rock from
above, this gallant horseman seemed a demon incarnate to the flying
savages, who slunk out of his path as if he had been--as indeed they
believed him--an evil spirit, whose very look was death. The tables were
now completely turned; the whole of the column is safely through the
poort; one or two Zulus are seen limping away, assisted into the bush by
their comrades, while the rest stand not upon the order of their going,
but rush pell-mell to gain the shelter of the neighbouring caves. One
large Zulu is seen to be badly hit, yet he manages to crawl away out of
sight, and doubtless is assisted to escape by his fellows.

The fun is becoming fast and furious. Buller's men are in their glory.
They have dashed into the kloof, and are driving the Zulus out of it in
parties of six or eight at a time. Everybody who an hour ago was as
silent and sombre as the grave thinks it now necessary to yell with
excitement. The sun is now at the meridian, and the day fearfully hot.
The pursuit has been carried through valley and over ridge; by kloof and
through _bosch_, by _bron_ (spring) and _drift_ (ford), and the whole
column is scattered in every direction. It is, in fact, a regular
scramble, and all ranks and uniforms are mixed up together. But the
chase begins to slacken; the pace is too good to last. The recall
sounds, and the firing dies away to a few desultory shots, while the
troopers canter back, dishevelled and puffing like school-boys after a
hard-won goal at football. As soon as the skirmish was over, and the
column clear of the kloof, the journey was continued, and they soon
reached the southern termination of the high valley two or three miles
farther on, where the mountains and table-land descend to the more level
and open country beyond, and by a slope which was noted as too steep for
waggons. The General was the first to set the example of dismounting and
leading his horse straight down most of the way, while the main body of
the little column diverged to the crest of the hill to the west, where
the trek wound gradually away in a spiral manner to the plain. This path
offered no obstacle whatever to the transit of waggons, and, moreover,
avoided a deep donga which lies right across the straight course. Here
General Wood, having an engagement in camp, left Buller and his men with
his orderly officers and escort, while they continued their
investigations in a direction almost due south, over a series of rolling
plains upon the table-land. The mist now most unfortunately came on
again just as they had prepared their glasses for a good inspection of
Ibabanango and the Alarm hill, but they could distinctly see on the
right the high ground before the Khandi and Iheensi hills, and thence
onwards to the Ingutu mountain, where they were not surprised to see
that a signal-fire of considerable magnitude had been made by the Zulus
as soon as they had fairly been discerned in the open and on lower
ground. About five o'clock they reached the banks of the Unyunyebea
river, one of the tributaries of the Ityotyosi, which in its turn flows
eastward into the White Umvolosi. Here, as the locality seemed
favourable, they off-saddled, and the men cooked their dinners, or
rather evening meal. Captain Woodgate, with a Zulu who had returned
lately from Ulundi, and half-a-dozen mounted natives as escort, rode
away to a kop some three miles on, to reconnoitre. A few Zulus were seen
on the opposite ridge, evidently watching the party's movements; and as
they reached the top of the eminence, a messenger was despatched by them
across the valley at speed to the next mountain, where soon after smoke
was seen, showing evidently that their advent had been signalled to the
next post. The remaining Zulus incontinently disappeared up some rocky
ground to the left, and although one of them was chased by four Natal
natives, he as well as his comrades escaped without injury. Colonel
Buller and Captain Woodgate, not having been able to see anything of the
range of mountains for which they were looking, went back to explore the
river, but they had scarcely disappeared down the slope when the mist
cleared off, and there could be distinctly seen the clearly defined
outlines of a high isolated mountain towards the south-east, and this
Zulu scouts declared to be Ibabanango, the principal object of their
search. A number of deserted kraals belonging to Malafchey and his tribe
were close at hand, and it was found that there was plenty of mealies
and firewood, and a very comfortable meal was obtained for men and
horses. As soon as it was sufficiently dark to hide his movements,
Colonel Buller, who always adopted the plan of never bivouacking where
he had halted during the day, quietly shifted the column across the
stream to a spot where a deep donga, sheltered on all sides but one,
gave protection from any night-surprise. The Natal native cavalry did
not bivouac with the remainder of the patrol, but were allowed to post
themselves and lie down without off-saddling at a point indicated to
their commander, Captain Cochrane, by Colonel Buller. Sentries were
posted, patrols sent out, and the night passed without incident or
alarm. The next morning, soon after daybreak, they were again in motion,
and were far more successful in their observations. Colonel Buller,
assisted by Captain Woodgate, obtained excellent data referring to the
position of the two mountains. From the observations and sketches they
were enabled to make, they came to the conclusion that there would be no
difficulty in the transport of waggons on either side of the road as
far as Ibabanango, or in their getting on to the Rorke's Drift road to
Ulundi. Another, and not the least important, point was noted, namely,
that although the district they surveyed was not nearly so well watered
as the Kambula country, the grass improved and became of a better
quality the more one went into Zululand. It was so thick, and at the
same time so green, that it would be practically impossible to get it to
burn for at least another month, so that up to the end of June oxen
would be tolerably sure of grazing. After carefully reconnoitring for
some distance further, without being at all molested, although a few
Zulu scouts were seen here and there, the column returned to camp, which
they reached about 7.40 p.m., after a most exciting ride of some fifty
miles and two days' experience of Zulu skirmishing.

Another reconnaissance was organized for the 12th instant. Colonel
Buller's patrol on this occasion was composed exclusively of picked and
seasoned men, and consisted of 60 of the Frontier Light Horse, under
Captain D'Arcy and Lieutenant Blaine; 40 Basutos, under Captain
Cockerell and Lieutenants Henderson and Rane; and 80 of Baker's Horse,
together with a few mounted scouts and orderlies, making altogether a
well-mounted, well-armed, and well-trained band of 200 horsemen. Colonel
Buller's guests, on this occasion, included the Prince Imperial, whom he
was to meet at Conference Hill, Mr. Drummond, several officers from
headquarters, and Lord William Beresford, who had earned the soubriquet
of "The Ubiquitous." Having received full instructions, and been
supplied with the usual three days' rations, with the best wishes for
luck from their comrades, and a cheer from the men and officers, they
filed out of the camp in the highest of spirits and eager for the road.
Their first halt was to be Conference Hill, where the Prince Imperial
was to join them. This post was at that time the most advanced point of
General Newdigate's division, and from Doornkop the distance is about
fifteen miles. From Wood's camp at Wolf's Kraal the distance would be
about seven miles, and this was soon accomplished. They found his
Imperial Highness waiting for them, with Colonel Malthus, commanding the
94th, and some other officers, showing the Prince round the defences.
After duly inspecting all the defences shown to them by Colonel Malthus,
they made the best of their way to a spot selected for their bivouac,
about six miles farther on, and where they remained the night, while
their horses grazed contented in some mealie fields.

Half an hour before dawn on the following morning Colonel Buller was to
be seen scanning the horizon in all directions, and by sunrise his party
were all in the saddle, and _en route_. They soon reached the ford at
the Blood river, which had gone down considerably since Buller had last
seen it. The country over which they rode was fairly open. They crossed
the ford without difficulty, and gaining the opposite bank, reached a
plain, from which they were, however, divided by a broad and well-worn
watercourse. Here they faced the mountain, a long unbroken range,
varying in height from 1000 to 1500 feet, which ran down the left of the
valley. A portion of the mounted men were now sent away to the right,
with instructions to ride up the kloof, then dismount, scale the rocks,
and await the result of the advance of the main body. Should natives
oppose the latter in force, the flanking party were then to drive them
down the mountain, where it was expected they would fall into the hands
of the Basutos under Henderson and Rane, who were placed in ambush on
the left. After half an hour's careful scouting, not a sign of a Zulu
could be seen, and Colonel Buller then gave the not unwelcome order to
off-saddle at, or rather close to, a kraal which bore unmistakable
evidences of recent native occupation. The troopers had no sooner
off-saddled, however, than the wily savages emerged from the caves and
crevices where they had been hid, and could be distinctly seen making
the best of their way with considerable speed up Sirayo's krantz exactly
opposite to where Buller's men were. They evidently were in some force,
and two or three men on horseback were observed directing their
movements as their reinforcements came rapidly in. The force, however,
they were able to collect was extremely small, and certainly would not
have numbered more than half Colonel Buller's command. The Prince
Imperial was excellently mounted upon a handsome and powerful horse, who
seemed, however a little fidgety under fire. Lieut. Rane was now sent on
with a few Basutos, to see whether any stand would be made by the enemy;
and the Prince Imperial immediately galloped after him, to see what he
could of the fun. When these men arrived at the foot of the mountain,
they found a much easier ascent than they had expected. A footpath,
which, however, was quite practicable for horses, was seen winding in a
devious manner in and out of the tall mimosa-trees which fringed the
belt of the wood, and along this path dashed Rane and his Basutos,
closely followed by the Prince, whose impatience to get to the front was
noticed by all. On reaching the summit, however, not a Zulu or an enemy
of any kind was to be seen. This was soon accounted for by the fact that
half way up the krantz on the right were posted a number of
Zulus--perhaps about 100. While the main body were watching these
people, to see if they would attempt to cut off from the column the
Prince and the Basutos, who were surrounding the plateau above, about
100 savages now suddenly showed themselves, as if to invite combat, on
the opposite side of the ravine. The object of all these man[oe]uvres
was now obvious enough. The Zulus who were running away on the plateau
above were so doing to lure the English force on to follow, when the
party halfway up the krantz would probably be joined by a number of men
from the kraals, and endeavour to block them in from the rear. It was
now noticed that they were about to send messengers away for assistance,
and this they could not do without running the gauntlet of fire of
Buller's column. Crouching down, so as to be concealed as much as
possible from the fire of the English rifles, two of the men belonging
to the Zulu party ran rapidly away from the native column until they
were within fifty yards of Buller's position. As they passed, a man
raised his gun, and made an excellent shot at the leader, who never
moved after he touched the ground, upon which he fell headlong. The
remaining man, seeing the fate of his comrade, ran back to his people
with wonderful activity, sharpened no doubt by the ping and whiz of
half a dozen rifle-bullets sent after him at about 200 yards. Baker's
Horse were now sent on to the table-land above, to look after the Prince
Imperial, Rane, and the Basutos, whom they found in high glee, chasing
some flying Zulus, who seemed too scared to notice that their assailants
only numbered eight men.

They now surveyed the surrounding country without further molestation.
In front lay a broad valley, in the midst of which ran the Blood river,
now shrunk to a thin silver thread; on the left at some distance off
could be seen the table-shaped mountain of Mhlatze; and on the right was
that spot of fatal memories, Isandhlwana, with its huge crag in the
rear, raising its lion-like crest over the veldt below. After descending
the mountain and burning the kraals on its south-east slopes, Buller and
his party returned to camp without any event happening on their homeward
route.

It was now determined at headquarters that a reconnaissance in force
should be made under the command of General Marshall, for the double
purpose of still further pursuing the investigations begun and of
burying the dead at Isandhlwana. For this purpose a force of no less
than 2490 men was detailed, and consisted of the 17th Lancers, the
King's Dragoon Guards, four companies of the second battalion 24th, and
a number of native auxiliaries. Major Black's experience and knowledge
of the road were found of great use, and the two cavalry regiments were
capitally handled by Colonels Drury-Lowe and Alexander. Major Bengough
had charge of the native battalion. The Natal mounted police were under
Major Dartnell, and one hundred and fifty Army Service horses were led,
in order to bring back the waggons. The entire force was gathered
together at Rorke's Drift one hour before daylight, and carefully
inspected by the light of the camp lanterns. They marched down to the
river at daylight, and commenced to ford the stream, which was finally
crossed by six o'clock. Colonel Drury-Lowe commanded the First Brigade,
consisting of two squadrons of his own corps and two of the King's, and
made a detour round the head and crest of the Bashee valley behind
Sirayo's celebrated mountain, and, without any mishap or molestation,
effected a junction with the remainder of the column at Isandhlwana.
Colonel Alexander, with a brigade similarly constituted, marched by the
direct waggon road straight upon his objective, while he threw out
strong flanking parties right and left as he advanced. A squadron was
sent at Colonel Black's suggestion to hold the gorge of the Bashee on
the right, and a number of vedettes were occupied in patrolling the left
of the same valley. Bengough's natives, meanwhile, came on at a rapid
pace, and were thrown out into skirmishing order along the slopes of the
Ingutu range, where the English troops once had such a tussle with
Sirayo and his men. In fact, here, it may be said, the first blood in
the campaign was shed, when they destroyed this cruel chief's
stronghold.

The manner in which Bengough's well-trained men scoured and scouted was
most gratifying to observe. Every nook and corner, every crevice and
cave, were carefully explored, and as the men advanced slowly along the
valley and slopes of the mountain, every kraal was fired that came in
their way. These men gradually worked their way round until they came
along the range to the eastern limit of the valley, where the
hunting-path trends towards the great kraal of Cetywayo. Meanwhile the
cavalry were not idle. Crowds of vedettes swarmed along the sides of the
valley ready to outflank any enemy or take him in reverse should he
appear. While this was undertaken, the main force moved steadily along
the front of the valley, and over the brow of the opposite ridge
Bengough's men swarmed, chanting their war-song in native fashion. Down
the hillside, to hold the head of the valley, came the four companies of
the 24th, marching steadily in column of fours. The sun streamed in
splendour upon the glittering files of cavalry as they wound like a
brilliant chain along the greensward. Nothing could exceed the
picturesque _ensemble_ that greeted the eye on all sides; nothing could
be sadder than the mission upon which they came.

As soon as the entire force was concentrated on the neck, their solemn
but ghastly duty commenced. Rider and horse, officer and private, boy
and man, their grim and parchment-looking skins half eaten by the
carrion birds and half covering the bleaching bones, gave to the scene a
terrible and weird significance, which can never be forgotten. Many of
the bodies were easily recognized. Captain Shepstone at once pointed out
that of Colonel Durnford, which was interred with deep respect in a
donga near the spot where he fell. Forty-five waggons were brought away
by the horses and mules, and a quantity of stores still intact was
carried in them. The staff of the 24th's colours was also recovered; and
the troops, having fully carried out their sad _devoir_ in the most
effective manner, returned home with the same precaution with which they
had moved on to the field.




CHAPTER VIII.

  Advance of the 2nd column--Landsman's Drift to Kopje
    Allein--Description of camp--Plan of campaign--Discovery of Port
    Durnford--It becomes the base of 1st division--Troops composing 1st
    column--Crealock's journey to Durnford.


The force thus gathered at Landsman's Drift was now quite ready for an
immediate advance. It was therefore determined to push on this column
(2nd) at once. Accordingly, on the 27th May the troops were formed up in
line of contiguous quarter-columns by eight a.m., and after the General
and his staff had ridden down the ranks, making a minute and detailed
inspection, the various columns moved off by fours in succession from
the right precisely at nine a.m. Newdigate's Division, which led the
way, consisted of the 21st Fusiliers, the 94th Foot, the 58th Foot, and
the 2nd battalion 24th Regiment, together with a wing of the King's
Dragoon Guards, a wing of the 17th Lancers, a battalion of Native
Contingent, two batteries of Royal Artillery, and a company of
Engineers. The crossing of the Buffalo at Landsman's Drift was commenced
at half-past nine, and the rear had crossed by two o'clock. The exact
distance to Kopje Allein as the crow flies is said to be ten miles, but
the route taken was somewhat circuitous, so as, for the sake of the
waggons, to avoid many bad places, swamps, morasses, and mud-holes,
which abound in this part of the country. The country between the Blood
river and the Buffalo is tolerably well supplied with water,
comparatively open, but singularly treeless in its character, though
there were patches here and there along the road, and the district
seemed well adapted for cattle posts and grazing purposes. Indeed there
could be seen a number of large deserted kraals and homesteads, which
had once evidently been the depots of pastoral wealth and prosperity.
These sites of industry had suffered a hard and rough usage in the
terrible necessities of war. These depredations were largely caused by
the foraging parties in search of fuel, the great want in all our camps.
Supplies, indeed, on more than one occasion, were brought even as far as
from the northern slopes of the Durnberg, a distance of twenty miles.
Most of the best information in regard to the topographical features of
this portion of the campaign was furnished by the very excellent reports
drawn up by Colonel Buller, Lord William Beresford, and, above all, the
Prince Imperial, whose pen and pencil gave a vivid and life-like idea of
the physical characteristics of this line of advance.

On the 16th instant Colonel Buller's second patrol returned at noon to
General Wood's camp at the Wolf's kraal, and had been so successful in
its reconnoitring operations that its officers were able to report that
no large bodies of Zulus were within twenty miles of the Blood river,
or, indeed, anywhere between the White Umvolosi and the Buffalo river.
The same evening on which the patrol started it bivouacked at Kopje
Allein, and, indeed, it was owing to the excellent reports made by
Buller and his staff that the place was chosen as one of the links in
the line of advance. A few Zulus there were, it is true, hovering about
in the distance, and attempts were made by feigned attacks and feigned
retreats to lure the troops into ambush, but Buller was far too old a
soldier to be taken in by such wiles. When the men had got steadily on
the summit of the hill they were exploring, the Zulu skirmishers
disappeared into some of the caves surrounding Sirayo's old kraal, and
nothing but some huts full of mealies could be found. The patrol that
night slept on the slopes of the Ingutu mountains, and the following
morning scouted in a southerly direction in rear of the Ingwe range, as
far as the White Umvolosi, showing in a tolerably plain manner that the
country about there was quite denuded of its population, at least
between the Buffalo river and the White Umvolosi, while to the eastward
and the northward of the latter river there were plenty of Zulus and
cattle, but no large or important bodies were assembled north of the
Isandaka range.

The Prince Imperial had won all hearts during these three days in the
saddle and night bivouac, and was seen to have considerably improved in
health since his last visit to the camp.

From the notes and sketches made by the officers above named the
following data may be adduced:--The key of the road from the Utrecht to
the Ulundi country is undoubtedly the Inhlazatye mountain, and, although
this road runs along a narrow ledge with a precipice on the one side and
with huge boulders on the other, interspersed with thorns and bush, yet
still it is actually the most direct line of advance upon Ulundi. This
Inhlazatye mountain covers a vast extent of country, has an immense
quantity of thorn-bush over it, is very broken and steep, but
undoubtedly can be turned by an invading force from the north either to
the east or to the west, probably the latter, where little bush worth
mentioning would have to be passed through. The most commanding and open
positions are upon the highlands to the south of the White Umvolosi and
Umtatoosi rivers, girdling the new capital, Ulundi. These are the
Emtonjaneni hills (which are called Magnibonium on most maps), near the
White Umvolosi, and the Tyoe and Entumeni heights in rear of the
Umtatoosi, all healthy positions, well watered, and with abundant grass
and wood. From the Emtonjaneni hills, explored by Colonel Buller, who
estimates them at 200 feet high, the circle of royal kraals on the
farther side of the White Umvolosi can be seen; three roads lead to the
rear into the colony, the upper, central, and lower. The Ekowe,
Entumeni, and Ungoga ranges, from 1500 to 2000 feet above the sea level,
dominate the valley of the Umtatoosi. Healthy positions suitable for
cavalry encampments may be found on these heights, well wooded and
watered, with excellent grass and roads leading to the rear into the
colony; and here Marshall's cavalry kept open our communications and
effectually severed connexion between the Zulu's right and left impis.
These central and coast lines, which are joined by a cross-road, both
follow the course of the Umtatoosi.

During the march, and whenever the country would admit of such
formation, the leading corps halted, and the extended line of march was
curtailed by the succeeding regiment forming upon its left; waggons came
up in a sort of deployment into line, and certain simple movements were
practised which would be carried out in case of sudden attack. Lord
Chelmsford invariably made a great point of concentrating his waggons
whenever the slightest opportunity offered. General Newdigate and
General Wood between them had 900 waggons, and it may easily be imagined
what a column 450 of these would make. Allowing 30 yards to each--and
that is not much, there being 16 or 18 oxen to each load--each column of
baggage alone is 15 miles long, but to this distance must be added 5
yards interval, and this gives 18 miles to defend. Of course, the forage
for the large cavalry force made one of the greatest strains upon the
commissariat, and all had to be sacrificed to this necessity. This
column and Crealock's were in this respect not upon a par, as it had to
provide for not less than 2000 horses, each receiving 12 lb. of corn
daily; which gave a total of 24,000 lb. daily, or 3000 lb. per waggon
load, or 6 waggons daily to supply them. At this rate, therefore, it
required 120 waggons to carry the oats for the cavalry alone. All Lord
Chelmsford's and the staff horses were, however, placed upon half
rations.

Ibabanango, which Lord Chelmsford had selected as an advanced depot for
the united forces of his column and that of Wood, is again situated
about midway between this place (Kopje Allein) and the king's kraal at
Ulundi. The troops in this camp consisted of a company of Engineers, the
cavalry brigade, two batteries of Royal Artillery, four line battalions,
and 800 natives. The encampment was rather extensive, but this upon
sanitary grounds and the best medical advice. The battalions were
encamped as at open order, front as in line, with a depth of 116 yards,
which is unusual, for half the above frontage is the usual encampment,
and 30 yards were left between each of the four battalions. Each
regiment of cavalry usually occupies 172 yards of front and 130 yards of
depth, but its camp can be condensed to 120 yards of front by crossing
heel-ropes, and this, for defensive reasons, was the plan adopted by
General Marshall. This could not be done with Cape or Indian remounts,
as entire horses would fight if so close to each other; but English
horses are so accustomed to this proximity that it was found they throve
better when allowed companionship. To each battery of artillery was
allowed a frontage of 133 yards, with a depth of 114 yards, or 70 yards
front at close order, while from centre to centre of the tents 10 paces
were allotted. The kitchens were simple enough, being nothing more than
a trench to catch the wind and hold the usual pattern of Flanders or
Torrens kettle--the former, weighing 8-1/2 lbs., holding twelve quarts,
and cooking for eight men, while the latter weighs 3-1/2 lbs., holds six
quarts, and cooks for five men. Whenever the ground was too wet for a
trench, two parallel sod walls answered the same purpose, and two
trenches, 10 feet long, 9 inches broad, and 12 inches deep were allowed
for a company of 120 men. The medical arrangements were as elaborate as
could be made consistent with the limited means of transport, but what
was deficient in quantity was made up in excellence of detail. Medical
officers and stretcher-bearers usually moved in front of the camp, and
the temporary hospital was always placed in the least exposed position
near at hand, while the field-hospitals were always in rear. One
medical officer was allotted to each battalion of infantry, regiment of
cavalry, or battery of artillery--more could not be spared. One bearer
company and two field-hospitals were allotted to each division. This
bearer company included 206 men, part natives, 101 mules or horses, and
30 waggons. The field-hospitals had each 75 men, 52 mules, and 10
waggons, while each field-hospital had equipment for 200 sick.
Fortunately the health of the troops was exceptionally good.

Instead of an advance from Rorke's Drift, it was now determined to take
a line from Kopje Allein to Blood river, across the more northern spurs
of the Ingutu hills, and endeavour to ultimately strike the road laid
down in the maps, between the Alarm and the Isipizi hills. This route
was to be taken by General Wood's flying column in advance, and General
Newdigate's division, of which actually it was intended to form an
integral portion. The former consisted of the 13th and 90th Regiments of
Light Infantry and five companies of the 80th Regiment, all of them in
splendid and hard-working condition, and devoted to their brilliant
leader. Wood's cavalry consisted of 900 mounted men belonging to various
corps, and commanded by the Rupert of South Africa, Redvers Buller,
whose men were ready to follow him anywhere, and die for him to a man,
after his splendid self-devotion at Zlobani and elsewhere. Wood, who
made friends wherever he moved, had some valuable allies in Oham's
people, who, hating the tyranny of Cetywayo, were invaluable as scouts
and spies to the flying columns. The arrangements for the line of
advance were as follows:--Wood's flying column was to keep in advance
of Newdigate's division by about five miles, while in front of the
former a veil of cavalry was to keep in advance about ten miles,
connected by intervening files. Each morning orderlies were to report
whether the front and rear were perfectly clear, nor was an advance to
be made until such was known. In case of any enemy attacking Wood, the
latter was to be at once supported by Marshall, who could circle round
and take the Zulus in the rear, a principle of strategy they strongly
object to. Crealock, with the aid of the naval authorities, was at the
same time to push forward from Fort Chelmsford, and, if the landing at
Port Durnford was reported practicable, force the Umvolosi and operate
in conjunction with the 2nd column from his base at Port Durnford.

Lord Chelmsford had long seen that the best method to obviate the almost
overwhelming difficulties of transport would be to form some seaport on
the Zulu coast. Delagoa Bay was at first selected; but considerable
difficulty was found in arranging with the Portuguese Government as to
our landing a force in the neighbourhood, and that scheme was
consequently abandoned. It then became evident that if a seaport, or
even ever so small a landing-place could be provided at the mouth of the
Umlalasi, it would be at once the nearest and best base of operations
for any force moving from the Tugela upon Ulundi or Cetywayo's other
stronghold.

Furthermore, as far back as December, 1877, Sir Theophilus Shepstone
wrote to Sir Bartle Frere, informing his Excellency that two
gentlemen--Mr. E. Rathbone and Mr. H. W. Taylor--wished to call
attention to the fact that, from personal observations they had made,
they were satisfied that a practicable landing-place on the Zulu coast
could be found. These gentlemen, it is true, as Sir Theophilus pointed
out, differed as to the precise spot on the coast, but both agreed that
it was near the Tugela mouth, and but a very few miles intervene between
the one place described and the other. This discovery was made
twenty-seven years ago, in the year 1852, and, so far from being kept a
secret, was published for general information in the _Natal Mercury_.

H.M. gunboat "Forester" was accordingly despatched to thoroughly explore
this part of the coast; no less than three minute and careful surveys
were made, and finally, on May 26th, she returned with the welcome
intelligence that a fine lagoon existed close to the mouth of the
Umlalasi, with a sheltered outlet, and that, from the soundings taken
for five miles on either side of the river, there was no actual obstacle
to a landing being practicable at all tides and all seasons.

There was, however, at the mouth of the river, a bar on which the surf
broke heavily; and in bad weather experience proved on more than one
occasion that this formed an impassable barrier even to the most
determined attempts to make a landing.

This spot was christened Port Durnford, and steps were immediately taken
to form there a fort and depot of supplies for the 1st column, in
command of which was General Crealock.

To Commodore Sullivan, Major Barrow, and the captain of H.M.S.
"Forester" principally belong the honours of the discovery; and while
the sailors worked heartily seaward and along the dangerous and
difficult coast, Barrow and his riders found out all the roads which led
to the point selected. It had been arranged that General Crealock, with
the advanced guard of the 1st division should move down the Umlalasi to
a point carefully surveyed by Barrow, and which was subsequently, in
compliment to the gallant young prince, called Fort Napoleon. Thence he
was to proceed to Port Durnford, to meet the "Forester."

Hitherto the advance had been slow; but when it is remembered that forts
were constructed at every strategic point of defence--at the Amatikula,
the Inyezani (respectively Forts Chelmsford and Crealock), and the whole
of the road between this place and the Tugela had been put into working
order by fatigue parties and Engineers, it is clear there was no real
ground for complaint of the delay. Every stream had been bridged, either
with pontoons, casks, or trestles, and trees had been cut down, rocks
and boulders blown up, as well as gradients eased and facilities for
transport carried out. Forts Pearson, Tenedos, Chelmsford, Crealock, and
Napoleon were garrisoned by the less robust men of the column. Six
companies of the 88th, with the headquarters, held Fort Chelmsford,
while a wing of the 99th performed the same office at Fort Crealock. The
regular communications along this line of advanced forts were placed in
charge of one of the best men out there, namely, Colonel Hugh Rowlands,
41st Regiment, whose eye for country, tact, and temper with the natives
and incessant vigilance eminently qualified him for such a
responsibility.

At this time the force of the 1st division stood as follows:--General
Crealock, Brigadiers Bray and Rowlands; two batteries of artillery and
one ammunition column; Royal Engineers, 30th company and C troop;
infantry, six battalions, viz.:--the Buffs, 57th, 60th, 88th, 91st, and
99th Regiments, two squadrons of mounted infantry, the Natal Horse, the
native scouts; as pretty and compact a little division as any moderately
ambitious general could wish to command, and it speaks well for the
chief's admirable temper under difficulties that, chafed as he now was,
and tied as it were by the leg, by want of transport, he kept working
incessantly without a murmur at the forts, bridges, fords, roads, and
other requisites.

In accordance with the above-mentioned arrangement, General Crealock,
Commodore Richards, and Lord Gifford set forth on the 25th June for Port
Durnford, taking with them the advance-guard of the 1st division.

At first the road was over a level and sandy plain, with numerous small
granite hills in different directions, and although there was not much
vegetation for the first two or three miles of the road, it opened on to
a more picturesque-looking champaign country, where the soil appeared
teeming with fertility, and the air was balmy and pure. The country
here, however, is arid and parched during the dry season, but in the
rains, which last from November till May, it is well watered, and large
crops of maize are grown, which by the end of June are usually ripened
and fit for cutting. Large crops of malama are also grown, and it is
upon the stalks of this that the cattle are mostly fed in the drought,
when they appear in good condition, notwithstanding its seeming want of
nutriment.

Here a halt was made; vedettes were placed, and a meal was partaken of.
Then, after half an hour's rest, they again pushed on, and soon came to
an undulating and extremely romantic-looking valley, shut in on either
side by some huge granite hills. Ascending the highest of these, they
looked down upon the Indian Ocean, Port Durnford, and the "Forester,"
standing off about a mile from the shore, and evidently on the look-out.
From this point to the outlet of the Umlalazi the country was fairly
open, and the landscape fertile and partly cultivated. The only obstacle
to progress was a rocky and rather narrow ridge, through which, however,
ran a fairly open kloof, with a small and tributary stream winding its
way to the Umlalazi. Here was the road, and another two hours saw them
through the kloof without question or attack, and they cantered along
the grassy slopes to the bright and shingly beach, upon which a couple
of boat's crews, despatched when they were first sighted, were occupied
in preparing a very excellent dinner of ship's rations for the tired and
hungry men.

General Crealock highly approved of the position, and a fort and other
works were at once traced out, thus rendering complete the cordon of
posts that had been drawn all round the south of Zululand, right from
the sea to the left attack (or 2nd column), and through which it was
impossible for Cetywayo to force a way, and which rendered his capture
or submission a mere question of time.




CHAPTER IX.

  Death of the Prince Imperial--Lieutenant Carey's
    account--Discrepancies in and comments thereon--Feeling in the
    camp--Expedition under General Marshall to search for the
    body--Description of the spot--Recovery of the body--Court-martial
    on Carey.


We now come to an event which, though it in no way affected the course
or result of this war, was nevertheless so deplorably sad in itself, as
well as to the British army, and was, furthermore, of such world-wide
interest, altering, as it undoubtedly did, the history of one of the
mightiest nations of Europe, that no apology is required for a detailed
narrative.

Ever since the arrival of the Prince Imperial in the colony he had
continued to win the friendship and esteem of all ranks, and his
unassuming quietude and modesty, genial humour, and readiness to learn
the most minute details of the profession he had adopted, made him a
universal favourite. It has been previously mentioned that the Prince
had been engaged in several reconnaissances, and only three days before
his death he had been with Lord Chelmsford upon a patrol extending more
than twenty miles into the Zulu country. On May the 28th General Wood
received orders to move parallel to, but slightly in advance, of
General Newdigate's column, from Kopje Allein, in a south-easterly
direction towards the Itelezi hill. After three days had been spent in
carefully exploring the country, General Newdigate moved forward on June
1st with his division, as nearly as possible 10,000 strong, and with a
baggage train of 480 waggons. The country had been carefully scouted by
Buller's Horse for twenty miles round, and no Zulus were reported near.
On the evening of the 1st the column laagered not far from the Itelezi,
and on the following day the General moved south-east along a level
country towards the Inguita range; and the flying column being one march
ahead, a communication was kept up by the vedettes of General Newdigate
and General Wood. On Sunday, the 1st, General Wood with a small escort
reconnoitred in advance of the column, which was about five miles in
advance of General Newdigate's force. Away on the right and left were
Buller's horsemen dotting the ridges of the hills on either side. In
front lay green slopes, which were traversed here and there by
watercourses, and bounded by the most singularly shaped mountains, flat
at the summit and crowned with a sort of rocky dome. A good deal of rain
had fallen in the night, and the morning was as clear and fresh as a May
day in England. The General and his escort had ridden about six miles,
when the path suddenly made a bend to the left, skirting a clump of
trees, which grew near the edge of the stream. Pushing a way through
thick thorny underwood mingled with date-palms and tall reeds, they at
length looked down upon the still deep waters of a narrow river, flowing
across a long red sandbank. A ledge of granite formed a rugged barrier
eight feet or ten feet high across the river, and down the hollows of
this the clear water rushed and gurgled in fantastic rills, cascades,
and rapids, bubbling and eddying among the great masses of rock above,
in many of which great holes were worn by stones which during the floods
had settled in small hollows. Traversing a sandstone hill, with a long
spur stretching away to the eastward, and rising in cliffs of 300 feet
to the south of the river, they came upon a grove of fan-palms and
mimosa, where the banks of the stream were covered with golden-blossomed
acacias. Crossing the river by an easy ford, they had ridden on about
another mile, when they observed some of the vedettes on the high ground
to the left signalling that horsemen were approaching. Soon they came
out upon an immense cultivated flat, terminating to the right in a long,
dark, and winding gorge, black with bush, and arched by huge precipices
of sandstone and granite. Into this they turned, and, following a Kaffir
path marked with tracks made by Buller's men, they came upon a bush of
about six or seven acres, in the centre of which were the remains of a
burnt kraal and marks of recent fighting. On the edge of a small stream
they discovered a path to the extreme right, in fact quite on the
hillside, and here the surface showed numerous boot-marks, where the
scouts had evidently been. They had now reached a plain, from which they
were divided by a broad and well-worn watercourse, and here they were
joined by three or four vedettes, who came to report that they had
noticed some horsemen coming at a rapid canter from the direction of the
Tombalaka and the Iyohgazi rivers, which were about equidistant between
Wood's late camp and that of General Newdigate. They had not long to
wait for the solution of the mystery, for, riding in the direction of
the horsemen, they were met by Colonel Buller and a dozen of his men,
who was equally anxious with General Wood to discover who the fugitives
could be. They all rode on together, and rounding the base of the cliff
came up with Lieutenant Carey and four troopers of Bettington's Horse.
In a few seconds more the terrible secret was revealed, and Lieutenant
Carey, whose horse was almost dead beat, and covered with foam, was
rapidly relating to General Wood the details. "Where is the Prince?"
exclaimed Wood, as he breasted his horse at some fallen trees which
intervened, and dashed forward to meet the fugitives. "Speak, sir; what
has happened?" "The Prince, I fear, is killed, sir," said one of the
men, Carey being at first unable to speak. "Is that the case? Tell me
instantly, sir," answered the General. "I fear 'tis so, General," was
the answer; upon which our chief exclaimed, "And what are you, sir,
doing here?" A veil must be drawn over the rest of the interview, which
was of the most painful character. A short despatch was at once written
while on horseback by the General, and in this a _resume_ of the fearful
tragedy was told, how English soldiers had had the unutterable shame of
seeing an English officer and four English troopers unwounded and
escaped from a Zulu ambush, in which a gallant young Prince, the guest
of England and the hope of France, had been barbarously slain. This
letter was at once despatched by the General to headquarters, where he
ordered Lieutenant Carey and his party to proceed and make their
report.

The story elicited from Carey and the four men, in spite of a few
discrepancies, was in the main as follows:--

On Sunday, the 1st of June, the Prince learnt that a patrol was to be
sent out in advance of the column, to choose the site for the camp on
the following day, and his Highness at once applied for and obtained
permission to accompany it. At six o'clock on Sunday morning the Prince
Imperial sent for his groom, and consulted him as to what horse he
should ride, and the man strongly advised him not to take the large grey
horse, which was eventually one of the causes of his death. This animal
was not one of those selected for the Prince by Sir John Bissett, who
had assisted him in the choice of others. He was a big, awkward-looking,
but very powerful animal, but an inveterate buck-jumper, and, moreover,
excessively timid under fire, a fault which in a charger is dangerous to
the last degree. Two of the Prince's horses had died, either on the
voyage out or soon after landing, and upon the fatal Sunday the grey
horse was the only steed not lame or upon the sick report, so he had to
be taken as a case of "Hobson's choice." At seven o'clock a note arrived
addressed to the Prince, in which he was informed that permission was
accorded him to go with the patrol about to be sent on to choose next
day's camping-ground. This note was from Colonel Harrison, the acting
quarter-master-general, and the Prince at once went over to his tent,
and received final instructions from him verbally; which it must be
assumed, were in accordance with the wishes of the Commander-in-chief,
who expressly stated that the Prince was to be well cared for, to have
no military responsibility, and yet, at the same time, was not to be
interfered with, or in any way prevented from seeing the country.
Lieutenant Carey's account of these matters is somewhat at variance with
this statement of Colonel Harrison, as he (Carey) says that he was told
that the Prince was to have the entire charge of the escort and the
entire duty of selecting the camp. Lieutenant Carey says in his written
statement, that it was by his express desire that he was named to
accompany the escort, and he made this request in consequence of his
knowledge of the country and, in some degree, of the language. Six men
of Captain Bettington's Horse and the same number of Shepstone's Basutos
were ordered to parade at half-past eight a.m. as escort, but for some
hitherto unexplained reason the latter never appeared, and when Carey
suggested they should wait for them the Prince, with that utter contempt
for danger for which he was always remarkable, exclaimed, "Oh, no; we
are quite strong enough!" At nine a.m. all was ready, a frugal breakfast
of black coffee and biscuit had been partaken of, saddles, carbines,
swords, revolvers, and accoutrements had been carefully inspected, and
the word was given to "mount" and "away!" Before leaving the camp,
however, a message was sent to Captain Shepstone to say that the escort
would halt and wait for the six Basutos on the ridge between the Incenzi
and Itelezi hills. A messenger was again sent to hurry on these natives,
but it seems they never came, and therefore the patrol consisted only of
the Prince, Lieutenant Carey, six mounted men of Bettington's Horse,
and one friendly Zulu. This was certainly not a fit escort for such a
charge, and it seems impossible not to attach a grave responsibility to
the staff officer who made the detail. All the six Europeans were well
armed and well mounted, their weapons consisting of the Martini-Henry
slung across the back, ammunition in bandoleer, and a stout serviceable
knife, which could be used for meals or on emergency as a weapon at
close quarters. The Prince and Lieutenant Carey had not rifles, but
swords and revolvers, and unfortunately the latter were not worn upon
the person as they invariably should be, but in the holsters. The Prince
had been on several visits to General Wood's camp, and was an
enthusiastic admirer of both Wood and Buller, with the latter of whom he
had become very intimate ever since the last two patrols he had made
with him. With Lieutenant Carey his Imperial Highness had also an
intimacy of some standing, and as Carey's skill as a draughtsman was
well known in the camp, he had been selected on several occasions to
assist his Highness in surveying operations.

The day had broken on this fated Sunday with all the glory of a real
South African morning. It had been raining during the night, but this
only served to give a more delightful perfume to the odorous plants that
were crushed by the hoofs of the horses belonging to the escort. The
rain of the previous day and night had refreshed the ground, and filled
the various pools with water, and the plains were cheerful with the
animals and birds coming out of the bush to feed. The patrol met with no
adventure for some time, but continued its course along a valley running
north-east, and narrowing gradually. The track in some places crossed
bad spruits, and was undefined, and in parts obliterated by thorn-trees
and bush. It was also commanded here and there by projecting spurs and
bluffs, where an enemy could have easily hidden in force, and have
attacked them at an advantage, but on either side could be seen the
friendly Basutos scouting in the distance. The watershed of the mountain
was reached about an hour after the patrol started, and on arriving at
the ridge the Prince and Lieutenant Carey dismounted, as they wished to
fix the position of some important hills with their compasses. Here
Colonel Harrison overtook them, and remarked that the whole of the
escort was not with them, adding that the patrol had better wait for the
Basutos to come up. The Prince said, "Oh, we are quite strong enough.
Besides, we have all our friends around us, and with my glass I can see
General Marshall's cavalry coming up." Lieutenant Carey, as soon as he
had finished his sketch, proposed to off-saddle and breakfast; but he
states that the Prince overruled this suggestion and expressed a wish to
push on to the river. The patrol accordingly proceeded on for about four
miles, where for some distance the way was along the bottom of a deep
sandy nullah with very precipitous sides, which they were forced to take
as the only practicable place. This at length debouched into an open
space, from which there appeared to be an entrance to a disused kraal
some two miles up the ravine. Here the escort found that there was good
drinking-water in some pools under a large kopje in front, situated in a
complete amphitheatre of hills, and upon this kopje were some of our
Basuto skirmishers. After watering the horses, the party advanced for a
mile and a half along a commanding and rocky range of hills a short
distance beyond the Ilyotosi river. Here Carey again proposed to
off-saddle, but the Prince did not approve of the spot, and after some
more sketching and surveying the country with telescopes and compass,
the valley was descended as far as an isolated kraal, and the order was
given to off-saddle. The Prince, who did not appear very strong, now
complained of being tired, and while coffee was being prepared lay down
beside the door of a hut.

The place where this halt was made would appear, from the statements of
Lieutenant Carey and the surviving men of the escort, to be about as
ill-chosen and suspicious a locality as could be found. The kraal where
they now were consisted of about half a dozen huts, and was situated
about three hundred yards from the river Moazani (so called by the Zulu
who accompanied the party). Between the kraal and the river stretched a
tall and luxuriant growth of that most dangerous cover, five, six, and
seven feet in height, Tambookie grass interspersed here and there, as is
customary, with equally tall mealies and Kaffir corn. The plains beneath
this spot afforded every temptation to the artistic eye of the Prince,
and here again another sketch of the panorama was quickly made. The
bright glowing tints of the foreground, whose colours were lit up by
green and fresh grass and wide-spreading acacia and flowering shrubs,
well mellowed away in the middle distance, while far away towards the
horizon were to be seen the shadowy outlines of the blue Itelezi hills.
The kraal was not completely surrounded, for in front there was an open
space where broken cooking utensils and burnt-out embers, bones, and
other _debris_, showed that the place had not long ago been occupied.
Some hungry-looking dogs came out and snarled at the intruders. Here the
fatal order was given to off-saddle, and, in defiance of the most common
and ordinary precautions, which the merest tyro should have taken, the
horses were knee-haltered and turned out to graze, while coffee was
prepared, and not the slightest search made in the cover around.

The friendly Zulu was sent down to the river for water, and also to see
that the horses did not stray too far. All this time a party of Zulus,
supposed to have been about thirty or forty, were concealed and watching
the doomed party, who, utterly unsuspicious of an ambush, were seated
around, chatting and sipping their coffee. A deep donga lay right across
the path subsequently taken by the fugitives, and this served to screen
the enemy as he stealthily crawled to his prey. Stealing noiselessly
along, hidden by the rank vegetation, and unheard by the unwatchful
escort, the savages came nearer and nearer to their quarry, but while
creeping along were descried by the watchful eyes of the Kaffir, who,
not losing a second, darted back to the Prince, and gave the warning of
danger. A little delay now occurs, for his Highness fails to understand
the native, who has to appeal to Corporal Grubb, one of the escort, to
interpret. The corporal explains to the Prince, who looks at his watch,
and (we are told) seeing it was ten minutes to four, says, "You can give
your horses ten minutes more." But this must have been countermanded,
for the horses were at once collected, and in a few moments were
prepared to start. The Prince is carefully and calmly examining his bit
and bridle, and, it is surmised, had not sufficiently tightened his
girths. His grey horse is a fidgety, troublesome animal to mount, and
now appears to be nervous and anxious to break away. Meanwhile all the
escort stand to their horses and await the word, which the Prince now
gives, "Prepare to mount." But this was the death-signal, for hardly had
the order escaped the lips that gave it, and that spoke no other word on
earth, than the fearful traditional "Usulu! Usulu!" awoke the echoes of
the valley, and a tremendous volley was poured in from the favouring
cover of the grass and mealies. All the horses swerved instinctively
with terror, and some broke away. Private Rogers was shot before he
could mount, and the Prince's tall grey, half mad with fright, became
impossible to mount. Where is the English iron nerve that is proof
against the panic of a moment? Where are the guardians of England's
princely guest? All have lost their courage and their sense of manhood.
_Sauve qui peut!_ is the craven spirit of those who had they rallied
back to back could have probably saved a noble life and preserved a
nation's honour. Not a carbine was loaded, not a sentry placed.
Surprise, the most unsoldierlike crime, was allowed, and white with fear
each trooper galloped away to save himself, nor drew bridle-rein till
miles of country placed safety in his path. Meanwhile, the gallant and
unfortunate Prince is losing every chance of escape which the slightest
attempt at succour would have given. One friendly hand to steady the
scared and ill-broken steed; one carbine, even unloaded, presented at
the bush--for the savages had not dared to come forth--or one gallant
heart like Buller, Leet, or Wood to have shown the chivalry of France
that England's sons were worthy of their ancient fame, and the Prince
would have been alive to-day. There is, it is true, the testimony of one
man, borne away by his frightened and possibly wounded horse, who says
that not being more than half in the saddle, and having no control over
his mount, he could not stay to aid the Prince. "Depechez-vous,
monsieur!" he cried, as he swept by at a racing gallop, and that was all
the warning he could give. And then--oh, shame and humiliation!--this
young lad, schooled to arms with English soldiers' sons, wearing an
English uniform, and escorted by British soldiers to a bloody grave, was
left alone to be speared to death, without a sword being drawn or a shot
fired, even from a distance, in his defence.

The Zulus, seeing only one man unable to mount, burst at length from
their treacherous cover, and with fiendish yells rush upon the Prince,
who, holding the stirrup-leather with one hand and the holster-flap with
the other, must have made one final and desperate attempt to spring into
the saddle. But all is in vain, the untrustworthy leather gives way in
his hand; his feet slip from under him; he falls beneath the horse,
which treads upon his body and gallops away! The last that was seen of
the Empress's beloved son was, that he was alone and on foot, with some
dozen Zulus poising their assegais within a few feet from him, and his
body was afterwards found pierced in front with some eighteen or twenty
thrusts, and stripped of all but his mother's amulet.

It cannot have escaped the reader that there are some discrepancies and
anachronisms in the accounts given by Lieutenant Carey and the survivors
of that fatal and ill-omened day, the 1st of June. These contradictions
were not unnoticed by General Wood when he took down the report and
forwarded it to the headquarter camp. In the first place we are told
that the Prince was too rash and venturesome, and that he nearly lost
his life on the day when, accompanied by Major Bettington, some of his
men, and a party of Basutos, he visited a Zulu kraal in the
neighbourhood of the camp, and was fired upon by the enemy. Now, on this
as on former occasions, when the Prince went out with Colonel Buller,
Lord Chelmsford, and other officers in charge of patrols or
reconnaissances, he was perfectly well aware that he was merely
incurring the same risk as were other English officers, whose lives to
the British nation, if not to France, were as valuable as his, and whose
temerity--if such it can be called--was absolutely necessary to the
conduct of the campaign. But on the last fatal occasion his Highness was
allowed to go alone, or virtually alone, for Lieutenant Carey does not
seem to have taken his honest and proper share of responsibility, or
looked after the most ordinary precautions which a subaltern of a week's
standing would have carried out in a time of profound peace. We are told
that the Prince gave all orders and words of command during the day,
that he selected, approved of, and disapproved of each halting-place
that was arrived at, and that when Lieutenant Carey wished the escort to
muster and leave the deserted kraal at a certain hour the Prince
demurred, and gave the order to stay much longer. Now this, if
authentic, indicates a lack of military knowledge which it is difficult
to understand as appertaining to an officer of Lieutenant Carey's
standing. The rule of the service is imperative, and no civilian, no
volunteer, and no guest, whatever his rank, may, can, or should at least
be allowed to give a word of command when an official authority is
present. If Lieutenant Carey, out of compliment or out of courtesy,
allowed the Prince Imperial to choose the halting-places and to give the
words of command to the troopers, whom he and not his Highness
commanded, he betrayed an ignorance of the customs, duties, and
etiquette of his profession which renders him totally unfit for the
possession of her Majesty's commission. If he did not allow our deplored
and gallant guest to select these halts, to choose the places for
"off-saddle," and to give the necessary cautions and words of command in
regard to mounting, why, then, he is still more to blame, as knowing, as
he should have known, that he and not the Prince was in command, his
first and transparently obvious duty was to post vedettes and keep a
soldierlike look-out on all sides. Lieutenant Carey was specially
ordered to take half a dozen Basutos with him, in addition to the scanty
escort allotted by the Quarter-Master-General of six of Bettington's
Horse. He says that the escort of Basutos never came, and that the
Prince, when told of their absence, would not wait, but insisted on
pushing forward. The captain of a ship who, at the instance of an
impatient passenger, puts to sea with only half his water and provisions
on board, endangers the lives of those under his command, and for ever
forfeits his claim to future confidence in his conduct and prudence. We
are told that as the first division and the flying column of General
Wood were on converging lines, and were rapidly approaching, and that as
the ground over which this fatal reconnaissance was made had been
previously explored by the Prince, Lieutenant Carey was justified in
arriving at the illogical conclusion that it must be safe from an enemy.
A more preposterous assertion was never before made to hoodwink and
blind justice. Why, not a day passed during this unhappy war when the
troops, in all their camps, were not dogged and followed by parties more
or less numerous, whose duties were to lie in wait for and cut off any
imprudent scouts or stragglers from the camp. The officer in command of
the escort should have been aware of this, and should have known that
the fact of a particular neighbourhood or kraal having been searched a
week previously and found deserted afforded no presumption that the
locality would not be full of Kaffirs some days further on.

After the word "Mount" was given by the Prince, a fact which is to most
minds somewhat doubtful, we are told that the volley of musketry was
fired, and that some of the horses broke away, while that of the Prince
became so frightened that he could not be mounted. "One by one the party
galloped past the Prince, who was in vain endeavouring to mount." Where
was the friend and associate of England's guest? Where was the officer
who had specially applied for this sacred and most honourable duty?
Where, we want to know, was the English officer in command of the
"escort"? His place was with his men, not leading them away with their
backs to the paltry handful of Zulus, which, it is now known, were in
the mealies, but holding the ground, and covering the body of his
charge. The captain of a sinking or waterlogged vessel is not the first
man in the boats, leaving passengers and crew to sink without him. His
place is upon his deck, trumpet in hand, and even if death-doomed,
sinking like an Englishman under the shadow of the British flag. Such,
comparatively, was the place and the _devoir_ of the officer in command
of the Prince's escort, and had he devoted one brief half-moment to see
and aid our guest to his saddle he would, even if killed or wounded in
the act, have earned a name in every English and French household more
cherished and lustrous than the star of valour which our Queen gives to
her bravest men.

We now come to the statements of the survivors, and here we are at a
considerable loss to reconcile the accounts. It is distinctly mentioned
by one witness that the abandoned Prince was seen vainly endeavouring to
spring into the saddle by the aid of the holster and the cantle. The
story must be received with considerable reservation, if not utter
mistrust. The Prince, it is well-known, was a most accomplished
horseman, and especially distinguished by his proficiency in all the
arts and minutiae of the _manege_, and he therefore would be most
unlikely to attempt to mount in the way described. Almost the first
lesson given in the riding-school to a recruit is the one which teaches
the method of mounting the horse. The merest novice in military
equitation must be aware that the first motion with the left hand is to
grasp a lock of the mane, before placing the right hand upon the cantle
of the saddle, or horse's back if not saddled. The Prince was too
well-drilled a cavalier to think of mounting by grasping either the
saddle-flap, holster, or stirrup-leather, either of which would tend to
turn a loosely-girthed saddle round under the horse. If the witnesses
had sufficient time to minutely describe the details of the Prince's
desperate struggle, they undoubtedly had equal time and opportunity to
have drawn rein and assisted him to mount. From all that can be gleaned
of a reliable nature, it would appear that the one exception of devotion
and courage displayed in this otherwise disgraceful affair was exhibited
by the friendly Zulu who was with the party. He it was who first
discovered the proximity of the enemy, and who, not being mounted, might
have had some excuse for trying to save his life by timely flight. But
he stayed loyally and gallantly with his white comrades, and came back
with quiet and deliberate consideration to give warning of the concealed
Zulus. Even then it would appear that he did not attempt to fly, but
fought with his breast to the foe until overcome by numbers. This poor
fellow's body was afterwards discovered not far from that of the Prince,
riddled with wounds, and in a pool of his own and the enemy's blood,
together with a number of his own assegais broken, but reeking with the
gore of his assailants. Doubtless, the first and real great error was
committed by the Prince and his party advancing without the Basutos
detailed to accompany them. Had these native scouts, whose powers of
observation and eyesight so far exceed those of any white man, that no
reconnaissance was considered complete without them, paraded as they had
been ordered to, it is beyond question that they would have detected
the vicinity of the concealed Zulus, and a fearful tragedy would have
been averted.

The sad news thrilled the whole camp. In every tent, and amongst each
group of old and young soldiers around the bivouac fires, the tidings
were discussed during the whole of the evening, and late into the night.
General Newdigate was applied to by General Marshall for permission to
take out a cavalry patrol, during the night, to recover the body of the
ill-fated Prince, but the former thought it would be more prudent to
wait for the daylight. At four a.m., however, two squadrons were paraded
in front of the camp, and, under General Marshall's command, proceeded
in the direction of the plateau three miles above the junction of the
Tombolaka and Ityolyozi rivers--about equidistant between the cavalry
camp at the Incetu Neck and that of Wood at the Munhla hill, and some
twelve miles from either. About eight miles from Incetu the horsemen
came to a bend of the river, and after crossing the spruit, which in the
rainy season helps to fill the Ityolyozi, they came to the base of one
of those flat-topped hills which are so common in this country. With
some considerable difficulty they ascended to the summit of this kop,
from which was obtained a splendid view of the river below as it wound
along the valley, and at the further end fell over a ledge of rock by a
directly perpendicular descent of 150 feet high and fifty feet wide.
Here the water whirled down into the abyss beneath, and seemed to be
carried off in a serpentine form through a deep channel between great
red scarped rocks. In the ascent to the kop several small but
well-built Zulu kraals were passed, and it was noticed that the huts
were very neatly built. The wickerwork was made of wattles, light and
straight, and bent over at regular distances. The kraals were well
plastered and very neatly thatched, while the doors were made rather
small, with the flooring hard and smooth. At the upper end there was a
raised ledge running right across the hut, which served as a cupboard
where all utensils are placed. Firewood was neatly packed inside between
two grass copes which were fastened against the wall. The furniture was
scanty and all of native manufacture, and some large clay pots to hold
native beer were in several of the huts. Looking down over the ground
dividing the lower ground from the higher range, a fine view broke upon
the eye in the foreground. Mount Munhla stood well out of the range upon
the plain like some huge bastion, while behind it endless grassy slopes
filled up the foreground of the picture. The hill ascended was one of
the spots selected by the Prince for his sketches, and here it was that
the party had made their first halt. Here they could be in no danger of
surprise, and well would it have been if the party had chosen an equally
safe position to off-saddle on Sunday. There is no doubt that the
Prince's talent with the pencil and the pen, combined with his
remarkable proficiency in military surveying, while making his services
so valuable to the army, contributed in no inconsiderable manner to the
risks which on several occasions he ran. From this spot, the Prince,
when he had finished his sketches, pointed out to Lieutenant Carey the
kraal at which he had been fired at on a previous occasion. From here
might be seen the Umbazini, about two miles farther on, and the kraal,
consisting of five huts, where the Prince was killed. Vedettes were now
ordered to push along the ridges to right and left, and to signal as
they advanced, while the main body of horsemen, in sections of fours,
were led by the General down the north-eastern side of the krantz. It
was an interesting sight to see the long blue and white line of horsemen
winding like a huge serpent round the sides of the mountain; the
steel-topped bamboo lances and fluttering pennons glistening bravely in
the morning sunlight, while the horses' hoofs, noiseless upon the soft
and elastic veldt, were in harmony with the silence and sad expression
that were maintained in the ranks. From the General and all the officers
to the rear-rank files there was a subdued and solemn determination of
countenance which was far more eloquent in sympathy for their dead
comrade than any words could speak, while might be seen, at the same
time, in every eye and on every lip, a stern resolve of retribution
should opportunity occur. The cry of "English cowards!" so often hurled
at our men at Ekowe, at Zlobani, at Kambula, Ginghilovo, and, above all,
on the fatal Sunday, was rankling in the hearts of our men, as they
longed to find themselves in the presence of a Zulu force. As they rode
cautiously yet speedily down the slopes of the mountain and came nearer
and nearer to the place of blood, low whispers and murmurs in subdued
accents were heard in the ranks, bronzed and bearded faces seemed to
grow more ironlike and hard, weapons were grasped with a tighter clutch,
and every eye scanned and searched the horizon for a hidden enemy. No
trumpet was sounded, but lance signals were employed to tell the
vedettes to close in upon the column as it advanced nearer to the kraal.
Now could be seen the long and luxuriant patches of Tambookie grass and
mealies intermixed which gave shelter to the foe, and whose proximity
was so strangely and unaccountably ignored by the escort of the Prince.

In front, with General Marshall and two other officers of the 17th
Lancers, rode Captain Wyatt-Edgell, their eyes fixed on the donga, where
the massacre--for it is difficult to give it another name--took place.
Would the lifeless remains of one whose bright spirit was part of a
widowed and stricken life, whose pure and Christian nature ennobled the
profession of strife to which his heart was devoted, be left intact by
the savages or mutilated by the instincts of their brutal superstition?
Would the young, calm, and somewhat sad eyes so well remembered by each
be torn or defaced by the vulture, or his still more repugnant rival the
common aasvogel (gyps fulvus), and would that lithe and graceful form
which used to lounge at evening into the homely bell-tent and
interchange camp gossip and pleasant badinage with glad and devoted
comrades--would all these be gone to human sight and ken? Were they to
have the mournful and defeated joy of bearing those poor shorn relics
back even one stage on the way to a broken-hearted mother's hearth; or
had the wild dog and the eagle feasted upon all that once was the pride
and the hope of Imperial Gaul? As they neared the horrible pit, for it
was nothing more, where the boy so well loved by all had given his
spirit to Him who gave it, they were startled and horror-stricken at the
sight of some bearded vultures, hawks, falcons, and secretary-birds,
which mounted on the wing from the long, dank grasses as the advance was
made; and they shuddered at the thought of the ghoul-like banquet of
which they might have partaken. But a deep and impassable kloof had to
be crossed, and although time was of the greatest importance at that
moment, General Marshall was too good a _sabreur_ to hazard the lives of
the living without precaution, in order to recover the relics of the
dead. Consequently, as it was quite possible that the foes might have
discovered how valued was the life which had been so carelessly
squandered, and that a large force might be hidden in other and
neighbouring ambush, the usual simple but most effectual precautions
were taken while the advance was continued. Vedettes were again thrown
out, lance in sling and carbine on thigh. Oh! what a moment of pride for
Drury-Lowe, for Boulderson, for Edgell, for Cooke, or for "Dick" Boyle
(had he been there to see). Every trooper's eye gleamed with excitement,
every thigh pressed the horse's flank, and every heart throbbed with
unspeakable rapture at the thought that a chance might be gained to dash
as an _enfant perdu_ at the Golgotha where the dead friends should be,
even though the living enemies were waiting to wrap and twine them in
their grim embrace. Twelve men were selected to ride to the right, left,
and front, and report. They had orders to dash at once into the bush
should a Zulu appear. To run away in the open before these people is not
only madness, but almost certain death to those whose misfortune it is
to be left behind; but the merest tyro in North American, South African,
or, indeed, any bush warfare, must know that once in the bush the
assailed well armed is more than a match for the antagonist ill armed.
But a ravine yet intervened between them and the scene of slaughter, and
they were compelled to make a somewhat wide detour, during the passage
of which, however, each eye and ear was on the _qui-vive_ to the
slightest rustle of branch or bough.

A group of officers were riding in front; but one topic could be
discussed--a sad and yet a cherished and welcome theme. There is that
peculiar temperament and idiosyncrasy about the soldier, a mixture of
sentiment, poetry, and practical common sense, which makes up a
philosophy all its own, and a measure of life and death, which no man
who holds not his life in the hollow of his palm can pretend to
comprehend. "_Depechez-vous, s'il vous plait, monsieur_," rang in every
ear, and seemed to be echoed through the eldritch and ghostlike
solitudes of the greystones and caverns above. The ravens, disturbed at
their approach, screamed as they passed on, while the monkeys, nestling
among the luxuriant clusters of imporotla or peopisi,--fruit whose pods,
three feet long, full of large broad beans, hanging from the branches
like cucumbers or sausages, gave a singular, a cultivated, and almost
civilized aspect to the scene,--seemed as wishing to point out the spot
where the gallant young Prince was slain.

Some Zulus, about one hundred in number, were now seen hiding in bushes
and caves; but they were quickly dislodged by a party of dismounted
Lancers under Adjutant Frith, a smart officer and worthy follower in the
old traditions of his corps. The line then brought its shoulders sharply
round to the left, and covered the five huts forming the kraal, while
the officers in front galloped through the tambookie grass and maize,
and posted vedettes at each angle of the plantation. Taking open order,
General Marshall now advanced and surrounded the donga, and, dismounting
himself, with three other officers, descended the slopes of the worn and
steep shelter that held what once was a bright and gallant spirit.

A small bank of sand, over which the sparse and struggling wild flowers
were striving to blossom and flourish, gave a pillow to the young
Prince, whose body divested of all clothing, and stripped bare save for
a charm or locket round his neck, lay extended, not in writhed
contortion, but graceful as in slumber. The face was composed and almost
smiling, and looked up to the sky towards which the pure and unselfish
spirit had soared. No trace of a violent and bloody death could be seen
on the fair and unwrinkled brow, where the lines of thought, care, and
sorrow, were as yet unploughed. The eyes were open, and seemed to gaze
up with human sympathy, though one was injured by a cruel wound which
gashed the lid and eyebrow. The body was not mutilated, and save for the
eighteen assegai wounds in the chest and front, no desecration of the
clay had been committed. The left arm lay across the chest as if
striving to shield the heart from some cruel thrust, while the right
grasped in deathly rigour a tuft of human hair, which showed in
conclusive evidence that the boy must have had time to close in the last
death-struggle with one at least of his assailants. Beyond this fact,
the ground near where the body lay was trampled and tossed, while here
and there, in the direction towards which the Zulus fled, dark
congealed clots of blood were still to be seen. Hence the conclusion
that the generous and high-souled boy, whom all loved so well, had
preserved, if not his revolver (which probably was left in his holster),
at least his sword, and that, accomplished swordsman as he was, even in
his mortal agony he had been able to sell his life dearly, and strike as
he fell. Hard-hearted and hard-headed troopers, impervious to danger and
to hardships, bowed their heads in sorrow and shame to their horses'
manes, while the fierce light of battle which is to be seen when the
trumpet sounds the "charge" gleamed through the mist of tears, as these
honest fellows looked upon the remains of him whose gashed body seemed
to appeal to them. But the sad duty was but half achieved, and, under
the kind supervision of General Marshall, a soldier's bier was quickly
improvised of 17th lances, covered with cut rushes and mealies laid
above, while a horseman's cloak lay like a shroud to cover the whole.
Tenderly and reverently as soldiers only can lift was the body lifted to
its carriage, and it was carried in relays by loving and respectful
hands back over the long and difficult road to the camp, where, on the
same day, the whole of the division paraded to do honour to the dead.
When the camp was nearly reached a messenger was sent on, and General
Newdigate and his staff came out to meet the sad _cortege_, and when
inside the lines, a gun-carriage was brought, upon which, decently
wrapped in linen clothes and covered with the Union Jack, the remains
were tenderly laid, while the funeral service was impressively performed
by the Rev. Charles Ballard, the Roman Catholic chaplain, Lord
Chelmsford, who was deeply affected, being the chief mourner. The same
evening the corpse was enclosed in a rough deal coffin and conveyed by a
mule waggon to Maritzburg. It was met bare-headed by the
Lieutenant-Governor, the Colonial Secretary, General Sir John Bissett,
and General Clifford, while minute-guns were fired from the fort, and
all the flags were at half-mast. Here again there was an elaborate and
impressive funeral, the coffin being carried by the representatives of
every branch of the service, and followed out of the town by the whole
of the large garrison, the civic authorities, and the Roman Catholic,
Protestant, and Dissenting clergy. At Durban, where the remains arrived
on the 10th inst., the body was received by the Mayor and Corporation.
The streets leading to the Roman Catholic Church were lined by the
garrison, leaning on their arms, reversed, and a requiem mass was
celebrated the same day. The following morning the coffin was received
on board her Majesty's ship "Boadicea," being escorted to the point of
embarkation by the naval and military authorities, while the sad boom of
the minute-guns accompanied the procession. The "Boadicea" then sailed
for Simon's Bay. Arrived there, the relics were transferred to her
Majesty's ship "Orontes," and so conveyed to England. After
identification and lying in state at the Woolwich Arsenal, the body was
conveyed to the Empress's residence at Chiselhurst; there, with all the
pomp and pageantry of full military honours, it was laid in the tomb in
the same chapel, where rest the remains of his loved father, Napoleon
III., Emperor of France. The utmost sympathy was shown for his bereaved
mother by the whole English nation, from highest to lowest. The Queen in
person attended the funeral at Chiselhurst, and amongst the pall-bearers
were the Prince of Wales, the Duke of Cambridge, the Duke of Connaught,
the Duke of Edinburgh, and Prince Leopold.

A court-martial was held on Lieutenant Carey, on the charge of having
behaved in an unsoldierlike manner in face of the foe; but the sentence
was kept secret, awaiting its confirmation by the Commander-in-chief in
England. Meanwhile Lieutenant Carey was sent home under arrest. On his
arrival there the proceedings of the court-martial were declared null
and void on account of some technical irregularity, and he was ordered
to resume his duties.[1]

[1] It is untrue that he has since received a high staff appointment.

It was generally understood that the sentence was dismissal from the
service with ignominy, but that it was not confirmed by the special
desire of the Empress, who made a personal request to the Queen that
nothing should be done in the matter.




CHAPTER X.

  March of the 2nd column--Kopje Allein--Climate of the
    locality--Sickness among the troops--Evil effects of Cardwell's
    system--Embassy from Zulu chiefs--Cavalry skirmish--Death of
    Adjutant Frith--Difficulties of transport--Reinforcement of
    Wood--Appointment of Sir Garnet Wolseley--Opinion of the troops
    thereon--Alleged inhumanities--The helioscope.


Two special orders were issued by Lord Chelmsford's command in regard to
this most melancholy affair. The first, dated Pietermaritzburg, June 5,
was signed by General Clifford:--"The Inspector-General of Lines of
Communication and Base has received from his Excellency the
Lieut.-General Commanding official confirmation of the calamity which
has befallen the forces under his command, by the death, on duty in the
field, of the late gallant young soldier, the Prince Imperial Louis
Napoleon, who, having, in his military training, been lately associated
with the British Army, came out to this country to take part in the Zulu
campaign. The General feels that he is carrying out the wishes of his
Excellency the Lieut.-General Commanding now in Zululand, by thus
recording the feelings of deep sorrow and sympathy, experienced by every
officer and man whose duty keeps him at his post in the colony with the
loss thus sustained."

The second order was issued by Major Butler to the troops at Durban,
and expressed the feeling and sympathy of all the columns:--"In
following the coffin which holds the body of the late Prince Imperial of
France, and paying to his ashes the final tribute of sorrow and honour,
the troops of the garrison will remember that he was the last inheritor
of a mighty name and great military renown; secondly, that he was the
son of England's firm allies in dangerous days; and, thirdly, that he
was the sole child of a widowed Empress, now left throneless and
childless in exile upon English shores, deepening the profound sorrow
and solemn reverence to those memories. The troops will also remember
that the Prince Imperial of France fell fighting as a British soldier."

On the 28th of May the second column or division quitted the camp at
Landsman's Drift, and proceeded to Kopje Allein, which is near the Blood
river, being about a mile to the north-east of it, at a point as near as
possible to the junction of that stream with the Buffalo. The position
of the camp there was all that could be desired, and the character of
the country was much more favourable than most of the previously
selected camps, inasmuch as no enemy could approach without being seen
for several miles. At Kopje Allein there was a further concentration,
and several reinforcements were received, the consequence being that the
whole force amounted to 2500 British infantry, 1100 British cavalry, 300
Artillery, 100 Engineers, 66 Colonial Horse, 1300 Native Infantry, and
in all, with Military Train and Hospital Staff, making 5700 men. It was
found impossible, for sanitary reasons, to form one undivided column,
and much as General Newdigate objected to straggling, the exigencies of
war compelled him to send his forces off in detachments. The King's
Dragoon Guards marched on Monday, the 26th, and these were followed by
Harness's Battery and a large convoy of stores on the following day,
Tuesday, the 27th. On the Wednesday the headquarter staff took the road,
accompanied by the 17th Lancers, Le Grice's Field Battery, the
field-hospital, and the 24th Regiment. They took with them fifteen days'
supplies, and to accomplish this General Newdigate wisely cut everything
down to the lowest possible limit, sixteen men being allotted to each
tent, and one tent only to six officers. Tents were really superfluous;
for the climate is simply magnificent, and no man out on a shooting
expedition would dream of carrying about with him such extra luxury as a
bell-tent. Of course the climate of this portion of Zululand being
semi-tropical, the usual precautions to be used in tropical lands must
be used here. The climate and diseases which prevail along the line,
from the Tugela, by which Crealock was advancing, are thus alluded to by
Dr. Jones, district surgeon, one of the most experienced authorities
upon the subject. He says that at a distance of fifteen miles from the
sea the fever is not more prevalent than in the interior; that the high
ground is comparatively safe in his district, and that the type of fever
is mild, the attack lasting usually from five to twenty days. It begins
about February, and is always at its worst in March, continuing more or
less till the end of May, and appearing to be more or less influenced by
the current of the north-east wind, which would, of course, carry the
miasma of the St. Lucia swamps in this direction. Dr. Dalzell, an
equally good authority as Dr. Jones, says that the high lands here are
remarkably healthy. The same holds good of the tract known as Oham's
country, situated in the valley of the Black Umvolosi river. It is
evident that the fever of this country has been greatly exaggerated, and
that it is merely intensified in localities which are within reach of
the poisonous malaria borne upon the wind. General Newdigate and General
Crealock both gave orders, that when the troops had to bivouac, they
were never on any account to pass the night either on a very low or on a
very wet situation, on account of fever, or on the hill-tops, on account
of thunderstorms. The position of the Zulu kraals should invariably be
noted, and a lesson taken from them in regard to choice of camp; while
the neighbourhood of a river that has been lately flooded should, if
possible, be always avoided. It is possible that a white man settling
here for good would sooner or later be attacked by fever, but white men
do not settle here, while a rapid march through the country appears to
injure no one. Dysentery and rheumatism troubled the troops but little,
and cases of sunstroke were rare. Sickness had prevailed certainly to a
considerable extent in some corps; but it was, as a rule, confined to
the young soldiers, unseasoned and of weak physique, who had been lately
sent out from England. The cause of our failures--and there were several
of a palpable nature--are not to be found in want of generalship, want
of organization, or want of transport. They were due undoubtedly to the
sending out of raw, sickly, unseasoned, and untutored boys, who, being
the sweepings of half the regiments in her Majesty's service, could not
possibly have any feeling of communion, or traditional sympathy, with
the corps into which, before a formidable enemy, they found themselves
pitchforked. Most of the battalions out there had to draw their
reinforcements not from its reserve battalion or depot at home, as was
the case in former years, but from the army at large, and some
battalions arrived on the shores of Africa so drenched and diluted with
outsiders, that they had the appearance of a mongrel pack, unused to
discipline and useless in the field. That the destruction of the
regimental system by Lord Cardwell has been the original cause of
several of our reverses, surprises, and humiliations, there can be
little hesitation in saying. The men at Isandhlwana were not well
handled, it must be admitted; but it has since leaked out that many of
them would not rally round their officers, but attempted safety in
flight. Dozens of the men, sergeants and other non-commissioned
officers, have since declared they did not even know the names of their
company officers, or those of their right or left-hand man.

Another instance of the evil effects of Lord Cardwell's system may be
given. The 91st recruits in past days were the envy of all
recruiting-sergeants, and so particular was the colonel, backed up by
the surgeon of the corps, that a young fellow must have had chest,
constitution, and stamina--qualities unfortunately not now insisted
upon--before he could pass the sacred portals of the 91st barrack. Few
regiments, however, have suffered from the present system more than, or
so much as, this corps. On receiving its orders for Zululand, it could
not muster 200 men, so denuded was the regiment of rank and file by the
drafts it had previously given. The consequence was that to make up the
900 men which was supposed to be its fighting strength, volunteers and
drafts had to be obtained from half the regiments at home, and the
facings of the 91st on parade, until the master tailor had put matters a
little straight, represented almost all the colours of the rainbow,
while the men, drawn from all parts, neither knew one another nor the
officers set over them.

Rumours of negotiations for peace, and the granting of an armistice,
which were being circulated about this time, arose from the following
facts:--In the middle of May Zulu messengers, of some position, but not
of the highest rank, had presented themselves to General Crealock, with
a desire to know what terms would be granted to Cetywayo in case of his
wishing to come to terms of peace. The General, finding they had no
authority or commission from the king, sent them away, but believing
from their statements that they were sincere, and knowing at the same
time that Setewango, one of the king's most influential indunas, and
Samapo and Panato, the indunas who commanded against Pearson at Ekowe,
were in the neighbourhood of Ginghilovo, let Setewango know that he
would not object to see him. Setewango admitted that he had no
commission or authority direct from the king, but added, at the same
time, that many of the chiefs were sick of fighting, as they considered
the English too strong. General Crealock then said he had no power to
treat, but that Lord Chelmsford had, and if Cetywayo were first seen by
Setewango something might be arranged. After this Setewango went to
Ulundi, and after great difficulty he and the indunas persuaded the
king to allow them to visit Lord Chelmsford, at whose camp they arrived
early in June, having first presented themselves to General Wood. Lord
Chelmsford saw these men three times, when they were distinctly told
that before any negotiations could be entered into, as an evidence of
the King's sincerity the whole of the spoil taken at Isandhlwana,
especially the two captured 7-pounders, must be restored. With these
guns were to be sent accredited ambassadors and hostages of the highest
rank. These Zulu messengers seemed much awed and impressed with the
appearance of the camp, and particularly with Marshall's cavalry, and
they left on the 6th instant. They had not long departed when much of
their story was corroborated by Tongabena and Lampunda, two well-known
friendly Zulu spies, who had just arrived from Ulundi, where they
assured us there were few warriors, the men having declined to assemble.
Dabulamanzi, whose death has been so often reported, was still there,
and a large number of women, children, stores, and cattle. Umbelini was
really dead, having been three times severely wounded, and was hit
mortally in the back through the blade-bone as he was escaping on
horseback.

On June 5th, Marshall had a very exciting little brush with the Zulus
not far from Wood's camp on the Nondonini river. In this affair poor
young Frith, a capital soldier, a good adjutant, and a general
favourite, was unfortunately killed. He was sitting on his horse
receiving an order from Colonel Drury-Lowe, when a Martini-Henry bullet
struck him, probably to the heart, as he never spoke. The patrol was
brought about by information brought into Wood's camp by the ubiquitous
and indefatigable Buller, who had been out on the previous day and
discovered the whereabouts of a large Zulu force. The gallant 17th and
the smart King's Dragoon Guards were delighted to see themselves in
orders on the afternoon of the 4th, that they were to parade at four
a.m. under General Marshall, who was also to take with him Shepstone's
Basutos and Bettington's cavalry. It was not yet sunrise when they
arrived at Wood's camp on the Nondonini, and then found that Buller,
anxious to draw first blood, had already started in the night to scour
the country and report what he could discover of the enemy. After
partaking of some excellent coffee, a little beltong, and some well-made
and well-baked bread done in Wood's field-ovens, they were again in the
saddle, taking a course towards the south-east, till the summit of a
wild ridge overlooking a deep kloof was reached. In the plain below was
a pretty little river, and near its bank a number of Kaffir huts all
blazing, having been fired early by Buller and his men, who could be
seen slowly retiring before a number of Zulus, who were keeping up a hot
fire upon them, as well as from both sides of the valley. The order was
given to advance, and Buller soon came on to meet them, making his
report that he had been attacked by these Zulus as soon as he attempted
to fire the kraal. Frith was the only casualty, and the order was then
given by General Marshall to retire firing by alternate squadrons. As
the Zulus were posted in clefts and caves of the ridges on either side,
it was impossible to get at them, and so the troops were brought
steadily off without further loss.

Lord Chelmsford had intended having a large depot formed on a portion of
the Ibabanango range; but owing to one of the principal staff officers
losing not only his own way, but his head, his lordship was compelled to
change the _venue_, and form the principal depot upon the Upoko river,
not far from the spot where the Prince met his fate. This was called
Fort Newdigate, and was held by four companies of infantry, and a
detachment or two of cavalry to keep up communication with a still more
advanced depot afterwards formed at Umsenguini, near the source of the
Upoko, where the main road from Utrecht and the Transvaal forms a
junction with that leading through Rorke's Drift and Isandhlwana.

How arduous were the duties of the cavalry in convoying large trains of
supplies from the bases to the front through the enemy's country may be
surmised, when it is borne in mind that Lord Chelmsford had to feed 7000
whites, 2000 natives, 350 English draught-horses, 850 saddle-horses,
2000 colonial horses and mules, and 10,634 oxen. From these figures also
may be formed an estimate of the work thrown upon the Commissariat.

In previous wars out in South Africa blame has been, and not unjustly,
thrown upon the Commissariat for the manner in which stores have been
wasted and frittered away while the troops have been without rations.
But in this war it would be impossible to cite any such instance of want
of management, as the troops were invariably well fed and cared for.
Want of success, therefore, could in no case be attributed to want of
supply. Great praise is due to Commissary-General Strickland for the
excellent manner in which all his plans were laid and executed. Another
instance of good work may be given. On the 4th instant Lord Chelmsford
had occasion to send a sudden order to Commissary-General Brownrigg for
the immediate furnishing and delivery of rations equal to six weeks'
supply for 9000 Europeans, 2500 natives, 1200 English horses, and 3000
cattle, and all these were sent in by the 10th.

On June 10th Sir Evelyn Wood's column received a valuable addition to
its force; viz. 450 men of the 80th Regiment, all old and seasoned
campaigners in South Africa, together with four splendid Gatling guns.
On the same day a report was made that Zulus had been seen near the
Inyezani, and on the following morning a patrol was sent out, consisting
of twenty Mounted Infantry, thirty Mounted Basutos, and fifty Light
Horse, under the command of Captain Brown, who had with him Lord William
Beresford, and Captains Cochrane, D'Arcy, and Berry. A reconnaissance
for fully twenty miles from the camp was made, and the patrol returned
about six the same evening, having made several sketches and surveys of
the country, but without seeing any Zulus.

Meanwhile grumblers and incompetent critics had kept so incessantly
bringing all sorts of reckless charges against Lord Chelmsford, of
incapacity as a soldier, that the home government thought it wise to
give way, and accordingly, to please the _vulgus profanum_, recalled Sir
Garnet Wolseley from Cyprus, and appointed him Governor of South Africa,
High Commissioner in Natal and the Transvaal, and Commander-in-chief of
her Majesty's forces in Africa, thus superseding Lord Chelmsford. This
news reached the troops actively employed against the Zulus about the
middle of June, and was received with considerable dissatisfaction by
both officers and men. It seemed to them unfair that their General
should be superseded just as a final advance was being made, and just as
he was about to reap the fruits of all his anxiety and labour. He had at
that time on the way to Ulundi a perfectly-equipped force of 9364
Imperial Infantry, 3957 Colonial Infantry, 1190 Imperial Cavalry, 1877
Colonial Cavalry, 775 Artillery, with a proportionate number of guns
(36), and 385 Royal Engineers. Generals Crealock and Newdigate had
received full instructions with regard to the concentration and movement
of this force, and all the organization had been planned and carried out
under the personal supervision of Lord Chelmsford, who had worked night
and day to get matters to a state of efficiency. It seemed, therefore,
rather hard and disheartening that the new General, who had had none of
the anxiety or the toil, should appear as the _Deus ex machina_ upon the
scene, and reap all the credit and glory of the campaign.

A great deal of rubbish was talked about the inhumanity of burning down
kraals, and accusations of shooting down women and children were not
unfrequently brought against the troops. Now most people in England do
not know that there are three distinct species of kraals. The king's or
royal kraals, the military kraals--i.e., the respective barracks or
official homes of the different corps--and, finally, the tribal and
domestic kraal, a sort of village of cabins, built together for
convenience and safety. Now, Lord Chelmsford and all his lieutenants
were too good soldiers to allow England's honour to be disgraced by
wanton cruelty or barbarous conduct even in fighting a barbarous enemy.
Military kraals, being the fortified depots of the king's troops, their
mustering rendezvous and rallying-points, were attacked and destroyed
without compunction, as they represented the arsenals and strongholds of
the enemy. The king's royal kraals, on the other hand, were the places
where Cetywayo got together cattle, mealies, and other commissariat
supplies, wherewith to tempt or reward his warriors. These were
destroyed as a matter of course, as one would capture a convoy or
destroy a hostile magazine.

It has been stated on apparently good authority that the destruction of
a royal or military kraal was considered by the Zulus as scarcely any
loss, and that the rebuilding of such was a matter of the greatest ease.
This is a totally erroneous view, as all the kraals belonging to
Cetywayo and his great chiefs which had been destroyed were most
formidable as regards defence, and must have taken great time and
trouble to construct. All these kraals of the kings, princes, and
principal chiefs are protected with high wooden stockades, pierced here
and there with low entrances, large enough to admit only one person at a
time. The isigodhlo, or inner enclosure, where the chief huts are
situated, is guarded by zigzags of the same description of stockade work
very strongly put together. There are altogether about forty military
villages or kraals scattered through the country, of from 400 to 3000
huts each, in which for a portion of the year the troops are quartered,
averaging 2000 men in each. There are, however, other military kraals
not fortified, and used only as barracks. These consist of a dry stake
and wattle fence, generally oval in form and about five feet high.
Inside this fence are the huts of the men in single, double, or treble
rows, according to the size of the kraal, while inside the huts is
another fence similar to the one outside, and the central space is
invariably the cattle-pen. The king's kraal at Ulundi (afterwards
destroyed) was 800 yards in diameter, and had a normal garrison of 5000
men. The Umhlabatini plains, upon which it was situated, are fifteen by
twenty miles in extent, and completely shut in by hills studded with
thick bush. The White Umvolosi runs through this plain, in which were
also established the other kraals forming the headquarters of regiments.
These, too, were subsequently destroyed. Here in these kraals the
principal regiments were wont to assemble annually at the great national
military festival held in honour of the king, which is now a tradition
of the past. Some years ago, when Cetywayo was full of ambition in
regard to his military power, and anxious in every manner to consolidate
it, he had a new magazine or depot of arms built at the junction of the
Black and White Umvolosi rivers. This magazine and kraal is called
Amanzekanze, and is surrounded by a dense bush. The Amanzekanze kraal
had, up to this time, held the reputation of being impregnable, and its
approaches, it was said, were so difficult that they could only be
forced at immense loss. The name of the kraal, Amanzekanze, translated
is "Let the enemy come now."

Coming now to the farming and domestic kraals, it may without fear of
contradiction be asserted, after minute and careful inquiries, that no
single instance can be adduced in which her Majesty's troops ever
attacked or molested such unless first attacked and fired upon.

A few words must here be said concerning the helioscope, which on more
than one occasion played a prominent part in this war.

One of the great features of the occupation of Port Durnford was the
establishment of mirror-signals from the "kop" at Port Durnford, and at
the post on the Inyezani down to the mouth of the Umlalasi. The use of
mirrors as a means of communication had been so fully demonstrated in
Afghanistan, that it seemed astonishing that army officers at Natal were
supremely ignorant of, and, indeed, indifferent to, the system. When it
is remembered that by this simple process it was found possible to flash
intelligence and words of sympathy and kindness to the half-famished
garrison at Ekowe, and that by means of this admirable invention, many
important items of intelligence were from time to time instantaneously
and surely communicated from one part of the British force to another,
which through the position of the enemy it was only possible to send by
messengers, who were compelled to take the most circuitous routes, thus
causing great delay and sometimes even failing to reach their
destination at all, the value of this simple yet grand discovery cannot
be too highly considered.

Its importance in some respects may indeed be declared to be in advance
of the electric telegraph, for that necessitates apparatus of delicate
mechanism and a friendly, or at least non-hostile territory, over which
the messages are sent. A predatory or hostile tribe may at any time
sever the line of telegraphic wire, and cut all communications between
neighbouring columns who are anxious to make their whereabouts and
intentions known; but this cannot be done to the mirror system, where
with no more apparatus than a small hand-glass telegraphy is established
which no mortal agency can interrupt. No invention, no discovery can
surpass in value this mode of silent yet eloquent communication, and
only the interruption of the sun's beams by clouds or fogs can interfere
with the transmission by signals, noiselessly, and in a manner almost
imperceptible to all save the two interlocutors, who may be distant ten,
twenty, thirty, or even forty miles.

At Gibraltar messages are by this process constantly sent across the
Straits; and in Australia, Mauritius, Singapore, and even Canada, the
invention has obtained for its discoverer the greatest reputation and
_kudos_.

Some four years ago Lieutenant Parrott, of the Volunteer Engineer Corps
of New South Wales, conducted a series of very successful operations in
mirror telegraphy, using discs, about six inches in diameter, of
polished metal covered with glass. At first the distance separating the
two mirrors was from six to ten miles, but eventually the system was
tested from the Kumagong mountain, about 2000 feet above the sea level,
to the lighthouse at the entrance to Port Jackson, 400 feet above sea
level, a direct distance of nearly forty miles. Now, when we consider
that the only apparatus required is a small hand-mirror, and that no
skill beyond the faculty of reflecting the sun's beam in the required
direction, and of flashing "dots" and "signals" by means of a simple
turn of the wrist, in the same way as the Morse telegraph is presented
by flag-signals, are necessary, we must allow the vast importance of
this discovery to the soldier and the sailor, more especially in savage
or uncivilized warfare. Of course the whole method is dependent on the
presence of sunshine, and, fortunately, Natal is seldom without this
great boon. In South Africa the sun's beams are more constant than in
almost any other clime, and they may be counted and depended upon during
the major portion of the dry season. It is not unworthy of notice that a
system of sun-signalling, not dissimilar to that established between
Port Durnford and General Crealock's column, has been known and
practised for some considerable time among the Nez Perces Indians of
North America. Mr. F. C. Browne, of Sydney, Australia, however, gives a
still more remarkable method of signalling, and states that successful
feats have also been accomplished by moonlight for distances of from
four to six miles. He considers, and doubtless he is correct, that it
would be quite possible to supplement this sun-and-moon telegraphy on
very dark nights by an analogous system of alternately obscuring and
displaying at longer or shorter intervals a powerfully reflected light.

Lately at Portsmouth some highly successful experiments in
night-signalling have been made by casting the electric and other
powerful lights upon columns of steam; a method evidently suggested by
the helioscope and use of reflecting mirrors.




CHAPTER XI.

  Advance of 1st column--Description of route--Forts Crealock and
    Chelmsford--Causes of delay--Sickness of troops and its
    origin--Capture of cattle--Proposals for peace by Umsintwanga--His
    interview with Crealock--Surrender of Umguelumgwizi--Advance of 2nd
    division--Details of troops composing it--A fortified kraal--Fort
    built by Wood on the Umlatoosi--Patrol by Buller--Burning of five
    kraals in the Usipexi district--Amhlabatini--Depot there
    described--Envoys from Cetywayo--Advance to White Umvolosi--Wood's
    camp--Lord Chelmsford's ultimatum to Cetywayo.


The actual advance of the 1st division may be said to have commenced on
the 17th of June, when the gallant bluejackets and Marines (the Naval
Brigade), one troop of Lonsdale's Horse, and one troop of Royal
Engineers effected an important though short movement from Fort Pearson,
the so-called base, to Fort Chelmsford; while the 57th Foot and Barton's
Contingent pushed on to Fort Crealock. General Crealock, with his
headquarters, arrived at Fort Crealock on the following day, and on the
19th reached Fort Chelmsford.

The road at starting from Fort Pearson led up a steep ascent and across
a table-land, gradually sloping towards the west, with occasional slight
undulations, until it came to the steep and almost cliff-like descent
into the valley of the Amatikula. Here frequent outcrops of sandstone
and quartz were noticeable to the engineers, whose professional
enthusiasm was excited at seeing before them the materials for building
a permanent fort in the district. Crystalline pebbles were plentiful,
and the soil, which was in some places of a reddish hue, was at other
points a pure white silver sand, both, however, being covered by a
considerable layer of vegetable mould.

Many beautiful flowers gladdened the eye on the march, amongst which
were tiger lilies, convolvuli, primulas of a rich deep yellow, and
another species having the appearance of a foxglove opened back. In the
valley of the Amatikula were some thorn-bushes of osier-like growth,
which the natives use for fencing their kraals, and these bore large
purple bell-shaped flowers. On the coast grow some of a similar nature,
and a full mile further on were white primulas, large yellow daisies,
and small red and blue flowers not unlike forget-me-nots. After this
came some rough marching, excessively trying to the waggons and oxen,
over very steep hills, through patches of tiger-grass, and across
ravines forty and fifty feet deep, with almost precipitous sides, at
each of which it became necessary to unload the more heavily-laden
waggons and carry the contents up by hand. All the hills were
exceedingly rocky, being composed mostly of granite, but in some
instances of nearly pure quartz, thickly clothed, however, with trees
whenever the inequalities of the ground and surface allowed the soil to
accumulate. The greater number of these trees were acacias in full
bloom, their red, white, and yellow blossoms, and those of other
flowering trees standing out in rich masses of gorgeous and Turneresque
colour. Late in the afternoon the column arrived at the camping-ground
near Fort Crealock, where the works were proceeding rapidly towards
completion, and every preparation was being made to reconnoitre on to
the Umlalasi. The laager was formed above a rocky pass, having at the
bottom pools of water in splendid granite basins. Out of these two small
streams issued, one running west and the other east, and falling
ultimately into the Umlalasi and the Umlatoosi. The next day a patrol
was sent out to explore a deserted kraal five miles distant. Barrow,
with about 100 horsemen, also went out scouting; but after riding a
couple of miles found the hills so closed in on either side and the path
so blocked with bamboo cane grass that his men were compelled to
dismount and lead their horses. The thick growth also shut out most of
the view of the hills, the prospect of which, however, when a peep was
obtainable, was delightful. By the side of the path was a torrent bed
more than twenty feet deep, with nearly perpendicular sides, and over
this slope went one of Barrow's men, horse and rider rolling over each
other until the stream below was reached, luckily without causing any
injury to the trooper--a Dutchman, whom Barrow congratulated by telling
him he suffered no injury as he fell upon his head. A little hair rubbed
off a remarkably sun-browned forehead was all the damage done, while the
horse had only a few scratches. The latter part of the pass, the same
afternoon, when the march was continued to Chelmsford, was very slippery
sandstone and quartz; and at one point, where the waggons had to wind
round in single file, the hills, clothed to their summits with trees,
rose to some 300 feet in height. These heights were scouted as the
troops advanced, but nothing but old women and children were seen.

The valleys through which the column passed were very fertile, with
pleasing alternations of open wood, jungle, grass, and cultivation. The
torrents, however, from the hills in the rainy season must do great
injury to the crops of mealies, and several spruits and streams were
crossed, flowing knee-deep between thickets of bamboo and tall rushes,
which, when flooded, would have been impassable.

The second brigade was behind encamped on the Inyezani, and included the
Buffs, Naval Brigade, 88th, and Sandham's battery, and came on to
Chelmsford as the first brigade marched into camp at Napoleon hill.

The two main causes of the seemingly protracted delay in the advance of
General Crealock's division were want of transport beasts, among which a
severe epidemic had broken out, and the large amount of fort-building
and road-making requisite in and around Port Durnford. Still, the time
taken up in regard to this new base was by no means wasted, as it
sufficed to keep a large and well-armed portion of the Zulu army idle in
this vicinity, and thus gave Lord Chelmsford immense facilities for
pushing on his men to the left front, whilst General Crealock was able
to utilise his force towards the coast while waiting for transport to
move up into the interior.

The sick-list still continued somewhat heavy, a very large proportion of
officers and men being _hors de combat_. Much of the malaria, the
medical authorities considered, arose from the effluvia caused by the
decomposition of the numerous carcases of oxen and horses which lay all
along the road, and literally tainted and poisoned the air. These
carcases lay where the convoys had to pass, and the consequence was that
whenever a detachment had to come or go to or from the fort, some
portion, often a large percentage, reported themselves ill with fever.
The remedy seemed easy, but was not so. The men were worked so hard at
digging and entrenching, that it was impossible to detail fatigue
parties to bury or remove the carcases, which, therefore, were left to
breed pestilence in the camp.

On June 22nd General Crealock decided to make another strong
reconnaissance towards the sea on the following day, and orders were
given overnight that the entire cavalry force, consisting of two
squadrons of mounted infantry, the Natal Horse, and the native Basuto
scouts, should parade at daybreak with the whole of the 91st
Highlanders. The General's object was to utilise his stay at Fort
Napoleon by doing as much to open communications with Port Durnford as
possible, and particularly to effect what improvements could be made in
the road between the fort and that place.

The only result of this expedition was that the troops accidentally came
upon a body of 250 Zulus, driving away a large number of oxen; of which,
after a sharp skirmish, though without the loss of a man, they captured
192 fine head, as well as numerous women and children, who came to the
General imploring protection. This was of course assured to them; and as
they appeared hungry and half starved, biscuits and mealies were served
out to them upon the ground. On the homeward march to Fort Napoleon they
were overtaken by two very good-looking young Zulus, fully armed and
equipped in war panoply. These men stated that they belonged to Cuzame,
a powerful Zulu chief, who was now on his way with his wives and head
men to Fort Napoleon to surrender. On arriving at the fort later on in
the evening, this was found to be the case. After a long interview with
General Crealock, in which Cuzame gave some valuable information in
regard to Cetywayo's army then collecting for the defence of the big
kraals, the chief was ordered by the General to leave his family and
some of his warriors, and return to his kraal for his arms and cattle.
This he expressed himself most willing and anxious to do.

It was now discovered that it was an error to suppose that the Zulus
were a united nation, all regarding Cetywayo as their supreme autocrat
and head. On the contrary, there were other chieftains with objects and
ambitions of their own. Thus, a chief named Umsintwanga (or the "Old
Fox") came in on the morning of June 26th, with the usual ivory tusk and
proposals for peace. He and his party were seen at daybreak about two or
three miles from the camp trying to ford a small stream, tributary to
the Umlalazi. The vedettes could not quite make out their proceedings,
as, when halfway across the stream, they turned back, ascended a
neighbouring kop, and spent a considerable time in reconnoitring the
position of the fort. This naturally excited the suspicions of the
patrol, to whom the mounted vedettes reported, and a small mounted body
of men was sent to make a circuit and cut them off in case they
attempted to retire. Whether this movement was observed is uncertain,
but eventually, after considerable delay, and after approaching the
camp from several different points, the chief and his attendants, four
in number only, came boldly up to the patrol, and requested to be
brought into camp, to the presence of the great chief. At eight o'clock,
Umsintwanga, who is a rather finely built, elderly man, inclined to be
corpulent, was brought into the presence of General Crealock, who
treated him with the greatest courtesy and respect. The countenance of
the chief showed a curious mixture of dogged determination, savage
cunning, and treachery. His hair was frizzed, and plastered elaborately
with red clay and grease, while he wore a belt with some foxtails round
his waist, and a species of garters of smaller tails tied below the
knee. His mantle seemed to be an old and much-stained horse-blanket, and
above this was a small tippet of leopard-skin, worn something like a
herald's tabard. He carried no weapon save a stout knobkerrie, and his
attendants, who were four splendidly stalwart Zulus, carried the tusk
with the greatest ease and dignity. Care had been taken that the place
of conference should be out of sight of the fort, and for this purpose
the base of a small hollow near the camp had been chosen, where the
rising ground intervened and prevented any observation of what was going
on in the trenches and about the lines. The conference was not of long
duration, for after waiting a reasonable time to allow the chief time to
collect himself, the general at once and shortly asked what was the
meaning and purport of his mission, and why he had come into camp. To
this Umsintwanga, through an interpreter, replied that he was sent by
the king and his indunas to sue for peace, and in proof of their
overtures being sincere he desired to present the immemorial symbol of
peace and friendship, the ivory tusk. He said further, that he was
deputed to ask the stoppage of the 1st Division, the proceedings of
which had much grieved and astonished the king, and he, therefore, was
desired to ask that it should advance no further towards the king's
kraal, while he, the ambassador, might be allowed to go through our
division to Natal. Umsintwanga spoke tolerably well, and seemed not to
have learnt his speech off by heart, as he occasionally hesitated,
stopped, and now and then exchanged words and phrases for others which
he thought more suitable. General Crealock, who listened with the utmost
deference and patience to the somewhat long tirade, then rather abruptly
said, "Am I to understand you distinctly, and without any reservation,
that you, Umsintwanga, induna, come direct and with full authority from
the king?" This query seemed to astonish and somewhat confuse the
ambassador, who, after some little circumlocution, admitted that he had
come, if not quite with the king's authority, at least with his
knowledge and sanction. On being pressed a little more, the old chief
further admitted that it was principally by the desire of the indunas,
more than by that of the king, that he had come, and he still most
positively adhered to the statement that his proposals were official and
in good faith. Umsintwanga was then informed that he had not come to the
proper camp with his proposals, that it was to Lord Chelmsford, and no
other, that he must apply, and that even if he went to Lord Chelmsford
he would not be listened to unless the demands specified in his
lordship's ultimatum were complied with to the letter. The whole of the
interview did not occupy more than a quarter of an hour or twenty
minutes; and when it was over, it would have been quite impossible to
have told, from the imperturbable countenances of the induna and his
suite, whether they were disappointed or not. They seemed to take their
rebuff as if they expected it, and were then conducted by a circuitous
route away from our camp, and left, with the tusk, two miles upon their
road.

It must here be remarked that Lord Chelmsford had throughout the
campaign shown the greatest suavity and patience to any attempt at
peaceful proposals, but he had by this time seen the necessity of a
certain degree of firmness, and General Crealock, although he doubtless
would have given a similar answer had he not been instructed, had a
complete understanding with the Commander-in-chief that no proposals
were to be listened to unless accompanied with the fulfilment of the
conditions laid down in the chief's message to the last messengers.
Brigadiers Bray and Rowlands, together with the whole of the General's
staff, were present at the interview, and the induna and his attendants,
although unwilling to manifest any surprise, were evidently impressed
with the quietude and promptitude with which every wish and order of the
General were carried out. Again on June 21st, General Crealock, then
engaged in completing the fortifications at Napoleon hill, rode out
across the Umlalazi river with a small staff and escort, to interview a
chief named Umguelumgwizi, who had just made friendly overtures and
expressed a wish to consult the General as to what his future line of
conduct should be. Umguelumgwizi's kraal was some miles off, but the
chief said he would come and meet the General; and not more than two
miles in his direction had been traversed when he was seen coming,
accompanied by several of his sons and head men. The Zulu chief was
known to be rich in cattle, and possessed of considerable local
influence. He was a man apparently about fifty-two or fifty-three years
of age, and, in spite of a somewhat sinister expression, had a tolerably
open and apparently honest manner of speaking. He was not by any means
long in coming to the point, declaring emphatically that he had no
quarrel with the English, or, for the matter of that, he added, with the
Dutch. He had heard of and understood the award given by the English
Commissioners in regard to the Dutch boundary, and he thought "Sompsen"
and "Bartle" had behaved most generously to Cetywayo. He had been
obliged to go out to fight on Cetywayo's side, but neither he nor his
young men wished to go out again. If he refused, he would be accused of
witchcraft, "smelt out" and "eaten out." What was he under these
circumstances to do? General Crealock, who had listened very patiently
to this somewhat long harangue, said he had spoken honestly and well,
that as a soldier he did not wish to advise any man to desert his king
or his chief, but that he could not be doing wrong in refusing to fight
in what he considered an unjust cause. If he chose to come in and
surrender, with his arms, his cattle, his wives, children, and his
tribe, all should be protected, and all should be held for him in trust
till peace was made. The chief, who seemed much pleased with General
Crealock's kind and manly advice, consulted a few moments with those of
his advisers who were with him, and then asked the General to give him
one day for consideration. "Willingly, my friends," said Crealock, "and
I will meet you on this side of the river to-morrow, when you can tell
me your decision." Upon the Monday (June 22nd), therefore, directly
after the General had made his usual tour of inspection among the road
fatigues, he crossed over, this time with a couple of troops of Barrow's
men, and met Umguelumgwizi with an immense following, consisting of his
wives and children. The General, however, explained to the chief that he
could only accept this surrender in part, and that it would not be
complete until all his cattle and all his fighting men came in. This the
chief promised to attend to.

On the 25th the 1st Brigade, under General Rowlands, crossed and moved
down the river, encamping about six miles from here. The day following
this brigade moved on to Port Durnford, and reinforced the small force
there. On the 27th Clarke's Brigade started from this place, and moved
on to support Rowlands', encamping and laagering up two hills in sight
of the 1st Brigade. From this encampment a splendid view of Fort
Durnford can be obtained.

The long ranges of mountains, which completely separate the coast-line
from the interior, here stand out in magnificent relief, and although
they are at a distance of fifty to seventy miles, they present a sharply
defined outline in the morning air, their ravines, watercourses, and
terraced heights appearing with almost supernatural distinctness. Here
is a country where the light is rich and brilliant, where the atmosphere
is surpassingly bright and clear, and the scenery bold, spacious, and
grand. The characteristic beauty of light in South Africa is not seen
in its blending with manifold forms of cloud so much as in the full and
even splendour with which it penetrates the air. Distant objects, that
in a less brilliant atmosphere fade away in hazy outline, stand out with
perfect distinctness. Let a spectator place himself at a distance of
twenty or thirty miles from the Drakenberg, or any of the big ranges of
this country, and contrast the effect he will obtain with that he would
experience with Snowdon, Mangerton, or any of our home mountains at a
similar distance. Small boulders, cavernous hollows in the rocks,
patches of bush at the head of the kloofs, at an elevation of 2000 or
3000 feet, are seen with the naked eye without difficulty. A northern
mountain at home, at either of these elevations, will appear in more or
less of hazy outline with all details of face and profile obscured, but
here in the clear atmosphere of Zululand, the very direction of the
watercourses, the curves of the kloofs, and, indeed, every bold wrinkle
on the face of the slopes of the mountains can be most clearly
discerned.

We must now leave Crealock building his forts and making his roads,
while we turn our attention to the movements of Newdigate and Wood.

Every facility had been given to Crealock's (1st) Division to make the
first forward movement on the king's kraal. Lord Chelmsford considering
that after the difficulties General Crealock had encountered it would be
only fair to him and to those under his command to give him every chance
of winning first blood in the final attack. However, the coast sickness
proved so fatal to Crealock's transport train that he was utterly unable
to take advantage of Lord Chelmsford's generosity, and it was to the
2nd column that the final honours of Ulundi fell. On Saturday, the 21st
inst., General Newdigate with this column reached the right bank of the
Umlatoosi, while Evelyn Wood, with his strong flying column, had
slightly preceded him, and had encamped a little lower down on the left
bank. Newdigate's brigadiers were Glynn and Collingwood, with Marshall
in command of the cavalry; and his corps were two batteries of artillery
and an ammunition column, the 2nd company of Engineers, the King's
Dragoon Guards and 17th Lancers, the 21st, the 1-24th, 58th, and 94th
Regiments, Shepstone's Horse, No. 3 Troop, and the Mounted Natives. This
force made up 1870 Europeans, 530 Natives, and eight guns. Wood's field
state of this date gave the Gatling Battery, the Engineers, the 13th,
90th, and a wing of the 80th Regiment, with Buller's Cavalry, consisting
of the Mounted Infantry, Frontier Light Horse, Transvaal Rangers, and
Wood's Irregulars, making a force of 2192 Europeans, and 573 Natives,
four guns and two Gatlings. These two columns, therefore, gave Lord
Chelmsford a compact and admirably-welded and homogeneous body of 4062
Europeans, 1103 Natives, 12 guns, and two Gatlings, and with this force
he justly considered that he held Ulundi in the hollow of his hand.

On the day following (the 22nd), while Newdigate, whose oxen much
required it, gave the division a holiday in camp, Wood pushed on about
four miles, taking care to note every bush, rock, stream, and salient
point _en route_. The march was through a mixture of jungle, long grass,
and occasional outcrops of granite, mixed with unpleasant-looking
boulders of grey sandstone, but which would have been well appreciated
by an engineer for the construction of a permanent work of defence. Ten
small streams were passed, besides tributaries of the Umvolosi, and many
tracks of buffalo and elephant were seen, while some of Wood's
enthusiastic sportsmen were positive they could at times hear the
well-known trumpet of the latter in the jungle. The road then led along
a narrow valley, flanked by rocky hills on either side. On the banks of
the stream which flowed in this spot some deserted kraals were seen,
with broken utensils, stone fireplaces, and small pits where mealies
were stored and still left. The huts which composed these kraals were
not built in the same way as others they had seen, but seemed
constructed with more skill and an eye to greater comfort. First of all
were stout posts planted in the ground, and the interstices filled up
with clay. The roof, instead of being of the general umbrella shape, was
flat, and with a slight slope to the front; and the rafters were covered
either with sheets of bark or with bushes and grass, over which was
spread a thick coating of earth. Sweet potatoes, cut in slices, pumpkins
and gourds, and other vegetables of a succulent nature, were laid on
some of the roofs to dry for the winter's provision. The interior of
these huts had, instead of one, as is usual in Zululand, two, and
sometimes three divisions. The first contained a small raised space for
a bed-place, covered with hides, and here was the almost universal
African fireplace, consisting of the three cones of clay, which in many
instances are hollow, and form a most ingenious oven. The only cooking
utensils were earthen pots, nearly everything in this part of South
Africa being prepared for eating by boiling. In the next division lambs
and goats were kept, and the innermost one was used as a granary, where
corn is stored in "lindo," band-boxes made of bark, with the lids
carefully luted on with clay. These lindo are sometimes of enormous
size, and are sufficiently large to contain a dozen or more sacks. Light
is admitted only through the one door, which also provides the sole
means for the escape of smoke, and as a consequence the rafters and
walls are black and shiny, and the cobwebs with which they are festooned
are loaded with soot. Among the rafters walking-staves, and knobkerries,
assegais, and other primitive weapons of war, are usually stored, so as
to get them good and due seasoning by the smoke. The largest of the
villages was clean and surprisingly well-built, said to be after a model
one made by the late King Panda. It was surrounded by a stockade, in
addition to the outer walls of houses, and the part where the chief had
evidently lived was divided off from the rest of the village, and was
also the gateway. The gates were heavy slabs of wood, hewn out of the
solid trunk, and those wanting to enter could only go up to the
principal gate one at a time, as a wing of palisading projected on
either side in the form of a long U, with holes to use assegais through,
so that it would be no pleasant attempt to try to force an entrance
against the will of the dwellers therein. There were some other smaller
doorways in the outer walls of the house, forming part of what might be
termed the _enceinte_, which closed in a sort of portcullis fashion. A
number of heavy logs had holes in their upper ends, and the wall plate
was rove through them. When the doorway is open, these logs are triced
up inwards and out of the way, and when closed the outer sides of the
lower ends butt, as it were, against a strong fixed log, and are secured
by a strong movable log inside.

On the 23rd, Brigadier-General Wood halted, still on the left bank of
the Umlatoosi, for the purpose of building a fort, which was to be held
by two companies of the 58th, two of Harness's field-guns, and some
irregular cavalry. The outlines and profiles were soon traced by
experienced though not professional engineers, and on the evening of the
same day the place was securely defensible.

The spot chosen by Wood to build the fort is on the Umlatoosi, and in a
position naturally of great strength, for the river there makes a rapid
bend and affords a ready means of both banks being swept and commanded
from the work. A rude and most insecure bridge, formed of a couple of
huge trees, already existed, but this was now under water, while the
strength of the current was so great when the survey was being made that
several of Wood's men were washed off, and only saved themselves by
catching at bushes on the bank. In the centre of the stream there is an
island, and upon this an outwork was constructed. This island is
situated amongst numerous rapids and cascades, breaking out from the
rocky hillside. The difficulties of getting across seemed at first sight
almost insuperable, but after a time it was discovered that there were
places where it was possible to jump from rock to rock, and then to wade
through the rapids themselves on narrow shelves, holding meanwhile "like
grim death" by ropes of creepers, stretched from side to side for that
purpose. It will be, of course, understood that a single false step, or
the snapping of the creeper-rope, at these points would be fatal, for
nothing could save the traveller in that case from being dashed to
pieces amongst the rocks beneath. The stream below this was about fifty
yards wide, very deep, and running like a sluice. Happily a passage was
effected without any casualty. Looking back from the other side a most
striking sight is presented by this mass of water bursting out of the
precipitous hillside, and broken by the rocks and little bushy islands
into foaming cascades. Many small streams are passed, which occasionally
flow for some considerable distance in subterranean channels. They work
in amongst loose stones, covered with soil and vegetation, the
underground portions of their course being sometimes not more than forty
yards of their length, while in other instances they seem to have
disappeared altogether, and no doubt help to supply those mysterious
fresh springs which are known to exist even on the beach at Port
Durnford.

The eastern portion of the Umlatoosi district, and that leading to the
sea is moderately level, with rocky hills, on the summits of which are
situated the villages of the chiefs; but as the western portion is
reached, the country breaks into mountains of every shape and form,
amongst which the more numerous are needles and cones of granite. In the
foreground the hills are of red sandstone, crowned with groves of
magnificent trees, festooned with jasmine and other sweet-scented
creepers. Many of the rivers appear to have been crossed in former days
by bridges, constructed either by the Zulus or by the missionaries, or
possibly by both. Poles were planted in the bed of the stream, and upon
others lashed at the top smaller poles and branches were laid to form
the footway. When first constructed these were doubtless secured to the
cross-pieces by lashings, but by this time they had rotted away, and
consequently afforded but a very precarious foothold.

Between the 24th and the 26th both columns--that is to say, the
headquarters and Wood's--advanced but six miles, but Buller was not more
idle than Wood, as, while the latter was building a fort to hold a
couple of hundred men in the heart almost of a formidable enemy's
country, the former had patrolled in almost every direction to the
front, rear, and both flanks. On the 25th Buller and his "merry men"
were in the saddle and away more than nine miles to the front, and by
noon there came an orderly, "bloody with sparring, fiery red with
haste," who brought news that "Redvers," with his usual good fortune,
had pounced upon about seventy or eighty Zulus busily engaged in
grass-burning, to bother the advance in regard to grass for the horses
and oxen. Buller made extremely short work of these fellows, whose
surprise was so complete that the whole lot might have been annihilated
if humanitarian principles had not interposed. As soon as the grass was
effectually saved, Buller proceeded on a few miles, and, although
watched here and there, suffered not the slightest molestation. The same
evening (25th) Buller came back from his own camp to the headquarter
camp with full information in regard to the five kraals that had been
observed on the 24th in the district of Usipexi, which he reported were
guarded by a tolerably formidable Zulu impi. A small and select council
of war was at once held in General Newdigate's tent, under the
presidency of the Commander-in-chief. After a very short conference, in
which Lord Chelmsford, Generals Newdigate and Marshall, and Colonels
Drury-Lowe and Buller were the principal speakers, it was finally
decided that an attack in force should be made upon the five kraals, and
any others that could be discovered at an early hour on the following
day. At daybreak accordingly the force was drawn up in line for Lord
Chelmsford's inspection, which, as was usual with him, was, though
rapid, most carefully minute. On the right were two guns and fifty men
of Le Grice's admirable battery, and next came two of Drury-Lowe's
splendid blue-and-white squadrons. These fellows would have won the
heart of any light cavalry colonel or adjutant, and it seemed almost a
pity that such glittering panoply of crest and spear and plume should
have to abide the thrust of a hidden assegai from behind a rock or bush.
Four hundred and fifty of Buller's best men, though not so smart nor so
well mounted as Drury-Lowe's gallant fellows, were not despised or
looked down upon by those who were present, and the more brilliantly
decked trooper, with his uniform and glittering _apanage_, felt proud to
ride with the men who had fought so well at Zlobani and conquered so
grandly at Kambula. Two companies of natives made up the force, which
perhaps was the largest patrol ever furnished in this war for such a
duty as the burning of kraals. The guns and part of the cavalry were
sent by a circuitous path which led to an eminence near the largest
kraal, and part of Buller's Horse bearing a little to the right, the
main body advanced along the road by which Buller had yesterday
returned. They first came to the large kraals of Udugwoosu and of
Udlumbedlu, which were found deserted, and shelled and burnt without
opposition; and when this was effected, the cavalry and natives
descended into the plains, to Uxixipi, which was also destroyed, after
shelling out about a thousand natives, who were at once pursued by the
Basutos and Frontier Light Horse. Not many Zulus were killed, as some
were old men and boys, and strict orders had been given to spare these.

On the 27th the flying column, under Wood, advanced nine miles on the
road to Ulundi; while the main division, under Newdigate, with
Brigadiers Glynn and Collingwood, and Marshall in command of the
cavalry, moved on eleven miles, both columns encamping at a place called
Amhlabatini, within a mile of each other. They carried no tents, but
took with them 200 ammunition-waggons, and ten days' full rations, which
on emergency could have been spun out to double that number. Soon after
the halt all the brigadiers were assembled by Lord Chelmsford, who
briefly but succinctly expounded to them his intentions and future
action. His lordship said the time had now arrived for a final blow to
be dealt, and he purposed, having first established a base of operations
by constructing a small depot laager at Amhlabatini, pushing on at once
to the attack of Ulundi. Buller would clear the front and mask the
columns as they advanced, and would do all he could to provoke and
entice the enemy to attack in the open. The question now was what
details were to be left at the laager as a garrison, and it was decided
that these should be furnished by three companies of the 1-24th
Regiment, and some other contingents, making up 500 men. Soldiers, as a
rule, must accept all commands without question; but although no open
word is spoken, there are times when the bitterness of disappointment
will show itself without speaking. Such was the case when the order-book
proclaimed the duty detailed for the 24th.

The entrenched laager was most artistically made in an incredibly short
space of time. Within a radius of 500 yards all trees and bush were cut
down and cleared away. In the centre a rectangle of waggons was formed,
with earth thrown up above the axletrees, and at 15 yards' distance from
these a trench and an embankment three feet high were constructed.
Again, about 100 yards beyond this, strong and well made abattis were
placed. These consisted of whole trees and stout branches 12 and 15 feet
long, felled and placed side by side, with their butts inwards and
boughs interlaced, while the twigs and small leaves were stripped off
and the boughs sharply pointed. The butts were strongly picketed down,
and in some cases fastened by logs laid across several butts. These
abattis were fully five feet in height, and as green wood--not easy to
burn--was selected, they made a formidable obstacle. It took 200 men
only eight hours to construct 200 yards of abattis, and this,
considering that many of them had never done such work before, was most
creditable. All the officers were in the highest possible spirits, and
no inconsiderable amount of banter was carried on between the two
columns during the visits paid from one to the other. One of the most
fertile subjects for "chaff" was the increasing weight and sleekness of
Buller's men as compared with the visibly apparent attenuation of their
horses, and the joke was to affect to believe that these "African
Cossacks," as they were called, devoured all the oxen they captured,
while making their horse-rations into oatmeal cakes for themselves! This
story, if _ben trovato_, was singularly devoid of fact, for Buller's
horses presented a most favourable contrast to those of Marshall, as the
former would eat almost anything, and the latter were only just
commencing to put up with mealies. The constant work of the former
animals had naturally kept them devoid of superfluous flesh, but, for
all this, they were as hard as "nails" and good in their wind.

On the afternoon of the 27th, vedettes signalled the approach of some
natives, accompanied by a large number of cattle. These proved to be
further messengers from Cetywayo, bringing 150 of our oxen captured at
Isandhlwana, together with a pair of elephants' tusks and a letter,
written in English by a captive dealer. The letter was fairly expressed,
and said that the king could not comply with all Lord Chelmsford's
demands, as the arms taken from us at Isandhlwana were not brought to
him, and that it was beyond his power as a king to order or compel any
of his regiments to lay down their arms. The letter also said that
Harness's guns should be sent, and on receipt of the cattle and these
weapons the English must retire from Zulu territory. Whoever had
written the letter must have been a bold and plucky fellow, as he had
added in a corner in pencil a few words of warning, and an intimation
that Cetywayo had with him at Ulundi and the neighbouring kraals a large
and picked impi, amounting to 20,000 men. Even without this message Lord
Chelmsford would have considered these overtures as suspicious; but, as
it was, increased precaution against surprise or treachery was taken.
Lord Chelmsford accordingly declined the tusks, and told the messengers
in the plainest language that, before he thought of retiring, all the
original conditions must be complied with, more especially as regards
the formal laying down of arms by the regiment. The messengers were then
escorted from our column, and later in the day several large bodies of
Zulus, amounting to some thousands, were noticed moving in a lateral
direction from the side of Ulundi, and passing along by the left flank.
The following day was a busy one for all. Lord Chelmsford was so anxious
to complete the main details of the depot laager that he deferred his
march till sundown. Wood, however, moved on in the morning as far as the
left bank of the White Umvolosi, where he bivouacked and waited for the
main body. After waiting until all the more prominent and essential
matters were completed in regard to the garrison left in the depot, Lord
Chelmsford ordered the parade for 5.30 in the evening, and they then
marched on to the next bivouac in a compact and well-organized column.
It was still daylight when the White Umvolosi was reached, and they saw
across the river, on the left bank, the flying column and the Lancers
already bivouacked. The scene as on the right bank of the river was
most picturesque. On the left bank of the Umvolosi Wood had admirably
chosen the ground for his bivouac. Here was a firm, wide plateau,
bounded on the east and north by a hilly country, broken up by knolls
and tall cone-like eminences, whose slopes here and there were covered
by patches of dense jungle or bordered by young forests, whose shades
seemed to invite shelter during the fierce heat of the day. Away in the
extreme distance the landscape differed materially in aspect from the
country near. Mountains of loftier altitude, rising peak upon peak, tier
upon tier, and range upon range, met the eye everywhere. Green trees
covered their slopes in apparently endless expanse of vegetation.
Immediately behind the Lancer camp, and sheltering it from the night
breezes that swept across the plain, was a massive buttress of rock
covered with richly and delicately-hued velvety mosses, while down the
hard, steep, rocky beds of granite and sandstone, with here and there
basalt and porphyry, flint and quartz, foamed sparkling little streams,
which always seem so refreshing and so tempting on a South African
march. A deep gaping fissure in a high jutting wall of rock, through
which bubbled the clear water in volumes; a great towering rock with
perpendicular walls, to which clung, in spite of apparent impossibility,
ferns and plants and moss, thick and velvety; and a huge conical hill
which ambitiously hid its head in the clouds; these were wild and rugged
forms of nature to be treasured up long after their marching days were
gone and past. The camp was situated on a wide terrace or shelf of
ground rising above a body of water, which more resembled a long narrow
lake than a river. This part of the White Umvolosi, indeed, like many
other African rivers, loses its current in the dry season, and becomes a
series of long narrow pools, which in some places may be compared to
lakes for their length, according to the nature of the ground in which
depressions are found. If the ground is rocky or of clayey mud the water
is retained, instead of being absorbed, and here swarm multitudes of
silurus, or bearded mud-fish. Wherever mud-fish are abundant,
crocodiles, the great fish-eating reptiles of the African waters, are
sure to be found, and, singularly enough, wherever crocodiles are found
one is almost sure to find the hippopotamus--not because crocodiles and
hippopotami have any affinity for each other, but because the soil which
retains the water during the hot days of the drought season is almost
sure to produce in the vicinity of the pools abundance of rich grass and
tall cane, the favourite food of the hippopotamus. Two miles further in
the plain Wood's bivouac fires were seen in glittering and regular
ranks, marking out the exact ground which each regiment or corps would
occupy in order of parade or march. Far away, but in a line with each
angle of the bivouac, were the outlying pickets; while, again, beyond
these were those vigilant and unsleeping patrols which made this column
so secure and impossible to surprise.

At daybreak on the 29th the main body crossed the river and joined the
flying column on the left bank. They now were but fifteen miles from
Ulundi, and all the king's kraals were visible to the naked eye. On the
far slope of the hills that bound the plain were the two round kraals,
Likasi and Undabakawazi; next, and built in the shape of a crescent,
were Unodwengo, Panda's old palace, Ulundi, built by the present king,
while farthest of all was another, making five, called Umpanibougwena.

On the 30th Lord Chelmsford was ten miles from the Umvolosi; and he sent
a despatch to Sir Garnet Wolseley, to say that the king's messengers had
just left with an ultimatum for Cetywayo, to the effect that his
lordship must advance to a position on the left bank of the river on the
1st July, but that if no opposition were offered the troops would wait
there without any hostile movement until twelve at noon on the 3rd,
when, if the original terms sent to Cetywayo, namely, the delivery of
the guns taken at Isandhlwana, and the cattle, were complied with, 1000
captured rifles would be received instead of a regiment laying down its
arms, and peace negotiations would be entertained. On the following
morning, accordingly, the main body marched at an early hour, and,
preceded by the flying column and Buller's men scouring the country in
front and flank, arrived at the river and took up the position named
above.




CHAPTER XII.

  Raid across the Umvolosi by Buller--Gallant rescue of a sergeant by
    Lord William Beresford--Buller's losses--Umvolosi crossed by the
    main body--Formation of troops into square--Total numbers--Firing of
    kraals--Advance of Zulus from Ulundi--The Zulu attack--Repulse of
    Zulus--Pursuit by cavalry--Death of Wyatt-Edgell--Losses of both
    sides--Withdrawal of English army--Effects of the battle of
    Ulundi--Surrender of 700 Zulus to Crealock--Cause of retreat after
    Ulundi--Resignation of Lord Chelmsford--His farewell parade--Epitome
    of work done by 1st column, and why it was not present at
    Ulundi--Ondini burnt by Barrow.


On the morning of the 3rd of July, the last day of grace, so far from
any compliance with Lord Chelmsford's demands being made, all sorts of
hostile demonstrations were shown by the Zulus, who were gathered in
large numbers about eight miles off. All day long, on the 1st and 2nd,
there had been a dropping fire at long ranges upon our men; and on the
3rd the enemy, growing bolder, pushed his skirmishers down to some rocks
on the opposite side of the river, and fired upon the men as they were
watering their horses in the stream. One horse was killed and several
men wounded, and then it was that Buller asked and obtained permission
to make a raid into the enemy's country.

Early in the afternoon Buller was waiting impatiently to cross,
looking, as was said of Picton, "in a heavenly humour, because some one
was likely to be killed." A couple of guns were brought into position on
the banks of the river, to cover Buller's crossing, and, if necessary,
to assist his retreat if hard pressed on his return. A couple or three
rounds of shrapnel made short work of a crowd of Zulus who had
approached on the opposite height in a most impudent manner; and hardly
were the echoes of these heard along the shores before Buller and
Beresford, dashing into the stream with a cheer that made the rocks
resound, were followed over the river by Buller's horsemen, the Mounted
Infantry, and Baker's Horse. A good billiard or racquet player likes a
gallery, and if the very dashing rifleman and _beau sabreur_ were at all
anxious for an audience, they certainly had a large one on this
occasion. In fact the whole camp--if camp you can call a bivouac without
tents--turned out literally in its shirt-sleeves to see the fun. The
fatigue parties stopped their wood-cutting to take a look at the two
camp favourites as they raced like school-boys at a paper hunt after the
Zulus, who were scuttling away like prize pedestrians to gain the
shelter of a friendly kraal. Buller being in command, however, was not
forgetful of his men; and, though galloping at a steeplechase pace, kept
them well in hand, and raced with about a score of his fellows at the
military kraal Dalwayo, on our right front. Beresford, however, being a
sort of chartered libertine, and having no separate command, "went for"
the Zulus entirely, as he subsequently expressed it, "on his own hook."
Meanwhile, by Buller's order, Baker's men, guided by their leader, had
inclined to the left front, to carry and hold a favourable hillock which
commanded the best part of the ford. This piece of thoughtful strategy
proved invaluable at the close of the day, when the horsemen had hard
work to get back. On galloped Buller's men past Nodwengo, Lord William
well to the front, now sabring a Zulu, now stopping to aid a wounded
comrade; while Buller, having picked a hundred of his best-mounted men,
pushed on with the intention of exploring and, if possible, firing
Ulundi.

There was nothing impossible in this project. Buller had good
information that the bulk of the king's army was away upon Lord
Chelmsford's right flank, and that the kraal would possibly have a
slender guard. It was well, perhaps, that this somewhat hairbrained
exploit should not be carried out, and it was stopped as follows:--The
contour of the ground between this point and the king's kraal was formed
by a succession of undulating (at rather a steep angle) plains, which in
the hollows gave admirable cover and concealment to the Zulus. These
large dongas in two places formed positions where bodies of men could be
massed at right angles, and so take an incautious enemy on the flank.
Here the Zulu general, whoever he was, had admirably disposed his
reserves, and here, but for the steady conduct of all hands, Buller
might have met his fate. As suddenly as the mountain warriors of
Roderick appeared above the heather to James Fitz-James, did the tall
Zulu warriors put in an appearance, and from front and flank a very well
sustained fire was poured in upon the daring Buller and his men. But
Buller, with all the dash of a Rupert or a Murat, had much of the
prescience and caution of a veteran, and invariably adopted the
principle which may be indifferently expressed as "having two strings to
your bow," or "not having all your eggs in one basket." He had,
previously to his daring advance in the enemy's country, ordered
Commandant Raaf to halt near Nodwengo, with his horsemen as reserve and
supports. At the imminent moment, therefore, when the Zulus appeared in
the hollows, these gallant fellows came up and saved the day, and it is
more than probable many valuable lives. As Buller and his splendid
marksmen retired by alternate ranks, and as each man fired, dropping his
man, Raaf and his well-trained fellows covered the slow retreat; Baker's
Horse also held the hillock of which mention has been before made, and
did excellent service by the manner in which the Zulus were held in
check. Tremlett's little battery on the right front of the camp kept
back the enemy on the left line of retreat, so that the raid into the
enemy's country, although not productive of any palpable advantage as
regards booty or prisoners, was eminently well carried out as a
reconnaissance in force. The Zulus were exceedingly well led, and it was
impossible not to admire their admirable skirmishing, and the
magnificent manner in which they charged right down to the river's edge,
amidst a storm of grape and shrapnel hurled against them to cover the
retreat. Buller, of course, was wherever hard knocks were most to be
obtained, while Beresford distinguished himself as much by his capital
horsemanship, daring valour, and perfect coolness, as by the noble
chivalry with which he galloped, under a heavy hostile fire, to bring
off, on his tired and overweighted horse, a wounded sergeant of the
Mounted Infantry.

It happened thus:--Just after the volley had been poured in by the Zulus
on either flank, Lord William Beresford, who had literally cut his way
through about fifty Zulus who had tried to surround him, turned in the
saddle to see how his men were getting on, and saw upon the ground a
dismounted and wounded trooper about to be assegaied by half-a-dozen
Zulus. Wheeling his horse round like lightning, he swept like a
thunderbolt on the group, knocking three of the savages over with his
horse's shoulder, and placing the other three _hors de combat_ with a
front and back-hander of his long, heavy sabre. In another moment
Beresford had the wounded man safely _en croupe_, and carried off from
what would have been a cruel death. Commandant D'Arcy, with equal
gallantry, was not so fortunate, for seeing a wounded man on the ground
he sought to carry him off, but his horse, being restive, reared and
fell back, so that the unfortunate trooper was overtaken and assegaied,
while D'Arcy was so severely bruised by falling on his revolver, that,
although able to get back safely, he was unable to take part in the next
day's fight. Three men killed, four wounded, and thirteen horses killed,
was the total loss to our men.

A little before daybreak on the 4th, Wood, with his flying column,
crossed the White Umvolosi, leaving the 1-24th Regiment in laager with
all the heavy baggage and supplies. Lord Chelmsford was so pleased with
Buller's magnificent reconnaissance, that he determined to advance at
once upon Ulundi, giving every temptation to the Zulu army to attack,
upon the plain which had been admirably surveyed two days previously by
Colonel Buller. Nothing could have been better considered, nothing could
have been better planned, and nothing could have been better worked out,
than the details of this splendid action. Every punctilio had been
observed by Lord Chelmsford as regards his answers and promises to
Cetywayo. The General had said he would not cross the river, thereby
placing himself at some considerable disadvantage in a strategic point,
and yet up to noon of the 3rd instant no act of submission was made. On
the 4th, therefore, the main body crossed after Wood's column, and
knowing that the Zulu army were somewhere between the river and Ulundi,
had good reason to hope that they would show fight. Lord Chelmsford
therefore advanced boldly, and without any undue show of caution, across
the plain. They had nothing in the shape of baggage with the exception
of ammunition and water-carts; but each man carried in his haversack
biscuit and preserved meat for four days.

The crossing of the river was made without any opposition, although the
movements of our troops were carefully watched by a body of Zulus from a
neighbouring hillock on the left, and a more brilliant and picturesque
sight could not be imagined. The banks of the river were covered with
tamarinds and acacia, growing right down to the water's edge; while
creeping plants, such as the convolvulus, the jessamine, and the deadly
nightshade, were festooned from tree to tree. The wild guava, the
pomegranate, and many a sweetly-scented bush, pushed upward their
luxuriant undergrowth, and gave out faint odours as they were crushed by
the horses' hoofs. Bees were humming among the sweetly-scented
dholiocs, and the ripple of the stream as it rushed and bubbled over the
clear pebbles below made a music that seemed out of place with thoughts
of bloodshed and strife. With Buller scouting far in front, Wood's
division led the van, Newdigate next, and Drury-Lowe, with his gallant
Lancers, brought up the rear. The fortified camp on the right bank of
the Umvolosi had been left with a Gatling gun, 900 Europeans, and 250
natives, under Colonel Bellairs. As soon as favourable ground had been
reached, Wood was signalled to halt and wait for the main body; and the
order was then given to form a large hollow square, with the ammunition,
two Gatlings, and the entrenching tool-carts and bearers in the centre.
Inside this square were also two companies of Engineers and some native
Pioneers attached, under Major Chard and Captain Ainsley, together with
the _impedimenta_, consisting of water-carts, ambulance-waggons, and
stretchers. The square, although large, was not unwieldy, and the steady
marching of the men prevented the slightest noise or confusion. The
flying column under Wood held the post of honour in the front half of
the square. Major Tucker, with the 80th Regiment, and Major Owen and two
Gatlings in the centre, held the front face. On his right flank were two
7-pounders of Major Tremlett's battery, under Lieutenant Davidson, with
seven companies of the 13th Light Infantry, under Major England,
supplemented in continuation of the right face by two more of Tremlett's
guns, in charge of Captain Brown and Lieutenant Slade; then came one
9-pounder of Major Le Grice's battery, under Lieutenant Crookenden;
four fine companies of the 58th making up the remainder of the right
face. The rear face was composed of one gun of Le Grice's battery, two
companies of the 21st Fusiliers, under Major Hazlerigg, and three
companies of the 94th, under Colonel Malthus. On the left or west flank
were the remaining three companies of the 94th, two 7-pounders of Major
Harness's battery, under Lieutenant Parsons; eight companies of the
90th, under Major Rogers; and two guns of Major Le Grice's battery,
attached _pro tem._ to Major Harness, under Lieutenant Elliott. Buller's
Cavalry were away scouring the front and flanks, while Colonel
Drury-Lowe, with two squadrons of the 17th Lancers, and Captain
Shepstone's Basutos, formed the rear guard. The numbers of all ranks
were as follows:--Flying Column, 2192 Europeans and 573 natives;
Newdigate (2nd Division), 1870 Europeans and 530 natives; making a total
of 5165 men.

Lord Chelmsford and his staff rode in the centre, in rear of the front
face. He, of course, assumed the chief command; and his clear, sharp,
soldierlike voice rang out like a trumpet to the men: "The square will
wheel to the right." This order was taken up by the division as quickly
and calmly as though by a brigade of Foot Guards at Aldershot or the
Curragh. After moving on for a few miles they began to approach the
smaller kraals; and Buller, with his advanced and seemingly ubiquitous
riders, could be seen dashing here and there in every direction to tempt
the Zulu columns, which could now be discerned along the horizon towards
the left front. At the extreme end of the plain the sun glanced down
upon a long line of white shields marching in a sort of double column,
with skirmishers thrown out in European fashion in front and on the
flanks. The square was now halted, while the first kraal was fired.
This, some of Shepstone's Basutos said, was named Umlambo-Bogivimo, and
Buller's men having applied their flints and steel to the task, the
flames and smoke ascended to the sky. Next they came to the great kraal
of King Panda, called Unodwengo; but although this was at first fired,
it was found the smoke acted as such a screen to the Zulus that Lord
Chelmsford ordered its extinction. Strong columns could now be seen
moving out in quick though good order from Ulundi, and as they seemed
bearing down upon the right front, the square took ground to the right
and was halted in a capital position, pointed out to Lord Chelmsford by
Buller. Our troops were now assailed by a dropping but harmless fire
from the Ulundi column on the right front, and from a strong Zulu force
operating in some broken ground from Unodwengo, now on the left. It was
now half-past eight, and by nine o'clock the Zulu attack was fully
developed. Buller's men then made a strong demonstration on the left,
driving the Zulus from the hollow where they were sheltered, back to the
Unodwengo kraal. This movement was well supported by Shepstone and his
Basutos, who skirmished splendidly on the left and rear face of the
kraal. While this, however, was going on, a Zulu on a white horse was
seen leading strong reinforcements from his proper right to assist in
the attack upon the cavalry on the left. The scene was now most
exciting. Buller and his men fought in two ranks, the first mounted and
ready to dash at a moment upon any weak point in the enemy's line; the
second, dismounted, and making capital practice at long ranges, with
their saddles as a rest for the rifle. As soon as the front rank became
too hardly pressed, they cantered to the rear, dismounted, and relieved
the second rank. This is the old Dutch mode of fighting the Zulus, and
it has rarely been found unsuccessful. Colonel Lowe, at this juncture,
asked Lord Chelmsford's permission to send out a squadron of his
Lancers, or even a troop; but the general wisely declined, as the ground
was broken, and the Zulu line too powerful to be charged. Nothing could
be finer than the way in which Buller and Shepstone retired, bringing
the Zulu columns and their horns under the deadly hail of our Gatlings
and Martinis. Now, thought the Zulus, was the time for their grand
attack. Were not the mounted men, under the terrible Buller, flying
before the fierce onslaught of the Zulu braves? Still the line of white
shields came roaring on, like the big white billows that roll on to and
break into foam upon the South Afric shore. The ridges on the front and
left were now swarming with Zulus, fierce, stern, and terrible, as with
fiendish and maniacal shouts they swept over the soft and springy veldt
to be shattered, bloody and broken in their pride, by the leaden tempest
that now whistled from all sides of the square. "Steady, my lads; close
up, fire low, and not so fast!" cried Evelyn Wood, who had his men under
splendid control. "Are the mounted men all in?" said Lord Chelmsford to
General Newdigate. "They are, my lord," replied Buller, who was just
lighting a cigarette. "Then give the enemy a round or two of shrapnel,"
said the chief. Shells from the right and left were now poured in; but
still on came the line of white shields. File-firing from the Martinis
was poured in, but the Zulu columns were deployed, and, regardless of
the _mitraille_, still came on in half-open order. But, under cover of
their strong lines of skirmishers, the Zulu attack was now changed and
further developed on the rear face, where Malthus and Hazlerigg held
post. Hazlerigg, whose tall and stalwart form was conspicuous above the
files of his men, made his front rank reserve its fire till the Zulus
had arrived within sixty yards, and then the word was given to fire low
and steady. The kraal of Unodwengo was, it has been said, upon the left,
and it proved rather a thorn in the side. Behind the rising ground from
which the Basutos had been driven now came a stream of thousands of
Zulus sweeping round the left flank from Ulundi. Their wild yells and
unearthly war-cries smote upon the air, and were heard through the ping
and rattle of the rifle-fire. Under cover of the Unodwengo kraal, and
sweeping over the ground beyond, this strong body, led by the chief on
the white horse, formed a hollow square, and after a few moments' pause
to collect themselves, dashed like a whirlwind upon the right rear angle
of the square. Now every one knows that the angle of a square, like the
salient angle of a bastion, is its weakest point, and for a moment it
seemed a question whether the attack would succeed. The angle was held
by two of Hazlerigg's companies, and although Le Grice's solitary gun,
admirably served, poured forth its most deadly shells, and Hazlerigg
kept his men firing in the most steady manner, at one moment it seemed
as though it would come to close quarters fighting. But one terrific
volley from the 21st, the 94th, the 58th, and Royal Engineers, shattered
their order, their square was broken, and after a moment's pause they
sought shelter from so terrific a fire. Meanwhile the front attack had
again developed, and here the gallant 80th were placed at a certain
disadvantage. That awkward dip in their front enabled the Zulus to make
their formation for attack out of sight and out of fire, so that Major
Tucker's men had to reserve their fire until the tops of the enemies'
heads were seen above the mound. But the 80th behaved so coolly and so
steadily that the front attack at length slackened, and the Zulu line
wavered, and finally ceased to fire.

It was now a quarter to ten, and as signs of wavering were remarked in
every face of the attack, Colonel Drury-Lowe at this juncture had been
allowed to file his men out from an opening in the rear face, and was
just forming them in squadrons, when a spent ball knocked him off his
charger. He was stunned, however, only for a moment, and was again in
the saddle, smiling at his mishap. Now was the moment for which the
gallant Lancers had so long waited. Now every man gripped his weapon
with stiffened sinews and determined heart. "Go at them, colonel, but
don't pursue too far!" shouted Lord Chelmsford, as he raised his helmet
to the men. Moving first at a walk to steady his men, Lowe advanced in
column of troops from the right, and as soon as the ground was
favourable gave the words in succession, "Trot!" "Form squadrons!" "Form
line!" "Gallop!" "Charge!" Away across the broad grassy slopes, and
greeted by a burst of cheering from the square, went the splendid
blue-and-white line, their pennons fluttering in the morning air, and
their bright and deadly steel-topped bamboo lances in rest. On they
went, driving the flying Zulus headlong into a donga, where sweeping
round it the pursuing squadrons forced the enemy out into the open to
fly for safety towards the mountains northward. But flanking the donga,
and hidden by the long grass, half of a Zulu regiment was posted to
cover the retreat, and as the squadrons of Drury-Lowe's men came on a
volley was poured in, which emptied several saddles, and was fatal to
poor young Wyatt-Edgell, who was gallantly leading on his men. His men,
almost maddened as they saw him fall, spurred more furiously on to take
immediate and bloody vengeance.

A moment more and the bristling line of steel meets the black and
shining wall of human flesh, rent, pierced, and gashed by a weapon as
death-dealing and unsparing as their own assegai. Still, though crushed
and stabbed by the lances, and though their firm array was scattered
like sea-foam, the Zulus fought on in stubborn knots, nor cried for
quarter, stabbing at the horses' bellies as they went down, and trying
to drag the men off their horses in the _melee_. The lance was now
relegated in most cases to its sling, and the heavy sabres of the
troopers became red with gore. Never was a cavalry attack better timed
or more effective, and never did that oft-abused arm, the lance, better
vindicate its reputation as a weapon of pursuit. But now a troop of the
King's Dragoon Guards, under Captain Brewster, and some irregular
cavalry, are let loose from different sides of the square, and, with
Lord William Beresford full six horse-lengths in advance, charge full
and fair upon the flying savages, who are cut down in scores until they
gain the crests of the hill; but even there no safety or rest is found,
for shrapnel, fired with time-fuzes, scatters them like chaff in the
wind.

The attacking force consisted of twelve regiments, and could not have
been less than 23,000; 15,000 surrounding the British square, and 8000
in reserve. Their loss has been estimated at 1500, but it should
probably be put down as double, for during the whole of the action they
could be seen carrying their dead and wounded away. The total loss to
our troops was not heavy--some dozen killed and about eighty wounded.
Amongst those killed was one officer, of whom might well be said, "We
could have better spared a better man." In the gallant white-and-blue
line of squadrons that swept like a torrent upon the scared and flying
Zulu hordes, there rode no braver, no more knightly spirit than young,
gallant Wyatt-Edgell. The scion of a noble house, and a soldier by
hereditary tradition and birth, he had all the accomplishments and
chivalrous attributes of his race. His loss was a great blow to all, and
his premature though glorious death cast a deep gloom not only over his
own regiment, but over the entire camp in which he had spent so many
cheerful days, esteemed and loved by officers and men alike, from
highest to lowest.

After the battle of Ulundi and the destruction of the king's five great
kraals, Lord Chelmsford marched his division back to Entonyani, where
they remained some days, having had a storm of rain and thunder lasting
thirty-six hours. As they had no tents the first night, the state of
affairs may more easily be imagined than described. The rain came down
in perfect torrents, sweeping away the bivouac fires and pouring through
the camp like the overflow of a mighty river. The men behaved admirably,
taking all the discomforts of their situation with the good humour and
jocularity of disciplined troops. The horses naturally suffered most,
although every attempt was made to picket them in a sheltered spot. On
arriving at Entonyani they found tents waiting for them, and were thus
enabled to get dry and refit. The nights were exceptionally cold and
with heavy dews, causing some little sickness amongst the men.

In fully estimating the importance of this battle, we must not forget
the surroundings, nor the associations of the place. The valley of the
Umvolosi is essentially the heart of Zululand. It is the richest and
most fertile portion of the country, and as such was chosen as the royal
abode. The two branches of the river, named after the district, converge
through it towards the main stream which flows on to St. Lucia Bay. The
one by which the king's great kraal but lately stood passes through a
comparatively open country; and its waters, gleaming clear in the
sunlight, are called "White," just as the waters of the other branch,
which run through a more bushy and broken district, are called "Black."
In the basin drained by this extensive water-system the Zulu nation was
originally cradled. Thither Dingaan retired after he had slain his
brother near the Nonoti. There the brave and bustling Dutchman Retief
and his companions were treacherously murdered in 1838; and there,
again, Bongore, led into a trap the unsuspecting Boers, who were again
duped by his representations, they believing that the king was alone at
Mahlabatini. The valley where this last battle was fought is with the
Zulus a sacred and historic spot. It is rife with what is most dear to
the Zulu pride--legends of bloody massacre, treacherous surprise, and
savage revenge. Dingaan fled from thence; Panda died there; Cetywayo was
first recognized and crowned there. Could the tall and wooded grey
cliffs that looked down upon the combat speak, they could tell, in a
direful tale of tyrannous cruelty and wrong, most of the annals of the
Zulu nation. Year by year they witnessed the periodical gathering
together of Cetywayo's legions, and watched the steady outgrowth of the
savage power whose overthrow, by British troops and British discipline,
they beheld but a few months since. But signal and satisfactory as this
victory was, it could not be accepted as final until Cetywayo had
completely submitted, though some of its effects were immediate and
important.

The day after the battle of Ulundi, and before the victory was known to
the troops of the 1st Division, about 700 Zulus, with all their cattle,
women, and children, came into the camp at Richard's Cove, near Port
Durnford, to tender submission and to claim protection. There is not the
slightest doubt but that they had heard of the battle, although there
was not a whisper of the engagement heard amongst these people. General
Crealock, to give importance to the ceremony, ordered a general parade
of the division at midday, and it was impossible not to be struck with
the attenuated condition of his battalions, although every available man
was put on parade. Both brigades made up rather a weak division. The
1st Brigade was made up of the Buffs, two companies of the 88th, two
companies of the "Shah's" and "Active's" bluejackets, and one of the
marine artillery; while the 2nd Brigade was composed of the Royal
Artillery, 57th, 60th Rifles, and 91st--in all twenty companies. At half
past twelve the General, surrounded by his staff, rode on to the ground,
and the division was wheeled into line. Then a galloper was sent out to
the Zulus who were halted on the crest of the neighbouring hills, and
they were told to advance and lay down their arms. Three hundred
fine-looking fellows then advanced in good order, and arriving at the
prescribed distance, made the customary obeisance while they deposited
assegais and guns, in number about seventy, fire-arms mostly of the old
pattern.

However, time proved that the results of Lord Chelmsford's engagement
and victory on the 4th (July) were of far greater importance than had
been at first imagined. Chiefs and tribes came pouring into the various
camps, not by dozens or by scores, but literally by hundreds, and the
only two questions they asked--and these kept invariably recurring--were
"Why was not the victory of Ulundi followed up vigorously? and why was
Cetywayo allowed to escape?"

It was this great error of immediately retiring from Ulundi which made
us again ridiculous, not only in the eyes of Zululand, but also in those
of military Europe. It was due, not to Lord Chelmsford, nor those under
his command, but to extraneous influences beyond his control; and public
opinion never arrived at a more true or just conclusion than in saying
that the arrival of Lord Chelmsford's successor, no matter how valuable
or how necessary it might have been, came at a most inopportune time,
for it was well known that Lord Chelmsford's plans were so perfectly
matured, that had he been left free to carry out his own designs,
instead of being hampered and constrained by the orders of the new
Commander-in-chief, he would have followed up Ulundi with the utmost
possible activity, and would in all probability have secured the person
of the king. Terms for the final pacification of the whole of Zululand
could then have been dictated on the spot, and there would have been an
end to the entire business.

Under these circumstances therefore Lord Chelmsford determined to resign
all command; and within three days of the brilliant victory of Ulundi it
was known to the soldiers throughout the camp that their General was
about to leave them, and that with him were going Sir Evelyn Wood,
General Crealock, and Colonel Redvers Buller. Accordingly a grand parade
of all arms was ordered on the morning of the 8th (July), that the
General might take a formal leave of his men. At nine a.m. the
bugle-call for coverers was sounded, the staff officers marked the
alignment, and the various corps moved like clockwork upon their
respective pivots. The division was then wheeled into line by General
Newdigate, and the flanks, bringing forward their right and left
shoulders, three sides of a large hollow square was formed, with the
front ranks facing inwards. Lord Chelmsford, his staff, and three
brigadiers formed the fourth side of the square, and in a few
warm-hearted, well chosen, and soldierlike sentences the
Commander-in-chief, under whom the troops had seen so much good hard
work, honest service, and from whom all ranks had received at various
times some recognition of their conduct in camp and on the field of
battle, bade them farewell, and thanked them for the manner in which
their duty to their Queen and country had been performed. "For the
courage, the coolness, and the devotion you have all displayed wherever
I have been with you, I give you my best and my warmest thanks. For the
unselfish devotion and untiring energy and good-humour with which you
have encountered hardship, fatigue, and privation I find it hard to
sufficiently express my gratitude. In all senses you have done your duty
as English soldiers." Such were the concluding words of a leader whom
all loved, respected, and all regretted.

On the following day the camp bivouac was broken up, and the cavalry,
the 2nd Division, and the flying column, marched _en route_ to
Intanjaneni and Kwamagwasa, thus beyond doubt leading Cetywayo and his
indunas to suppose that their losses at Ulundi and want of military
skill caused them to forego the advantages they had won.

Despatches from General Crealock fully demonstrate that his inability to
effect a junction with the 2nd Division before the action at Ulundi was
due to no want of energy or organization on his part, but solely to
those causes which will impede the movements of all bodies of civilized
troops in uncivilized lands. But although sickness amongst the oxen and
other impediments to transport caused General Crealock to lose his share
of the victory gained, his time had not been wasted, for much valuable
work was done in the nature of road-making and raiding over the enemy's
country, thus affording a diversion which considerably weakened
Cetywayo's chances of inflicting a defeat upon the other column. The
task of establishing the new base of supply at Port Durnford and the
building of Fort Napoleon was thrown entirely upon the 1st Division, and
naturally interfered with its rapid advance. The work, however, that
fell to the coast column was fully and admirably carried out, and a
pontoon and a trestle-bridge were built over the Tugela, without which
no important advance could have been made along the coast. The ford over
the Inyoni was rendered permanently practicable, and can, now that the
descent is made easy for waggons, be passed at all seasons. The same
work was effected at the Umsundusi and Amatikula rivers, whose
approaches were made safe for wheels. The Umkusi and Inyezani hills and
drifts were also made passable by improvement in the roads. Along the
Umlatoosi valley numerous small but difficult streams had drifts made
over them. From the Umlatoosi to St. Paul's Mission Station used to be a
bad and most difficult road, but all the dangerous places were now
levelled, and a strong and defensible position was given. Fords were
secured across the Uvulu, the Entonjaneni, the Umvolosi, and the
Umlalasi, and there no physical obstacle was allowed to remain to delay
the march of a European column with its baggage in any part of the coast
and the south of Zululand, while forts had been completed or erected at
Tenedos, Pearson, Crealock, Chelmsford, Napoleon, and Durnford.

The result of this was that Sir Garnet Wolseley, in taking over Lord
Chelmsford's command, found a complete chain of military posts, the
like of which was never before seen in South Africa, extending along the
Zulu frontier from the Blood and Buffalo rivers to the Umvolosi mouth
and Port Durnford, and, in fact, encompassing three out of four sides of
Cetywayo's kingdom.

In addition to the formation of the new base and the seaward
communications the later operations of Barrow's cavalry fully vindicated
the reputation they had obtained for activity. Barrow's Irregular
Mounted Corps, although not so numerous as those of Buller, were equally
worthy of praise, alike for their admirable discipline, courage in
action, and skill in patrolling. They consisted of about fifty enrolled
volunteers under Captain Addison, forming a body called the "Natal
Guides," three troops of Lonsdale's Mounted Rifles, three of the Mounted
Infantry, the Natal Horse, and a very useful contingent of mounted
natives. These, under such leaders as Colonel Barrow, Major Lord
Gifford, Captains Barton and Nettleton, were at once the eyes and ears
of the column. On July 6th Barrow's men made a forced march, during
which they were thirty hours in the saddle, and, reaching Ondini, the
king's old kraal, burnt it to the ground. The patrol paraded overnight,
and started some two hours before daylight, making its way through a
valley district over fifteen miles in length by three or four in
breadth, though here and there narrowing in parts to only one mile, over
lofty spurs and ridges running into it, forming a series of
densely-wooded and impracticable ravines. The weather was intensely hot,
and although the men and horses were both distressed at times, the
troops did their work in a manner which reflected great credit upon all
present. From this valley the road or trek ran for ten or twelve miles
through an open but rather broken country, the hills in the distance
being covered with dense bush. The patrol then turned eastwards over a
table-land which stretched away for about twenty miles, till the edge of
the plateau is reached, and the path descends abruptly into the great
thorn valley to the west of the White Umvolosi; at the edge of this
plateau the coast road joins. From this point the patrol marched a few
miles, and halted for off-saddle and breakfast on the right bank of the
river. The road is fairly good, but passes through thick thorn-bush, and
the country is very broken and contains a number of small streamlets
tributary to the Umvolosi. The drift here is good, and is commanded by a
high stony hill to the north and upon the right of the road, and within
rifle range of one of the smaller royal kraals. The Ondini kraal was
reached about noon. It was occupied by some Zulus, who made away as the
troops advanced at a canter; the place was fired, and in half an hour
was utterly destroyed. The return to camp was made by another road,
which was long and tedious; several of the horses were completely
knocked up, one dying from exhaustion and several having to be abandoned
on the road.




CHAPTER XIII.

  Arrival of Sir Garnet Wolseley--Reception at Durban--Changes made by
    Wolseley--His plans for the future--Attempt to land at Port Durnford
    and its failure--Sir Garnet at St. Paul's--Grand council of Zulu
    chiefs--Resignation of General Crealock--His farewell to his troops
    at Camp Umlalasi--Fetes in honour of Lord Chelmsford--Wolseley at
    Pietermaritzburg--Disturbances in Pondoland and Transvaal--Wolseley
    at Rorke's Drift--McLeod and the Swazis--Their appearance and
    habits--Wolseley at Intanjaneni--Surrender of guns by
    Mbelebele--Adhesion of various chiefs.


It is now time to turn attention to the movements of the new
Commander-in-chief and Governor. On the 28th of June his Excellency Sir
Garnet Wolseley and his staff landed at Durban from the C.R.M.S.
"Dunkeld." The whole town was that day _en fete_, as the Durbanites like
a sensation, no matter of what nature. At daylight the whole of the
military and naval authorities were astir, and various coloured bunting
began to appear all over the town. Crowds of well-to-do shopkeepers and
farmers went down to the point on horseback, while hundreds went by the
train. All the ships in the harbour and the bluff were gaily decorated,
and the men-of-war, transports, and merchant-vessels were gallantly
dressed in bunting from stem to stern. Sir Garnet brought with him
many of his old staff, and others joined later on. Colonel Pomeroy
Colley arrived by the next Zanzibar steamer, and took up the duties of
chief of the staff, and Captain Lord Gifford joined from his regiment,
the 57th. Sir Garnet Wolseley was not only to be Governor,
Commander-in-chief, and High Commissioner in Natal and the Transvaal,
but also to exercise the functions of the latter office in the countries
to the north and to the east.

The changes ordered by the new Commander-in-chief were numerous and
important. In the first place all military operations against Secocoeni
were to be discontinued. This order gave great dissatisfaction, as
several highly successful patrols had already been made against this
chieftain; and Colonel Lanyon, after great delay and difficulty having
completed his arrangements for the attack, was actually on his way to
the front, when instructions reached him to stop and send his men to
Derby, to protect that part of the border from Zulu raids.

The troops were to be immediately consolidated and reduced, and with
them the expenses of the war.

The landing of the Marines was countermanded, and they were to be sent
back with all possible speed to Simon's Bay; the Natal Carabineers, the
Durban Mounted Rifles, Bettington's Horse, and the Frontier Light Horse
were to be forthwith disbanded: the 1st Division and the Cavalry brigade
were to be broken up; while the forts along the coast were to be
abandoned. The following troops were also named for immediate
embarkation:--1-24th, the 3rd (Buffs), the 99th, the 88th, the 1st
battalion 13th, and two batteries of artillery, to proceed to England;
the 17th Lancers to go on to India; Ellaby's and Tremlett's batteries
to proceed to St. Helena. Lord Chelmsford, Generals Marshall, Wood, and
Crealock, Colonels Crealock, Downe, Dawney, and Buller, Captains Buller,
Molyneux, Frere, Milne, Grenfell, Beresford, and Reilly were going home,
either by order or at their own request. Indeed almost the only officer
of high position who elected, or was selected, to remain was General
Clifford, who still retained his post of Inspector-General of the lines
of communication.

Sir Garnet's plan of operations for the future was as follows: a
military post at Durnford with 400 men; another at St. Paul's, with a
brigade; and a third at Intanjaneni with 400 men; a regiment to remain
on the Umlatoosi, and a battalion of the Native Contingent to guard the
line of the Tugela. Colonel Baker Russell was to start at once with a
flying column from St. Paul's and co-operate with Oham in the west.
Colonel George Villiers was to proceed to join Oham and organize various
bodies of burghers, Natal natives, and Zulus, to hem in Cetywayo in that
direction, whilst McLeod (late 74th Regiment) was to raise, equip, and
command 5000 warriors of the Amaswazis, and, if necessary, lead them
right into Zululand. Colonel Clarke (57th) meanwhile was to march
straight on Ulundi, there to await Sir Garnet's arrival, with a force
consisting of the 57th, 60th, five companies of the 80th, two troops of
Lonsdale's Horse, one battalion of the Natal Native Contingent, and some
mounted natives under the chiefs Jemptse and Mafionge, together with a
battery of Gatlings and the Natal Pioneers. Meanwhile Sir Garnet had
convened a great council of Zulu chieftains to be held at St. Paul's,
July 19th, to arrive if possible at some definite arrangement for the
temporary government of the country. Such were the main features of the
new commander's programme, and though severe strictures were at first
passed thereupon by the majority of the colonists and old soldiers
experienced in Kaffir warfare, time proved that his calculations were
just and well-founded.

Leaving Durban on the 2nd of July, Sir Garnet and staff embarked on
board her Majesty's ship "Shah," and proceeded to Durnford, where
several attempts to land were made, but without success. On the morning
of the 3rd, the steam-tug "Koodoo" came alongside, and Sir Garnet and
his staff, including the two Colonels Russell, Captains Buchanan,
Maurice, Braithwaite, and Baynes, Dr. Russell, and Mr. Herbert (private
secretary), were with great difficulty and no little risk embarked on
her and subsequently transferred to a surf-boat or lighter. While towing
the lighter towards the shore the hawser broke, but most fortunately a
sail was hoisted at once, and the boat, getting clear of the breakers,
was again taken in tow by the "Koodoo." After several ineffectual
attempts to get the lighter made fast to the warp, the recall was fired
from the "Shah," and Sir Garnet returned to the man-of-war. As the day
wore on the surf became worse, and towards evening Captain Bradshaw,
commanding the "Shah," deemed it no longer safe to remain at anchor off
the bar. Sir Garnet therefore returned to Durban, and hastening on
overland _via_ Forts Chelmsford, Pearson, and Crealock, reached the camp
of the 1st Division at Richard's Cove, Port Durnford, on July 6th.

On the 14th an advance column, consisting of Buller's Light Horse about
100, two guns, the 57th Regiment, the whole under Colonel B. Russell,
C.B., left camp and marched in the direction of St. Paul's, as far as
the Umlatoosi, where they entrenched themselves on the right bank, the
cavalry and Dunn's scouts forming an advanced guard on the left. This
position commands a path about ten miles from the mouth of the river,
and the site is very picturesque, overlooking the valley to the
north-west. His Excellency and headquarter staff accompanied the column,
and the next morning pushed on to St. Paul's with an escort of cavalry,
where were the headquarters of the 2nd Division. A parade of the troops,
including the 17th Lancers and some 500 irregular cavalry--the
celebrated Buller's Horse--was held, and the General, after taking leave
of Lord Chelmsford, Brigadier General Wood, Colonel Buller, who with
their staffs were leaving for England, returned to the camp on the
Umlatoosi. It has been already said that the 19th was fixed by Sir
Garnet Wolseley for the meeting or durbar of the principal chiefs, all
of whom were expected to attend. By noon on that day the camp presented
a curious sight. Outside the General's tent a guard of honour, with the
Queen's colours, was drawn up, while a large space was railed off for
the reception of Zulu visitors, who came winding in bands over the
slopes of the neighbouring hills from an early hour in the morning. As
each deputation from its respective tribe came into camp, preceded by
its principal rulers, it was formed up in a sort of column, sixteen or
eighteen feet deep, in the space set apart for the visitors. The
gathering was a numerous one, upwards of 250 chiefs and their followers
having attended, and evidently considering the occasion as one of great
importance, as each man was attired in his most gorgeous manner. The
enclosure was at the same time council-chamber and reception-hall, and
although no seats were required, skins, mats, and canvas were put down
for the principal chiefs to sit upon. Some of the chiefs had a covering
of cow's tails and other skins round the waist, while broad rings of
copper were worn round the arms and ankles of others. Plumes of feathers
adorned the heads of the principal men, and hanging behind, somewhat
after the fashion of a Hungarian pelisse, each warrior wore a panther or
other similar skin. The array of dusky savages looked fairly imposing,
although none of them were armed save with the knobkerrie of place,
which as they squatted was laid methodically in front of each man. Upon
the hills in the distance were a number of boys and women who had
accompanied the chiefs, but who preferred to remain outside spectators
of the conference. The enclosure was marked out by branches of the
mimosa, cut in convenient lengths, and forming a sort of palisade, which
kept the crowd from intruding. When all were reported present, Sir
Garnet and his staff, accompanied by Mr. Fynny, border agent, came out
of his tent, and the guard having presented arms, the proceedings
commenced. The two principal chiefs were the king's brothers,
Dabulamanzi and Magwendi, who both replied to Sir Garnet's speech.
Dabulamanzi was a fine-looking man of large size, apparently in the full
vigour of his age, and of great muscular development, presenting in this
regard a striking contrast to his brother Oham, who was simply a large
fat man. There was an air of considerable thought and command in his
face, and, unlike the other chiefs, who wore their hair closely cropped,
except with a black band round the temples, his hair was thrown back and
his broad forehead was encircled with a fillet of ostrich feathers
terminating with a single plume behind. Heavy rings of highly polished
copper spanned the thick part of the arms of Magwendi, a much shorter
and more common-looking man, and whose neck was adorned with a necklace
formed of monkey's teeth and small shells. Both these chiefs held in
their right hands the same kind of short stick carried by their
warriors, while their left hands rested on their naked knees. Mr. Fynny,
the well-known border agent, who was considered to know almost as much
about Zululand and the Zulus as Mr. John Dunn, and that is saying much,
performed the duties of interpreter with remarkable skill and fluency,
translating Sir Garnet's speech, sentence by sentence, as it was
uttered, with due emphasis and point. Sir Garnet Wolseley spoke as
nearly as possible to the following effect: "I am very pleased to
welcome you to my camp, because your coming in answer to my invitation
shows you are as anxious for peace as I am myself, and as is the great
Queen in whose name I now speak. We came to make war with Cetywayo, not
with the Zulu people, and to put an end to his cruelties and his
military system, which with his marriage laws made life and property
unsafe in your land. We want peace with the Zulus, and that they shall
be at peace with our people in Natal. We have beaten the king in open
fight and burnt his kraal, so that he is now a fugitive and shall never
more reign in Zululand. We might now take all Zululand, but we do not
want any of it, and we wish that all of you should have your property
and land. I rode to St. Paul's the other day, and found all the people
on the way living quietly in their own kraals, and with their cattle in
them. All may do the same, but all must first give up their arms and the
king's cattle in token of their submission. The old laws of Zululand
shall be restored, and you shall be ruled by your own chiefs, whom you
all know. I shall divide the kingdom into four or five districts, and
all men shall be free to come and go, to work, to marry, and to become
rich. The great Queen, who sends me, wishes the Zulus should be happy,
but those who continue to bear arms, and will not submit, must be given
up. On the north the Swazis and the Amatongas are only kept by my orders
from invading Zululand, while Oham and his soldiers are moving upon the
west. I am going myself to Ulundi on the 10th, where I shall tell the
Zulu people my arrangements for the future government of the country."
This address was listened to with great attention, and with the most
respectful silence, and several of the chiefs replied, one in particular
making the naive and rather sarcastic remark that he and his friends
could not see what fault Cetywayo had committed, but as the English
chiefs had seen it they were satisfied. Dabulamanzi did not speak,
except to Magwendi, who rose and complained that his cattle had been
taken from him, and that some of them had been sent in as belonging to
the king. Redress was at once promised by Sir Garnet. The meeting then
broke up, the chieftains undertaking to meet Sir Garnet again at Ulundi
on August 10th, to arrive at a final settlement of affairs.

It has been before mentioned that General Crealock had determined to
resign his command of the 1st Division; it was in pursuance of this
resolution that he ordered a general parade on July 21st, on which
occasion he made a short but appropriate speech to his men.

There were on parade the Buffs, 60th Rifles, 91st, the naval brigade of
the "Boadicea," one company of Marines, two troops of Lonsdale's Horse,
one troop of Natal Horse, and a battery of 7-pounders. This little army
was drawn up on the usual parade-ground, not far from the river, and in
the midst of a scene of the greatest natural beauty. The banks of the
stream are thickly wooded, and the valley is the resort of large species
of game. Crocodiles frequent the river, and make it dangerous to bathe.
Thick, thorny underwood, mingled with tall reeds and date-palms, grow
close down to the waters, which reflect the tall green trees that
overarch above. Trees, with branches bearing bright green leaves and
yellow fragile flowers, drooped nearly to the ground around the plain.
Pre-eminent in splendour shone out the brilliant _combretta_, whose
masses of bloom gleamed like torches amidst the dark green of the
thickets, whilst the golden sheen of the fruit intensified the marked
contrast of the tints. At the drinking-place used for the horses the
water flowed in streamlets over the rocks and along a long red sandbank.
A ledge of granite forms a rugged barrier eight or ten feet high across
the river, and down the hollows of this the clear waters rush and ripple
in rills, cascades, and rapids, bubbling and eddying among the great
masses of rock below, in many of which, like those of the Zambesi, great
holes are worn by stones which during the flood perhaps had settled in
small hollows. Dark lines of trees border the river on the right, and on
the left there is a fine grove of baobabs with large dark green leaves
and wide-spreading branches. Crossing a sandstone hill with a spur
stretching away to the eastward, and adorned with some splendid
specimens of the encephalartos, or Kaffir bread, and then descending
into the valley of the Umlalasi, one comes to sandstone and gneiss,
rising in cliffs of 600 feet on the south of the river, but sloping away
gradually on the north. The banks are covered with verdant and
golden-blossomed acacias, some of them with yellow bark and the sweet
gum, which is said to indicate the presence of the tsetse fly. Away to
the north are to be seen groves of palm and mimosas, with stems forty
feet to the lower branches. Far away beyond the plain can be seen the
purple outlines of the great Lebombo range of mountains. These are to
the east of the Drakenberg, and intervene between it and the sea.
Stretching northward from the Pongolo river, this range crosses the
Oliphant and touches the Limpopo. Its highest elevation is about 2150
feet high, and at the point at which the Umvolosi passes through the
range to Delagoa Bay there is a lofty peak which reaches to 1900 feet,
the river bed being there only 300 feet above sea level. Further north
the range declines, and is cut through by the Pongolo and the Usuta,
tributaries of the Maputa; also by the Umvolosi, the Umcomazi, the
Sabia, and the Oliphant, all of which run into the Indian Ocean. Such
were the features of the landscape, and such was the background to this
farewell parade.

After the division had wheeled into line a very creditable march past
was performed, and the troops then wheeled into a square, and were
addressed by General Crealock, who told them that, in obedience to
orders received from Sir Garnet Wolseley, the column was to be broken up
and dispersed. The General said that he took this opportunity, before
separating, to thank all hands for their good conduct and constant hard
work, carried on without a murmur and in the midst of many difficulties.
The task allotted to the 1st Division was to establish a series of posts
along the coast of Zululand with an advanced depot of supplies, to open
a base of supplies at Port Durnford, from which to feed a force
operating against Ulundi, and finally to destroy the military kraals and
clear the district of Zulus. All these instructions were fully carried
out by the 1st Division by the 5th of July; and the General, in wishing
them a hearty good-bye and success and prosperity, thanked all for the
good conduct and zeal which enabled him to do so much.

Lord Chelmsford, who was now on his way home to England, received most
enthusiastic receptions at Maritzburg, Durban, and Capetown. The banquet
given in his honour at Pietermaritzburg was, perhaps, the most brilliant
affair of the kind ever achieved in the colony, but there were those who
considered the ball in Durban as a still greater, for there were more
ladies and officers present who had come long distances to assist at the
festivity. Sir Garnet Wolseley and the Lieutenant Governor, Sir Evelyn
Wood, and his _Fidus Achates_, Colonel Buller, Major-General Clifford,
and all the fighting and dancing men within a hundred miles of the place
responded to the call. Durban never before saw such a display of "rank,
beauty, and fashion." All the belles of Natal were there to welcome the
winner of Ulundi, and to sympathize with him in his efforts, under
adverse criticisms and untoward fortune, to do his duty as a soldier of
our Queen. The general feeling of the colony may be gathered from the
mayor's speech, who, in proposing his lordship's health, said that he
felt doubly proud on the occasion, as he did not speak alone for
himself, but in the name and with the voice of all Natal. Against
difficulties which only colonial experience could realize, and against
bitter and most vituperative criticism, Lord Chelmsford had worked
steadily and patiently until he accomplished the object he was sent to
perform. The General, in reply, expressed in a soldierlike and
impressive manner his deep sense of the kind feelings expressed by the
mayor, and acknowledged that the reception accorded to him had quite
overwhelmed him. But in giving his acknowledgments and thanks, his
lordship made a happy allusion to the devotion and zeal of those who
commanded and fought under him; and when he came to the mention of
Evelyn Wood and Redvers Buller--two names which, he said, represented
all that a soldier could show in loyalty and efficiency--his modest
eulogium upon these, "his right hand and left hand supports during the
war," was perhaps the most well received and telling point of his
address. That Wood's services were appreciated by the colonists may be
gathered from the fact that he was most warmly solicited by Mr. Gordon
Sprigg, the Premier, to accept the appointment of Commandant-General of
the Colonial Forces; and this request was made by the almost unanimous
wish of the whole ministry. Sir Evelyn, however, did not feel at liberty
to accept till he had consulted with the authorities at home.

On August 5th, Lord Chelmsford, Sir Evelyn Wood, Colonel Crealock,
Colonel Buller, Major Grenfell, Captain Molyneux, and Captain Buller,
embarked on board the Union steamship "German," and sailed for England,
where they arrived safely and were received with the honours they had so
worthily deserved.

After the meeting of chiefs on the 19th, at the camp on the Umlatoosi,
Sir Garnet Wolseley returned to Pietermaritzburg. Here he was engaged in
arranging matters of detail until July 29th. Disturbances in Pondoland
and the Transvaal also now claimed his attention. In the former the
Pondos had attacked the Xesibes, a tribe in alliance with England and
under British protection. Hither Lieutenant-Colonel Bayley, with a
detachment of Cape Mounted Rifles, was despatched from Butterworth, and
soon succeeded in putting an end to this trouble. In the Transvaal the
Boers were agitating for a repeal of the union, and threatening to
assert their independence by force of arms. To render matters secure in
this quarter Sir Garnet sent the headquarters of the King's Dragoon
Guards, under Colonel Alexander, to Pretoria. On the 30th the Commander
and his staff moved to Greytown and thence on, with a small escort, to
the temporary camp at Umsingu. Travelling herefrom with all speed he
reached Rorke's Drift early the following morning (August 3rd).
Despatches were waiting here for the Commander-in-chief, and determined
the next week's movements. Cetywayo was still reported in a kraal in the
Ngome, while letters were at hand from Villiers giving anything but a
flattering account of his friend Oham and his promised Burgher and
native levies. M'Leod also wrote to point out the difficulties under
which he was labouring with his Swazis, and asking for some European
troops to be sent to him to keep them under control. Villiers was
concentrating his heterogeneous gathering of levies at Luneberg, and
hoped to be ready on or by the 6th; while M'Leod suggested that he
should merely guard the frontier to prevent Cetywayo's escape, and not
tempt his savages with the sight of their enemy's kraals or cattle; for
to allow them to cross the border would be, he wrote, risking murder,
rapine, and all sorts of atrocities, which, if once begun, it would be
impossible to stop.

So little is generally known of the Swazis, that a short description of
their persons and habits may here be acceptable. What are usually called
Swazis are, in reality, somewhat a mongrel race, being a cross between
the Zulu and the old race of Swaziland. The Swazis living along the
borders of the Wakkerstroom, until late owed allegiance to Cetywayo, and
some of them indeed had fought for him, notably Manyoyaba, a chief
paramount in the Abakalusian district. But quarrels arose between the
two races and they became most bitter foes; indeed once the Swazis were
near extermination at the hands of the Zulus.

The whole tribe possess characteristically broad heads with thick hair,
which would be as frizzly as that of a negro were it not carefully
dressed in the Zulu fashion with plaster of grease and red clay. Their
eyes, almond-shaped and somewhat sloping, are shaded with thick,
sharply-defined brows, and are of remarkable size and fulness. The wide
space between them testifies to the unusual width of the skull, and
contributes a mingled expression of animal ferocity, warlike resolution,
and, strange to say, ingenuous candour. A flat, square nose, a mouth of
about the same width as the nose, with very thick lips; a round chin,
and full, plump cheeks complete the countenance which may be described
as circular in its general contour. The bodies of the Swazis are
generally inclined, like those of the Zulus, to be fat, but they are
seldom wanting in muscular strength. They are fairly well proportioned,
but the upper part of the figure is somewhat long in proportion to the
legs, and this peculiarity gives a strange character to their movements,
although it does not seem any bar to their agility in their war-dances.
Nothing can be more simple than the ordinary headgear of the women. It
would, however, be a matter of some difficulty to find any kind of
plait, tuft, or topknot, which has not been used by the Swazi men. The
hair is usually parted right down the middle; towards the forehead it
branches off so as to leave a kind of triangle, and from the fork which
is thus formed, a tuft is raised and carried back to be fastened behind.
On either side of this tuft the hair is arranged in rolls, like the
ridges and crevices of a melon, while over the temples separate rolls
are gathered up into knots, from which hang more tufts, twisted like a
cord, that fall in bunches round the neck, three or four of the largest
tresses being allowed to go free over the breast and shoulders. A
favourite decoration is formed with the teeth of a dog strung together
under the hair and hanging along the forehead like a fringe. Another
ornament not at all uncommon is worn by some, and this is ivory cut in
imitation of lions' teeth, and arranged in radial fashion round the
breast, the effect of the white substance in contrast with the dark skin
being very striking. The weapons of the Swazis are much the same as
those of the Zulus, but they have more variety in shape and quality of
the assegai. The shields are smaller, and usually woven of stout reeds
and then covered with undressed hide. They use also a heavy kind of
lance which is adapted to the chase of large game.

A favourite amusement is a kind of war-dance, in which a warrior
describes a conflict in which he was once engaged. Thus a chief may be
often seen with his assegais in one hand, his woven shield and
knobkerrie in the other, with his knife in his girdle, and his limbs
encircled by a skin, to which are attached the tails of the wild cat and
other animals. Adorned on his breast and on his forehead by strings of
teeth, the trophies of war or of the chase, his large keen eyes gleaming
from beneath his heavy brow, his white and pointed teeth shining from
between his parted lips, he alternately advances and retires before an
imaginary foe, with a wild yet dramatic grace, which adds life and
reality to the tale he is telling. In describing these people, it is
hard to determine how far they should be deemed a race of hunters or of
agriculturists, the two occupations being apparently equally distributed
between the sexes. The men most assiduously devote themselves to their
hunting, and leave the care of the cattle and the culture of the soil to
be carried on exclusively by the women. Now and then, indeed, the men
bring home fruits, tubers, and funguses from their excursions in the
forests, but practically they do nothing for their families beyond
providing them with game. The agriculture of Swaziland, like that of
Zululand involves but a small amount of labour. The area of the arable
land is certainly limited, but the exuberant productiveness of the soil,
scarcely to be surpassed in any part of the world, makes the cultivation
of the country supremely easy, and provides the people with all they
want. The entire land is, besides, pre-eminently rich in spontaneous
products, animal and vegetable alike, and these conduce to a direct
maintenance in comparative ease of human life. Manioc, sweet potatoes,
yams, are cultivated with little trouble, and all yield good crops.
Plantains are rarely seen. Although the Swazis have a few carefully
prepared dishes, of which they partake on high feasts and festivals, in
a general way they exhibit as little nicety or choice in their diet as
the Amaxosas or the Zulus. They have one dish, however, on which they
pride themselves, and this most palatable mess is composed of the pulp
of fresh maize, ground or pounded while the grain is soft and milky,
cleansed from the bran, and prepared carefully, so that it is not burnt
to the bottom of the pot. The mode of preparation is ingenious. A little
water having been put over the fire, until it is just beginning to boil,
the raw meal, which has previously been rolled into small lumps, is very
gently shaken in, and, having been allowed to simmer for a time, the
whole is finally stirred up together. The acme, however, of all earthly
enjoyments to these people would seem to be meat. "Meat!" is a watchword
that one hears in all their campaigns, and beyond all doubt the alacrity
with which these people responded to M'Leod's appeal was caused by the
anticipations of devouring Cetywayo's cattle. Amongst their other
accomplishments may be mentioned the art they possess of making from
malted eleusine a very palatable species of beer. This drink, which by
the Swazis is prepared from the eleusine, is really capable, from the
skill with which it is manipulated, of laying a very fair claim to be
known as beer. It is quite bright, of a reddish pale brown colour, and
is regularly brewed from the malted grain, without the addition of any
extraneous ingredient. It has, moreover, a pleasant bitter flavour
derived from the dark husks, which, if they were mixed in their natural
condition with the dough, would impart a twang that would be exceedingly
unpalatable. How large is the proportion of beer consumed by the Swazis
may be estimated by simply observing the ordinary manner in which they
store their corn. As a rule there are three granaries allotted to each
dwelling, of which two are made to suffice for the supply which is to
contribute the meal necessary for the household, and the other is
entirely devoted to the grain that has been malted.

On August 4th Sir Garnet Wolseley left Rorke's Drift, and, after
inspecting the several posts _en route_, reached Intanjaneni on the
evening of the 6th. Intanjaneni is admirably situated for a central
rendezvous as well as a depot of supplies. It is on the left bank of the
Umlatoosi, or Slater's River, a stream which is constantly confounded
by careless geographers with the Umlalazi, which is ten miles further to
the south-west. Hither General Clarke and his column had preceded him;
messengers also had already come in from Umnyama, Cetywayo's prime
minister, from Tyengwayo, who was second in command at Isandhlwana, and
likewise from the headmen Usukame and Umkilebani; all these men said
they would come in if their lives were spared and their property not
confiscated. Many other chiefs were also in correspondence and treaty
with the General, and all had promised to come to Ulundi on the 10th
August.

On the 7th August messengers came from another chief of importance, by
name Mbelebele, whose kraal was situated on the eastern bank of the
Black Umvolosi, about twenty miles N.N.E. of the old kraal at Ondini. A
party was sent, in accordance with his request, to meet him halfway
between his kraal and Fort Victoria, the new post near Ulundi. The
interview, which took place at the foot of the mountain range of the
Lebombo, was short and satisfactory.

Mbelebele brought with him over 200 guns. He also brought information
that Mangondo, another chief whose dwelling is near the Inkankla, would
surrender if assured of safety against the vengeance of the king.
Mbelebele seems to have been a man much trusted by the other chiefs, as
he had been in correspondence with the younger brother of Cetywayo,
Tyami, Usmwelu, Usiteon, and with Sekatewayo, a northern chief, who all
manifested a wish to come in and surrender their arms, cattle, and
ammunition, provided life and safety were assured. The chief, in
speaking of the king, although somewhat reticent on some points, was
certainly not so on others, and stoutly maintained that Cetywayo had
doubled upon his pursuers, and so far from being, as was thought, on his
way westward to Secocoeni, was in all likelihoods heading back towards a
kraal beyond the Lebombo range, called Mussipulo. This information, of
course, was at once sent to Lord Gifford and to Colonel Baker Russell.

Sir Garnet Wolseley's next move was on to Fort Victoria, Ulundi, where
he arrived on August 9th. On the following day he received information
which eventually led to the capture of Cetywayo; but of this we shall
speak hereafter.




CHAPTER XIV.

  Plans for the capture of Cetywayo--The Jantjis--Vijn's appearance at
    Victoria--His narrative--Its consequences--Despatch of Major Barrow
    and Lord Gifford in pursuit of the king--Their march--Description of
    country traversed--Gifford and Maurice sent on by Barrow--Marches
    and countermarches--Physical characteristics of country; its flora
    and fauna--Visit to kraal of friendly Zulus--Capture of two of the
    king's attendants--Women of the king's household captured--Captain
    and twenty Basutos join Lord Gifford--Gifford's stratagem to obtain
    information of the king's hiding-place--Cetywayo's refuge
    discovered--Forced night-march--Message to Major Marter--His arrival
    on the scene--Capture of the king.


Meantime the meshes of the net spread for King Cetywayo's capture were
being more and more closely woven. Colonel Villiers, who it has been
before mentioned had been sent to Oham's district, having got together a
force of 65 Europeans and 3050 natives in a fair state of organization,
had by August 13th advanced as far as the Assegai river, so as to form a
junction with M'Leod and his 5000 Swazis, at that time on the banks of
the Pongolo, and thus complete the chain round that side of the Zulu
country.

Lord Gifford, with a number of Jantjis, was following up the king,
whilst 200 of the 57th were also in pursuit, carefully patrolling the
hills that lay beyond Amansekranze, ably seconded by 500 of Barton's
natives. The Intanjaneni district, from Middle Drift to Victoria and
St. Paul's, was laid down with a line of piquets, whose orders were to
keep strict watch by night and day. The escape of the Zulu monarch
therefore appeared an impossibility. The Jantjis just spoken of merit a
few words of description, not only on account of the good services they
rendered, but also because in some points they differ vastly from other
South African tribes. The men of this race are fine, active, and well
made, standing not unusually six feet in height. Their clothing consists
simply of a blanket, worn in peace time in the manner of a Roman toga,
but on the war-path invariably discarded for a simple belt of wild-cats'
tails. Their weapons are the light assegai, or umkhonto, and this spear
can be thrown by them to the distance of seventy or eighty yards, when
at that it will have sufficient strength to enter a man's body. Many of
the men even brought their guns, and showing Lord Gifford how expert
they were in their use, were allowed to carry and employ them, instead
of the original native weapon. The Jantjis, like the Kaffirs first, and
then the Zulus, are beginning to find out that the assegai is not a
match for a gun; consequently, as they have money, they procure a
tolerably large number of them. Like most of the Zulu tribes, they build
wickerwork huts, and thatch these with the long tambookie grass. These
huts are, as usual, arranged in a circle, and thus form a village, or,
as we should say, a kraal. The men, unlike the Zulus, are very fond of
horses, and most of them can ride. This makes them most useful as
mercenaries and levies. As they ride well, it is a pretty sight to see
those who are chosen as orderlies dashing along with the letter-bag
upon the smart little horses given them by Government. They utterly
disdain the use of a saddle, and always gallop along at full speed, with
an ostrich feather (if a chief) streaming in the wind, and some wild
animal's skin worn hussar fashion, and floating behind. Even with their
long black legs almost touching the ground, there is nothing grotesque
in their appearance, though doubtless in London such a horseman would
cause astonishment. Dashing up with a letter or heliographic message
from Sir Garnet, these fellows bring their horses to a sudden stand, as
Bedouins do, sending the mould and grit beneath the hoofs flying in the
air. Saluting then most gracefully, with the spearhead to the earth, the
messenger springs to the ground, and hands in his _paquet_.

To resume our narrative. On Sunday afternoon (10th August), as Sir
Garnet Wolseley was walking with an aide-de-camp near the camp at Fort
Victoria, Ulundi, a man on foot was observed, apparently lame and
feeble, making the best of his way towards our camp. With glasses it
could be made out that he came along with difficulty, limping much, and
occasionally casting a furtive glance behind, as if in danger of being
pursued. As ponies were ready at hand and saddled, Sir Garnet mounted
and cantered out of the camp to see who the man was. On coming to close
quarters he found the wayfarer to be no less a personage than one
Cornelius Vijn, a Dutch trader of Natal, who was known to have been a
prisoner for some time at Cetywayo's kraal. His aspect and general
appearance were, to put it mildly, more those of a badly-dressed
scarecrow than those of a human being, and his haggard and hungry
contour, his wearied look, lean and meagre, with eyes deeply sunk in
their orbits, and his parchment-like cheeks, hollow and cavernous, all
spoke with an eloquent voice of the ordeal he must have undergone while
the enforced guest of King Cetywayo. The aide-de-camp, having with him a
flask and some biscuits, was enabled to somewhat revive the fugitive,
who then informed them who he was, and how he had managed to escape from
the king's thrall. As his information was considered highly important,
Sir Garnet desired Mr. Vijn to narrate briefly his story out of hearing
of the camp in order that any future operations or measures, consequent
upon the information given, might not transpire to the outer world. The
necessity for this precaution had been of late forced upon the General,
who had had many of his plans and movements made known by those upon
whose discretion while at headquarters he thought he could vouch for.
Besides, since his arrival in Natal, Sir Garnet had achieved all his
successes by striking without warning, and by carefully concealing the
movements of troops, stores, &c., from all but those actually in command
where the movement was to be made; and there was but little doubt that
the Zulus, in the earlier portion of the war, obtained much of their
information from the Dutch, at least from that section of the Boers who
thought it their interest to see the English army unsuccessful, and who
consequently made known to the enemy the British weak points.

Mr. Vijn's narrative, although very long, did not contain many details
of general interest. He left Natal for trading purposes as far back as
the 29th of October, 1878, and about the middle of January fell into
the power of the king, who, however, does not seem to have treated him
at all rigorously, but allowed him to remain at one of his brother's
kraals under a sort of friendly supervision. During this detention Mr.
Vijn appears to have kept a sort of journal, which has a certain value,
as showing the opinions of the king, his brothers, and the Zulu people
in regard to the war. As Mr. Vijn's information regarding the movements
and whereabouts of the king was both authentic and valuable, and as he
volunteered to return to Cetywayo and persuade him to surrender, Sir
Garnet decided to avail himself of such offer. His presence near the
camp was, however, kept entirely secret, and having been allowed to rest
and refit, he was despatched on his return journey, pledging himself to
return if possible by Tuesday evening with the king's answer. On the
following Wednesday Mr. Vijn came back to the camp, and reported that
his mission had been unsuccessful, as the king had left the kraals where
Vijn had last seen him, and had fled away to the north towards the Ngome
forest. As soon as this news was communicated to Sir Garnet,
instructions were given to Major Barrow to take a troop of the King's
Dragoon Guards, sixty mounted infantry, some colonial levies and
natives, making in all a force of 220 whites and eighty natives, and to
proceed into the territory of those chiefs who were still holding out,
and where, it was supposed, the king had taken refuge. Major Marter,
K.D.G., Captain Maurice, Lord Gifford, Captain Hardy, Captain Hay, and
Mr. Herbert accompanied Major Barrow, and they merely took with them, to
be in as light marching order as possible, three days' preserved
rations--their commander wisely assuming that they would find no great
difficulty in foraging as they went on. Half an hour after the order to
parade was given they were all in the saddle and ready for the road. Sir
Garnet, accompanied by Colonel Colley, minutely inspected men, horses,
equipment, rations, and ammunition, and, after addressing a few private
words of advice to the officers, bade them "God-speed."

Proceeding north-eastward at starting they soon came to the little river
Umbellan, which, flowing past the dense bush of the district, ultimately
joins the Umvolosi. At this time of the year it is about twenty feet
deep, and murmurs along a channel of from twenty to thirty feet wide,
now and then forming deep basins, which were found to be full of fish.
Soon after midnight the junction of the Black Umvolosi was reached, and
the first night's camp was made near a fine tamarind-tree, which was
noted as a landmark in case of a return that way. At this season there
was a rather heavy dew towards daybreak, but the nights were calm, and,
in comparison with the day, considerably colder than would be expected.

Just as the party was ready and preparing to start, after an early meal
in the morning, some natives came from a neighbouring kraal with the
information that on the previous night one of their best oxen, having
strayed outside the cattle enclosure, had been seized and carried off by
a lion. It had already been stated by John Dunn that the district
through which they had to pass had been for some years infested with
lions, and lately the casualties had been so frequent that the
inhabitants were commencing to migrate. The Umvolosi at its junction
with the Umbellan is about the same size as the latter river, and at
this point makes a most remarkable bend from south-east to north-east,
but its general direction for some distance in this district is due
north, the stream flowing between banks twenty or thirty feet in height,
with an average width of full forty feet and a depth of only three feet.
The velocity of the current, however, was 120 feet a minute. Leaving
Amansekranze, they marched about nine miles towards the north-west,
having on their left the Black Umvolosi, and on their right the huge
terraces and wood-crowned ravines of the Lebombo mountains. The woods
came down to the river as it flowed between its rocky banks; and farther
north-west some wide meadow-like flats were crossed, containing water
basins almost as large as lakes. Several kinds of antelope of the larger
sort, waterbucks, and hartebeests appeared, and as the troopers managed
to wound and ride down several, their nightly bivouac in the forest was
solaced by a feast of excellent venison. Between the Umvolosi and the
Lebombo range the previous uniformity of the rocks began to be broken by
projections of gneiss and by scattered hills. About twelve miles from
the junction of the rivers at Amansekranze a remarkable illustration of
this formation was passed, where huge blocks of stone rose in mounds
from which colossal obelisks could be cut. These elevated places
alternated with extensive flats as level as a table-top. In keeping with
this weird and fantastic scenery and eccentric native architecture is
the peculiarity of the conies or rock rabbits that have their dwelling
among the crevices of the gneiss. Soon after the sun went down, and just
before sunrise, they were to be seen all round squatting like natives at
the entrance of their holes, into which at the slightest noise or sound
of danger they darted with the most extraordinary snorts and grunts.
There is, however, a great variety of species--difficult for one who is
not a skilled naturalist to distinguish the one from the
other--scattered through the whole of Zululand, each district seeming to
present its own representative. They appear to feed chiefly on the bark
of trees, although they will occasionally devour young shoots and grass.
Distinct from anything in the more civilized parts of South Africa was
the aspect of the landscape presented to view on the second morning of
the march. From the heights to which Barrow and his men had ascended,
and as far as the eye could reach, there extended a wide, grassy plain,
broken artistically by huge stones of the most fantastic outline and by
thickets and single trees. Graceful and luxuriant palms of the fan
species waved above the groves, while the russet autumnal tints gave a
rich colouring to the scenery; every rock, with its wealth of covering
parasites, being a picture in itself. In the far north could be seen the
Mussipulo and the distant portions of the Lebombo, whose purple peaks
stood out in bold relief in the pale azure of the horizon. In the far
distance, and in the direction of the Amatongas, the country had the
deep and luscious blue of a Neapolitan sky, mellowed, however, as it
came nearer and nearer into the most bewitching tints of grey and a
golden brown that Titian would have loved to paint. In the foreground
were the sturdy troopers of Marter's squadron grouped in picturesque
disorder as the process of saddling went on. These with their bright
uniforms, and the glint of steel scabbard, spur, and chain, were thrown
out by the splendid hues of a foliage rich and alternating with the
varied tints of red, yellow, and olive green, lightened up with the glad
freshness of the sprouting shrubs, the deep red of the numerous
ant-hills and the silver grey of the jutting rocks.

After leaving the river, the way at first led over what for horses
alone, without wheels, was fair trekking ground. They then descended for
about five miles, coming gradually down the slopes to a sort of rough
trampled pathway, evidently made by a herd of driven cattle. Here could
be distinctly traced the spoor, and here the king's cattle had evidently
been driven. Now dipping into a deep hollow, where the grass grew in
rank luxuriance, now topping a gentle rise and stopping to listen if
they could hear the distant horns of the Zulu sounded when they announce
the proximity of an enemy,--the horsemen neared the forest-land at the
foot of the steep mountain range. Troops of eland crossed their path now
and then, and occasionally a herd of koodoo. They now came to the end of
the plain, and had to pass over a much more difficult country, where
they could scarcely manage to get along two abreast, and sometimes in
Indian file. The onward path at one portion of the kloof seemed
completely barred by a closely set forest of underwood bush of dwarf
acacia and creepers of the most tangled nature. Indeed it seemed at one
time impossible to pass, but Lord Gifford, after a search of some
moments, found the dry bed of a stream, up which, he said, they might
have a chance of progressing. They had now to dismount and lead their
horses, and slowly and with the greatest difficulty made their way on,
sometimes crawling on hands and knees, and having to drag their rifles
after them, winning way patiently, yard by yard, and almost inch by
inch. Sometimes they were fairly stopped by huge masses of rock, and
even compelled to cut a road through the spiky branches of the mimosa,
which were bound up tightly together with the wild vines and creeping
cane-like plants. For more than a mile did the column toil on through
this ravine, their clothes torn, and face and hands bleeding from the
thorns.

The morning after the first day's march brought them to the kraals where
the king had been a fortnight previous to his flight, as stated to Sir
Garnet by the Dutch trader, and it was no surprise to find these kraals
burnt to the ground, and completely deserted. Therefore, after a brief
halt, they pushed on, and did not draw rein until it became only too
evident that the tired horses could go no further. They had been more
than three and twenty hours in the saddle, and the weight of the
dragoons had told severely upon Marter's horses, which, after the last
ten miles under a most burning sun, and over rough and broken ground,
were nearly all done up. On coming to the next kraal they found they
were still upon the right track, as they gleaned sufficient intelligence
to know that the king had slept there on the day preceding. He had,
however, been warned by scouts and signal-fires,--the latter had been
noticed as they came along,--and had decamped in time to get a good
start. At this point Major Barrow decided to leave the King's Dragoon
Guards behind, and push on with the lighter portion of his mounted men,
and this arrangement was carried out with the understanding that the
"King's" should follow as soon as their horses were fit. Once more,
therefore, Barrow set out, and, as he subsequently found, was upon the
king's trail for two clear days, having by dint of bribery and threats
extorted information as to the king's intentions. On Thursday the column
had a fearfully fatiguing and at the same time disappointing day. They
reached another kraal at sundown, having travelled over a most difficult
and hilly country all day. Major Barrow decided to bivouac at this
kraal, and to start during the night should the moon give sufficient
light. The moon, however, rose so late that it was really sunrise when
they were on the move on Friday morning. Lord Gifford was now sent on
ahead with a few men, and it was subsequently found afterwards that he
and Captain Hardy chased and nearly caught one of the king's principal
attendants. This man would have been caught had he not dexterously
abandoned his horse, and, taking to the jungle, managed to elude further
pursuit. Meanwhile the main body followed on, and on Saturday came to
another kraal. One of the king's personal attendants was here captured,
who having been frightened by a little threatening, showed where the
king had stayed and slept on Thursday. This fellow's statements were
somewhat contradictory and improbable. He wished Major Barrow to believe
that the king meditated changing the direction of his flight and
endeavouring to gain the Inkhangla bush, which is as nearly as possible
opposite the Tugela middle drift. But to make this point the king would
have had to get through the line of posts stationed in this district,
and this made the story seem improbable. Major Barrow, however, taking
the remote chance of the man being truthful, and having no better
information, allowed the Zulu to take him in a retrograde and southerly
direction, until he met another Zulu messenger, who said he had heard
nothing of the king along the road he came. Major Barrow therefore
retraced his steps to the camp of the main body on the Black Umvolosi,
and sent Lord Gifford and Captain Maurice on with eight men to get some
cattle from a kraal and obtain what information he could.

The first destination of this party was a kraal with cattle and mealies,
and this was said to be about seven miles from where they were then
halted. On reaching the said kraal on Saturday afternoon they surprised
some Zulu boys, and partly by threats and partly by persuasion induced
them to come on to another kraal, seven miles off. These boys, after
some pressing, confessed that on the previous day (Friday), the king had
endeavoured to double back towards the south, and had slept within a
mile of where they had bivouacked, and had actually passed the kraal
where they then were. This intelligence confirmed the story that had
previously been told by the king's attendant, and the information was at
once sent back to Major Barrow. On Saturday night they slept in the
kraal they had reached in the afternoon, having during the day visited a
number of smaller kraals and villages, in which they captured many
assegais and other weapons. They thus had made a circuit and were now
heading almost due south, and though they had now been four clear days
in the saddle, had managed their three days' supply of rations so well
that they had still a reserve to fall back upon. This feat of
commissariat skill was accomplished by obtaining wherever they could
such simple supplies as the kraals afforded--sour milk, Indian corn
cakes made of mealies, pumpkin, sweet potatoes, and now and then a
little Kaffir beer, which after a time, and when the taste is acquired,
is not such very bad stuff. Sunday, the 17th, was a most eventful day.
Lord Gifford paraded his men, and they started, as usual, just before
sunrise, their destination being an important military kraal, which they
had every reason to believe the king must have visited. The gallant
leader had on the previous evening induced two Zulu boys to accompany
his men as guides, for the shortest way was through the forest and
across country, where it was impossible to find the smallest trace of a
trek. When they set out, the whole of the wood was veiled in mist, and
the ground was yet reeking with the early dew. But as the light came on
they were rewarded by seeing an immense variety of forest shrubs.
Especially beautiful was the _Encephalartos_, which grew in abundance;
most noticeable too was a cabbage-shaped _Euphorbia_, as well as a large
variety of conspicuous shrubs, many of them covered with such fine
blossoms as to give the wilderness the aspect of an artificial park.

About three miles to the right, and to the south of the ford last
crossed, rose several thickly-wooded hills, and in the kloofs could be
seen the smoke of kraals. The guides had by this time become quite
friendly and confidential, and by their advice more than one of these
kraals were surrounded, in hope that if they did not see the king they
might hear of his more recent movements. At three of these kraals they
captured arms and ammunition, and filled their haversacks with mealies,
but could gain no tidings of Cetywayo, although they knew he could not
be far off. In one instance they thought they had discovered their
prize, as coming out of the forest they saw a portion of open country
before them and several natives on horseback and on foot about two miles
away to their right. The scenery they were now approaching towards the
south-west assumed a character very different to the parklike landscape
through which they had been passing. For many miles the eye rested upon
treeless steppes and flats, broken by bamboo and mimosa jungles that
seemed almost impenetrable, and standing in detached groups, their dark
olive green contrasted admirably with the bright hue of the grass,
giving a complete novelty of character to the general aspect. The moment
the group of natives saw them emerge from the forest they quickened
their pace, and endeavoured to gain the jungle to their left, while Lord
Gifford detached three of his men round a small hill to cut them off. A
most exciting race now commenced, two Basutos joining in the pursuit,
and taking advantage of every rock and bush to dodge and intercept the
fugitives. Suddenly the Zulus became aware of the party sent round the
hill to intercept them, and giving a shout of alarm ran back in the
direction of the kraal the English troopers had left. This was exactly
what was required, and galloping right across the plain the troopers
caught them halfway. These men were found to be Zulus of the
neighbourhood, and when they were satisfied that their pursuers had no
hostile intentions they became quite friendly, offering milk and Kaffir
corn, as well as food for the horses. They professed to be starting on a
journey to a kraal about ten miles off, belonging to a chief named
Isnabomlika, who, they said, was anxious for the capture of the king, as
he had grievously oppressed him. Leaving these men, they continued their
march, and soon came to a tract of country much better cultivated than
any they had hitherto seen. Maize-fields (mealies) showed that the
ground was fertile, and although no cattle was seen, the presence of
several kraals on the neighbouring hills showed that the district was
populous.

About midday they reached the large military kraal where it was thought
probable the king might have stopped. His guides had served him with
fidelity, and so Lord Gifford promised to reward them at headquarters
with a present of cattle to each. These lads had made themselves great
favourites with the men, who seemed quite to fraternize with them. Their
delight was unbounded when the officers came across and killed with
their rifles any description of game, and they seemed wonderfully
impressed with the accuracy of the shooting. They said it had been
currently reported in their neighbourhood that the king was lame and
could not travel fast, and that his followers were leaving him every
day. Just before reaching the kraal one of the lads, an intelligent,
sharp little fellow, as he was running a few yards in front of the
horses, pointed out to Lord Gifford the track of cattle leading away to
the bush on the right. They halted and had a consultation; but it was
decided not to follow these tracks, but to continue on southwards, their
object being, if possible, to hem in the king, and drive him on towards
the pickets of Barrow's party or the scouts of General Clarke, who had
four companies of infantry, the headquarters of the King's Dragoon
Guards, and a number of irregulars (cavalry and infantry) encamped at
the drift of the Black Umvolosi. As they knew that Clarke's patrols were
scouring the country to the north and east, they had no fear of the
king's escape in that direction. But little information was gained at
the big kraal, where they off-saddled for two hours, and fed their
rather overworked mounts. At three o'clock they again started and now
made a bend towards Entonjaneni, as by this course it was considered
they would have the best chance of intercepting the king in his attempt
to cut through the cordon now drawn around him. The range of hills which
they now had on their right were the Umyati. They are a continuation of
the Ngome mountains, which shoot out from the Lebombo towards the west,
and they form a portion of the ridge bordering the southern or right
bank of the Black Umvolosi.

On the summit, as far as the eye could reach, there was an extensive
plateau broken by detached groves and handsome trees, and sloping down
towards the north to the stream. A few miles on they came to some fine
tamarinds, under the pleasant shade of which another short halt and
off-saddle was made. Before reaching the river they had to cross four
little brooks that flowed in an easterly direction to join it. The
first of these to the north of the hills was the upper course of the
Enhlongana, and was full of water in a deep bed enclosed in an avenue of
trees. A ridge of hills ran parallel to the path on the left, and after
they had crossed the second brook a mass of red rock, rising to about
300 feet was observed on the right. The long grass was now very
troublesome, coming up in some places to the saddle-flaps, and tickling
the horses in a most unpleasant manner. Towards five o'clock they
entered the splendid forest of Enhlongana, through which, but ten miles
to the west, they had passed some ten days before. After the forest came
an open steppe, with a distant view of the hills in front, which they
crossed, though more to the west than before. The passage of the
Enhlongana having been accomplished without mishap, the road began to
ascend and led through a wood, where the foliage was so dense that it
was quite impossible to see many steps in front.

It will be observed that there were no less than twelve brooks crossed
in the interval between the march in the morning and the final bivouac
on Sunday night. These are all supplied more or less copiously with
water, even in the dry season; at least so said the guides. Although all
these streams have their origin quite close to the left bank of the
Enhlongana, yet they take a very devious course before they actually
join it; the last five, indeed, do not actually meet the river, but join
another stream a little to the west called the Ivuma, which unites
itself with the Black Umvolosi under the Ngome mountain. On this
watershed bamboo and mimosa jungles extend over an area of many square
miles. The species of bamboo which is thus found in such masses is not
so large as that one is accustomed to see in India, Ceylon, or the
Mauritius; and in the manner of its growth it is not unlike an asparagus
bed in the summer-time, hundreds of sprouts starting up from a single
root, and drooping in the most graceful curves over towards the ground.
In other respects the habit of the plant is similar to the Indian
bamboo. The night was now coming on; they had ridden at the very least
thirty-five miles, besides exploring kraals, examining prisoners, and
galloping after wounded game. All knew and felt instinctively that the
king was in the toils, that he could not have broken through the network
spread for him, and that it was a mere question of days as to when he
would be forced to surrender. The horses were indeed fatigued, but none
as yet were lame, while the three days' rations of biscuit and preserved
meats, with which they had started, were almost intact, so well had they
been husbanded by the men living on what they could shoot or obtain from
the kraals.

On Sunday night (August 17th) the bivouac was made at the wild mountain
kraal of Unhlovani; some women, girls, and children were found here, who
at first were terribly frightened at the approach of the troopers, but
soon became reassured and friendly. Indeed Lord Gifford had a wonderful
faculty of ingratiating himself with the native races, and, after a
little persuasion, made one of the chief's daughters confess that,
although the king did not pass by this particular kraal, his attendants
did but two days since. She also added information of great value,
namely, that there were but two passes over the mountain they had now
reached, and that three of the king's wives had passed over the eastern
road the day before, carrying bundles and food. They further learnt that
this girl had no possible reason for sympathy for or loyalty to
Cetywayo, inasmuch as an old Zulu, who stated that she was his niece,
told them that the king, about two years ago, suspecting her father of
some pretended conspiracy, had had him smelt out and killed, and that
the children were at Cetywayo's disposal for sale or gift. On the
following morning (Monday) the horses were tolerably refreshed. They had
a good amount of forage given them, and a careful examination of each
animal showed that no back sinews were strained, and that no sore backs
had come on. A small supply of sweet potatoes, pumpkins, and a quantity
of mealies were given to them by the chief's daughters, whose hearts
their leader had won by explaining to them that the king's reign of
terror was at an end, and that henceforth they could marry any young
warrior they pleased. Bidding these Zulu friends adieu, the party were
in the saddle and on the road by five o'clock; and, ascending by a path
pointed out by some boys of the kraal, they came to a lofty ridge
dominating the valley below, and along which they pushed at a fast walk
for about an hour. From this ridge, which they were following as quickly
as the rugged nature of the narrow ledge would allow, the view was
magnificently grand. In the foreground, where they were compelled to
march in single file, and where a halt was made every now and then to
allow a straggler to come up, was a most inviting grove, with some of
the most charming types of tropical vegetation--the large-leaved,
blue-green anona, the purple _Grewia mollis_, and a number of pretty
little trees of the pine genus, that gave a Swiss character to the
scene. Having risen in their march to an elevation of 2000 feet, they
gazed down upon a fine view of the valley and its meandering rivers
below. The banks of each stream were marked by rows of tall reeds, and
the morning sun gleamed upon the mirror of the numerous backwaters,
while the distance revealed a series of woody undulations in the
direction of the Norwegian mission station of Enhlongana. Turning
sharply round a curve in the rocky path, they came suddenly upon a kraal
nestled in a most secluded and difficult spot, and here they found two
good-looking and very communicative Zulu girls, who fetched for them
some capital milk, and, after a little coaxing, told them that the
king's attendants had passed on that way the previous evening. These
women, as far as could be gleaned from the interpreter, had also
suffered some wrong and oppression, and whatever might be the political
feeling or loyal tendencies of Cetywayo's male subjects, it seemed
tolerably evident that the Zulu women would have no objection to a
change of government. These women at the kraal having shown them a short
cut down one side of the ridge, they hastened on in the hope of
overtaking some of the king's following, and their activity was soon
rewarded by discovering a couple of figures making their way hurriedly
along the lower ledge about a mile from them. One of the officers
volunteered to proceed on foot to cut these people off by a sort of
goat-path that seemed practicable down the side of the cliff; and,
accompanied by one trooper, half-sliding, half-falling, and with a
desperate scramble, the gallant fellow reached the next ledge at a point
where it was evident the travellers must pass. In ten minutes they came
up--a tall and stalwart Zulu with a bundle of assegais, accompanied by a
lad carrying a sort of canvas bag, something in shape like those in
which cricketers carry a bat and flannel suit. At the word "Halt!"
accompanied by a presented revolver, the couple of natives came to a
stand, and on being questioned declared they were messengers from the
chief Usibibo to a neighbouring kraal. As this story seemed rather
doubtful, it was determined to search the cricket-bag, and they were not
long in finding a trophy that almost repaid them for their many weary
miles of travel. Inside was a very handsome Henry rifle belonging to the
king, a small leather handbag, a number of cartridges, and a
hand-mirror! As such articles do not form the travelling appendages of
the ordinary Zulu, it was at once seen that they were getting hotter and
hotter on the trail. While these two were thus carefully examining the
captured spoil, the main party came winding down the kloof, having
during their absence come suddenly upon and surprised some more of
Cetywayo's attendants. A halt was immediately ordered, and the whole of
the prisoners examined one by one.

Some of the people from the friendly kraal had, in the meantime,
overtaken the English horsemen, and their presence seemed to act as a
wonderful incentive to truth on the part of the prisoners. "Tell them,"
said Lord Gifford, "that if they all speak the truth to our questions we
will do them no harm and let them go free." This had a wonderful effect,
and, coupled with a private communication of a confidential nature,
from the Zulus of the kraal, evidently to the effect that the white
man's intentions were not hostile to them, it caused the prisoners to
confess at once that they were of the king's following, and that the
elder was his personal attendant. From further information then obtained
from these people it was found that a mile further on, and hidden in a
cave, were a troop of Zulu girls and other attendants with goods and
chattels of the king. Guided by these not too faithful adherents of
Cetywayo, the troopers soon came to where these people were, and they
surrendered at once without any attempt to escape. These latter
prisoners appeared to have with them all the paraphernalia of the
monarch's toilet. There were gums, wax, and unguents for the hair and
face, brushes, combs, tweezers, scissors, and razors, together with old
pocket-books, almanacks, gaily-coloured pocket-handkerchiefs, and charms
and medicine, made of ground human teeth, and hair and skins of
reptiles, reminding one irresistibly of the ingredients of the witches'
cauldron in Macbeth. A silk pocket-handkerchief was recognized as
belonging to Colonel Degacher by the name in its corner, and this was
almost the only article that could not be considered rags or rubbish.
While Lord Gifford and his party were holding a solemn Court of Inquiry
over this burlesque of human vanity a loud whistle was heard, and coming
round the corner of the ledge, they saw Captain Hay and a Basuto
approaching at a smart canter. Hay, flinging himself from his panting
mount, and wiping the perspiration from his forehead, announced that he
was sent on by Major Barrow, to say that, having himself failed in
obtaining any traces of the king, and deeming it inadvisable to delay
the others in waiting for him to catch them up, he had decided to
increase Lord Gifford's little force with twenty Basutos, under their
leader, Jantzi, and to leave the pursuit of the king in his (Gifford's)
hands, while he (Barrow) made his way back to Clarke's camp. Meanwhile,
the arrival of these additions to the English force seemed to exercise a
marked influence upon the ladies of the king's household, who
immediately jumped at the conclusion that Cetywayo had fallen into the
hands of the soldiers. This had a wonderful effect, as they now
discovered from the women and attendants where the king had actually
slept the previous day, and armed with this information, they pushed on,
bivouacked for the night at the nearest kraal, and started before
daybreak on the following morning. From these prisoners they learnt,
moreover, several most important and invaluable pieces of information:
first, that the poor king was almost deserted; secondly, that he had
been obliged to abandon his horses; and, thirdly, that he was ill and
footsore.

From Tuesday, the 19th, until Wednesday, the 27th, long marches were
incessant, and to describe the adventures that befell this small party
would be merely a repetition of those already told. The arrival of
Jantzi and the timely reinforcements of Basutos enabled Lord Gifford to
detach parties and hem in the fugitive monarch in a manner he could not
have effected with only nine men. It was now almost a point of honour
with Gifford that his men should succeed in capturing the king after the
way in which Barrow had entrusted the pursuit to him; and although he
knew that the king was pursued by Barton's Native Infantry, three
companies of the 57th, and 150 of Marter's Dragoons, he still felt
confident that his party alone were upon the right track. Marter he had
heard had gone back after losing three of his horses by lions in the
district through which he had passed; and his only fear now was that the
Mounted Police would take the wind out of his sails by a rapid move from
the Transvaal, and capture the king should he attempt to escape towards
the north. This he considered was not improbable, as he had news from
Villiers up to the 12th, saying that the tribes in his neighbourhood
were most unfriendly, and anxious to afford help to the king. Indeed
they had attempted an attack upon the mixed force organized by Villiers,
but had been easily beaten off. The movements of Gifford's party from
the 20th (Wednesday) up to the 26th, were not of special interest. They
marched and countermarched, the king never far in front, but always
managing to keep thirty or forty miles between himself and them, and
their information sometimes right and sometimes wrong, according to the
feelings of the natives whom they questioned.

On the 25th they had tolerably authentic information that the king had
decided to come in to Lord Gifford, and surrender. Dabulamanzi, however,
a brave soldier although a double-dyed and scheming traitor, wrote or
sent to the king, telling him the English would hang or shoot him if he
surrendered. Dabulamanzi's object was most transparent. He hoped the
king might be killed or die in the wilds of starvation, as then he might
possibly be made the English nominee to the throne.

Jumping over the interval between Monday, 18th August, and that day
week, during which the pursuer's movements merely resembled those of a
pack of harriers when "pussy" will keep dodging and doubling over the
same ground, we may come to the incidents which led up to the king's
capture. On Monday night, 28th August, scouts came in, who kept Gifford
and his party well in line with the king's refuge, and although their
horses were nearly dropping from fatigue they marched on Tuesday and on
through Tuesday night, until at daybreak on Wednesday they came to a
large kraal situated close to the Ngome forest, where it was known the
king had passed the previous night. This kraal was situated in a most
curious and out-of-the-way portion of the land that skirted the forest,
and, hidden as it was between two high kops, it might have been easily
passed unobserved had it not been for the information Lord Gifford had
been enabled to obtain. They approached this kraal at dusk, and found
that the king had left early in the morning. Some mats, two blankets,
and a snuff-box were recognized as belonging to the king. A couple of
lads were caught, who at first would tell nothing, but Lord Gifford,
assuming a stern air, ordered them both to be blindfolded, and said in
their own language, "Shoot first one and then the other!" A volley was
fired, and the ruse succeeded, for one boy had been led away out of
sight, and the other, thinking he was shot, exclaimed, "They will kill
me next; I will confess!" He accordingly said, if his life were spared,
he would conduct Lord Gifford to the king's hiding-place.

What was to be done? The horses had had a terrible ten days'
"bucketing," the men were tired, hungry, and incapable of great fatigue;
but when their chief said, "My lads, we must do it to-night!" every
heart beat high with enthusiasm, and hunger, thirst, and fatigue, were
at once forgotten. That night-march, conducted by the Zulu boy, was an
event that will never be forgotten by those engaged therein. Scarcely
had the sun disappeared below the horizon when the devoted little band
started on their way, and the novelty of their position in the
wilderness could hardly be realized by those who were not used to the
country--the deep hum of hundreds of insect creatures signalling their
presence to each other, the lizards and poisonous snakes that crawled
across the path, the grim, gaunt figure of the beast of prey stalking
near the projecting rock, the yells of the monkeys, and the howl of the
wild dogs in the plain. Busy, silent, spectral-like forms passed in the
night, and, with a snort of terror or a growl of anger, moved out of the
path, scarcely liking to let pass such defenceless creatures as men seem
to be, yet apparently in awe of a certain presence which the brute
creation can never thoroughly overcome. Tiny creeping animals crackled
the crisp leaves as they scampered about in their fastnesses among the
bushes, and sniffed the scent of the strange intruder, while the
noiseless flapping of wings attracted for an instant the soldier's sight
as some ghostlike moving night-bird flew around and examined the strange
being that intruded in his domain. Having marched all Tuesday night,
with men and horses almost dead with fatigue, they arrived at daybreak
within four miles of the kraal where they were told the king was lying.
He was, they knew, footsore, weary almost unto death, and so despondent
that he would scarcely speak to those who still continued with him. Lord
Gifford, knowing the king could go no farther, deemed his capture more
certain in the dusk, and accordingly sent back a message to Major
Marter, who was known to be not far off, for him to come up on the
opposite side to that on which he and his men were posted. Where Lord
Gifford was posted was a splendid ambush, as they could see without
being seen, and during the day they noticed that an ox was killed and
preparations made for a feast. They also saw Marter's men appear on the
opposite heights, and then they knew that their task was virtually
accomplished. Gifford's ambush, it may be remarked, was on the
south-east side, while Marter had posted his men on the north-east.

The king, it was subsequently learnt, saw Marter, but did not see
Gifford's men, and he considered that the cavalry could not approach
without his knowing. But Marter had wisely taken off his saddles, and
made his men leave their steel scabbards, advancing only with numnahs
and naked swords, and then, disappearing into the bush as if
disappointed in his quest, the major stole up quietly by a circuitous
route to the kraal, and surrounded the king's hut. The Native Contingent
were actually the men first up, as they were on foot, and could move
more rapidly than the horses. These fellows dashed at the kraal, saying
to the king's attendants, "The white man is here, you are caught!" Major
Marter then rode up quietly to the king's hut, inside the kraal, and
called upon Cetywayo to surrender. The king said, with a certain amount
of dignity, "Enter into my hut; I am your prisoner!" Major Marter,
however, declined this invitation, and prudently invited the king again
to come forth. This was the final picture! A Zulu kraal is, perhaps, a
refuge with as little of the picturesque or dignified as any known
habitation, yet the poor king, somewhat bloated in appearance, weak,
footsore, and evidently sick at heart, came out of his refuge with a
royal dignity which could not be surpassed, and when a too heedless
dragoon tried to touch him, said, in grave and majestic tones, "White
soldier, do not touch me--I surrender to your chief."

Meanwhile Lord Gifford, to whom, beyond all doubt, the capture was due,
as he alone tracked down the quarry, galloped in, and the king expressly
said he surrendered to him, and not to Major Marter. With haughty gaze
and supremely regal though savage dignity, with head erect, and the mien
of a Roman Emperor, Cetywayo marched between the two lines of the 60th
Rifles to his tent, while the men, by the order of Lord Gifford,
presented arms to him as he passed. Such was the final scene of the Zulu
War.




NOTE I.

NARRATIVE OF CETYWAYO'S WANDERINGS AFTER ULUNDI, TAKEN FROM HIS OWN
LIPS.


The following account of Cetywayo's movements after the battle of Ulundi
is of great interest as having been taken directly from his lips since
he has been confined in Capetown:--

"Cetywayo was not present at Ulundi; he was then at the kraal of a chief
called Umbonambi, which is situated about three miles north of
Kwamizekanze. One of Cetywayo's brothers, Uziwetu, in company with
Vijn, the captured German trader, had posted himself on the summit of
the Uncungi hill, and thus witnessed the conflict. Men, also, had been
placed on the look-out, and they brought the news of his army's defeat
to Cetywayo, who, at once crossing the neck of the Ntabankulu mountains,
retreated into the bush beyond, where he was joined by Umnyama and other
chiefs. Vijn and Uziwetu came to the king on the following day, but
after a short interview withdrew to Uziwetu's kraal of Ematina. Cetywayo
then retired to Ekushu Maileni, a kraal belonging to Umnyama, his prime
minister, which is on the banks of the river Isiqmeshi. Arriving here
three days after the engagement, he received news of the retreat of the
English army; this determined him to remain where he was; so he lived in
this kraal for nearly three weeks.

"When information of Sir Garnet Wolseley's advance was brought to him,
Cetywayo despatched three chiefs to meet the General, and tell him that
the king was getting together his cattle, and would send them on to Sir
Garnet by his minister Umnyama, who was then personally engaged in
collecting the royal herds. These messengers, having fallen in with a
detachment of Clarke's column, were directed by them to Entonjaneni,
where they met Sir Garnet on his arrival. Vijn, in the meantime, had, by
the king's command, gone to Fort Victoria bearing a similar message,
with this addition, that after the cattle had been received by the
English commander he would give himself up. During Vijn's absence
Cetywayo moved on to Zonymana's kraal; here he was rejoined by Vijn, who
told him that the English were thoroughly determined to capture him.
Hereupon he sent Vijn a second time to Sir Garnet, with no definite
proposals, but merely a complaint that he could not give himself up to
any of the patrols, as he was apprehensive that he would be killed out
of hand. And there was some ground for this fear, as Dabulamanzi had
sent a message warning him that the English meant to put him to death,
and so he had better not yield himself up until the cattle had been
received and Umnyama made terms for him with the English commander. The
three first messengers, after leaving Entonjaneni, fell in with Umnyama
and the cattle near Ulundi, whither they betook themselves, in company
with that chieftain, instead of returning to Cetywayo.

"The morning following that on which Vijn had been despatched on his
second embassy the king moved on to the river Mona, and slept that night
in a kraal upon its bank. On the next morning, having crossed the
stream, he was ascending the hill that rose on the other side when a
messenger from his brother Uziwetu came to tell him that soldiers on
horseback had just visited Zonymana's kraal. He therefore concealed
himself in the bush, and in no long time beheld the white men's scouts
on the opposite hill; thereupon he descended the ravine into the Mona
bush. The same evening he travelled as far as the Black Umvolosi, and
slept there. On the following day they had scarcely finished killing
and skinning a couple of oxen when scouts came in to say the white
horsemen were coming through the bush. The king then bade all the women
to escape as best they could, whilst he, going out of the bush,
concealed himself in the long grass on the top of a mound just above the
drift, whence he could clearly watch the patrol as they passed, and,
indeed, could hear them speak and laugh. As soon as they had passed, he
and the five or six followers, who were now all the retainers that
remained with him, journeyed further up the Black Umvolosi, and lived
for some days in various kraals. Remaining for three days in the same
kraal, he was joined by one of his wives. Finding the troops still on
the trail, he now struck off across country into the Ingome forest,
where news reached him that Umnyama had, instead of making terms for
him, promised Sir Garnet Wolseley to use his best endeavours to capture
the king and to deliver him up should he be found in any of the kraals
of his (Umnyama's) district. Cetywayo was much grieved at this, and
exclaimed, 'Why does Umnyama do this? Why does he act treacherously
towards me? Why does he not send a message to tell me to deliver myself
up?' He then moved on to the kraal of the Ingome, where four more women
rejoined him. Here he was taken by Lord Gifford and Major Marter, and
conducted by them back to Ulundi. On the way one of the women escaped
into the bush."




NOTE II.

FATE OF CETYWAYO AND FINAL SETTLEMENT OF ZULULAND.


Cetywayo was first taken to Sir Garnet Wolseley at Ulundi, and thence by
that General's orders was conveyed, under an escort commanded by Captain
Poole, R.A., to Capetown, where he still remains in an honourable
captivity, treated with all the respect and indulgence due to his
position.

After Cetywayo's capture no further opposition of any sort was
encountered in Zululand, but the chiefs and people immediately assented
to the terms of peace proposed by Sir Garnet, by which the country was
split up into thirteen districts, each subject to its own chief, while
supreme over all these was placed a British resident. Native laws and
customs were to be respected, and European immigration was forbidden.
Mr. Wheelwright, for some considerable time a magistrate of Natal, was
appointed the first resident.




GILBERT AND RIVINGTON, PRINTERS, ST. JOHN'S SQUARE, LONDON.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of the Zulu Campaign, by
Waller Ashe and E. V. Wyatt-Edgell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF THE ZULU CAMPAIGN ***

***** This file should be named 42956.txt or 42956.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/9/5/42956/

Produced by Steven Gibbs, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
