The Project Gutenberg EBook of Shaving Made Easy, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Shaving Made Easy
       What the Man Who Shaves Ought to Know

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: July 9, 2013 [EBook #43166]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHAVING MADE EASY ***




Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive.)









  SHAVING MADE EASY


  What the Man Who
  Shaves Ought to Know


  ILLUSTRATED


  PUBLISHED BY
  THE 20th CENTURY
  CORRESPONDENCE SCHOOL
  NEW YORK




  COPYRIGHT, 1905
  BY
  THE 20TH CENTURY
  CORRESPONDENCE SCHOOL




  THIS BOOK
  IS DEDICATED TO THOSE
  MEN WHO HAVE DIFFICULTIES IN
  SHAVING, IN HOPE THAT ITS CONTENTS
  WILL BE OF ASSISTANCE IN REMEDYING
  THEIR TROUBLES.




PREFACE.


The object of this little book is to furnish clear and full information
about the art of shaving. There are few men who do not experience more or
less difficulty in shaving themselves, and many who, after a few
unsuccessful attempts, give it up in dispair and go to the barber shop. We
believe most of these would much prefer to shave themselves if only they
could do as well as a barber.

The advantages, indeed, seem to be wholly with the man who shaves himself.
In the first place the shaving is done in the privacy of his own room. He
has his own razor, cup, soap, brush and towels, which can be kept
scrupulously clean and sanitary, thus avoiding the constant danger of
infection. There is no long wait for the call of "next." After the first
cost of the outfit there is nothing to pay, either for services or "tips."
Thus in point of time, money and health, the man who shaves himself is a
decided gainer.

There are few things in life that are really difficult to perform when one
thoroughly knows how to do them. Shaving is no exception. The art of
shaving can be easily acquired if one only has the will, and the necessary
practical information. This book, which, as far as we are aware, is the
only one treating the subject at all completely, endeavors to supply such
information; as well for the improvement of men accustomed to shave
themselves, as for the instruction of beginners. We believe that any man
who will carefully read and follow the instructions here given, will, with
some little practice, soon be able to shave himself easily and even better
than the barber can do it for him.




CONTENTS.


     I. The Shaving Outfit                     9

    II. The Razor                             11

   III. Care of the Razor                     19

    IV. The Safety Razor                      21

     V. The Hone                              23

    VI. How to Use the Hone                   29

   VII. The Strop                             37

  VIII. How to Strop the Razor                41

    IX. The Brush                             45

     X. The Cup                               48

    XI. The Soap                              50

   XII. The Lather                            53

  XIII. Instructions to Beginners             56

   XIV. The Right Way to Shave                61

    XV. Care of the Face After Shaving        74

   XVI. Irritation of the Skin--Its Cause
        and Prevention                        78




Shaving Made Easy

What the Man Who Shaves Ought to Know




I.

THE SHAVING OUTFIT.


First-class tools are necessary at the very outset. No matter how
skillfully one may handle inferior tools, they will invariably produce
poor results.

Probably as many failures have resulted from the use of poor razors,
strops, or soap as from the lack of knowledge how to use them. In order
that the best possible results may be attained, _good tools_ and _skill
in using them_ should go hand in hand.

The shaving outfit should consist of one or two good razors, a first-class
strop, a mirror, a cup, a brush, a cake of shaving soap, and a bottle of
either bay rum, witch hazel, or some other good face lotion. These
constitute what may be considered the _necessary_ articles, and to these
may be added a number of others, such as a good hone, magnesia or talcum
powder, astringent or styptic pencils, antiseptic lotions, etc. which,
while not absolutely requisite, will nevertheless add much to the
convenience, comfort and luxury of the shave.




II.

THE RAZOR.


The most important article of the shaving outfit is of course the razor,
and upon its selection your success or failure in self-shaving will
largely depend. Never purchase a razor because it happens to be cheap; a
poor razor is dear at any price. You want not the cheapest, but the best.

[Illustration: AN IDEAL RAZOR.]

A _good_ razor if rightly used, will last for years, and will be a source
of continual pleasure when used, whereas a _poor_ razor will do inferior
work, irritate the skin and make the face sore, and be a continual source
of trouble and annoyance. If you have such a razor, the sooner you throw
it aside and substitute a good one, the better.

The principal point to be considered in selecting a razor is the quality
of the steel. By "quality" is meant its _temper_ or degree of solidity,
and its consequent capability of receiving, even after a series of years,
a firm and fine edge. This is undoubtedly the first point to which the
purchaser should give attention. By what means though, can he judge of the
temper of a razor without using it? The unassisted eye is not sufficient.
Its power extends no further than to the discovery of defects the most
striking and injurious. The irregularities in a razor's edge, which arise
from improper tempering and lack of skill in working, are usually so
minute, that they may remain undistinguished until the razor is used. They
will nevertheless very sensibly add to the friction the razor produces on
the skin and particularly if it happens to be thin and tender. There are
two ways of judging of the temper of a razor; one of these is practically
infallible--viz:--the examination of the blade and its edge by means of a
microscope.

It will be readily admitted that the real excellence of a razor is in
direct proportion to the firmness and unbroken regularity of its edge.
When a razor is too brittle, in consequence of having been either to much
heated in the process of hardening, or not sufficiently cooled in that of
tempering, it cannot possibly take a good cutting edge, no matter how much
skill may be employed in honing and stropping it. Such defects are quickly
detected by the use of a microscope in the hands of an experienced and
attentive observer.

The other method of testing the temper, while not infallible, will
nevertheless be of assistance even to the most inexperienced. It consists
of catching the point of the blade under the thumb nail, and then letting
the nail slip off quickly. If the blade gives a good clear ring, you may
conclude that it is well tempered, but if it does _not_ ring full and
clear it is an indication that the blade is tempered unevenly.


THE CONCAVE BLADE.

The thinnest edge is always the sharpest. A blade ought therefore to be as
thin as the strength of the metal composing it will permit. Nearly all
razors are now made "hollow-ground" or "concave"--a great improvement over
the old style of thick blade. The edge of the hollow-ground razor is
thinner and therefore cuts better, and is much easier to keep sharp.

Almost any desired make of razor may be had in either half,
three-quarters, or full concave. The full concave blade is of course the
thinnest. In view of the fact that the thinner the edge the sharper the
instrument, most purchasers of a razor quite naturally conclude that the
full concave blade is the best. Our impression is that this is a mistake;
that the full concave blade is not so good for shaving most beards as the
three-quarters concave. In a very deeply hollow ground razor, the blade is
ground extremely thin, back to a line some distance from the edge. When
such an edge--almost as thin as paper--comes in contact with a stiff
beard, unless the blade is held very flat upon the face, it is quite
likely to bend and spring, and a cut will be the result.


WIDTH OF THE BLADE.

The width of the blade is another point that should receive attention. As
a rule we believe the beginner selects too wide a blade. A comparatively
narrow one, in the size known as the 4-8 is the best for most purposes,
as it does not spring on the face so readily as the wide blade, yet it
follows the contours of the face more closely, and in general is managed
more easily.

[Illustration: SHOWING DIFFERENT WIDTHS OF BLADES.]


POINT OF THE BLADE.

The point of the razor ought to be slightly rounded as shown in the
illustration. While this is seemingly a small matter, yet a sharp point
has probably occasioned more cuts than almost any other cause. If you
have a razor with a sharp point, you can round it off, on the _edge_ of
the hone. You should not use the top surface of the hone for this purpose,
for if you do you are quite likely to scratch the hone and spoil it. Use
water freely otherwise the blade will become heated and that would quickly
spoil its temper.

[Illustration: A.--THE ROUND POINTED BLADE.]

[Illustration: B.--THE SHARP POINTED BLADE.]




III.

CARE OF THE RAZOR.


Take good care of your razor. Many a fine razor has been spoiled by
carelessness and neglect on the part of the user. The life of a razor will
depend entirely on the care given it. Never put it away until it has first
been wiped thoroughly dry, using a piece of chamois skin for this purpose.
Even this will not remove all the moisture, so the blade should be drawn
across the strop a few times, or else left exposed to the air for a few
moments until the little particles of moisture not removed by the cloth
have evaporated. Then you may replace the razor in its case with the
expectation of finding it in good condition when you next use it.

Rusting must be prevented, especially upon the edge, which seems to rust
more quickly than any other part of the blade. A tiny rust spot on this
delicate line, by causing the metal to soften and crumble at that point,
will soon end the usefulness of the razor, unless the edge is ground back
past the rust spot. In such a case there is always the liability of not
getting a good edge.

In wiping the lather off the blade never use a glazed or coarse paper.
Tissue paper is the best. Many overlook this point and by drawing the
blade straight across a glazed or hard finished paper, turn the edge, and
then wonder why the razor has lost its keenness. Draw the blade over the
paper obliquely, away from the edge, in the same direction as when
stropping it.




IV.

THE SAFETY RAZOR.


Of recent years a great number of safety razors have been invented and
placed on the market, the manufacturers of each claiming that theirs are
superior to all others and that they have at last produced a razor that is
destined to revolutionize shaving.

One thing may be said of safety razors in general--that if a man uses one
he is less likely to cut himself, but this is all that can reasonably be
said in their favor. Of course, if it were impossible to shave with the
ordinary razor _without_ cutting one's self, then the safety razor would
become a necessity. The truth is, however, that anyone who has a good keen
smooth-cutting razor, lathers the face thoroughly, and will learn--if he
does not already know--how to handle the razor properly, will run almost
no danger. Such a man will seldom cut himself.

On the other hand, most of the safety razors are difficult to keep clean
and dry, and therefore free from rust; and owing to the difficulty of
stropping them, it is almost, if not quite impossible to keep them sharp.
It is also difficult to make the correct stroke with them. Probably a
hundred thousand safety razors have been sold in the United States within
the past few years and it is extremely doubtful if ten per cent. of them
are now in use.




V.

THE HONE.


The edge of a razor, when viewed under a powerful microscope, presents an
appearance very different from that seen by the unaided eye. Unmagnified,
the edge appears to be a continuous unbroken line. Such actually is not
the case, for the microscope reveals the fact that, instead of being
straight and unbroken, the edge is in reality composed of a great number
of minute points much resembling the teeth of a saw.

These points or teeth follow each other throughout the entire length of
the blade, and by their extreme minuteness and unbroken regularity give
the edge its exceeding keenness. Now if the razor becomes dull, these
teeth will be less even and regular and their edges will be rounded and
worn away. To sharpen the razor, therefore, it is necessary--by making the
edge as thin as possible--to restore these little teeth to their original
condition. This cannot be done by stropping, but is accomplished only by
the process known as honing.

[Illustration: EDGE OF THE RAZOR AS IT APPEARS UNDER THE MICROSCOPE.]

It has been asserted by some, that when once the razor has been ground and
set, the strop alone without further honing or grinding is sufficient to
keep it in order. This opinion has eminated from certain makers of
razor-strops, who wish to induce the public to purchase their goods. They
represent their strops as having been "metalized," or otherwise treated
with some kind of preparation that makes honing unnecessary. As a rule, we
would advise the reader to beware of these "wonder-working-strops." Such
preparations _may_, and sometimes _do_, improve the strop, just as lather
when applied to a strop will improve it, but that they will do more than
this, we deny. When the special offices of the hone and of the strop are
fully understood, it will at once become apparent that no strop can
possibly take the place of a hone.

The object of honing a razor is to make its edge as _thin_ and _flat_ as a
proper attention to the degree of firmness required will permit. This is
accomplished by the hard fine grit of the hone cutting and wearing away
the steel. The strop cannot do this. On the contrary, stropping a razor,
instead of giving it a thin and flat edge, always has a tendency to
produce a rounded one. This results from the very nature of the strop,
which always "gives" or sags more or less during the process of stropping,
and the more the strop is permitted to sag, the sooner will such an edge
be produced, and in proportion as the edge assumes this rounded form, it
losses its keenness. The flattest and thinnest edge is always the
sharpest, and the only way to impart such an edge to a razor is by means
of the hone.

Before explaining the process of honing, it may be well to say a word
about the different kinds of hones, so that should the reader wish to
purchase one, he may do it intelligently.

There are two distinct classes of hones in general use,--one known as the
rock hone, on account of its being cut from the natural rock, and the
other manufactured. A great number of hones are produced in different
parts of the United States, but few that are really suitable for
sharpening razors. A razor hone must be of the very finest quality. The
natural stones are usually composed principally of silica, which is one of
the sharpest cutting minerals known. It easily cuts the hardest steel and
the fine grit imparts a very smooth edge to a razor. The "Arkansas," found
near the famous Hot Springs, is one of this variety, but owing to the
difficulty of obtaining this stone, and the great waste in cutting it, the
supply is limited and the price high.

[Illustration: THE HONE.]

Most of the razor hones used in the United States are imported. The most
noted are the German water hones, the oil hones from Belgium, and the
Swaty hones from Austria. The last named are very reasonable in price and
quite a favorite among barbers. They are a manufactured hone, and in some
respects the manufactured hones are superior to the natural stones, in
that they are free from seams and uneven spots and perfectly uniform in
texture.

Most men have the idea that honing is a difficult operation and should be
undertaken only by expert cutlers or barbers. Very few seem to think that
they can hone there own razors. How this impression became current, it is
difficult to say. We venture to assert, however, that honing a razor is at
least as easy as stropping it. In this case as in many others, the
difficulty arises from supposing there is a difficulty.




How to Use the Hone




VI.

HOW TO USE THE HONE.


The hone being the only means of sharpening a dull razor, its use becomes
at once of the utmost importance to those who wish to keep their razors in
perfect order.

Hones are seldom used dry, but are usually covered with either water,
lather or oil: first--to prevent heating the blade which would quickly
spoil its temper; second--to keep the particles of steel that are ground
off the blade from entering the pores of the stone, which would soon fill
up and result in what is known as a glazed surface; and third--to make
the surface of the hone as smooth as possible.

Before commencing the operation, wipe the hone clean, then put on a few
drops of oil or else cover it with water or lather. This will float the
little particles of steel ground off the razor, thus preventing them from
remaining directly on the hone to impede its full and equal effect. With
most hones you may use either water, lather or oil; but do not change from
one to the other; whichever you begin with, use that exclusively. It
requires a longer time to produce a keen edge when oil is used but the
edge is somewhat smoother. Most barbers use lather and we should advise
the beginner to do so.


DIRECTIONS FOR HONING.

The hone, with its fine surface up, should be placed perfectly flat on a
table or other solid foundation. (The rough surface is intended merely as
a support and not for use.) After covering the hone with lather, place
the razor flat upon it as shown in Fig. A. With the thumb and fore finger,
grasp the razor back of the heel, so as to have firm hold of both the
blade and the handle. Draw the blade from heel to point, forward against
the edge, and with a moderate degree of pressure, until it comes into the
position shown in Fig. B. Now, without lifting the blade from the stone,
turn the edge up, so that the razor rests on the back of the blade. Slide
it forward on its back from point to heel and let it fall into the
position indicated in Fig. C. Push the blade from heel to point against
the edge, finishing the stroke as in Fig. D. Turn the blade on its back,
slide from point to heel and let it fall into the first position, as shown
in Fig. A. Continue honing until the blade is sufficiently keen and free
from nicks and inequalities. This may be known by drawing the edge, very
lightly, across the moistened thumb nail. If it sticks to the nail
slightly, it is an indication that the honing has developed the little
teeth which constitute the perfect razor edge, and that the razor is now
ready for stropping.

[Illustration: HOW TO HONE THE RAZOR.]

If the honing be carried too far, a "wire edge" will be produced, and this
must be removed. To do this, draw the edge with a steady hand across the
moistened thumb nail in the manner indicated above. The blade should then
be drawn once or twice across the hone as before, in order to unite all
parts of the edge and cause a perfect equality of keenness from one end of
the blade to the other. With this done, the operation is in general
performed, and the wondrous difficulty of honing the razor vanishes.


SPECIAL DIRECTIONS.

The following directions should be specially observed.

First--The blade should be held perfectly flat on the hone, so that the
back, as well as the edge, touches the stone. If the back is raised from
the stone so that only the edge touches, the bevel will be short and the
edge blunt.

Second--In drawing the blade across the hone diagonally against the edge,
the heel should be about one and a half inches in advance of the point,
and care should be taken to maintain the same angle when the stroke is
reversed and throughout the entire operation. This sets the teeth at the
proper angle, that is, slightly inclined toward the heel. We have likened
the edge of a razor to that of a saw, but there is this difference: saw
teeth incline away from the handle and toward the point, while the razor
teeth incline away from the point and toward the heel. This is correct in
principle, for the saw in use is pushed away from the handle toward the
point, while the razor is usually drawn away from the point toward the
heel.

Third--Press with equal force on all parts of the edge. With a good hone,
very little pressure will be required.

The time required to hone a razor depends much on the condition of the
razor and the hardness of the steel composing it. When the edge is in the
usual condition--that is when it is free from nicks and has merely become
thick in consequence of the injudicious use of the razor strop--it will
need very little honing; eight or ten strokes in each direction will be
quite sufficient. When, however, the edge has nicks: though so small as to
be scarcely perceptible, the operation will require more time and
attention. Should the nicks be large, it will be better to send the razor
to a cutler to be ground.

If the razor is well cared for and properly stropped, it will not require
very frequent honing, probably not oftener than once in from six to eight
weeks. When it is required you will become aware of it, from the fact that
stropping will not sharpen it.




VII.

THE STROP.


The object of honing the razor, as has been explained, is to abraid and
wear away the edge of the blade so that it becomes as thin as possible.
But when this is done, the process of sharpening the razor is still
incomplete, for the edge, when taken from the hone, is left rough and
unfit to put on the face. Another process is necessary, and that is
stropping. The object of stropping is not to make the blade thinner, but
to _smooth the edge_, taking off the rough surface of the little teeth
which have been developed, and setting them all in perfect alignment.
This gives the razor its exceeding keenness.

You should have a first-class strop. It little matters how good your razor
may be if your strop is a poor one, for it is absolutely impossible to
keep a razor in good condition if the strop is of poor quality or rough
and haggled. Many a razor has been blamed when the fault lie entirely with
the strop and the manner of using it. So called sharpening preparations,
sometimes applied to the surface of strops, as a substitute for the hone,
should be avoided. Most of them contain acid or emery, which is likely to
gradually spoil the temper of the razor.

There are many kinds of strops manufactured and placed on the market, some
good and some bad. The most common is the swing strop, made of leather or
horse hide on one side and canvas or hose on the other. Some of the
cheaper grades have a very _coarse canvas_, and unless you wish to ruin
your razor, you should never put it on such a strop. In our opinion _a
good leather or horse hide strop is the best_, and meets every
requirement; but if a combination strop is used, the linen or hose side
should be of the finest quality.

The strop should be not less than twenty inches long and two inches wide.
Its surface should be very soft and smooth--not glazed--and you can tell
whether it is so, by rubbing the hand over it. Do not fold the strop when
putting it away, for if you do you are likely to crack or roughen the
surface, and this will injure the edge of the blade when it is drawn
across it.


CARE OF THE STROP.

After the strop has been put to a great deal of use, it will sometimes be
found that it will not "take hold" on the razor--that is it will allow the
blade to slip over it with little or no resistance and thus fail to impart
a keen, smooth-cutting edge. The reason is that the strop has become dry
and porous. Do not attempt to remedy the matter by applying oil or razor
paste; these will only make matters worse. Hang the strop on a hook, and
with the left hand stretch as tightly as possible. Apply a good thick
lather to the surface and rub it in with the palm of the hand. Barbers
sometimes nail the strop to a board and rub the lather in with a smooth
bottle; but the hand will do quite as well, and indeed, we think it
preferable. What the strop requires is to have the pores filled with the
lather; so put on and work in coat after coat, until the leather will take
up no more. Then leave the strop to dry. This simple treatment will
completely change the action of the strop, and the next time you use it,
you will be surprised and delighted to note its improved effect on the
razor. It will have that "cling" and "resistance" which barbers so much
desire in a strop, and which, indeed, is quite essential to its
efficiency.




VIII.

HOW TO STROP THE RAZOR.


Place a hook in a door or a window casing about four or five feet from the
floor. Put the ring of the strop over the hook, and hold the handle firmly
in the left hand as shown in the accompanying illustration. The strop
should be pulled tight--not allowed to hang loosely--otherwise the edge of
the razor will become rounded and require frequent honing.

Open the razor, so that the handle is in line with the blade. Grasp it
firmly with the right hand, the first two fingers and thumb holding the
razor just back of the heel, so that perfect control is had of both the
blade and handle. With the razor held in this manner it is an easy matter
to turn the razor back and forth from one side to the other.

[Illustration: HOW TO STROP THE RAZOR.]

Lay the blade flat on the further end of the strop, as shown in Fig. E,
with the edge away from you. Draw the blade toward you, always keeping the
heel of the razor in advance of the point. When at the end of the strop,
rotate the razor on its back till the unstroped side of the blade comes in
contact with the strop, as shown in Fig. F. Then, with the heel in
advance, push the razor away from you, until it reaches the further end of
the strop. Again rotate, and continue the stropping until the razor is
sharp.

Always hold the blade at the same angle, and perfectly flat on the strop.
You will observe that the stroke is exactly opposite to that used in
honing. In honing, the edge is in advance; in stropping, the back. During
the operation _the back of the razor should never be taken from the
strop_. By observing this, and always turning the blade on its back,
instead of on the edge, you will avoid cutting the strop.

Beginners should not attempt to make a quick stroke. Let the stroke be
slow and even, developing speed gradually until a complete mastery of the
movement is acquired.

If the razor is in good condition and not in need of honing, fifteen or
twenty strokes in each direction will be sufficient. If, however, the
razor should require honing, no amount of stropping will put a keen edge
on it. It will usually be necessary to strop the razor each time you
shave, and with stiff beards more than once may be required.




IX.

THE BRUSH.


Purchase a good brush. The cheap ones are usually the most expensive in
the end, and nearly always prove unsatisfactory. It should be remembered
that the vital part of a brush is in the _setting_, and particular
attention should therefore be paid to that part of it. Cheap brushes are
commonly set with glue, rosin or cement, which soon cracks and becomes
unadhesive; whereupon the bristles fall out. We recommend a brush made of
bristles or badger hair and set in hard vulcanized rubber. A brush so
constructed, with wood, bone or ivory handle, and hard rubber ferule, will
not shed the bristles or crack open, and with proper care will last for
years.

[Illustration: SECTIONAL VIEW OF THE BRUSH SHOWING INTERNAL CONSTRUCTION.]

[Illustration: THE BRUSH.]

Do not leave the lather to dry in the brush, but after shaving rinse it
out thoroughly and dry the brush with a towel, before putting away. The
cup and brush should be kept clean and away from dust. Once a week they
should be washed with hot water.




X.

THE CUP.


The shaving cup should be of earthen ware or china, and large enough to
accommodate the ordinary round cake of shaving soap. Some cups are made
with two compartments, one for soap and the other for water, but this
arrangement is unnecessary, and in fact, not so convenient as the ordinary
cup, for it leaves too little room for making the lather.

If possible, the cake of soap should entirely fill the bottom of the cup
so that no space is left between the soap and the sides: otherwise water
will get in and keep the bottom of the cake continually soaked. If it is
found that the cake does not quite fill the space, take the soap out and
warm it until it becomes somewhat soft, then put it back in the cup, and
with the hand press down the sides all around, thus flattening out the
cake until it quite fills the intervening space. If at any time the soap
should cleave away from the sides of the cup, it should be pressed back as
at first. This will be found the most convenient way of using the soap.

Great care should be taken to keep the cup scrupulously clean, rinsing it
out thoroughly each time after shaving, in order to remove any lather that
may have been left unused. Keep the cup away from dust.

Some use the sticks of shaving soap and make the lather on the face. While
this is permissable, we think the better way is to make the lather in the
cup and put it on with the brush.




XI.

THE SOAP.


Next to the razor, the most important article of the shaving outfit is the
soap. In its proper use lies the real secret of easy shaving. The razor
may be ever so good, but unless the beard is properly lathered with a good
soap, shaving will be anything but a pleasure. Use only a regular
recognized standard make of shaving soap, not, under any circumstances, a
toilet soap. The latter is not intended for shaving, and is likely to
produce irritations of the skin and leave the face rough and sore.

A wrong idea prevails regarding the use of the soap. The popular
impression is that the soap is used for the purpose of _softening_ the
beard, in which condition it is supposed to be most easily cut. This is a
mistake. The soap is used, _not to soften the beard_, but to produce
exactly the opposite effect--namely, _to make the hair stiff and brittle_,
so that they will present a firm and resisting surface to the razor. A
hair, as is well known, is a tube composed of a hard fibrous substance,
growing from a bulb or root, which secretes an oily matter. This oil works
its way up through the hair, and by permeating all parts, renders the hair
soft and pliable. Now in this natural oily condition, it is very difficult
to cut the hair with a razor, and it becomes even more difficult if the
beard be made still softer by the application of hot water. Many do this,
and it is no wonder they find shaving difficult. When this is done, the
hairs become soft and limp, and the razor will either slip over them
entirely, or else cut partly into them, bend them back and slice them
lengthwise, all the while pulling and straining them at the roots, and
making the process of shaving most painful. Now soap has the opposite
effect. It contains either alkali, potash or soda, which when applied to
the beard in the form of lather, unites with the oil of the hair,
neutralizing it and removing it, and renders the hairs hard stiff and
brittle--in which condition they may be easily and readily cut. For the
sake of cleanliness, the face should, of course, be washed previous to
shaving in order to remove any dirt or grit from the beard, which might
dull the razor; but before applying the lather, the face should be well
dried with a towel.




XII.

THE LATHER.


To make the lather, see that the soap is placed in the cup according to
previous directions. Fill the cup with water, allowing it to stand for a
few seconds, then pour the water out. Usually sufficient water to make the
lather will adhere to the cup, soap and brush. Now with the brush, mix
thoroughly, using a combined stirring and churning motion, until a good
thick lather appears. The more the brush is rubbed over the soap the
thicker the lather becomes. A great deal depends upon having the lather
just right. If it is thin and watery, you will have poor success in
shaving. The more creamy it is, the better will be the effect of the
alkali in stiffening the beard. Some of the poorer qualities of soap
produce lather very quickly, sometimes half filling the cup, but it will
be found thin and without lasting qualities, so that by the time one side
of the face has been shaved, the lather is all gone from the other. A good
soap will produce a thick creamy lather that will last throughout the
entire process of shaving.


APPLYING THE LATHER.

Put the lather on with the brush, covering every part of the face that you
intend to shave. Then with the fingers _rub it thoroughly into the beard_
until the lather has had sufficient time to stiffen the hairs. Next to
having the razor in perfect condition, this is the most important thing to
do; for it is impossible to shave easily unless the face is well lathered
and the lather thoroughly worked into the beard. Go over the face once
more with the brush, in order to spread the lather evenly, and then
_begin shaving at once_, before the lather has time to dry. Should it dry
while you are shaving, wet the brush slightly and apply fresh lather. If
you prepare your face in accordance with these instructions, a keen razor
will slip over the face so easily that shaving will become a real
pleasure.




XIII.

INSTRUCTIONS TO BEGINNERS.


If you are a young man, just beginning to shave, it is important that you
commence right. It is quite as easy to learn the _right_ way as the
_wrong_ way. Do not entertain the idea that it is a difficult matter for
one to shave himself--for there is nothing difficult about it when you
know how. You may have previously tried and failed, but if you will now
follow the instructions contained in this book, there is no reason why
shaving may not be performed without further difficulties.

[Illustration: THE RIGHT WAY TO HOLD THE RAZOR.]

The accompanying illustration shows the position in which the razor should
be held. It will be observed that the handle is thrown well back past the
heel. The first three fingers rest on the back of the blade, with the
little finger over the crook at the end, and the thumb on the side of the
blade, near the middle. In this position, with the handle acting as a
balance, the razor will be under perfect control, and there will be little
danger of cutting oneself. This position can be maintained throughout most
of the process of shaving, although it may be necessary to change it
slightly while shaving certain parts, as for instance the neck, under the
jaw. But whatever the position, endeavor to have the razor at all times
under perfect control. The position here indicated, is the one we should
certainly advise the beginner to adopt, but if a man, from long continued
use has formed the habit of holding the razor in a different way, any
change will prove difficult and may not be advisable.


THE STROKE.

Owing no doubt largely to individual temperament, there is considerable
variation in the manner of using the razor, with different persons. Some
find a long slow stroke best, while others make it short and quick. Each
man must suit the stroke to his own convenience. But certain principles
are applicable to everybody. In the first place you should begin with a
slow even stroke, gradually increasing it as you gain better control of
the razor. Speed will develop naturally with practice.

Hold the razor quite flat upon the face. Do not pull the razor directly
down against the beard, but hold it obliquely to the direction of
movement. In general shave in the direction of the growth of the beard,
like this:

[Illustration]

Shaving against the growth pulls the hairs and thus irritates the skin,
and if the beard is heavy and wiry the edge of the blade is quite liable
to catch in the hairs and be deflected inward and cut the face.


POSITION OF THE MIRROR.

The mirror should hang between two windows if possible, so that when you
look into it the light will fall directly upon both sides of your face.
You will then be able to get a good reflection of either side. Remove the
collar. To prevent soiling the shirt, place a towel around the neck in an
easy, comfortable manner, pinning it at the side.




XIV.

The Right Way to Shave


[Illustration: TO SHAVE THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE FACE.]

TO SHAVE THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE FACE.

Reach over the head with the left hand and with the fingers draw the skin
upward, thus making a smooth shaving surface. The illustration shows the
proper position. Shave downward until about half of the right cheek is
shaved, then slide the left hand still further over until the fingers rest
in the middle of the cheek and again pull the skin upward. Now continue to
shave downward until the entire right side of the face is shaved clean, as
far as the middle of the chin and well under the jaw.


[Illustration: TO SHAVE THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE FACE UNDER THE JAW.]

TO SHAVE THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE FACE UNDER THE JAW.

Hold the head over toward the left side with the chin slightly elevated.
With the fingers of the left hand, draw the skin tight under the jaw.
Shave downward if the beard grows in that direction; if not reverse the
stroke. You should never shave against the growth when going over the face
the first time, if it can be avoided. Keep the skin as tightly drawn as
possible, for a better shaving surface is thus presented to the razor, and
there is less liability of cutting yourself.


[Illustration: TO SHAVE THE LEFT SIDE OF THE FACE.]

TO SHAVE THE LEFT SIDE OF THE FACE.

Place the fingers of the left hand in front of and just above the ear and
press upward so as to draw the skin smooth on the upper left cheek. With
the razor in the right hand, toe pointing upward, reach across the face as
shown above, and shave downward. In shaving the lower part of the cheek
and chin, follow downward with the left hand, keeping the skin tightly
drawn.


[Illustration: TO SHAVE THE LEFT SIDE OF THE FACE UNDER THE JAW.]

TO SHAVE THE LEFT SIDE OF THE FACE UNDER THE JAW.

For many, this is the most difficult part of the face to shave as the skin
is very tender, and unless treated gently will soon become irritated and
sore. To shave easily, raise the chin, incline the head toward the right,
and draw the skin as tight as possible with the left hand. Shave downward
unless, as sometimes happens, the beard grows in the opposite direction,
in which case you will, of course, reverse the stroke.

To shave the upper lip, draw the lip down as much as possible, to tighten
the skin. Owing to the strong muscle in the lip, you will hardly need to
use the left hand for this purpose.


[Illustration: TO SHAVE UNDER THE CHIN.]

TO SHAVE UNDER THE CHIN.

Throw the head backward and elevate the chin. Hold the razor in the right
hand, and with the fingers of the left hand draw the skin downward. You
should always endeavor to keep the skin drawn as smooth as possible, for
by so doing you will greatly lessen the liability of cutting yourself and
will be able to shave much more easily.


[Illustration: TO SHAVE UPWARD AGAINST THE GROWTH OF THE BEARD.]


SHAVING OVER THE SECOND TIME.

If you desire a really clean shave, you must go over the face the second
time. Strop the razor a few times before beginning. Lather the face as
before, though it is unnecessary to rub the lather in with the fingers.
Simply put it on with the brush.

In shaving over the face the second time, some reverse the stroke. That
is, they shave upward against the growth of the beard, instead of
downward, as during the first time over. This gives an exceedingly close
shave and if the beard is stiff and heavy and the skin thin and tender, it
may make the face sore, and cause the hairs to grow inward, under the
skin. Perhaps the best way will be to shave _lightly_ over the face the
second time, in the same direction as at first. Each man should decide
this point according to his own experience.




XV.

CARE OF THE FACE AFTER SHAVING.


Most men who shave themselves seem to think that when they have removed
the beard, they have nothing further to do. This is a great mistake. They
undervalue the importance of a proper treatment of the face. A quick and
easy way of caring for the face after shaving, is to remove the lather by
a thorough washing, then to apply either witch hazel, bay rum or some
other good face lotion, and to follow this with a small quantity of talcum
powder, evenly applied. This is probably about all that the average man
will usually find time to do.

In order, however, to keep the skin in a healthful condition, a little
more elaborate treatment should occasionally be given. We recommend the
following: Wash the face thoroughly to free it from the lather, and then
apply a steaming hot towel, as hot as can be borne. The heat and moisture
draw the blood to the face, open the pores, and set up a healthful action
of the skin. Next apply witch hazel, and finally give the face a thorough
massage. There is no other treatment so beneficial to the skin. With many
persons the flow of blood to the face and scalp is very sluggish, because
of enfeebled or slow heart action; and in consequence, the many small
arteries and capillaries become clogged. Massage stimulates the
circulation, and brings the blood from the inner centers to the surface,
filling the many minute capillaries just underneath the skin, thus
producing a tonic effect, which gives the skin renewed vigor and health.


WHAT TO DO FOR A CUT.

If a man cuts himself while shaving, it is usually due to certain causes
that are easily avoidable. The principal causes are six in number:

First--Attempting to shave with a dull razor.

Second--Using a sharp pointed razor.

Third--Shaving with a razor that is too hollow ground, so that the edge
springs and bends on the face.

Fourth--Holding the razor improperly.

Fifth--Shaving upward against the growth of the beard.

Sixth--Shaving in too great a hurry.

If you will avoid these mistakes and exercise proper care, you will seldom
cut yourself. But when you do, it will be well to know how to treat the
wound. If it be slight, the bleeding may sometimes be checked by using
pressure. Covering the fingers with a towel, simply press the cut
together. If this does not stop the flow, use an astringent. The styptis
pencils, made especially for this purpose, are the best, and may be
obtained at any store where barbers' supplies are kept. In case you should
not have the pencils, alum may be used. In any event do not be
discouraged, for such accidents sometimes happen to the best barbers.

[Illustration]




XVI.

IRRITATION OF THE SKIN--ITS CAUSE AND PREVENTION.


Some men almost always experience burning and irritation of the skin after
shaving. To such, we wish to offer some suggestions, which we hope will
greatly benefit, if not entirely prevent the trouble.

The most common cause of irritation is undoubtedly a dull razor. If the
razor is keen and sharp, the hairs will yield readily to the blade and no
irritation will be produced. But if the blade is dull, instead of cutting
the hairs easily, it passes over some, slices other lengthwise, and pulls
and strains at the roots of all. This necessitates scraping the face over
and over again, in order to get a clean shave, and the result is an
irritation that perhaps continues until you are ready to shave again. Thus
the tender parts of the skin are kept in a state of continual irritation.
The remedy is of course, to see that the razor is always keen and sharp.

Another cause that may be mentioned, is chafing of the neck by the collar.
If the edge of the collar is worn and rough, and comes in contact with the
tender skin, it is sure to make it sore.

Too close shaving is a frequent cause, and those who are troubled in this
way will do well to shave over the face but once.

Some of the cheap toilet waters are adulterated, and contain ingredients
which undoubtedly produce a bad effect on the skin. In using bay rum or
other face lotions, use only the best. If much trouble is experienced, we
should advise the use of pure distilled witch hazel, which may be
obtained at any drug store. This is soothing to the face and allays the
burning.

Sometimes the trouble is due to an excess of alkali or potash in the soap.
The best shaving soaps are especially prepared and have antiseptic and
demulcent properties, which render them practically non-irritating. After
shaving, take care to remove all the soap from the face; for during the
process, the lather has been worked into the pores of the skin, and only
by means of a thorough washing can it all be removed.

Irritations resulting from constitutional disease, or impurity of the
blood, should, of course, be treated by a physician.

Some men are more subject to irritation of the skin than others. Those who
have a thin and tender skin and a heavy and stiff beard, are especially
liable, but with care, even these may prevent most of the trouble.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Shaving Made Easy, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHAVING MADE EASY ***

***** This file should be named 43166.txt or 43166.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/1/6/43166/

Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
