The Project Gutenberg EBook of Zen Buddhism, by Arthur Waley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Zen Buddhism
       and Its Relation to Art

Author: Arthur Waley

Release Date: July 21, 2013 [EBook #43273]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ZEN BUDDHISM ***




Produced by Henry Flower and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









  ZEN BUDDHISM
  and Its Relation to Art

  By
  ARTHUR WALEY

  LONDON:
  LUZAC & CO., 46, Great Russell Street, W.C.1.
  1922




ZEN BUDDHISM




ZEN BUDDHISM

AND ITS RELATION TO ART


Books on the Far East often mention a sect of Buddhism called Zen. They
say that it was a "school of abstract meditation" and that it exercised
a profound influence upon art and literature; but they tell us very
little about what Zen actually was, about its relation to ordinary
Buddhism, its history, or the exact nature of its influence upon the
arts.

The reason of this is that very little of the native literature which
deals with Zen has yet been translated, perhaps because it is written
in early Chinese colloquial, a language the study of which has been
almost wholly neglected by Europeans and also (to judge by some of
their attempts to translate it) by the Japanese themselves.

The present paper makes no attempt at profundity, but it is based on
the study of original texts and furnishes, I hope, some information not
hitherto accessible.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before describing the origins of Zen itself I must give some general
account of Buddhism. At the time when it reached China[1] there were
two kinds of Buddhism, called the Lesser Vehicle and the Greater. The
former, Primitive Buddhism, possessed scriptures which in part at
any rate were genuine; that is to say, they recorded words actually
used by Shakyamuni. The ordinary adherent of this religion did not
hope to become a Buddha; Buddhas indeed were regarded as extremely
rare. He only aspired to become an Arhat, that is "an ascetic ripe
for annihilation," one who is about to escape from the wheel of
reincarnation--whose present incarnation is an antechamber to Nirvana.
To such aspirants the Buddha gives no assistance; he is what children
in their games call "home," and his followers must pant after him as
best they can.

[1] First century A.D.

Those who found this religion too comfortless invented another, which
became known as Mahayana, the Greater Vehicle. Putting their doctrines
into the mouth of Shakyamuni, they fabricated _ad hoc_ sermons of
enormous length, preached (so they asserted) by the Buddha himself in
his "second period" to those who were ripe to receive the whole truth.

The great feature of this new Buddhism was the intervention of the
merciful Bodhisattvas, _illuminati_ who, though fit for Buddhahood,
voluntarily renounced it in order to help mankind.

The first Buddhist books to reach China emanated from the Lesser
Vehicle. But the Greater Vehicle or Bodhisattva-Buddhism soon
prevailed, and by the sixth century A.D. over two thousand
works, most of them belonging to the Greater Vehicle, had been
translated into Chinese.


BUDDHIST SECTS.

There were already many sects in China, the chief of which were:

    (1) _The Amidists._

    This was the form of Buddhism which appealed to the uneducated.
    It taught that a Buddha named Amida presides over the Western
    Paradise, where he will receive the souls of those that worship
    him. The conception of this Paradise closely resembles the
    Christian idea of Heaven and may have been derived from it.

    (2) The _Tendai_ Sect, founded at the end of the sixth century.
    Its teaching was based on a scripture of enormous length called
    the _Saddharma Pundarika Sutra_, which is translated by Kern in
    the Sacred Books of the East. It was perhaps the broadest and most
    representative sect. It laid great stress on the ethical side of
    Buddhism.

We now come to _Zen_.

In the year 520 A.D. there arrived at Canton a missionary from
Southern India. His name was Bodhidharma and he appears to have been
the younger son of an Indian Prince.

The reigning Emperor of China was a munificent patron of Buddhism. He
had built monasteries, given alms, distributed scriptures, defended
the faith. Hearing that a Buddhist prince had arrived from India he
summoned him at once to his Capital. The following conversation took
place in the Palace at Nanking:

    _Emperor_: You will be interested to hear that I have built many
    monasteries, distributed scriptures, given alms, and upheld the
    Faith. Have I not indeed acquired merit?

    _Bodhidharma_: None at all.

    _Emperor_: In what then does true merit consist?

    _Bodhidharma_: In the obliteration of Matter through Absolute
    Knowledge, not by external acts.

    _Emperor_: Which is the Divine and Primal Aspect of Reality?

    _Bodhidharma_: Reality has no aspect that is divine.

    _Emperor_: What are you, who have come before my Throne?

    _Bodhidharma_: I do not know.

The Emperor could make nothing of him. Monasticism, a huge vested
interest, decried him, and after a short stay in Nanking he started
northward, towards the Capital of the Wei Tartars, who then ruled over
a large part of China. The Wei Emperor, like his Chinese confrere, was
also a great patron of Buddhism, and he, too, desired an interview with
the Indian priest. But Bodhidharma had done with Emperors, and settled
in a small country temple, where he lived till his death nine years
later. Some say that he tried to visit the Capital of the Weis, but was
prevented by the intrigues of the monks there.

He left behind him a few short tractates, the substance of which is as
follows:

    There is no such person as Buddha. Buddha is simply a Sanskrit
    word meaning "initiate." The Absolute is immanent in every man's
    heart. This "treasure of the heart" is the only Buddha that exists.
    It is no use seeking Buddha outside your own nature. Prayer,
    scripture-reading, fasting, the observance of monastic rules--all
    are useless. Those who seek Buddha do not find him. You may know
    by heart all the Sutras of the twelve divisions, and yet be unable
    to escape from the Wheel of Life and Death. One thing alone
    avails--to discover the unreality of the World by contemplating the
    Absolute which is at the root of one's own nature.

Some one asked him: "Why may we not worship the Buddhas and
Bodhisattvas?" He answered:

    "Ogres and hobgoblins can at will assume the outward form of
    Bodhisattvas; such are heretical and not of the true Buddha. There
    is no Buddha but your own thoughts. Buddha is the Way. The Way is
    Zen. This word Zen cannot be understood even of the wise. Zen means
    'for a man to behold his fundamental nature.'"[2]

[2] Zen (_Sanskrit: dhyana_) means literally "contemplation."

       *       *       *       *       *

    The highest truths cannot be written down or taught by speech. A
    man who cannot write a word, can yet contemplate his own heart and
    become wise. Knowledge of 1,000 Sutras and 10,000 Shastras cannot
    help him to realise the Absolute within him.

He was asked: "Can a layman with wife and children, one given over to
the lusts of the flesh, achieve Buddhahood?" He answered:

    "Provided he contemplate his own inner-nature, he will achieve
    Buddhahood. It does not matter about his lusts. Even a butcher can
    achieve Buddhahood, if he searches in his own heart."

"What," cried his listeners, "a butcher, who lives by taking life, and
_he_ achieve Buddhahood?" The master replied:

    "It is not a question of the man's trade. If he has learnt to know
    his own nature he will be saved.

    "I have come from India only to teach you that Buddha is Thought.
    I care nothing for monastic rules or ascetic practices. As for
    walking on water or through fire, climbing sword-wheels, fasting,
    sitting upright for hours without rest--all such practices are
    heretical; they belong to the World of Being.

    "Thought, Thought, Thought! It is hard to seek. Expanding, it
    covers the whole world; shrinking, it is too small to lodge a pin.

    "I seek the heart; I do not seek Buddha. For I have learnt to know
    that the outer world is empty and untenanted."

Such was the teaching of Bodhidharma. It was Vedantic[3] rather than
Buddhist. The terms "thought," "Buddha," etc., used by Bodhidharma
correspond exactly to the _brahman_ of the Upanishads. Mystic
contemplation or _yoga_ had been used by the Brahmins and was not
unknown to the early Buddhists. But Bodhidharma was the first to insist
upon it as the sole means of salvation.

[3] Dr. McGovern tells me that Zen would seem to be more immediately
derived from the Nihilistic School of Nagarjuna (1st century
A.D.).

Yet though his whole teaching turned on this "meditation" or "Zen,"
he left behind him no exact directions for the practice of it. Having
shown the end, he left it to each individual to find his own means.
Rules, dogmas and definitions were precisely what he set out to destroy.

Less than a hundred years after his death another Indian, Buddhapriya,
came to China and there defined with exactitude and blunt materiality
the various forms of meditation.

The transition from the spirituality of Bodhidharma to the grossness of
his follower is, however, typical of religious history. The poetry of
Christ turns into the theology of Paul; the hovel of Saint Francis into
the mansion of Brother Elias.


BUDDHAPRIYA.

He first describes the different attitudes in which Zen may be
practised, with an exact account of the correct position for hands,
feet, head, etc. The normal attitude of meditation, cross-legged, with
upright back and hands locked over the knees is familiar to every one.

Zen could also be practised while walking and, in cases of sickness,
while lying down. Buddhapriya's instructions are in the form of
question and answer.

    _Question._--How does the Zen practised by heretics and by the
    other schools of Buddhism differ from our Zen?

    _Answer._--The Zen of the heretics is not impersonal. The Zen of
    the Lesser Vehicle is material. The Zen of the Greater Vehicle
    only abstracts man and phenomena.

    _Question._--How ought one to set about practising Zen?

    _Answer._--First put far away from you all anger and malice, and
    fill your heart with kindness and compassion.

    _Question._--Can the beginner at once proceed to the contemplation
    of non-Being?

    _Answer._--By no means! He must by stratagems gradually enter in.
    I have never yet seen one who straightway achieved the vision of
    non-Reality. If for example he were meditating in this room he
    must first banish from his mind every part of the world except the
    city of Ch'ang-an. Next every building in the city except this
    monastery. Next, every room in the monastery except this cell,
    every object but himself, every part of himself except the end of
    his nose. Finally the end of his nose hangs in space like a drop of
    dew and on this nose-end he concentrates his mind.

    This is only a preliminary exercise. There are others of the same
    kind. For example--persuade yourself that your navel is a minute
    rivulet running through the sands. When this conception is firmly
    achieved, you will see a bright light and ultimately, the body
    growing transparent, you will behold the working of your bowels.

    Or again, regard your head as the top of a hollow pipe which runs
    straight down through your body into the earth. Meditate upon the
    top of your head, that is to say, upon the mouth of the drain-pipe,
    and then gradually ascend in your thoughts to a height of four
    inches above the head, and concentrate firmly on this conception.
    You will thus easily pass into the contemplation of non-Being,
    having performed the transition from elementary to complete Zen as
    comfortably as a workman climbs the rungs of a ladder.

    _Question._--Are there any signs whereby I may know that I have
    attained to Samadhi?[4]

    _Answer._--To be sure there are. Sometimes you will feel a
    sensation as of bugs or ants creeping over your skin; or again, it
    will appear to you that a cloud or mass of white cotton-wool is
    rising immediately behind your back. In neither case must you be
    discomposed or put out your hand. Sometimes it will seem as though
    oil were dripping down from your head and face; sometimes a light
    will shine from out of the ground you are sitting upon.

    These are all preliminary signs.

    Sometimes when you have been sitting for a long while and your
    back is aching, you will suddenly hear a sound of rapping with the
    fingers or a noise as of some one bumping against the door. Do not
    be disquieted. These are the Good Spirits of Heaven, come to warn
    you against sleep.

    Again, it may happen that you have an agreeable sense of lightness
    and floating; this is a good sign. Beware, however, of a _painful_
    sense of lightness; for this may merely indicate flatulence.

    Patches of heat on the body are a sign of Fiery Samadhi. A light
    filling the whole room is a premonitory sign of Zen; to smell
    strange fragrances not known on earth is a sign of whole and utter
    Abstraction.

    Such and many more are the signs of Zen. The practicant must not
    heed them; for if by them he be encouraged or dismayed, all his
    work will be undone.

    _Question._--Can Zen be practised in a Buddha Shrine?

    _Answer._--No, indeed! Zen should be practised in a quiet room or
    under a tree or among tombs or sitting on the dewy earth.

    _Question._--Can Zen be practised by many sitting together?

    _Answer._--To be sure it may; but each must face his neighbour's
    back. They must not sit face to face. When there are many sitting
    together at night, a lamp or candle may be lit; but when there are
    few together, it ought not to be used.

    _Question._--Need I wear monastic vestments at my meditations?

    _Answer._--Vestments? Why, you need wear no clothes at all, if so
    be you are alone.

[4] Concentration.


LATER DEVELOPMENT OF ZEN.

Zen was at first a purely personal discipline, non-monastic,
non-ethical, not demanding the acceptance of any Scripture or any
tradition. In modern Japan it has to some extent regained this
character. In China the habit of quoting written authority was
too strong to be easily discarded. The Zen masters soon began to
answer difficult questions by quoting from the Buddhist Scriptures.
Convenience dictated that practicants of Zen should live in communities
and monasticism was soon established in their sect, as in every other
sect of Buddhism. Questions of conduct arose, and Zen was squared
with the contemporary ethical outlook; though in medieval Japanese
literature wicked and cynical persons are generally depicted as adepts
of Zen.

Bodhidharma denied the existence of Good and Evil; but it was pointed
out by later apologists that the Zen adept, having viewed the Absolute,
is convinced of the unreality and futility of those pleasures and
possessions which are the incentive to sin. The Zen practicant, though
he makes no moral effort, nevertheless is certain not to sin, because
he is certain not to be tempted.

Finally, Zen forged itself a tradition. Probably during the eleventh
century a Scripture[5] was fabricated which recounts how once when
Buddha was preaching, he plucked a flower and smiled. Only the disciple
Kashyapa understood the significance of this act. Between him and the
Buddha there passed a wordless communication of Absolute Truths. This
communication was silently passed on by Kashyapa to his disciple, and
so ultimately to Bodhidharma, who brought it to China.

[5] _Dai Bonten Monbutsu Ketsugi Kyo._

The method of teaching by symbolic acts (such as the plucking of a
flower) was extensively used by the Zen masters. For example, when
a disciple asked Enkwan a question about the nature of Buddha, he
answered, "Bring me a clean bowl." When the priest brought the bowl,
the master said, "Now put it back where you found it." He signified
that the priest's questionings must return to their proper place,
the questioner's heart, from which alone spiritual knowledge can be
obtained.

The object of the Zen teachers, as of some eccentric schoolmasters
whom I have known, seems at first sight to have been merely to puzzle
and surprise their pupils to the highest possible degree. A peculiar
"brusquerie" was developed in Zen monasteries. The literature of the
sect consists chiefly in an endless series of anecdotes recording
the minutest happenings in the lives of famous Zen monks and their
(apparently) most trivial sayings. But behind these trifling acts
and sayings a deep meaning lay hid. The interpretation of such
teaching depends on a complete knowledge of the symbolism used. I
am not inclined to agree with those students of Zen who assert that
its written teaching are wholly devoid of intellectual content or so
completely esoteric as not to admit of explanation in words. Like other
Buddhist philosophers the Zen masters were chiefly concerned with the
attempt to define the relation between the One and the Many, between
the subjective and objective aspects of life.

The idealism of Zen does not mean that the phenomenal world has no
importance. To those who have not reached complete self-realisation
the urgencies of that world remain paramount and are the only
stepping-stones upon which he can climb higher.

On the day of his arrival at the monastery a novice presented himself
before the abbot, begging to be allowed to begin his spiritual
exercises without further delay. "Have you had supper?" asked the
abbot. "Yes." "Then go and wash your plate."


THE ZEN MASTERS.

Let us begin with Eno, a master of the seventh century. He lost his
parents when he was young and earned his living by gathering firewood.
One day when he was in the market-place he heard some one reading the
Diamond Sutra.[6] He asked where such books were to be had and was
told "From Master Konin on the Yellow Plum-blossom Hill." Accordingly
he went to Konin's Monastery in Anhui and presented himself before the
Master. "Where do you come from?" "From the South." "Bah! In the South
they have not Buddha in their souls." "North and South," replied Eno,
"are human distinctions that Buddha knows nothing of."

[6] Translated by W. Gemmell, 1912. Its use by Konin shows that Zen did
not long avoid the use of scriptures.

Konin accepted him as a lay-brother and put him to pound rice in the
bakery.

Konin was growing old and wished to choose his successor. He therefore
instituted a poetical competition in which each monk was to epitomise
in a quatrain the essence of Zen. The favourite candidate was the
warden Shinshu, who sent in the following verses:

    _The body is the trunk of the Bodhi-tree;
    The mind is the bright mirror's stand;
    Scrub your mirror continually,
    Lest the dust eclipse its brightness._

Eno, as a lay-brother, was not qualified to compete. Some one told him
of Shinshu's quatrain. "Mine would be very different," he exclaimed,
and persuaded one of the boys employed in the bakery to go stealthily
by night and inscribe the following poem on the monastery-wall:

    _Knowledge is not a tree;
    The Mirror has no stand;
    Since nothing exists,
    How could dust rise and cover it?_

The authorship of the poem was discovered and the abbot Konin visited
Eno in the bakery. "Is your rice white or no?" he asked. "White?"
answered Eno; "it has not yet been sifted." Thereupon the abbot
struck three times on the rice-mortar with his staff and departed.
Eno understood his meaning. That night at the third watch he came to
Konin's cell and was invested with the abbot's mantle, thereby becoming
the Sixth Patriarch of the Zen Church. He died in 712 A.D.,
without having learned how to read or write.


FASHIONABLE ZEN.

The warden Shinshu had lost the Patriarchate and with it the spiritual
headship of Zen. But as a compensation Fate had in store for him
worldly triumphs of the most dazzling kind. Leaving the rural monastery
of Konin, he entered the Temple of the Jade fountain in the great
city of Kingchau. His fame soon spread over central China. He was a
man of "huge stature, bushy eyebrows and shapely ears." The Empress
Wu Hou, who had usurped the throne of China, notoriously cultivated
the society of handsome priests. About 684 A.D. she summoned
him to the Capital. Instead of commanding his presence at Court she
came in a litter to his lodgings and actually knelt down before him.
The friendship of this murderous and fiendishly cruel woman procured
for him temporal dignities which in the eyes of the world completely
outshone the rustic piety of the Sixth Patriarch. Shinshu at the
Capital became as it were the Temporal Father of Zen, while Eno at his
country monastery remained its spiritual pope. The successors of Eno
became known as the Fathers of the Southern School; while the courtly
and social Zen of Shinshu is called Zen of the North.

Was it in sincere goodwill or with the desire to discredit his rival
that Shinshu invited Eno to join him at the Capital? In any case Eno
had the good sense to refuse. "I am a man of low stature and humble
appearance," he replied; "I fear that the men of the North would
despise me and my doctrines"--thus hinting (with just that touch of
malice which so often spices the unworldly) that Shinshu's pre-eminence
in the North was due to outward rather than to spiritual graces.

Shinshu died in 706, outliving his august patroness by a year. To
perpetuate his name a palace was turned into a memorial monastery; the
Emperor's brother wrote his epitaph; his obsequies were celebrated with
stupendous pomp.

His successor, Fujaku, at first remained at the Kingchau monastery
where he had been Shinshu's pupil. But in 724 the irresolute Emperor
Ming-huang, who had proscribed Buddhism ten years before, summoned
Fujaku to the Imperial City. Here princes and grandees vied with one
another in doing him honour. "The secret of his success," says the
historian,[7] "was that he seldom spoke and generally looked cross.
Hence his rare words and occasional smiles acquired in the eyes of his
admirers an unmerited value." He died at the age of 89. On the day of
his interment the great streets of Ch'ang-an were empty. The whole city
had joined in the funeral procession. The Governor of Honan (one of
the greatest functionaries in the State), together with his wife and
children, all of them clad in monastic vestments, followed the bier,
mingling with the promiscuous crowd of his admirers and disciples.

[7] _Old T'ang History_, 191.

Religion was at that time fashionable in the high society of Ch'ang-an,
as it is to-day in the great Catholic capitals of Munich, Vienna or
Seville. When I read of Fujaku's burial another scene at once sprang
into my mind, the funeral of a great Bavarian dignitary, where I saw
the noblemen of Munich walk hooded and barefoot through the streets.

I shall not refer again to the Northern School of Zen. One wonders
whether the founders of religions are forced by fate to watch the
posthumous development of their creeds. If so, theirs must be the very
blackest pit of Hell.

Let us return to the Southern School, always regarded as the true
repository of Zen tradition.


OBAKU.

Obaku lived at the beginning of the ninth century, and was thus a
contemporary of the poet Po Chue-i. He enjoyed the patronage of a
distinguished statesman the Chancellor Hai Kyu, of whom the Emperor
said, "This is indeed a true Confucian." It is to the Chancellor that
we owe the record of Obaku's conversations, which he wrote down day by
day. I will make a few extracts from this diary:

    Hai Kyu.--Eno could not read or write. How came it that he
    succeeded to the Patriarchate of Konin? The warden Shinshu was
    in control of 500 monks, gave lectures, and could discourse upon
    thirty-two different Sutras and Shastras. It was certainly very
    strange that he was not made Patriarch.

    Obaku (replying).--Shinshu's conception of Thought was too
    material. His proofs and practices were too positive.

"The master told me that when he was studying with Enkwan, the Emperor
Tai Chung came dressed as a monk. The master happened to be in the
chapel prostrating himself before an image of Buddha. The Emperor, who
thought he had learnt the lesson of Zen idealism, said to him: 'There
is nothing to be got from Buddha, nothing from the Church, nothing from
Man; for nothing exists. What do you mean by praying at your age?'

"Obaku answered him: 'I seek nothing of Buddha, the Church, or of
Man. I am in the habit of praying.' The Emperor said: 'What do you do
it for?' Obaku lost patience and struck him with his fist. 'You rude
fellow,' cried the Emperor. 'Since nothing exists, what difference
does it make to you whether I am rude or polite?' and Obaku struck him
again. The Emperor retreated hastily."

In his old age Obaku visited his native village and stayed a year in
his mother's house, without revealing his identity. After he had set
out again for his monastery, his mother suddenly realised that he was
her son and went in pursuit of him. She reached the shore of a certain
river, only to see him disembarking on the other side. Thereupon she
lost her reason and flung herself into the water.

Obaku threw a lighted torch after her and recited the following verses:

    _May the wide river dry at its source, to its very bed
    If here the crime of matricide has been done;
    When one son becomes a priest, the whole family is born again in Heaven;
    If that is a lie, all that Buddha promised is a lie._

Henceforward the throwing of a lighted torch into the bier became part
of the Zen funeral ceremony; it was accompanied by the reciting of the
above verses. Probably formula, ritual, and story alike belong to a
period much more ancient than Buddhism.

In the seventeenth century a Chinese priest named Ingen[8] carried the
teaching of Obaku to Japan, where it now possesses nearly 700 temples.

[8] 1592-1673 A.D.


BASO.

Baso was a master of the ninth century. One day he was sitting with his
feet across the garden-path. A monk came along with a wheel-barrow.
"Tuck in your feet," said the monk. "What has been extended cannot be
retracted," answered Baso. "What has been started cannot be stopped,"
cried the monk and pushed the barrow over Baso's feet. The master
hobbled to the monastery and seizing an axe called out "Have any of you
seen the rascal who hurt my feet?" The monk who had pushed the barrow
then came out and stood "with craned head." The master laid down his
axe.

To understand this story we must realise that the wheel-barrow is here
a symbol of the Wheel of Life and Death, which, though every spoke of
it is illusion, cannot be disregarded till we have destroyed the last
seed of phenomenal perception in us.


RINZAI.

Obaku, as we have seen, taught wisdom with his fists. When the novice
Rinzai came to him and asked him what was the fundamental idea of
Buddhism, Obaku hit him three times with his stick. Rinzai fled and
presently met the monk Daigu.

    _Daigu_: Where do you come from?

    _Rinzai_: From Obaku.

    _Daigu_: And what stanza did he lecture upon?

    _Rinzai_: I asked him thrice what was the fundamental doctrine of
    Buddhism and each time he hit me with his stick. Please tell me if
    I did something I ought not to have done?

    _Daigu_: You go to Obaku and torture him by your questions, and
    then ask if you have done wrong!

At that moment Rinzai had a Great Enlightenment.

Rinzai substituted howling for Obaku's manual violence. He shouted
meaningless syllables at his disciples; roared like a lion or bellowed
like a bull. This "howling" became a regular part of Zen practice,
and may be compared to the yelling of the American Shakers. Upon his
deathbed Rinzai summoned his disciples round him and asked which of
them felt capable of carrying on his work. Sansho volunteered to
do so. "How will you tell people what was Rinzai's teaching?" asked
Rinzai. Sansho threw out his chest and roared in a manner which he
thought would gratify the master. But Rinzai groaned and cried out, "To
think that such a blind donkey should undertake to hand on my teaching!"

It was in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries that Zen most completely
permeated Chinese thought. Upon the invasion of the Mongols[9] many Zen
monks from Eastern China took refuge in Japan; the same thing happened
during the Manchu invasion in the seventeenth century. But by that time
Zen had a serious philosophic rival.

[9] On the attitude of the Mongol rulers to Zen, see an article by
Prof. Kunishita, _Toyogakuho_, xi., 4, 87.

In the fifteenth century the philosopher Wang Yang-ming began to
propagate a doctrine which, in all but names, strongly resembled the
philosophic side of Zen. He taught that in each one of us is a "higher
nature," something which, borrowing a phrase from Mencius, he called
"Good Knowledge." Of this inner nature he speaks in exactly the same
terms as the Zen teachers spoke of their "Buddha immanent in man's
heart." He even uses the same kind of doggerel-verse as a medium of
teaching.

Rigid Confucianists, who would not have listened to any doctrine of
professedly Buddhist origin, were able through Wang Yang-ming's tact to
accept the philosophy of Zen without feeling that they were betraying
the Confucian tradition. The followers of Yang-ming are to-day very
numerous both in China and Japan. They cultivate introspection, but not
the complete self-hypnosis of Zen.

In China, where Zen is almost forgotten, the followers of this later
doctrine are not even aware of its derivation.


ZEN AND ART.

I said at the beginning of this paper that Zen is often mentioned
by writers on Far Eastern Art. The connection between Zen and art
is important, not only because of the inspiration which Zen gave
to the artist, but also because through Zen was obtained a better
understanding of the psychological conditions under which art is
produced than has prevailed in any other civilisation.

Art was regarded as a kind of Zen, as a delving down into the Buddha
that each of us unknowingly carries within him, as Benjamin carried
Joseph's cup in his sack. Through Zen we annihilate Time and see the
Universe not split up into myriad fragments, but in its primal unity.
Unless, says the Zen aesthetician, the artist's work is imbued with
this vision of the subjective, non-phenomenal aspect of life, his
productions will be mere toys.

I do not mean to suggest that Chinese artists found in Zen a short
cut to the production of beauty. Zen aims at the annihilation of
consciousness, whereas art is produced by an interaction of conscious
and unconscious faculties. How far such an interaction can be promoted
by the psychic discipline of Zen no layman can judge; moreover the
whole question of the artist's psychology is controversial and obscure.

Perhaps it is not even very important that the artist himself should
have a sound aesthetic; but it is of the utmost importance to the artist
that the public should have some notion of the conditions under which
art can be produced--should have some key to the vagaries of a section
of humanity which will in any case always be found troublesome and
irritating.

Such a key Zen supplied, and it is in the language of Zen that, after
the twelfth century, art is usually discussed in China and Japan.


THE ROKUTSUJI SCHOOL.

One institution, about which till recently very little was known,
seems to have been an important factor in the propagation of Zen art
and ideas. About 1215 A.D. a Zen priest came from the far
south-west of China to Hangchow, the Capital, and there refounded a
ruined monastery, the Rokutsuji, which stood on the shores of the
famous Western Lake. His name was Mokkei. He seems to have been the
first to practise the swift, ecstatic type of monochrome which is
associated with Zen. In hurried swirls of ink he sought to record
before they faded visions and exaltations produced whether by the
frenzy of wine, the stupor of tea, or the vacancy of absorption.

Sometimes his design is tangled and chaotic; sometimes as in his famous
"Persimmons,"[10] passion has congealed into a stupendous calm.

[10] See Kuemmel, _Die Kunst Ostasiens_ Pl. 118.

Of his fellow-workers the best known is Raso, a painter of birds and
flowers. Ryokai, once a fashionable painter, left the Court and with
his pupil Rikaku worked in the manner of Mokkei.

Examples of Ryokai's work before and after his conversion are still
preserved in Japan.

Finally, about the middle of the fourteenth century, a Japanese priest
came to China and, under circumstances which I shall describe in an
appendix, confusingly became Mokkei II. It may be that it was he who
sent back to his own country some of the numerous pictures signed
Mokkei which are now in Japan. Which of them are by Mokkei and which by
Mokuan is a problem which remains to be solved.

This Zen art did not flourish long in China, nor in all probability do
many specimens of it survive there. But in Japan it was a principal
source of inspiration to the great painters of the fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries. Sesshu himself is the direct descendant of Mokkei;
as in a decadent way are Kano masters such as Tsunenobu.

Zen paintings are of two kinds. (1) Representations of animals, birds
and flowers, in which the artist attempted to identify himself with the
object depicted, to externise its inner Buddha. These were achieved
not by study from the life, as the early Sung nature-pieces have been,
but by intense and concentrated visualisation of the subject to be
painted. This mental picture was rapidly transferred to paper before
the spell of concentration (samadhi) was broken. (2) Illustrations of
episodes in the lives of the great Zen teachers. This branch of Zen
art was essentially dramatic. It sought to express the characters of
the persons involved, subtly to reveal the grandeur of soul that lay
hidden behind apparent uncouthness or stupidity. Typical of this kind
of painting are the pictures of "Tanka burning the Image."

One night Tanka, a Zen priest, stayed as a guest at an ordinary
Buddhist monastery. There was no firewood in his cell. As the night
was cold he went into the chapel, seized a wooden statue of Shakyamuni
and, chopping it up, made himself a comfortable fire. To him the
idol of Buddha was a mere block of wood; his indignant hosts took a
different view. The controversy is the same as that which occupies the
central place in the No play _Sotoba Komachi_.

There is another aspect of Zen which had an equally important effect on
art. The Buddha-nature is immanent not in Man only, but in everything
that exists, animate or inanimate. Stone, river and tree are alike
parts of the great hidden Unity. Thus Man, through his Buddha-nature
or universalised consciousness, possesses an intimate means of contact
with Nature. The songs of birds, the noise of waterfalls, the rolling
of thunder, the whispering of wind in the pine-trees--all these are
utterances of the Absolute.

Hence the connection of Zen with the passionate love of Nature which is
so evident in Far Eastern poetry and art.

Personally I believe that this passion for Nature worked more
favourably on literature than on painting. The typical Zen picture,
dashed off in a moment of exaltation--perhaps a moonlit river expressed
in three blurs and a flourish--belongs rather to the art of calligraphy
than to that of painting.

In his more elaborate depictions of nature the Zen artist is led by his
love of nature into that common pitfall of lovers--sentimentality. The
forms of Nature tend with him to function not as forms but as symbols.

Something resembling the mystic belief which Zen embraces is found
in many countries and under many names. But Zen differs from other
religions of the same kind in that it admits only one means by
which the perception of Truth can be attained. Prayer, fasting,
asceticism--all are dismissed as useless, giving place to one single
resource, the method of self-hypnosis which I have here described.

I have, indeed, omitted any mention of an important adjunct of Zen,
namely tea-drinking, which was as constant a feature in the life of Zen
monasteries as it is here in the regime of charwomen and girl-clerks.
I have not space to describe the various tea-ceremonies. The tendency
of monasteries was to create in them as in every part of daily life a
more and more elaborate ritual, calculated to give some pattern to
days otherwise devoid of any incident. We possess minute descriptions
of every ceremony--the initiation of novices, the celebration of birth
and death anniversaries of the Patriarchs, the procedure in cases of
sickness, madness, disobedience, disappearance or death of monks;
the selection and investiture of abbots; the lectures, liturgies and
sessions which constituted the curriculum of Zen instruction.

In China decay set in after the fifteenth century. The Zen monasteries
became almost indistinguishable from those of popular, idolatrous
Buddhism. In Japan, on the other hand, Zen has remained absolutely
distinct and is now the favourite creed of the educated classes. It
has not hitherto conducted any propaganda in Europe, whereas the Amida
Sect has sent out both missionaries and pamphlets. But I believe that
Zen would find many converts in England. Something rather near it we
already possess. Quakerism, like Zen, is a non-dogmatic religion,
laying stress on the doctrine of Immanence. But whereas the Quakers
seek communion with the Divine Spark in corporate meditation and
deliberately exploit the mysterious potencies of crowd-psychology--the
Zen adept probes in solitude (or at least without reference to his
neighbour) for the Buddha within him.

In cases where a Quaker meeting passes in silence, the members having
meditated quietly for a whole hour, a very near approach to a Zen
gathering has been made. But more often than not the Holy Spirit,
choosing his mouthpiece with an apparent lack of discrimination,
quickly descends upon some member of the meeting. The ineffable,
which Zen wisely refused to express, is then drowned in a torrent of
pedestrian oration.

Some, then, may turn to Zen as a purer Quakerism. Others will be
attracted to it by the resemblance of its doctrines to the hypotheses
of recent psychology. The Buddha consciousness of Zen exactly
corresponds to the Universal Consciousness which, according to certain
modern investigators, lies hid beneath the personal Consciousness.
Such converts will probably use a kind of applied Zen, much as the
Japanese have done; that is to say, they will not seek to spend their
days in complete Samadhi, but will dive occasionally, for rest or
encouragement, into the deeper recesses of the soul.

It is not likely that they will rest content with the traditional
Eastern methods of self-hypnosis. If certain states of consciousness
are indeed more valuable than those with which we are familiar in
ordinary life--then we must seek them unflinchingly by whatever means
we can devise. I can imagine a kind of dentist's chair fitted with
revolving mirrors, flashing lights, sulphurous haloes expanding and
contracting--in short a mechanism that by the pressure of a single knob
should whirl a dustman into Nirvana.

Whether such states of mind are actually more valuable than our
ordinary consciousness is difficult to determine. Certainly no one
has much right to an opinion who has not experienced them. But
something akin to Samadhi--a sudden feeling of contact with a unity
more real than the apparent complexity of things--is probably not an
uncommon experience. The athlete, the creative artist, the lover, the
philosopher--all, I fancy, get a share of it, not when seeking to
escape from the visible world; but rather just when that world was
seeming to them most sublimely real.

To seek by contemplation of the navel or of the tip of the nose a
repetition of spiritual experiences such as these seems to us inane;
and indeed the negative trance of Zen is very different from the
positive ecstasies to which I have just referred. I say that it is
different; but how do I know? "Zen," said Bodhidharma, "cannot be
described in words nor chronicled in books"; and I have no other
experience of Zen. If I _knew_, I might transmit to you my knowledge,
but it would have to be by a direct spiritual communication, symbolised
only by a smile, a gesture, or the plucking of a flower.

I need not therefore apologise for having given a purely external and
historical account of Zen, a creed whose inner mysteries are admittedly
beyond the scope of words.




APPENDIX I.


Reproductions of Zen Paintings in Japanese art publications. (The
_Kokka_ and the other publications here referred to may be seen at the
Art Library, Victoria and Albert Museum; and at the Print Room of the
British Museum.)

    MOKKEI--_Kokka._ 37, 112, 122, 177, 185, 238, 242, 265, 268, 291,
    293, 314.

    RASO.--_Shimbi Taikwan_ XX.

    MOKUAN.--(Mokkei II).--_Kokka_ 295, _Shimbi Taikwan_ Vol. IX. (Nos.
    21 and 22 in the collection of Chinese Paintings at the British
    Museum are probably by Mokuan.)

    RYOKAI.--_Kokka_ 40, 114, 145, 152, 220, 227, 229.

    RIKAKU.--_Kokka_ 269.

    MUJUN.--(An important thirteenth century Zen writer.) _Kokka_ 243.

    INDRA.--(A Hangchow priest, presumably an Indian; flourished c.
    1280.) _Kokka_ 35, 110, 223, 310. _Shimbi Taikwan_ IX.




APPENDIX II.


MOKUAN.

The Nikkoshu[11], a diary by the priest Gido, has the following entry
under the year 1378 (month and day uncertain):

    To-day Donfu[12] came, and we fell to talking of Mokuan. It seems
    that he was once known as Ze-itsu. But on becoming a pupil of the
    priest Kenzan[13], he changed his name to Mokuan. Afterwards he
    went to China and entered the Honkakuji[14], where he became the
    disciple of Ryo-an[15] and was made librarian. Here he published at
    his own expense (lit. "selling his shoes") the _Second Collection
    of Sayings by Korin_.

    Subsequently he lived at the Shotenji at Soochow, and was warden
    there under Nanso[16], dying soon afterwards.

    When he first came to China he spent some time at the Joji
    Monastery at Hangchow and from there visited the Rokutsuji on
    the shores of the Western Lake. This monastery was inhabited by
    the followers of Mokkei. The abbot greeted Mokuan with a smile,
    saying to him: "Last night I dreamt that our founder Mokkei came
    back again. You must be his reincarnation"; and he gave to Mokuan
    Mokkei's two seals, white and red. Henceforward he was known as
    Mokkei the Second.

[11] See my _No Plays of Japan_ (Allen & Unwin, 1921), p. 19. The
passage here translated is taken not from the current, two-chapter
abridgement of Gido's Diary, but from the _Kokuchoshu_, a miscellany by
the 15th century priest Zuikei, who quoted many passages from the lost
portion of the Diary. See Mr. Saga Toshu, _Shina Gaku_, I., 1.

[12] 1314-1384.

[13] Died 1323. Both he and Donfu were Japanese priests who visited
China.

[14] At Chia-hsing in Chehkiang.

[15] Entered this temple in 1334.

[16] Visited Japan; was at the Shotenji from 1342-1345.




APPENDIX III.

Reproductions of paintings illustrating Zen legend.


BODHIDHARMA.

    (1) With tightly closed lips, as he appeared before the Emperor of
    China in 520. _Masterpieces of Sesshu_, Pl. 47.

    (2) Crossing the Yangtze on a reed. Perhaps the best example may be
    seen not in a reproduction, but in No. 22 of the original Chinese
    Paintings at the British Museum.

    (3) Sitting with his face to the wall. He sat thus in silence for
    nine years in the Shorin Monastery on Mount Sung. _Kokka_ 333.


EKA.

    Second Patriarch of the sect. Severed his own arm and presented
    it to Bodhidharma. In spite of his fanaticism (or because of it)
    the Founder did not at first regard him with complete confidence
    and recommended to him the study of the Langkavatara Sutra,
    not considering him ripe for complete, non-dogmatic Zen. Eka
    waiting waist-deep in the snow for the Founder to instruct him.
    Masterpieces of Sesshu, Pl. 45.


ENO.

    Sixth Patriarch. See above, p 15. _Kokka_, 289, 297.


TOKUSAN, died 865 A.D.

    _Shimbi Taikwan_, I, 13, shows him with his famous Zen stick. He
    is also sometimes depicted failing to answer an old market-woman's
    riddle; and tearing up his commentary on the Diamond Sutra.


TANKA.

    A painting by Indra (_Kokka_ 173) shows him burning the wooden
    statue of Buddha at the Erin Temple.




BIBLIOGRAPHY.


(1) EUROPEAN.

The only writer who has made extracts from the works of Bodhidharma is
Pere Wieger, whose remarks (in his _Histoire des Croyances religieuses
en Chine_, pp. 517-528) show a robust and likeable bigotry.

Of Zen literature he says: "Nombre d'in-folio remplis de reponses
incoherentes, insensees.... Ce ne sont pas, comme on l'a suppose, des
allusions a des affaires interieures, qu'il faudrait connaitre pour
pouvoir comprendre. Ce sont des exclamations echappees a des abrutis,
momentanement tires de leur coma."

For the tea-ceremony in Japan see Okakura's _Book of Tea_ (Foulis,
1919). The "military" Zen of Japan is well described by Nukariya Kaiten
in his _The Religion of the Samurai, 1913_.


(2) NATIVE.

Most of this paper is derived from the section on Zen (Series II, Vol.
15, seq.) in the "Supplement to the Collection of Buddhist Scriptures,"
_Dai Nihon Zoku Zo Kyo_.

Much of the information with regard to the Rokutsuji School is taken
from the article by Mr. Saga to which I have already referred. For the
Rokutsuji ("Temple of the Six Penetrations") see _Hsien Shun Lin-an
Chih_ ("Topography of Hangchow, 1265-1275 A.D."), ch. 78, f. 9
recto.

I have also used Yamada's _Zenshu Jiten_ (Dictionary of Zen) and the
_Hekiganroku_, edited by Soyen, 1920.




SHORT INDEX.


(Chinese pronunciations given in brackets.)

  Amida, 8.

  Baso (Ma Tsu), 20.

  Bodhidharma (Ta-mo), 8 _seq._, 29.

  Bodhisattvas, 8.

  Buddhapriya (Chio-ai), 11.

  _Dai Bonten Monbutsu-ketsugi Kyo_, 14.

  Daigu (Ta-yue), 20.

  Diamond Sutra, 15.

  Dhyana, see Zen. Also, 10.

  Eka (Hui-k'o), 29.

  Enkwan (Yen-kuan), 14.

  Eno (Hui-neng), 15, 29.

  Fujaku (P'u-chi), 17.

  Haikyu (P'ei Hsiu), 18.

  _Hokkekyo_, see _Saddharma_, etc.

  Honkakuji (Pen-chio-ssu), 28.

  Joji (Ching-tz'u), 28.

  Kern, 8.

  Konin (Hung-jen), 15.

  Korin (Ku-lin), 28.

  Mahayana, 7.

  Mokkei (Mu-ch'i), 22, 27.

  Mujun (Wu-chun), 27.

  Nanso (Nan-ch'u), 28.

  Obaku (Huang Po), 18.

  Okakura, 30.

  Raso (Lo-ch'uang), 23, 27.

  Rikaku (Li Ch'ueeh), 27.

  Rinzai (Lin-chi), 20.

  Rokutsuji (Liu-t'ung-ssu), 22.

  Ryo-an (Liao-an), 28.

  Ryokai (Liang K'ai), 23, 27.

  _Saddharma Pundarika Sutra_, 8.

  Saga T. 28, 30.

  Samadhi (San-mei), 12.

  Sansho (San-sheng), 21.

  Shakyamuni, 7.

  _Shina Gaku_, 28, 30.

  Shinshu (Shen-hsiu), 16.

  Shotenji (Ch'eng-t'ien-ssu), 28.

  Tanka (Tan-hsia), 23, 29.

  Tendai (T'ien-t'ai), 8.

  Tokusan (Te-shan), 29.

  Wieger, 30.

  Wu Hou, 17.

  Zen (Ch'an), 7, etc.


       *       *       *       *       *


Transcriber's Note

A duplicate title page has been removed from the text.

"Externise" on p. 23 is a variant form of "externalise", and has been
left as printed.

The diacritics in "Saddharma Pundarika Sutra" on p. 8
were marked in pen on the printed copy, and may not have been printed.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Zen Buddhism, by Arthur Waley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ZEN BUDDHISM ***

***** This file should be named 43273.txt or 43273.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/2/7/43273/

Produced by Henry Flower and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

