Project Gutenberg's Female Warriors, Vol. I (of 2), by Ellen C. Clayton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Female Warriors, Vol. I (of 2)
       Memorials of Female Valour and Heroism, from the
       Mythological Ages to the Present Era.

Author: Ellen C. Clayton

Release Date: September 5, 2013 [EBook #43646]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FEMALE WARRIORS, VOL. I (OF 2) ***




Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)











FEMALE WARRIORS.




FEMALE WARRIORS.

MEMORIALS OF

_FEMALE VALOUR AND HEROISM, FROM THE MYTHOLOGICAL AGES TO THE PRESENT
ERA._

BY ELLEN C. CLAYTON (_MRS. NEEDHAM_),

AUTHOR OF "QUEENS OF SONG," "ENGLISH FEMALE ARTISTS," ETC.


IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.


    LONDON:
    TINSLEY BROTHERS, 8, CATHERINE STREET, STRAND.
    1879.
    [_All Rights Reserved._]




    PRINTED BY TAYLOR AND CO.,
    10, LITTLE QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN'S INN FIELDS.




    THIS SHORT RECORD IS
    Dedicated,

    IN TOKEN OF AFFECTION AND ESTEEM,

    TO
    MADAME RONNIGER.




CONTENTS.


                                                                 Page
  CHAPTER I.

  Mythology--Warlike Goddesses--The Amazons--The Sarmatians--The
  Machlyes and Auses--The Zaveces--More Modern Tribes of Amazons
  in Asia and Africa                                                   1


  CHAPTER II.

  Semiramis, Queen of Assyria--Harpalyce, daughter of Lycurgus,
  King of Thrace--Atalanta (Argonautic Expedition)--Camilla, Queen
  of the Volscians--Tomyris, Queen of the Massagetae--Telesilla the
  Poetess--The Two Artemisias (I. and II.) Queens of Caria--Mania,
  Governess of AEolia--Cratesipolis of Sicyon--Arsinoe, Queen of
  Egypt                                                               24


  CHAPTER III.

  Hypsicrates, Queen of Mithridates the Great--Cleopatra--Candace,
  Queen of Ethiopia--Boadicea and her Daughters--Ancient British,
  Caledonian, and German Female Warriors--Combats of Roman
  Ladies--Nero's Amazons--Victoria, Empress of the West--Zenobia,
  Queen of the East--Empress Hunila, and other Gothic Amazons--Mavia,
  Queen of Pharan--Pharandsem, Queen of Armenia                       47


  CHAPTER IV.

  THE ARABS.

  Henda, Wife of Abu Sofian, an Arab Chief--Forka, an Arabian
  Lady--Woman of Yemaumah--Arab and Greek Heroines at the Siege
  of Damascus--Khaullah--Prefect of Tripoli's Daughter--Ayesha,
  Widow of the Prophet--Cahina the Sorceress, Queen of the
  Berbers--Saidet, Queen of Persia--Turkhan-Khatun, Sultana of
  Kharezme--Hadee'yah, title of a Maiden who precedes the Bedouin
  Arabs in battle at the present day                                  75


  CHAPTER V.

  Libyssa and Valasca, Queens of Bohemia--Wanda, Queen of
  Poland--Moors in Spain--Women of Tudmir--Female Knights of
  Tortosa--Alleged Origin of the word "Infantry"--Queen
  Carcas--Elfrida, Daughter of Alfred the Great--Igor, Grand
  Duchess of Russia--Richilda, Countess of Hainault                   90


  CHAPTER VI.

  THE CRUSADES--French, German, and Genoese Amazons--Eleonora
  of Aquitaine--Matilda of Boulogne--Empress Maud--Aldrude,
  Countess of Bertinoro--Empress Constantia--Nichola de Camville
  (Barons' Wars)--Blanche of Castille, Queen-Regent of
  France--Women of Culm--Blanch de Rossi--Black Agnes, Countess
  of March--Countess de Montfort--Julia du Guesclin--Jane de
  Belleville, Lady of Clisson--Marzia--Margaret, Queen of Denmark,
  Norway and Sweden, the Semiramis of the North--Fair Maiden
  Lilliard (Chevy Chase)--Lady Pelham--Philippa, Queen of Denmark    102


  CHAPTER VII.

  Jeanne d'Arc, the Maid of Orleans.--Margaret de Attendoli,
  Sister of Sforza--Bona Lombardi and Onorata Rodiana, Female
  Condottieri--Marulla (Turks in Europe)--Margaret of
  Anjou--Jeanne Hachette--Dona Aldonza de Castillo, and Dona
  Maria Sarmiento (Civil Wars in Castile)--Isabel the
  Catholic--Caterina Sforza                                          134


  CHAPTER VIII.

  Maria d'Estrada, and other Spanish Women serving under the
  command of Cortez--Catalina de Erauso, the Monja Alferez
  (Nun-Lieutenant)--Dona Maria Pacheco (Confederacy of the
  Holy Junta in Castile)--Eleonora of Toledo, Grand Duchess
  of Tuscany--Turks in Hungary--Courage of a Jewess at
  Buda--Bravery of the Women of Temesvar, Erlau, Valpon, Agria,
  and Szigeth in Hungary, and of Famagosta in Cyprus--Louise
  Labe--Mary of Hungary--Granu Weal--FEMALE WARRIORS OF THE
  REFORMATION--Kenan Simonz Hasselaar--Women of Alkmaar--Mary,
  Queen of Scots--Magdalaine de Saint-Nectaire--Constance de
  Cezelli--Christine de Lalaing, Princess d'Espinoy--Queen
  Elizabeth--English and Scottish Heroines--Barbara of Ernecourt
  (Thirty Years' War)--Christina of Sweden                           164


  CHAPTER IX.

  THE AMAZONS IN SOUTH AMERICA                                       198


  CHAPTER X.

  Lady Offaley (IRISH REBELLION, 1641)--Lady Arundell--Lady
  Bankes--Countess of Derby (CIVIL WARS IN ENGLAND)--Helena
  Zrinyi, Wife of Tekeli, the Hungarian Patriot--Incident at
  the Coronation of William and Mary--Lady Newcombe (James II.
  in Ireland)--Madame de Vercheres--Mademoiselle de la Charce        208




LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL AUTHORITIES CONSULTED.


  Beloe's Herodotus.
  Booth's Diodorus Siculus.
  Hearne's Justin.
  Murphy's Tacitus.
  Suetonius (Bohn's Classical Library).
  Abbe Guyon.  Histoire des Amazones. Paris, 1740.
  Rollin.  Histoire Ancienne.
  Grote.  History of Greece.
  Gibbon.  Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.
  Mills.  History of Mohammedism.
  Neale.  Islamism: its Rise and Progress.
  Miss Strickland.  Queens of England and Scotland.
  Mrs. Matthew Hall.  Queens of England before the Conquest.
  Mrs. Forbes Bush.  Queens of France.
  Michaud.  Histoire des Croisades.
  Lingard.  History of England.
  Sir J. Mackintosh.  History of England.
  Tytler.  History of Scotland; and Worthies of Scotland.
  Wolfgang Menzel.  History of Germany (Mrs. Geo. Horrocks).
  Kelly.  History of Russia.
  Coxe.  House of Austria.
  Motley.  Rise of the Dutch Republic.
  Berriat St. Prix.  Jeanne d'Arc.  Paris, 1817.
  Lebrun des Charmettes.  Hist. de Jeanne d'Arc.  Paris, 1817.
  Jollois.  Hist. Abregee de la Vie et Exploits de Jeanne d'Arc.
        Paris, 1821.
  Prescott.  Conquest of Mexico.
  Ralegh's Guiana.  With Introduction and Notes, by Sir Robert Schomburgh
        (Hackluyt Society).
  Life of Mrs. Christian Davies, _alias_ Mother Ross.  London, 1741
        (Defoe).
  Lamartine.  Hist. of the Girondists.  (Capt. Rafter)
  Sir John Carr.  Tour through Spain.
  Maria Graham.  Journal of a Voyage to Brazil, etc.
  Garibaldi.  An Autobiography.  Edited by Alexandre Dumas.
  Scenes of the Civil War in Hungary, with the Personal Adventures of
        an Austrian Officer.  London, 1850.
  Ferishta.  History of Mahommedan India (Jo. Briggs). 1828.
  Ferishta.  History of the Dekkan, and History of Bengal (J. Scott).
        1794.
  Gladwin.  History of Hindostan.
  Francklin.  History of Shah Aulum, Emperor of Hindostan.
  Private Life of an Eastern King.
  Nolan.  Illustrated History of British India.
  Bruce's Travels.
  Winwood Reade.  Savage Africa.  1864.
  Duncan.  Travels in Dahomey.  1847.
  Captain Burton.  Mission to Dahome.  1864.
  Matilda Betham.  Cyclopaedia of Female Biography.
  Mrs. Ellet.  Women Artists.
  Fullom.  History of Woman.
  Mrs. Hale.  Woman's Record.
  Mrs. Starling.  Noble Deeds of Woman.
  Watson.  Heroic Women of History.  Philadelphia. 1852.
  Wilson's Wonderful Characters.  1821.
  Kirby's Wonderful and Eccentric Museum.  1820.
  Annual Register.
  Notes and Queries.
  Illustrated London News.  Galignani.
  Edinburgh Annual Register.
  Biographie Universelle.
    Etc. etc.

[Illustration]



FEMALE WARRIORS.




I.

     Mythology.--Warlike Goddesses.--The Amazons.--The Sarmatians.--The
     Machlyes and Auses.--The Zaveces.--More Modern Tribes of Amazons
     in Asia and Africa.


WERE it not for fear of Mrs. Grundy, whose awful visage is to the
modern Briton what the Gorgon's head was to the ancient Greek, it might
be said that Popular Prejudice is the deaf, deformed sister of Justice.
Popular Prejudice makes up her mind on certain subjects, and is grandly
unconscious of any fault within herself; ignorant that she is deaf, and
that she is morally blind, although able to see every petty object that
passes within her range. Popular Prejudice, like her stately cousin,
Mrs. Grundy, arranges fixed rules of etiquette, of conduct, even of
feeling, and never pardons the slightest infringement of the lines
she marks out. A man may lay down his life for "an idea," but if it
be outside the ramparts of Popular Prejudice, he does so as a rebel,
maybe a fool. A man may have high aspirations, but if by the breadth
of a hair's line they run not parallel with the views of Popular
Prejudice, let him be anathema maranatha, let him be bound in chains,
away with him to outer darkness, to the company of the few who share
his--"crotchets."

Whisper it not in Gath that a woman should dare ever to transgress
the lines laid down by Popular Prejudice. A woman is a subordinate
accident in Creation, quite an afterthought, a supplementary notion, a
postscript, though Humour might laughingly say, much like the famous
postscript to a lady's letter. Man (though he is permitted to include
in his superb all-comprehensive identity, Woman) is big, strong, noble,
intellectual: a Being. Woman is small, weak, seldom noble, and ought
not to be conscious of the significance of the word Intellectual.

The exception is supposed to prove the rule. A woman may be forgiven
for defying Popular Prejudice, if she is very pretty, very silly, and
very wicked. Popular Prejudice has the natural instinct of yielding to
any little weakness that may be imagined to flatter a Man. But Popular
Prejudice is superbly angry with a woman who is perhaps not pretty,
yet ventures to claim good sense and personal will, and who may be
innately good. Popular Prejudice is the fast friend of lean-faced Envy;
and woe betide the woman (or even the man) who would presume to sit
down at the board of these allies uninvited.

Popular Prejudice, having decided that woman is a poor, weak creature,
credulous, easily influenced, holds that she is of necessity timid;
that if she were allowed as much as a voice in the government of her
native country, she would stand appalled if war were even hinted at.
If it be proved by hard facts that woman is not a poor, weak creature,
then she must be reprimanded as being masculine. To brand a woman
as being masculine, is supposed to be quite sufficient to drive her
cowering back to her 'broidery-frame and her lute.

Popular Prejudice abhors hard facts, and rarely reads history. Yet
nobody can deny that facts are stubborn things, or that the world
rolls calmly round even when wars, rumours of wars, revolutions, and
counter-revolutions, are raging in every quarter and sub-division of
its surface.

War is, undoubtedly, a horrid alternative to the average woman, and
she shrinks from it--as the average man shrinks. But, walking down the
serried ranks of history, we find strange records of feminine bravery;
as we might discover singular instances of masculine cowardice, if we
searched far enough.

As argumentation is unpleasant and unprofitable, be it counted only
idle pastime gathering a handful of memories from the playground of
history.

Opinion among the ancients on all subjects was as fairly divided as it
has been among moderns. Naturally, however, in that uncivilised stage
of the world's development, men and women inclined more towards brute
force than they now do. Plato, the Athenian philosopher, lamented
that the lives of women should be wasted in domestic, and sometimes
servile, duties; arguing that if the girls were trained like the boys,
in athletic sports and warlike exercises, and were taught to endure
fatigue, they would soon cease to be the weaker sex, and could not only
fight as well as their lords and masters, but might take the command of
armies and fleets.

But though the counsels of the great Athenian were followed in many
things, they were entirely declined on this question. His countrymen,
even in cases of the direst necessity, were loth to swell their ranks
with female recruits; and it was only during the degenerate days of
the Empire that Rome publicly authorised the combats of women in the
amphitheatre.

Very few people deny that woman did, occasionally, fight in olden
times. All nations, from the rudest barbarians to those most advanced
in civilisation, hold this belief. An old Chinese tradition says that
but for the wisdom of certain mandarins in days gone by, the weaker sex
might possibly be now the stronger in the Celestial Empire. Once upon
a time, so the story runs, the Chinese women, discontented with the
unequal share accorded to them in the government, rose in rebellion.
The revolt so very nearly became a revolution that the Emperor and
his ministers, to prevent a recurrence of the danger, decreed that
henceforth the feet of girls throughout China should be bandaged in
such a way as to put it out of their power ever again to take the field
as warriors. And thus, says the fable, originated the famous Golden
Lilies.

The ancients were all familiar with the idea of women sometimes
exchanging the spindle and distaff for the spear and shield. Not only
did they believe their goddesses to take part occasionally in the
battles of mortals, but the supreme direction of military affairs was
assigned to a female, as Goddess of War; and this deity, combining
wisdom and courage, frequently proved more than a match for the brutal
if not blundering God of Battles. "Which, indeed," observes Pope, "is
no more than just, since wisdom is generally averse to entering into
warlike contests at all; yet when engaged, it is likely to triumph
over brute force, and to bear off the laurels of the day." No general
amongst the ancients would have dared to enter an enemy's country,
besiege a city, or risk an engagement without first sacrificing to the
Goddess of War.

All nations alike held the same belief. The Egyptians offered
sacrifices to Neith, the Goddess of War, Philosophy, and Wisdom, to
whom lions were subject, and whose fitting emblem was the vulture. The
Greeks and Romans adored Minerva, the Thunderer's armour-clad daughter:
and Bellona, sister, or perhaps wife of Mars, whose chariot she was
said to drive through the din and tumult of the fight, lashing the
foaming horses with a bloody scourge. And Victoria, whose name denotes
her office, was so greatly honoured both in Greece and Rome, that
Hiero, King of Syracuse, to flatter the Romans, once sent them an idol
figure of this goddess, three hundred and twenty pounds in weight, made
of solid gold; while the Egyptians, who worshipped her under the name
of Naphte, represented her in the form of an eagle, because that bird
is the strongest of aerial warriors, and invariably victorious over
all the feathered race. The Brahmins, who claim an antiquity as great
as, or greater than, Egypt, worshipped, and still worship, Durga, or
Katyayini, whose ten arms and hands, each of which grasps a warlike
weapon or emblem, prove how formidable a foe she is believed to have
been. Our ancient British forefathers prayed to Andate, or Andraste,
Goddess of Victory, and called upon her in their hour of need. The
northern races, Goths, Vandals, Germans, who over-ran Europe during the
decline of the Roman Empire, assigned a somewhat analogous place in
their mythology to the Valkyrias, or Disas--

    "Those dread maids, whose hideous yell
     Maddens the battle's bloody swell."

These beautiful women were believed to take a leading part in every
battle fought on earth. Mounted on swift steeds, armed with helmets and
mail, drawn swords in their hands, they rode wildly over the field to
select those heroes destined by Odin for the slaughter, and lead them
to Valhalla, the Paradise of the Brave.

Nor is the belief in warlike goddesses confined to the Old World. When
Cortez entered Mexico, he found the subjects of Montezuma worshipping,
amongst other deities, all more or less repulsive to the eye, a horrid
basalt monster named Teoyamiqui, Goddess of War. She was supposed to be
wife of the equally terrible Huitzilopochtli, or Tlacahuepancuexcotzin,
the Mexican Mars. Like the Valkyrias, her chief duty was to conduct
those warriors who fell in defence of the gods to the house of the Sun,
the Elysium or Valhalla of the Mexicans, where she transformed them
into humming-birds.

The present age is a decidedly sceptical one.

It is the fashion nowadays to sneer at the traditions venerated by our
grandfathers. Those chapters in the world's history which have not
been _proved_ by _facts_, have passed, in the opinion of many well
educated people, into the category of fable and nursery-rhyme. The
early histories of Greece and Rome, and of our own country too, are
now taken, if taken at all, _cum grano salis_. King Arthur, Hengist
and Horsa, and many another hero of whom we were once so proud, have
been cast, by most matter-of-fact writers, on the same dusty shelf
with Achilles and Hector, Romulus and Remus, side by side with Jupiter
and Mercury, Jack the Giant-Killer and Blue Beard. Scarcely anybody in
our days is so credulous as to believe that the Amazons ever existed.
"Amongst barbarous nations," observes Gibbon, "women have often
combated by the side of their husbands; but it is almost impossible
that a society of Amazons could have existed in the old or new world."
His opinion has been endorsed by most subsequent writers, some of whom
are even more positive in their expressions of incredulity.

Ancient writers are divided on the question. Strabo denies that there
ever was or could have been such a community, and adds, to believe in
their existence we must suppose "in those days the women were men and
the men women." Plutarch, more moderate, half believes they did exist,
but doubts most of their marvellous achievements, which, he thinks,
"clearly resemble fable and fiction." Amongst those who speak for the
defence, Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, Justin, and Quintus Curtius stand
prominently forward.

Their origin, as related by Justin, though curious, is far from being
impossible or even improbable in the remote days when they lived.
Some years previous to the reign of Ninus, king of Assyria, two young
princes of the Scythian blood-royal, Hylinos and Scolopitos, being
driven from their native country by a faction of the nobility, induced
several hundred young men and women to emigrate with them. After a
toilsome march through barren wilds they settled at last in Cappadocia,
on the rugged banks of the Thermodon. This little river, which now
bears the name of Termeh or Karmili, falls into the Black Sea, between
Trebisond and Sinope.

For a number of years, the new-comers carried on a species of border
warfare with the natives of the Themiscyrean plains--stealing their
cattle, tearing up their corn, destroying their homes by fire and
sword. At last the aborigines surprised and massacred the male
settlers, by means of an ambush. The wives of the latter, having now
no one to whom they could look for protection, armed themselves and
expelled the foe from their territory.

From this time they laid aside all thoughts of marriage, "calling it
slavery and not matrimony." And, to enforce this law, it is said, they
murdered a few men who had escaped the fury of the natives in the
general massacre. The Amazons were thenceforth forbidden even to speak
to men, save during certain days in the year. At the appointed time,
throwing aside their military character, they visited the surrounding
nations, and were permitted, by special treaties, to depart again
unmolested. Justin says they strangled all their male children directly
they were born; Diodorus, that they distorted their limbs; while
Philastratus and others affirm that they sent them back, uninjured, to
the fathers.

The girls were bred, like their mothers, "not in idleness, nor
spinning, but in exercises of war, such as hunting and riding." In
early childhood the right breast was burnt off, that they might, when
grown up, be more easily able to bend the bow and hurl the dart.
From whence, some say, they derived the name of Amazon, which is
formed of two Greek words, signifying "wanting a breast." Bryant,
the antiquarian, rejects this theory, and suggests, though with less
probability, that the name comes from Zon, the Sun, which was the
national object of worship.

The bow was their favourite weapon, and from constant practice they
acquired such proficiency as to equal, if not surpass the Scythians and
Parthians, who were the most skilful archers of ancient times. With the
Greeks and Romans it was not uncommon to speak of a very superior bow
or quiver as "Amazonian."

The nation soon became formidable, and in due time grew famous
throughout the world. At one time the dominion of the Amazons extended
over the entire of Asia Minor and Ionia, besides a great part of Italy.
So renowned did they at last become, that Jobates, king of Lycia,
commanded Bellerophon to effect their subjugation, feeling certain that
the hero would never return; great indeed was his astonishment to see
the redoubtable conqueror of the Chimera return victorious, and he no
longer hesitated to confess the divine origin of the hero. It is said
that Cadmus, the founder of Thebes, was married to an Amazon named
Sphynx when he carried letters from Egypt to Greece, about 1550 B.C.

Lampedo and Marpesia were the first Amazon queens whose names became
known beyond their own dominions. To give greater _eclat_ to their
numerous victories, they claimed to be daughters of the God Mars--a
common expedient in the olden times. Taking it in turn to defend the
frontier and invade foreign countries, they speedily conquered Iberia
(Georgia), Colchis (Mingrelia), Albania, the Tauric Chersonese (the
Crimea), and a great part of Asia.

To commemorate the achievements of Queen Marpesia during her passage
over the craggy and snow-capped Caucasus, when every peak, every ridge
was bravely defended by hordes of desperate mountaineers, the name of
Mount Marpesia was bestowed upon one of the loftiest rocks.

It was Marpesia who founded Themiscyra, the capital of the Amazons, on
the banks of the Thermodon. She adorned this city with many stately
buildings, conspicuous amongst which was the royal palace. Many cities
in Asia Minor owed their origin to the same queen--amongst others,
Ephesus, Thyatira, Smyrna, and Magnesia.

On the death of Marpesia, who was surrounded by the barbarians during
an expedition into Asia, and, together with her entire army, put to
the sword, Orithya, Orseria, or Sinope, and her sister Antiope, or
Hippolyte, ascended the throne. Orithya, the most famous of all the
Amazon queens, inherited the beauty, together with the military skill
of her mother, Marpesia. Under her rule the nation became so renowned,
that Eurystheus, fancying he had at last found a task beyond the powers
of Hercules, commanded the hero, as his ninth labour, to bring him the
girdle of the Amazon queen. The hero succeeded, however.

Hercules, accompanied by Theseus, Castor and Pollux, and most of the
young princes of Greece, sailed to the Euxine with a fleet of nine
ships, landed at the mouth of the Thermodon, during the temporary
absence of Orithya with the best part of the army, and gained an
easy victory over Antiope, whose sister Menalippe he made prisoner;
restoring her to liberty in exchange for a suit of the royal armour,
including, of course, the girdle.

Historians differ as to the expedition of Theseus. Some say he took
away Hippolyte or Antiope, at the same time that Hercules captured her
sister; others, however, relate that he undertook a separate voyage
many years after that of Hercules, and carried Antiope to Greece, where
he made her his queen. Plutarch, in his life of Theseus, gives many
details of this latter expedition.

When Orithya heard of the invasion, and of the part which the Athenian
prince had acted in it, she vowed not to rest till she was revenged.
Calling her subjects together, she soon found herself at the head of
many thousand warriors. At her entreaty, Sagillus, king of Scythia,
furnished a squadron of horse, commanded by his nephew, Panasagorus.
Passing through Colchis, over Mount Caucasus, and crossing an arm of
the Cimmerian Bosphorus, which, tradition says, was frozen, the Amazons
marched victoriously through Taurica, Thrace, Thessaly, Macedonia,
Attica, and entered the city of Athens. A hard-fought battle in the
streets--described in detail by old Plutarch--ended by the total rout
of the Amazons, who were compelled to take refuge in the camp of the
Scythians--the latter, in consequence of a quarrel, having taken no
part in the engagement.

The fate of Orithya is unknown, and historians differ as to that of
Antiope. Some say she fell in the battle by the hand of an Amazon,
while fighting in the Athenian ranks, side by side with Theseus; but
according to others, it was her mediation which brought about a treaty
of peace some four months later.

Theseus and the Amazon queen had a son named Hippolytus, or Demophoon,
who afterwards ascended the throne of Athens.

That the Amazons survived this defeat is evident, since, years after
this, we find the Phrygians imploring aid of Priam, king of Troy,
against Myrene, queen of the Amazons. Little is known about this war,
save that the queen lost her life, and was succeeded by the beautiful
Penthesilea, who not only made peace with Priam, but led a chosen
band of Amazons to the assistance of Troy when it was besieged by
the Greeks. She arrived shortly after the death of Hector, and, some
declare, seemed, in the eyes of the old king, destined to take the
place of the deceased hero. New life was infused into the dejected
Trojans. But, alas! their joy was short-lived. The morning after her
arrival Penthesilea fell by the hand of the invincible Achilles, who,
struck by her exquisite beauty, repented too late of what he had done.
The sarcastic Thersites jeered and derided, as usual, till the hero,
in a fury, turned on the sneering old wretch and slew him. Diomedes,
enraged at the death of his mocking old comrade, dragged the corpse of
the Amazon queen from the camp, and flung it into the Scamander.

Pliny ascribes the invention of the battle-axe to this queen.

After the death of Penthesilea we learn nothing of the Amazons until
the days of Alexander the Great. When that conqueror arrived at
Zadracarta, the capital of Hyrcania, about the year B.C. 330, he
is said to have been visited by an Amazon queen named Minithya, or
Thalestris, who--like another Queen of Sheba--having heard of his
mighty achievements, travelled through many lands to see him, followed
by an army of female warriors. After staying thirteen days she returned
home, greatly disappointed with the personal appearance of the
Macedonian king, who, contrary to her expectations, proved, 'tis said,
to be a little man.

This is the last we ever hear of the great female nation. Some Roman
authors affirm that the Amazons, in alliance with the Albanians,
fought most valiantly in a battle against Pompey the Great, B.C. 66.
But the only ground for this assertion consisted in the fact that some
painted shields and buskins were found on the battle-field.

If we may believe Herodotus, the Sauromatae, or Sarmatians, in Scythia,
were descended from the Amazons. This historian relates how, after a
victory gained by the Greeks over the Amazons near the Thermodon, the
victors distributed their prisoners into three ships, and set sail for
Greece. Once upon the open sea, the captives rose upon their guards
and put them to death. Being totally ignorant of navigation and the
management of sails, oars, or rudder, they resigned themselves to the
mercy of winds and waves. They were carried to the Palus Maeotis (the
Sea of Azof), where the liberated Amazons resumed their arms, sprang
on shore, and meeting a stud of horses, mounted them, and commenced
plundering the natives.

The people, ignorant alike of the dress, the language, or the country
of the invaders, supposed them to be a body of young men. A sanguinary
battle, however, led to mutual explanations. The Amazons consented
to accept an equal number of young Scythians as husbands; but afraid
that their habits would never assimilate with those of the mothers
and sisters of their husbands,--for the Scythian women, so far from
going to battle, passed their days in the wagons--resolved to seek
out some desert land where they would be free to follow their own
manners and customs. Crossing the Tanais (the Don), they travelled six
days' journey east and north, and set up their homes in an uninhabited
country. The nation increased greatly in the course of two or three
centuries, and, even in the days of Herodotus, retained the habits of
their progenitors. The women pursued the chase on horseback, sometimes
with, sometimes without their husbands, and, dressed like men, they
fought in battle.

No maiden was permitted to marry till she had first killed an enemy;
"it sometimes, therefore, happens," quaintly adds the historian, "that
many women die single at an advanced age." Hippocrates says they were
condemned to single-blessedness till they had slain at least _three_
enemies.

Yet, in spite of this, there was only one Sarmatian queen who became
famous for her deeds on the battle-field. This was Amagia, whose
husband, King Medosac, having given himself up to indolence and
luxury, permitted the affairs of the nation to fall into disorder. At
last Amagia took the reins of government into her own hands, received
ambassadors, took the command of the army, went in person to reinforce
the frontiers with troops, and not only repelled several invasions but
even made some incursions into foreign countries to assist such of her
allies as were in peril. Very soon she became an important personage,
and was more than once chosen as mediatrix by the various petty
monarchs of the Chersonese.

As a ruler, Queen Amagia had not her equal in those days throughout
Scythia. Her judgments were sound; and both as a general and as
a governor, she was respected by all. Her justice was severe and
unbending, and untempered with mercy.

       *       *       *       *       *

The African Amazons, who are said to have existed for some centuries
prior to those of Thermodon, were not, like the latter, a community
of women only, but the men were kept in close subjection to their
better-halves, by whom they were treated as women are usually treated
in barbarous countries. While the women conducted the government or
fought with their neighbours, the men staid at home, attending to the
household duties. They were not permitted, under any circumstances, to
serve as soldiers or hold any public office. The girls were not allowed
to marry till they had served a certain number of years in the army;
and, like the Asiatic Amazons, one breast was burnt off.

This nation, Diodorus tells us, originally dwelt on a large island
called Hesperia, on the western coast of Africa. This isle, which,
the historian says, abounded "with all sorts of fruit trees," is
supposed to have been one of the Canaries. The climate was then, as
now, delicious, the soil more than ordinarily fertile, and the natives
possessed "many herds of cattle and flocks of sheep and goats."

The Amazons, more warlike than their neighbours, speedily conquered
the entire island; and, crossing into Africa, subdued great part of
Numidia and founded a large city named Chersonesus, in the Tritonis
Morass. This gigantic fen was situated near the Atlantic Ocean, under
the shadow of the lofty Mount Atlas.

When Queen Merina ascended the throne, she determined to accomplish
mightier deeds than her ancestors. Assembling an army of thirty
thousand foot and two thousand horse, dressed in coats of mail made
from the skins of large serpents, she passed into Africa, conquered
the Atlantides, the Gorgons, and many another nation, and formed an
alliance with Orus, King of Egypt, the son of Isis. After making war
successfully on the Arabians she conquered Syria and Cilicia, and the
tribes around Mount Taurus, who, says Diodorus, "were both men of
strong bodies and stout hearts"; marched through Phrygia, and passed
along the shores of the Mediterranean, founding several cities, one
of which she named after herself, and the others after her principal
captains. Crossing to the Greek Archipelago, where she conquered
Lesbos and other isles, Merina founded the city of Mitylene, and named
it after her sister, who accompanied the expedition.

Shortly after the return of the Amazons to Africa, Mompsus, a refugee
from the court of Lycurgus, king of Thrace, and Sipylus, a banished
Scythian, invaded the dominions of Merina. The queen was slain in the
first battle, together with many thousand Amazons; and the rest of her
subjects, after bravely contending in several engagements with the
invaders, retired, it is said, into Lybia.

We also read that Egee, another queen of the African Amazons, also
raised a large army, with which she invaded Asia. Being opposed by
Laomedon, King of Troy (who was afterwards conquered by Hercules), she
defeated his troops in several actions, and took a quantity of valuable
plunder. While re-passing the sea a storm arose, and Egee perished with
her entire army.

The nation was finally extirpated by Hercules when he undertook his
journey into Africa, and erected the famous Pillars.

       *       *       *       *       *

Herodotus mentions two Libyan tribes, the Machlyes and Auses, dwelling
on the shores of Lake Tritonis, who trained their girls to the use of
arms. Once a year, at the festival of Minerva, their patron-goddess,
the maidens of each tribe formed themselves into two hostile armies,
and attacked each other before the temple with sticks and stones,
contending for the victory with the most desperate valour. On the
conclusion of this _sham_ fight, the most beautiful of the survivors
was presented with a magnificent suit of armour and a sword, and,
amidst the noisiest acclamations from the spectators, escorted in a
chariot triumphantly round the lake.

The Zaveces, another African tribe mentioned by the same historian,
employed their wives and daughters to drive their war-chariots on the
day of battle, thus placing them in the front of the battle.

       *       *       *       *       *

From what certain modern travellers have reported, it would seem that
even as lately as the eighteenth century the legend of the Amazons
still held its ground in various parts of Asia and Africa. Father
Archangel Lamberti, a Neapolitan monk, who travelled through Mingrelia
in the seventeenth century, was told that a warlike and ruthless
nation, amongst whom were several female warriors, dwelt somewhere in
the neighbourhood of the Caucasus. They were often at war with the
Calmuc Tartars and the various tribes living near them. Lamberti was
even shown some suits of armour taken from the corpses of these warlike
women, together with their bows and arrows and brass-spangled buskins.

The Chevalier Chardin (a Huguenot jeweller, knighted by Charles II. of
England), in travelling through Persia, between 1663 and 1680, was told
that a powerful nation of Amazons dwelt to the north of the kingdom
of Caket. The monarchs of the latter country, which was situated in
the neighbourhood of the Caucasus, subjected these Amazons for a
time, though they afterwards regained their liberty. The people of
the Caucasus, and the Calmucs were always at war with these Amazons,
and never sought to make peace or form any treaties, for they knew
the warlike women had neither religion, laws, nor honour. Sir John,
however, adds that he never met with anybody who had been in their
country.

Juan de los Sanctos, an early Portuguese traveller, in speaking of a
kingdom named Damut, in Ethiopia, mentions a numerous tribe entirely
composed of women, who had adopted (or perhaps retained) the habits of
the ancient Amazons. The exercise of arms and the pastime of the chase
were their principal occupations in times of peace, but their chief
business and pleasure was war. They burnt off the right breast as soon
as the girls were old enough to bear it; and, as a rule, they passed
their lives in a state of celibacy, the queen setting a rigid example.
Those who married did not rear their male children, but sent them back
to the fathers. The neighbouring sovereigns esteemed themselves only
too fortunate when they could secure the alliance of this people; and
so far from seeking to destroy them, more than once aided them when
they were attacked by others. This tribe was finally subjugated, says
the Portuguese friar, by the successors of Prester John, the kings of
Abyssinia.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




II.

     Semiramis, Queen of Assyria--Harpalyce, daughter of Lycurgus,
     King of Thrace--Atalanta (Argonautic Expedition)--Camilla, Queen
     of the Volscians--Tomyris, Queen of the Massagetae--Telesilla the
     Poetess--The Two Artemisias (I. and II.) Queens of Caria--Mania,
     Governess of AEolia--Cratesipolis of Sicyon--Arsinoe, Queen of
     Egypt.


SEMIRAMIS is the earliest female warrior of whose existence there
is any certainty. But even her history is intermingled with much of
fable and idle tradition. The exact period at which she reigned has
never been positively determined. The following dates, assigned to her
reign by various historians, ancient and modern, as compared by the
antiquarian Bryant, show the diversity of opinion amongst chronologists
upon the subject.

                                                 B.C.
    According to Syncellus, she lived            2177
    Petavius makes the time                      2060
    Helvicus                                     2248
    Eusebius                                     1984
    Mr. Jackson                                  1964
    Archbishop Usher                             1215
    Philo Biblius Sanchoniathan (apud Euseb.)    1200
    Herodotus (about)                             713

"What credit," indignantly asked the learned Bryant, "can be given to
the history of a person, the time of whose life cannot be ascertained
within 1535 years?"

The early life of this famous woman is enveloped in one of those
mythological legends in which the ancients loved to shroud the origin
of their heroes and heroines. According to tradition she was the
natural daughter of Derceto, a Philistine goddess, and while yet a
babe, was left to perish by her cruel mother in a wood near Ascalon,
in Syria. But, as Romulus and Remus were suckled by a wolf, so doves
came and fed the future queen. The birds were observed and followed by
the neighbouring peasants; and Simma, or Sisona, chief shepherd of the
Assyrian king, having no children of his own, adopted the babe, and
gave her the name of Semiramis, a Syrian word signifying doves, or
pigeons.

At the early age of thirteen or fourteen, Semiramis was married to
Menon, one of the principal officers of the king, who saw her at the
hut of Sisona while inspecting the royal flocks. Captivated by her
surpassing beauty and charming conversation, Menon induced her to
return with him to Nineveh, the capital. For some months she was kept
a close prisoner in her husband's palace; but her influence soon ruled
paramount, and all restraints were removed. Two or three years passed
thus, during which time Semiramis bore her husband two sons, Hypates
and Hydaspes.

When Ninus invaded Media, Semiramis, who only waited for some
opportunity to distinguish herself, insisted upon accompanying
her husband, who, as one of the principal courtiers, held an
important command in the invading army. The campaign was at first an
uninterrupted series of successes. One city fell after another before
the Assyrian hosts. But the army was suddenly checked in its onward
career of victory before the impregnable walls of Bactria. The city was
defended with such obstinate bravery that Ninus at last resolved to
retreat. But Semiramis presented herself before the assembled council
of war, proposed an assault on the citadel, and offered to lead, in
person, the storming party.

When the decisive moment arrived, Semiramis proved herself fully equal
to the emergency. Amidst vollies of arrows and showers of stones,
before which the bravest men turned pale, she led the forlorn hope to
the foot of the citadel. Animating all by her courage, shaming cowards
by the thought that a young and lovely woman was sharing, nay, braving,
the same dangers as themselves, the intrepid heroine rushed up the
scaling ladder, and was the first to reach the battlements. A struggle
ensued, short, but fierce, and in a few moments the golden standard of
Assyria floated from the walls. The capital of Media had fallen.

The king, violently smitten with love for the brave girl, earnestly
besought her husband to give her up. He even offered his own royal
sister, Sosana, in exchange. But promises and threats were alike
vain; and Ninus, in a fury, cast Menon into prison. Here, after being
deprived of sight, the wretched husband terminated his existence with
his own hands.

Ninus married the young widow; and after their return to Nineveh, she
bore him a son called Ninyas.

'Tis said Ninus paid very dear for his marriage. Semiramis, by her
profuse liberality, soon attached the leading courtiers to her
interest. She then solicited the king, with great importunity, to place
the supreme power in her hands for five days. Ninus at last yielded to
her entreaties; and, as his reward, was cast into prison, and put to
death,--either immediately, or after languishing some years.

To cover the meanness of her origin, and to immortalise her name,
Semiramis now applied her mind to great enterprises. If she did not, as
some suppose, found Babylon the Great, she adorned it with beautiful
and imposing edifices, and made it worthy to be called "the Golden
City."

Not satisfied with the vast empire left by Ninus, she enlarged it by
successive conquests. Great part of Ethiopia succumbed to her power;
and during her stay in this country she consulted the Oracle of
Jupiter-Ammon as to how long she had to live. The answer was, that she
should not die until conspired against by her son; and that, after her
death, part of Asia would pay her divine honours.

Her last and most famous expedition was the war with India. For this
campaign she raised an army of more than ordinary dimensions. Ctesias
puts down the number at three million foot, fifty thousand horse,
and war-chariots in proportion; but this is, no doubt, a slight
exaggeration. The chief strength of the Indians lay in their countless
myriads of elephants. Semiramis, unable to procure these animals in
sufficient numbers, caused several thousand camels to be accoutred like
elephants.

Shahbrohates, King of India, on receiving intelligence of her hostile
approach, sent ambassadors to inquire her motive for invading his
dominions. She returned a haughty answer; and, on reaching the Indus,
she erected a bridge of boats and attempted to cross. The passage was
disputed, and although the Indians at last retreated, the victory was
more disastrous to the Assyrians than many a defeat.

But Semiramis, carried away by the blind infatuation which guided all
her movements in this war, marched into the heart of the country. The
king, who fled deceitfully to bring about a second engagement further
from the river, faced about, and the two armies again closed in deadly
combat. The counterfeit elephants could not long sustain the attack
of the genuine animals, who, crushing every obstacle under foot, soon
scattered the Assyrian army. Semiramis performed prodigies of bravery
to rally her broken forces, and fought with as little regard for her
own safety as though she had been the meanest soldier in the army.
Shahbrohates, perceiving the queen engaged in the thick of the fight,
rode forward and twice wounded her. The rout soon became general,
and the royal heroine, convinced at last that nothing further could
be done, gave the rein to her horse, whose swiftness soon placed her
beyond the reach of the enemy.

On reaching the Indus a scene of the most terrible disorder ensued. In
the wild terror which possessed the minds of all, officers and soldiers
crowded together on to the bridge, without the slightest regard for
rank or discipline. Thousands were trampled under foot, crushed to
death, or flung into the river. When Semiramis and all who could save
themselves had crossed over, the bridge was destroyed. The Indian king,
in obedience to an oracle, ordered his troops not to cross the river in
pursuit.

Semiramis was the only sovereign amongst the ancients, except Alexander
the Great, who ever carried a war beyond the Indus.

Some time after her return to Babylon, the queen discovered that her
son, Ninyas, was conspiring against her. Remembering now the oracle
of Jupiter-Ammon, and believing that her last days were approaching,
Semiramis voluntarily abdicated the throne. Some chroniclers give a
different version of the story, relating that the queen was slain
by her son, and this latter account, though disbelieved by most
historians, is the popular story.

Semiramis lived sixty-two years, out of which she reigned forty-two.
It is said the Athenians afterwards worshipped her under the form of a
dove.

       *       *       *       *       *

The early lives of Harpalyce and Atalanta, the first known female
warriors who were natives of Greece, resemble in some respects that
of Semiramis. It appears to have been a favourite custom, during the
primitive ages, to have children nursed by birds or beasts. Harpalyce,
daughter of Harpalycus, or Lycurgus, king of the Amymnaeans, in Thrace,
having lost her mother during infancy, was fed with the milk of cows
and horses. Her father trained her in every manly and warlike exercise,
riding, racing, hurling the dart, using the bow and arrow. By-and-by
she became a mighty huntress; and soon the opportunity came for her to
prove herself a brave soldier and a skilful commander. The Getes, or
Myrmidones of Thessaly invaded the dominions of King Lycurgus, defeated
his best troops and made him prisoner. Directly Harpalyce learned this
news she hastily called together an army, placed herself at its head,
and falling on the foe, put them to flight and rescued her father.

Lycurgus endeavoured to cure the Thracians of their drunken habits,
and caused all the vines in his dominions to be rooted up, whereby he
brought about a general insurrection, and was compelled to fly for
safety to the isle of Naxos, where he went mad and committed suicide.
Harpalyce turned brigand and haunted the forests of Thrace. She was
so swift of foot that the fleetest horses could not overtake her once
she began running. At last, however, she fell into a snare set by some
shepherds, who put the royal bandit to death.

Atalanta, too, was likewise bereft of a mother's care. Her father,
Jasus or Jasion, unwilling to rear the babe, yet not sufficiently
inhuman to see her slaughtered before his eyes, left her to her fate on
Mount Parthenius, the highest mountain in Peloponnesus. Close by was
the cave of an old she-bear who had been robbed of her cubs. In place
of devouring the babe, the savage brute adopted it, and brought up the
girl as her own daughter. Orson-like, the girl learned many of the
habits of her shaggy nurse. But, she also, through constant exercise,
acquired marvellous dexterity in using the bow and arrow; and with this
weapon she once slew the Centaurs Rhoecus and Hylaeus.

Atalanta was one of those brave warriors who sailed in the Argonautic
expedition, B.C. 1263; and throughout the voyage she earned the praises
of her comrades by her bravery and military skill. After her return to
Greece she assisted in the chase of the Calydonian boar, a savage brute
of monster size who was ravaging AEtolia. She was the first to wound
this beast; hence Meleager awarded her the first prize. His uncles,
jealous of the honour thus conferred upon a woman, endeavoured to
wrest the trophies from her, and in the scuffle which ensued, Meleager
unfortunately slew both his uncles.

This heroine must not be confounded with another Atalanta, daughter of
Schoenus, King of Scyrus, famous for her marvellous skill in running,
and for the stratagem of the three golden apples by which she was at
last defeated.

It would seem that no Grecian or Trojan heroines distinguished
themselves during the siege of Troy; though it is not unlikely that
many of the Greek soldiers were secretly accompanied by their wives.
When AEneas landed in Italy, a few years after the fall of Troy, he
found, amongst the sovereigns confederated against him, Camilla, the
Amazon queen of the Volscians, renowned for her high courage, her
beauty, and her swiftness in running. Virgil says that she outstripped
the winds in speed, and could have skimmed over the topmost stalks of
standing corn, or along the surface of the ocean, without leaving a
trace of her footsteps.

From childhood she was dedicated by her father, King Metabus, to the
service of Diana, and trained in martial exercises. She grew so fond
of the chase, that even after the death of her father, she preferred
leading the semi-barbarous life of a wild huntress to the prospect of
domestic happiness as the wife of a Tuscan noble.

She joined Turnus, King of the Rutulians, with a squadron of horse and
a body of foot, equipped in bronze armour. Followed by her retinue of
warlike maidens, she bore a prominent part in a battle fought near the
walls of Latium. But after spreading death and terror on every side,
she was herself slain by a Tuscan chief.

Virgil's description of her death is one of the most beautiful passages
in the AEneid.

       *       *       *       *       *

Cyrus, one of the greatest conquerors the world has ever seen, some
say met his first and last defeat at the hands of a female general.
Many historians describe him as dying peaceably in his bed, surrounded
by his family; but others relate that, still thirsting for fresh
conquests, he cast his eyes, in an unlucky moment, on the land of the
Massagetae, a warlike people governed by Queen Tomyris, a widow, and a
woman possessing both courage and energy. Her country extended beyond
the broad stream of the Araxes, to the Caucasus. The Massagetae were a
savage, hardy race, resembling the Scythians in their mode of life.
Agriculture was neglected, and they subsisted entirely upon their
cattle and the fish supplied by the Araxes. Though they had nothing to
lose by a change, this nation was devotedly attached to its freedom;
suffering death rather than the loss of liberty, and resolutely
opposing every invader.

It was against this indomitable race that Cyrus marched, at the head
of two hundred thousand men, B.C. 529. By means of a stratagem he
was at first successful. Knowing the Massagetae to be ignorant of
Persian delicacies and the flavour of wine, he spread out a banquet,
accompanied with flowing goblets of wine; and, leaving a few hundreds
of his worst soldiers to guard the camp, retired to some distance.
When the Massagetae, commanded by Spargapises, nephew of Tomyris, had
taken the camp, they feasted and drank, till, overcome by drunkenness
and sleep, they afforded an easy victory to Cyrus. The greater number,
including Spargapises, were made prisoners, or slain.

However, so far from despairing, Tomyris collected the rest of her
forces, and having led the Persians into a narrow pass, attacked them
with such fury that they were all slain, together with the king. Justin
says "there was not one man left to carry the news home;" but as the
news _did_ somehow find its way home, that fact is doubtful.

The body of Cyrus was discovered after considerable search. Tomyris
ordered the head to be cut off and flung into a vessel full of human
blood.

"Satisfy thyself now with blood," cried she, exulting over her dead
foe, "which thou didst always thirst after, yet could never satisfy thy
appetite."

       *       *       *       *       *

A few years prior to the invasion of Greece by Xerxes, Cleomenes, King
of Lacedaemon, who arrogated to his state the first rank in Greece, went
to war with the people of Argos. Having learned from an oracle that
he would be victorious, the Spartan king without loss of time invaded
the Argeian territories, and routed the enemy in a sanguinary battle
at Sepeia. Those Argives who escaped death on the battle-field took
refuge in a grove sacred to Argus, their hero; where, however, they
were surrounded and burnt alive by the enemy. Upwards of six thousand,
the flower and strength of Argos, perished that day. Cleomenes marched
direct to the city, which, decimated, almost depopulated though it was,
made a gallant defence.

There dwelt in the city a beautiful girl named Telesilla, famous
throughout the land as a lyric poetess. Inspired by patriotism, she
addressed the Argive women and incited them to defend their homes.
The call was responded to with enthusiasm. Armed with weapons from
the temples, or from private dwellings, the women of Argos, headed by
Telesilla, ascended the walls, and compensated by their courage for the
dearth of male warriors.

The Spartans were repulsed; and Cleomenes, afraid of being reproached,
even if successful, with fighting against helpless women and timid
girls, commanded a retreat.

Demeratus, Cleomenes' partner in the throne, is said by some historians
to have accompanied this expedition; and they relate that whilst
Cleomenes was besieging the walls, Demeratus attacked the Pamphyliacum,
or Citadel, whence he was driven with great loss by Telesilla and her
companions. This, however, is acknowledged to be mere tradition,
for Herodotus says that the two kings, having quarrelled some years
previously, never engaged together in the same war.

Grote, for an even better reason, disbelieves the entire story, which,
he says, "is probably a myth, generated by the desire to embody in
detail the dictum of the oracle a little before, about 'the female
conquering the male.'" Without for a moment denying that the Argeian
women could or would have achieved the great deeds ascribed to them,
he doubts their having done so, because, says he, the siege never took
place at all.

Great honours, so runs the legend, were paid to Telesilla and her brave
companions, many of whom fell in the conflict. A statue of the poetess
was erected by the grateful citizens and placed in the Temple of Venus.

       *       *       *       *       *

The terrible danger of the Persian invasion caused all the internal
wranglings and disputes of the Greeks to be hushed for a time. In the
year B.C. 480, the Great King declared war on the (temporarily) united
states of Greece, and sailed thither with a gigantic and overwhelming
army and navy. Amongst the tributary sovereigns who followed him in
this expedition was Artemisia, Queen of Caria. She was daughter of
King Lygdamis, and her husband, the late king, having died while her
son was a minor, Artemisia conducted, _pro. tem._, the government of
Halicarnassus, Cos, Nisiras, and Calydne. Though she brought only five
ships to the Greek war, they were almost the lightest and best equipped
of any in the fleet.

Herodotus says that amongst all the Persian commanders, naval or
military, there was not one who gave the king such good advice as this
heroine; but King Xerxes was not at that time wise enough to profit
by her counsels. She was the only one who had the courage to raise
her voice against the proposed sea-fight at Salamis, which Xerxes was
resolved to risk.

As the Carian queen foretold, the Persians were defeated. Yet, though
she openly disapproved of the battle, Artemisia behaved most gallantly
throughout. The Athenians, indignant that a woman should dare to
appear in arms against them, offered ten thousand drachmas for her
capture, alive or dead. The way she escaped displayed great presence
of mind, though it also showed how unscrupulous she was in the choice
of stratagems. Closely pursued by an Athenian ship (commanded by
Aminias of Pallene, the brother of AEschylus), escape seemed impossible.
But with her customary decision of mind, the queen hung out Grecian
colours, and turned her arms against a Persian vessel. This cost her
no feelings of regret, for on board the ship was Damasithymus, King of
Calynda, with whom she had some private quarrel. Her pursuers, seeing
her send a Persian ship to the bottom of the sea, concluded that she
belonged to their navy, and so gave up the pursuit.

Xerxes, from an elevated post on shore, saw the disgraceful flight of
his own navy, together with the bravery of Artemisia. When he could
no longer doubt that it was she who performed such gallant deeds, he
exclaimed, in astonishment, that the men had behaved like women, while
the women had displayed the courage of men.

Like most warlike leaders, Artemisia was not at all scrupulous as to
the means employed, provided the end answered her expectations. Wishing
to possess herself of Latmus, a small city which lay temptingly near to
Halicarnassus, she placed her troops in ambush, and under pretence of
celebrating the feast of Cybele in a wood consecrated to that goddess,
she repaired thither with a grand procession, accompanied by drums and
trumpets. The people of Latmus ran out in crowds to witness the show,
while Artemisia's troops took possession of the city.

The ultimate fate of Artemisia proves how true it is that "love rules
the court, the camp, the grove." She fell violently in love with a
native of Abydos, a young man named Dardanus; but her passion was not
reciprocated. To punish his disdain, she first put out his eyes, and
then took the noted "Lover's Leap" from the promontory Leucas--now
Santa Maura.

       *       *       *       *       *

Artemisia II., who lived more then one hundred and thirty years after
the former heroine, has frequently been confounded with her, as both
were queens of Caria. The second of that name was daughter of King
Hecatomus, and is principally famous for the honours which she paid to
the memory of her husband, Mausolus, to whom she erected a magnificent
tomb at Halicarnassus, which monument was afterwards reckoned as one of
the Seven Wonders of the World.

Most writers represent Artemisia as plunged in tears during her
widowhood; but there are some who, on the contrary, declare that she
made some important conquests at that time. Vitruvius relates that the
Rhodians, indignant that a woman should reign over Caria, despatched a
fleet to Halicarnassus to dethrone Artemisia. The queen commanded the
citizens to appear on the walls directly the Rhodians came in sight,
and to express, by shouts and clapping of hands, their readiness to
surrender. The enemy, falling into the trap, disembarked, and went with
all haste to the city, leaving their ships without even one man to
guard them.

Artemisia came out with her squadron from the little port, entered
the great harbour, and seized the Rhodian vessels. Putting her own
men on board she sailed to Rhodes, where the people, seeing their own
ships return adorned with laurel-wreaths, received them with every
demonstration of joy. No resistance was offered to the landing; and
Artemisia seized the city, putting to death the leaders of the people.

She caused a trophy to be erected, and set up two statues--one
representing the city of Rhodes, and the other an image of herself,
branding the former figure with a red-hot iron. Vitruvius says the
Rhodians were forbidden by their religion to destroy this memorial; so
they surrounded it by a lofty building which concealed it from view.

Her death, which took place the same year (B.C. 351) probably
reinstated the Rhodians in their liberty.

During the reign of Artaxerxes Nmenon, King of Persia, and brother
of Cyrus the younger, the province of AEolia was governed--under the
authority of Pharnabasus, satrap of Asia Minor--by Zenis the Dardanian.
When the latter died, Mania, his widow, went to Pharnabasus with
magnificent presents, leading a body of troops, and begged of him not
to deprive her of the government. Pharnabasus allowed her to retain the
province, and he had no reason to regret it. Mania acquitted herself
with all the prudence and energy which could have been expected from
the most experienced ruler. In addition to the customary tributes, she
added magnificent presents; and when Pharnabasus visited her province,
she entertained him with greater splendour than any of the other
governors throughout Asia Minor. She followed him in all his military
campaigns, and was of great assistance not only with her troops, but by
her advice. She was a regular attendant at all his councils, and her
suggestions contributed to the success of more than one enterprise. The
satrap knew how to estimate her merit; and the Governess of AEolia was
treated with greater distinction than any of her fellow-governors.

Her army was in better condition than that of any neighbouring
province; she even maintained a body of Greek soldiers in her pay. Not
content with the cities committed to her care, she made new conquests;
amongst others, Larissa, Amaxita, and Colona, which belonged to the
Mysians and Pisidians. In every war she took the command in person, and
from her war-chariot decreed rewards and punishments.

The only enemies she possessed were in her own family circle. Midias,
her son-in-law, thinking it a reproach on him that a woman should
command where he was subordinate, strangled her and her son, B.C. 399,
and seized two fortresses in which she had secured her treasures. The
other cities of AEolia at once declared against him; and he did not very
long enjoy the fruits of his crime. Dercyllidas, commander of the Greek
forces in Asia, arrived at this juncture. All the fortresses in the
province surrendered, either voluntarily or by compulsion; and Midias
was deprived of the possessions for which he had stained his hands in
the blood of his relatives.

       *       *       *       *       *

Cratesipolis was the wife of Alexander, the son of one of Alexander the
Great's captains.

On the sudden death of Alexander the Great, his posthumous son and his
half-brother were placed on the throne, under the regency of Perdiccas,
the most talented of Alexander's captains. However, the generals
soon began to quarrel among themselves; two years later, Perdiccas
was assassinated, and the regency conferred on Antipater, governor
of Macedonia and Greece. The latter, on his death-bed, bestowed the
office of regent and the government of the provinces on Polysperchon,
the eldest survivor of all the captains who had followed Alexander to
India. Cassander, the son of Antipater, indignant at being set aside,
went to war with the new regent.

Alexander, the son of Polysperchon, was possessed of great military
talent, and his father confided to him the defence of Peloponnesus.
Cassander, knowing the abilities of Alexander, offered him the
government of Peloponnesus, and the command of the troops stationed
there if he would join the faction of the malcontents. The offer was
accepted; Alexander established his head quarters at Sicyon. At the
head of his troops he gained several victories. Cratesipolis, his
wife, was the idol of the soldiers. They regarded her, and justly, as
a woman who possessed the spirit of a hero and the talents of a great
general. She interested herself in all their affairs--appeased all
their differences, and did not disdain to think of their wants and
their pleasures. She consoled those who were sad, relieved those who
were in want, and strove to make all happy. Frequently she accompanied
Alexander in his expeditions, and was as much respected by the officers
as beloved by the privates.

Alexander held his governorship for only a few months. The citizens
of Sicyon, furious, and groaning under the yoke imposed upon them,
conspired against their rulers. The governor was slain by Alexion and
some companions who pretended to be Alexander's friends. The soldiers,
who were setting out on an expedition, seized with terror when they saw
their leader fall, fled in all directions.

Cratesipolis gave way neither to grief nor despair. Rallying the
broken forces, she assumed the command, and soon restored order and
discipline. The Sicyonians, who never suspected that a woman could
take the command of the army, rose in rebellion, and barred the city
gates. Cratesipolis, enraged as much at the insult as at the treachery
with which they had slain her husband, laid siege to Sicyon, routed
the insurgents in a hotly-contested battle, and took the city by storm
(B.C. 317), when, by her command, thirty of the ringleaders were
crucified.

Having assuaged her thirst for revenge, Cratesipolis entered Sicyon
in triumph, and assumed the government. Appeasing all the troubles
caused by the rebellion, she ruled with such wisdom and prudence as
to excite the admiration of all. To the last she kept up a large
and well-disciplined army, always ready at a moment's notice to set
forth on an expedition. The soldiers, whose love and reverence had
been increased by the courage with which she had acted during the
insurrection, would, any of them, have gladly sacrificed his own life
to save hers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Arsinoe, Queen of Egypt, was the wife of Ptolemy Philopater. She was
a brave as well as prudent woman, and accompanied her husband when he
invaded Syria, B.C. 217. In the battle of Raphia she rode up and down
through the ranks, exhorting the soldiers to behave manfully during the
fight. She remained beside her husband during the heat of the action;
and by her presence she greatly contributed to the victory gained by
the Egyptians.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




III.

     Hypsicrates, Queen of Mithridates the Great--Cleopatra--Candace,
     Queen of Ethiopia--Boadicea and her Daughters--Ancient
     British, Caledonian, and German Female Warriors--Combats
     of Roman Ladies--Nero's Amazons--Victoria, Empress of the
     West--Zenobia, Queen of the East--Empress Hunila, and other Gothic
     Amazons--Mavia, Queen of Pharan--Pharandsem, Queen of Armenia.


PONTUS, in Cappadocia, the _ci-devant_ home of the Amazons, passed through
many changes and vicissitudes as time rolled on. Under Cyrus and his
successors, Cappadocia was divided into two distinct provinces, whose
governors made themselves finally independent of Persia, and ruled
as kings till the days of Alexander. After the death of the great
Macedonian, Pontus was not long regaining its independence: increasing
rapidly in power and extent till the days of Mithridates the Great, who
made it one of the chief empires of the East.

This ambitious monarch, believing himself a second Alexander, cared
for nothing but war; and through his bravery and his obstinacy, he
contrived to make himself one of the most formidable rivals Rome
ever had to cope with. Hypsicrates was his favourite wife--like most
Oriental monarchs, he had more than one; and in respect of personal
courage, she was worthy to be the companion of the royal tiger. They
were romantically attached to one another; Mithridates, ruthless
towards others, was loving and tender to his favourite sultana. She
accompanied him in many of his perilous expeditions, and fought by
his side in more than one battle. For this reason, her name, properly
Hypsicratia, was changed to Hypsicrates; thus altering it from feminine
to masculine, on account of her manly courage. Besides being valiant,
she was exceedingly beautiful and highly accomplished, as a queen
should be.

After the defeat of Mithridates by Lucullus, the gourmand, on the
plains of Cabirae, B.C. 71, the unfortunate monarch sent a messenger
to the ladies of his court, enjoining them to die by their own hands
rather than fall alive into those of the Romans. All obeyed save
Hypsicrates. Though she feared death as little as any among them, yet
could she not bear even this temporary separation from her lord.
Mounting a swift steed, she overtook the king, after encountering and
surmounting innumerable difficulties; and by her presence and counsel
she restored to him his former energy and strength of mind.

Five years later (B.C. 66), Mithridates fought a battle with Pompey the
Great on the banks of the Euphrates. Hypsicrates appeared in the dress
of a Persian soldier, and, mounted on a charger, fought beside the
king so long as the action lasted. However, the battle was not of long
duration. The barbarians were afraid to await the shock of the iron
legions, and fled in wild terror. The Romans ruthlessly slaughtered the
fugitives; ten thousand were slain on the field, and the camp fell into
the hands of the victors.

Mithridates and his brave queen, placing themselves at the head of
eight hundred chosen horsemen, cut their way, sword in hand, through
the ranks of the foe. But the eight hundred quickly dispersed, and
left the king with only three followers, one of whom was Hypsicrates.
She attended him during his flight, grooming his horse, and enduring
great hardships through fatigue and want of food. At last they reached
a fortress, where lay the royal treasures. Here Mithridates gave to
each a dose of strong poison to be taken in case of dire necessity.
But whether Hypsicrates finally swallowed the fatal potion, or by what
death she passed from the world, historians have not told us.

       *       *       *       *       *

Cleopatra, the beautiful and ambitious queen of Egypt, was at all
times desirous to acquire renown as a great warrior. But she possessed
neither the courage nor the prudence necessary for those who seek the
laurel-wreath. She was too fond of her ease to take the command of an
expedition, unless the occasion was one which rendered her presence
absolutely necessary.

She first appeared as a warrior in the year B.C. 48, when her brother
Ptolemy deprived her of her share in the throne. She withdrew to Syria,
raised troops there, and re-entered Egypt at the head of her forces
shortly after the battle of Pharsalia. Pompey, routed by Caesar, fled
to Egypt, where he was assassinated by order of the king. Scarcely
had he breathed his last, when Caesar landed. He assumed the right to
arbitrate between Ptolemy and Cleopatra. The former refused to accept
him as referee, and for several weeks the great Caesar had to contend
with the soldiers of the king as well as with the infuriated citizens
of Alexandria. However, the war was soon terminated by the defeat and
death of Ptolemy; and the crown was bestowed upon Cleopatra.

After the assassination of Julius Caesar, Cleopatra declared for the
Triumvirs, Antony, Octavius, and Lepidus. She prepared a powerful
fleet, designing to take the command, and sail to the assistance of
Caesar's avengers. Violent storms prevented the squadron from setting
out; but some time subsequently the queen sailed with a well-equipped
fleet to join the Triumvirs. Again she was frustrated by the elements.
A terrible storm arose, wrecked many vessels, threw the queen on a bed
of sickness, and compelled the fleet to put back to Alexandria.

This love of warlike display finally caused her ruin and that of
Antony. Against the advice of the most practised Roman officers, she
insisted upon taking an active part in the war against Octavius. Before
the decisive battle of Actium, Antony was counselled not to hazard a
sea-fight; but the haughty Egyptian queen, like Xerxes of old, insisted
upon it. So her advice was followed in preference to that of old and
experienced generals.

The battle was fought on the 2nd September, B.C. 31, at the mouth
of the Ambracian Gulf, within sight of the opposing land armies who
were encamped on each shore anxiously watching the struggle. A more
magnificent sight could not have been seen than the fleet of Antony;
and the most splendid object in it was the galley of Cleopatra, blazing
with gilding and bright colours, its sails of purple, flags and
streamers floating in the wind. Victory inclined to neither side till
the flight of the Egyptian queen. Terrified by the horrid din of the
fight, though in no personal danger, she fled from the scene of action,
her example being followed by nearly all the Egyptian fleet, which
numbered sixty ships. Antony, when he saw the queen's galley take to
flight, forgot everything but her, and precipitately followed. And thus
he yielded to Caesar not merely the victory, but the Sovereignty of the
World.

       *       *       *       *       *

About the time that Cleopatra sat on the throne of Egypt, the
neighbouring kingdom of Ethiopia was ruled over by another warlike
queen, Candace, whose kingdom comprised that part of the Nile valley,
which, under the name of Meroee, contained numberless towns and cities
in a high state of civilization. Very little is known concerning this
queen, save what we glean from Strabo. The year before the battle of
Actium, Candace invaded Egypt, and compelled the Roman garrisons of
Syene, Elephantine, and Philae to surrender. Caius Petronius, Roman
prefect of Egypt, marched against the Ethiopians, and routed Candace
near Pselcha, after which the victor ravaged great part of Ethiopia.

When Petronius left the country, Candace attacked the garrison he had
left in Premnis. But directly the prefect heard of this he returned
hastily to Meroee, again defeated the Ethiopians, and imposed a heavy
tribute on the kingdom. Candace sent an embassy to Octavius, who was
then at Samos, suing for peace. The dictator not only granted her
prayer, but remitted the tribute levied by Petronius.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next female sovereign who defied Rome on the battle-field was
of a very different stamp from Cleopatra, or even Candace. This was
Boadicea, the "British Warrior Queen," the story of whose wrongs and
bravery was for centuries a favourite subject with poets. Her name,
which has been variously written Boadicea, Boudicea, Bonduca, Vonduca,
Voadicea, or Woda, signified "the Woman of the Sword," and in the
ancient British or Welsh language is equivalent to Victoria. She was
the daughter of Cadalla, King of the Brigantes; and, through her
mother, Europeia, daughter of Evanus, King of Scotland, she claimed
descent from the kings of Troy and the Ptolemies of Egypt.

Boadicea's career was a sad and a stormy one from first to last.
At an early age she was compelled by her step-mother, the wicked,
ambitious, Cartismandua, to marry Arviragus, son of that queen by her
first husband, King Cymbeline. Arviragus was King of the Iceni, who
possessed a great part of Essex, Norfolk, and Cambridgeshire. They are
said by Tacitus to have been a rich and powerful nation. After the
queen had presented her lord with a son and two daughters, the Emperor
Claudius came to Britain. Arviragus, having suffered several defeats,
was compelled to divorce Boadicea, and marry Gwenissa, the emperor's
daughter. A general insurrection of the Britons was the result; and the
natives, led at first by the famous Caractacus, brother of Boadicea,
and ultimately joined by Arviragus himself, were defeated again and
again by the Romans. Weary at last of the never-ending struggle,
Arviragus and Boadicea accepted very humiliating terms from Vespasian,
and were permitted to retain their dominions.

Towards the close of his life Arviragus appears, for some unexplained
reason, to have changed his name to Prasutagus. Dreading the rapacity
of the Romans, he thought to secure their protection for Boadicea and
her two daughters (her son died long before), by making the emperor
Nero joint-heir to his dominions. He died A.D. 61. Scarcely had he
ceased to breathe, when Catus, the Roman procurator, who commanded
in the absence of Suetonius Paulinus, Governor of Britain, annexed
the country of the Iceni, seized the personal effects of the deceased
monarch, treated all his relations as prisoners of war, despoiled
the wealthier Iceni, imposed heavy taxes upon the poor, and demanded
from Boadicea the payment of large sums which her father, Cadalla,
had bestowed upon the Romans. Unable to pay, the queen was publicly
whipped, and her daughters were treated even more shamefully.

Burning for revenge, Boadicea raised the standard of revolt. She was
soon joined by patriots from all parts of Britain. Eighty thousand men,
headed by the queen, rushed down like wild beasts on the colonies of
Camulodunum (Malden), Colchester, and Verulam (St. Alban's), putting to
death, in the first-named city, with every torture they could devise,
more than seventy thousand persons of every age and sex.

Shortly after the destruction of Camulodunum, Boadicea was joined by
her brother Corbred, king of Scots. Together they marched to the attack
on Colchester. Petilius Cerialis, the conqueror of Batavia, marched out
from Verulam at the head of the ninth legion to oppose the victorious
Britons. He had lately received from Germany reinforcements, amounting
to eight auxiliary cohorts of one thousand horse. A furious battle
ensued, resulting in the total defeat of the Romans. Upwards of six
thousand Romans and three thousand confederate Britons (their allies)
were slain.

Petilius fled with his broken cohorts--for, it is said, not even
one foot-soldier escaped the carnage--to his entrenched camp. Catus
Decianus, the procurator, was severely wounded in the engagement, and,
struck with terror, he continued his precipitate flight over sea into
Gaul.

Suetonius Paulinus, absent at the time on that expedition which
concluded with the massacre of the Druids in Mona (the Isle of
Anglesea), hastened back to South Britain. With ten thousand men, he
entered London; but, despite the prayers of the people, he deserted it
at once, and encamped at a short distance north of the city. Scarcely
had he departed, when Boadicea marched directly on London, captured it
after a slight resistance, and put the inhabitants to the sword.

For some time Suetonius was afraid to venture on a battle against
a victorious queen commanding a force so immeasurably superior to
his own, amounting, according to Tacitus, to one hundred thousand,
while Dio Cassius raises the number as high as two hundred and thirty
thousand; while the Romans could muster scarcely ten thousand. At last
an engagement took place on a wild spot, guarded in the rear by a dense
forest.

Before the battle, Boadicea passed up and down in her chariot,
exhorting the warriors to avenge her wrongs and those of her daughters.
Dio Cassius has described the British Queen, as she appeared on that
memorable day. She was a woman of lofty stature, with a noble, severe
expression, and a dazzlingly fair complexion, remarkable even amongst
the British women, who were famous for the whiteness of their skin. Her
long yellow hair, floating in the wind, reached almost to the ground.
She wore a tunic of various colours, hanging in folds, and over this
was a shorter one, confined at the waist by a chain of gold. Round
her alabaster neck was a magnificent "torques," or collar of twisted
gold-wire. Her hands and arms were uncovered, save for the rings and
bracelets which adorned them. A large British mantle surmounted, but
did not conceal the rest of her attire.

Suetonius on his side used all his powers of oratory to excite the
Romans to do their best, telling them to "despise the savage uproar,
the shouts and yells of undisciplined barbarians," amongst whom, he
said, "the women out-numbered the men."

The battle was long and obstinately contested; but the steady order of
the iron legions triumphed over the savage onslaught of the Britons.
The latter were routed with terrible slaughter, leaving, Tacitus says,
upwards of eighty thousand dead on the field. The Romans lost only five
hundred. "The glory won on this day," adds Tacitus, "was equal to that
of the most renowned victories of the ancient Romans."

The exact scene of this engagement has been variously placed by
different writers. Some decide that Battle-Bridge, King's Cross, marks
the spot; while by others it has been settled as identical with the
ancient camp called Ambresbury Banks, near Epping. Some even place it
at Winchester.

Boadicea, rather than let herself be taken alive, put an end to her own
existence by poison. She was afterwards interred with due honours by
her faithful adherents.

The two daughters of Boadicea, completely armed, fought most valiantly
in the battle; and even during the rout of their countrymen they strove
wildly for victory. At last they were made prisoners, and brought into
the presence of Suetonius, who expressed deep sympathy for them, and
spoke with indignation of their oppressors.

The elder princess, by the intervention of Suetonius, was married, some
months later, to Marius, also styled Westmer, son of Arviragus and
Gwenissa. This prince was acknowledged by the Romans as King of the
Iceni, over whom he ruled for many years. His son Coel was the father
of Lucius, the first Christian king of Britain. Boadicea, the younger
daughter, inherited not only her mother's name, but her bold, dauntless
spirit, and her relentless hatred of the Romans. Marius, fearing her
influence over the Iceni, banished her from his court. She raised a
formidable army of Brigantes and Picts, and sailed to Galloway, which
was occupied by the Romans. Marching in the dead of the night, she fell
on the encampment of the foe and slew several hundred men. The entire
Roman army would probably have been put to the sword had not Petilius,
the general, ordered his men to light torches. The Britons were driven
off, and next morning Boadicea was attacked and defeated in her own
camp.

Next day Boadicea marched to Epiake, the Roman head-quarters in that
district, and setting it on fire, destroyed the garrison. Shortly after
this she was captured in an ambuscade. It is said by some that the
young princess, expecting a horrible death, followed the example of her
mother, and took poison. Others, however, declare that she was brought
alive into the presence of the Roman commander, who interrogated her
respecting the object of her invasion, when Boadicea, making a spirited
answer, was slain by his guards.

The bravery of Boadicea and her daughters was not so strange in those
days as it might now be. The British and Caledonian women were, as a
rule, brave and warlike, and invariably followed their husbands to
battle. More than five thousand women enlisted under the banners of
Boadicea, and fought, many of them, as bravely as the men. Women,
even far advanced in years, marched with their male relations to the
defence of king or country; and those who did not fight hand to hand
with the foe, peppered him well from a distance with volleys of stones.
To render themselves competent to share the perils and dangers of the
battle-field, the women, in times of peace, practised the use of arms,
and inured themselves to fatigue and hardship; as Holinshed says,
"never refusing to undergo any labour or fatigue assigned them by their
leader."

The women of Caledonia were equally warlike. In a curious old book of
engravings published in London during the last century, entitled a
"Collection of Dresses of Different Nations, Ancient and Modern," there
are three plates, one of which represents a Caledonian woman, after De
Brii, dressed in a short garment, and armed with masculine weapons;
the other two represent the wife and daughter of a Pict. The woman
Pict is entirely naked, and is tattooed and painted with stars, rays,
and various similar devices. In one hand she grasps a lance and in the
other two darts. The girl differs from the mother only in being painted
with divers floral ornaments in lieu of the astronomical adornments.

The Gallic and German women also, joined frequently in the battles
between rival tribes. Philostratus, probably for this reason, speaks
of Amazons living on the shores of the Danube; and in Lucius Flaccus
we also read of German Amazons. The Allemanni, the Marcomanni, the
Quadi, and the other warlike tribes who dwelt beyond the Rhine were
always accompanied by their wives and daughters whenever they set out
on an expedition. During the battle, such of the women as took no share
in the action, stood on the outskirts, cheering and encouraging the
warriors. More than once a beaten army of Germans was stopped in its
flight by the women, and obliged, through very shame, to turn again and
confront the enemy. If their side was defeated the German women almost
invariably committed suicide on the corpses of their friends. During
the wars of Marcus Aurelius with the Marcomanni and Quadi, several
women were found amongst the slain, many clad in armour.

Under the patronage of the emperors the combats of Roman matrons in
the amphitheatre afforded intense gratification to a pleasure-seeking
public. Juvenal, the satirist, regards these female duels from a
ludicrous point of view. "What a fine business it would be," he says,
"for a man to cry out at an auction of his wife's equipment, 'Who bids
up for my wife's boots? Who'll give most for her corslet, helmet, and
gauntlet?'"

The Romans, however, often tried to raise amateur corps of female
warriors, in imitation of the ancient Amazons, whose warlike deeds were
much admired in the imperial city. Suetonius tells us that Nero, when
he learned the news of Galba's revolt, dressed up the women of his
seraglio as Amazons, arming them with battle-axes and small bucklers,
and intending to march at their head against the rebels.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the third century the Roman empire was in a state of dire confusion.
So many governors of provinces and commanders of legions had assumed
the purple, with more or less success, in various parts of the world,
that at last the Emperor, who was recognised by the senate at Rome,
though nominally sovereign of the universe, was, in fact, very little
more than ruler of Italy. One of the first to dispute the imperial
dignity in Europe was Posthumus, commander of the legions in Gaul. He
so far acquired the affections of his soldiers that they proclaimed him
Emperor of the West, A.D., 257. His dominion, the capital of which was
Cologne, extended over Gaul, Spain, and Britain.

There dwelt in Cologne a noble Roman lady named Victoria. Some say
she was the sister of Posthumus. Be that as it may, she persuaded the
emperor to raise her son, Victorinus, to the throne, as his colleague;
and when Posthumus was murdered by the soldiers, three years later,
Victorinus remained sole emperor of the West. He was a brave soldier
and an able general, and reigned over Gaul for about a year longer,
when he was slain by the troops, A.D. 269. His eldest son, named after
himself, was now proclaimed emperor; but in a few days he, too, fell a
victim to the fury of the legions.

An ordinary mind would have sunk beneath this double misfortune; but
the "Heroine of the West" was cast in a very different mould from
most women. Exceedingly ambitious, she possessed both the courage and
the ability to carry out her schemes. Even when her son was living,
she held the reins of government. So great was her influence over the
legions, they obeyed her behests in everything without a murmur. She
passed much of her time amongst them, and received thence the title of
Mater Castrorum,--"Mother of the Camp." When her son became emperor,
she, as his mother, received the title of Augusta.

Victoria bestowed the vacant throne first on Marius, a distinguished
general, who was slain in a few days, and next on Tetricus, the chief
noble in Aquitaine, a distant relative of her own. During his absence
in Spain she continued to govern the Gallic provinces. Placing herself
at the head of the troops, she maintained the authority she had seized
against all the armies sent from Rome. Even during the early days of
Aurelian's reign, she opposed the imperial forces with the same bold
and undaunted spirit, and with equal success.

Very soon Tetricus grew weary of being subordinate to Victoria. The
empress, stung by his ingratitude, would have hurled him from the
throne to which she had raised him; but Tetricus took care to prevent
this by causing Victoria to be poisoned, A.D. 269, a few months after
his own accession.

       *       *       *       *       *

Since the days of Semiramis no female ruler in ancient times attained
so high a pinnacle of greatness throughout the East as Zenobia. For
more than five years, unaided, she set the Roman emperors at defiance,
defeated their armies, and laughed equally at their threats and their
underhand machinations.

Septimia Zenobia was an Arab princess, and while some writers assert
that she was a Jewess, the heroine herself claimed descent, through her
father Amru, from the Ptolemies of Egypt. Truly she was as beautiful as
any Egyptian queen--even the handsome Cleopatra. By some writers she
has been cited as the loveliest woman of her age. An olive complexion,
pearly teeth, large, brilliant, black eyes, which sparkled alternately
with the fire of the heroine and the sweetness of the loving wife--such
were the charms of her face. Her voice was rich and musical. She was
conversant with Greek, Latin, Syriac, and Egyptian; and compiled for
her own reading an epitome of Homer. Her tutor in philosophy was the
famous Greek, Cassius Longinus.

Zenobia was a widow, and the mother of a son, Vhaballathus, when
she wedded Odenathus, Prince of Palmyra. The latter, however, was a
widower, and also the father of a son--Ouarodes, or Herod, a weak and
effeminate youth.

Septimius Odenathus, who raised himself by his own genius and the
fortune of war, to the sovereignty of the East, was, like his wife, an
Arab. He was chief prince of the wild Saracen tribes who dwelt in the
Syrian deserts, on the shores of the Euphrates. Odenathus early learned
the rudiments of war in the exciting chase of wild beasts--a pastime
which, to the last, he never wearied of, and in which he was joined
with equal ardour by Zenobia. Together the royal pair, during the
intervals of peace, hunted lions, panthers, or bears, through the woods
and deserts of Syria.

When the emperor Valerian was captured and flayed alive by Sapor, King
of Persia, A.D. 260, Odenathus marched, at the head of an Arab host,
against the Persians, defeated them near Antioch, compelled them to
retreat, beat them again on the banks of the Euphrates, and finally
drove them across the river; capturing, in the first battle, the
greater part of the wives and treasures of Sapor.

Zenobia accompanied her husband in this, as in all his subsequent
expeditions, and bravely seconded his efforts. She proved herself as
good a soldier as any, and endured, with the utmost fortitude, the
same hardships as the meanest there. Disdaining the use of a covered
carriage, she frequently marched several miles at the head of the
troops.

Pursued closely by Odenathus and Zenobia, Sapor fled through
Mesopotamia, suffering many defeats, losing towns and cities, and at
last took refuge in Ctesiphon, his capital, where the victors besieged
him for some months.

The Roman senate recognised the deeds of Odenathus by granting him
the title of Augustus, A.D. 263. In the following year the royal pair
undertook a second expedition against Sapor. New triumphs were added
to the glories of the last campaign. The Persian king was once more
forced to take refuge in Ctesiphon, which would no doubt have fallen
had not the incursion of a horde of Scythian Goths into Syria compelled
Odenathus to raise the siege.

Surrounding nations soon learned to respect the brave prince of Palmyra
and his no less warlike consort. Even Sapor, humiliated though he had
been, was glad, not merely to make peace, but to join in close alliance
with his conquerors, who were threatened by the underhand machinations
of the contemptible emperor Gallienus. But the brilliant career of
Odenathus was unexpectedly brought to a close by the hand of his
nephew, who, believing himself insulted by the monarch, assassinated
him, together with his son Herod, at a banquet in the city of Emesa,
A.D. 267.

The murderer gained nothing but the empty pleasure of revenge. Scarcely
had he assumed the title of Augustus ere he was sacrificed by the royal
widow to the memory of her husband, though some historians have accused
her of being an accomplice in the double murder. Zenobia was proclaimed
queen; and, passing over Timolaus and Herennius, her sons by Odenathus,
she arrayed Vhaballathus in the purple, and showed him to the troops as
their emperor.

With the death of Odenathus ceased that authority granted him as a
personal favour by the emperor and senate of Rome; and Gallienus
despatched an army to dethrone Zenobia. But the queen soon compelled
the Roman general to retreat into Europe with the loss of both army and
reputation. Zenobia governed the East for more than five years; and
by successive conquests she extended her dominions from the Euphrates
to the Mediterranean and the borders of Bithynia; and added, besides,
the land of the Ptolemies. Her power became so great that the warlike
Claudius II., who succeeded Gallienus, was satisfied that while he was
occupied in the defence of Italy from the Goths and Germans, Zenobia
should assert the dignity of the Roman power in the East.

Palmyra, the capital of the warrior queen, almost rivalled the
Eternal City in the magnificence of its temples, its mansions, its
public monuments, and the luxury of its citizens. It became the great
centre of commerce between Europe and India, and its merchants grew
wealthy through the trade of East and West. Arcades of lofty palms
shadowed its streets of marble palaces; purling fountains, fed by icy
springs, rendered it a perfect Elysium in the midst of burning arid
sands. Schools, museums, libraries, fostered by the care of Zenobia,
encouraged and aided the arts and literature.

At last the stern, the inflexible Aurelian ascended the throne of the
Caesars. Firmly resolved to rid the empire of every usurper, great or
small, he began by re-conquering Gaul and making prisoner the Western
usurper, Tetricus. He then passed into Asia, A.D. 272, when his
presence alone was sufficient to bring back Bithynia to its allegiance.
Of course Zenobia did not indolently permit an invader to approach
within a hundred miles of her capital without taking measures to arrest
his progress. She marched with all her forces to oppose him; but was
signally defeated in two battles, the first near Antioch, the second
near Emesa. In both engagements the queen animated the soldiers by her
presence, though the actual command devolved on Zabdas, the conqueror
of Egypt. The latter, Zenobia's principal general, has been by many
supposed to have been Zabba, the queen's sister; this, however, is mere
surmise.

After the second defeat, Zenobia was unable to raise a third army. She
retired within the walls of her capital, prepared to make a gallant
defence, and boldly declared that her reign and her life should end
together.

Aurelian arrived before Palmyra, after a toilsome march over the sandy
desert which separated the city from Antioch. His proposals being
rejected with scorn, he was obliged to begin the siege; and, while
superintending the operations, he was wounded by a dart.

"The Roman people," he wrote in a letter, "speak with contempt of the
war which I am waging against a woman. They are ignorant both of the
character and of the power of Zenobia. It is impossible to enumerate
her warlike preparations of stones, of arrows, and of every species of
missile weapons. Every part of the walls is provided with two or three
balistae, and artificial fires are thrown from her military engines. The
fear of punishment has armed her with a desperate courage."

Zenobia was at first supported in her determined resistance by the hope
that the Roman army, having no means of getting provisions, would soon
be compelled to retreat, and also by the expectation that Persia would
come to her aid. Disappointed in both calculations, she mounted her
swiftest dromedary and fled towards the Euphrates. But the Roman light
cavalry pursued, and soon overtook the queen, who was brought back
prisoner. Palmyra surrendered almost immediately after, and was treated
with unexpected clemency by the victor.

The courage of Zenobia entirely deserted her when she heard the angry
cries of the soldiers, who clamoured for her immediate execution. She
threw the entire guilt of her obstinate resistance upon her friends and
counsellors, and the celebrated Longinus, amongst others, fell a victim
to the emperor's rage.

Vhaballathus, the only surviving son of Zenobia, withdrew into Armenia,
where he ruled over a small principality granted him by Aurelian.

When the emperor returned to Rome, in the following year (A.D. 274),
he celebrated, after the manner of Roman conquerors, a magnificent
triumph in honour of his many victories over the Goths, the Alemanni,
Tetricus, and Zenobia. Elephants, royal tigers, panthers, bears,
armed gladiators, military standards, and war-chariots passed in
succession. But the great object of attention was the Eastern queen,
who, completely laden with golden fetters, a gold chain, supported by
a slave, round her neck, her limbs bending beneath the weight of the
jewels with which she was decked, was compelled to precede, on foot,
the triumphal car in which, not many months previously, she had hoped
to enter the gates of Rome as a conqueror.

After the conclusion of his triumph, Aurelian presented Zenobia with
an elegant villa at Tibur (or Tivoli), about twenty miles from the
capital; and here she passed the rest of her days as a Roman matron.
She died about the year 300. Her daughters married into wealthy and
noble families; some say, indeed, that Aurelian espoused one of them;
and the family was not extinct even in the fifth century. Baronius
supposes Zenobius, Bishop of Florence, in the days of Saint Ambrose, to
have been one of the great queen's descendants.

Amongst the numberless captives--Sarmatians, Alemanni, Goths, Vandals,
Gauls, Franks, Dacians, Syrians, Arabs, Egyptians--who unwillingly
graced the triumph of Aurelian, were ten Gothic women, captured in a
battle between the Goths and Romans when the emperor was driving the
barbarians out of Italy. Each party was distinguished in the procession
by its own, or by some fancy name; these Gothic females were designated
"Amazons." Besides these prisoners, many Gothic women and girls, in
male attire, had been found dead on the field of battle.

Hunila, or Hunilda, one of these Gothic women, was afterwards married
to Bonosus, a wealthy and influential Roman general, Governor of
Rhaetia. She was admired and distinguished amongst her new friends
for her beauty, wit, and virtue. But the _ci-devant_ Amazon kept
up communications with her own countrymen; and Bonosus, promised
assistance by his wife's relations, assumed the purple. For a few
months his authority extended over Gaul, Spain and Britain; but at last
he was conquered by the Emperor Probus. To avoid falling into the hands
of the victor, he put an end to his own life by hanging; whereupon some
wit, alluding to his favourite vice (for Bonosus, they say, could drink
as much as ten strong men) remarked that "there hung a bottle, not a
man."

Probus spared the life of Hunila, and granted her an annual pension for
the rest of her days; he permitted her sons to enjoy their paternal
estate.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mavia, Queen of Pharan, another of those troublesome women who defied
the Roman emperors, was by birth a Roman, and by education a Christian.
When very young she was carried away by a troop of Arabs, who brought
her to their prince, Obedien, King of Pharan. The latter, who was
himself a Christian, charmed by the beauty of his captive, made her his
wife. At his death Mavia became sole ruler of Pharan. Placing herself
at the head of a numerous army, A.D. 373, she invaded Palestine, and
advancing as far as Phoenicia, defeated the forces of the emperors
Valentinian, Valens, and Gratian in a series of battles extending over
some months. The Roman governor of Phoenicia, unable to make head
against the invader, was compelled to seek assistance of the general
commanding the Eastern emperor's forces. The latter came speedily
to his aid, and after bragging much and loudly of what he would do,
engaged in battle with Mavia. He was signally beaten, his army cut to
pieces, and he had to fly ignominiously.

After this victory the Queen of Pharan gained many another battle,
and she proved herself so dangerous an opponent that the Romans were
compelled to sue for peace. Peace was at last concluded, on the
condition (dictated by Mavia) that the anchorite Moses should be sent
as bishop to Pharan. Having thus destroyed idolatry in Pharan, the
queen remained for the rest of her days in friendly relationship with
the Romans, to one of whom, Count Victor, she gave her daughter in
marriage.

       *       *       *       *       *

Towards the close of the fourth century, one of the Sapors, King of
Persia, invaded Armenia, which for many years previously had maintained
its independence. He was resolutely opposed by King Tiranus and his
wife Pharandsem, or Olympias; but after valiantly defending his throne
for nearly four years, Tiranus was deserted by his nobles and compelled
to surrender.

Armenia was once more reduced into a Persian province, and divided
between two of Sapor's favourites. The city of Artogerassa was the only
stronghold which still dared to resist the Persians. It was defended
by Pharandsem. The Persians were surprised and routed under the walls
by a bold and concerted sortie of the besieged; but the former were
constantly reinforced, while the latter steadily diminished in numbers,
through famine and disease, rather than by the weapons of the foe.
After a siege of fourteen months the city was compelled to surrender.
Pharandsem, with her own hand, flung open the gates, when she was
seized by the victors, and, by order of Sapor, impaled.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




IV.

     THE ARABS--Henda, Wife of Abu Sofian, an Arab Chief--Forka,
     an Arabian Lady--Women of Yemaumah--Arab and Greek heroines
     at the Siege of Damascus--Khaullah--Prefect of Tripoli's
     Daughter--Ayesha, Widow of the Prophet--Cahina the Sorceress,
     Queen of the Berbers--Saidet, Queen of Persia--Turkhan-Khatun,
     Sultana of Kharezme--Hadee'yah a Maiden who precedes the Bedouin
     Arabs in Battle.


THE ARABS, even in "the days of their ignorance," were always a brave,
warlike people. Their liberty, almost the only wealth they possessed,
was jealously guarded with such courage and determination, that
the greatest nations of antiquity were unable to subdue them. With
the preaching of Mohammed began the glorious days of Arabia. Their
semi-obscurity as a nation, hitherto, had been due solely to the want
of some common bond of union, some link to bind together the princes
of the various tribes. But when there was one leader to rally round,
one faith to propagate, one Paradise for those who fell in conquering
the heathen, the wild children of the Desert proved that they could
conquer foreign countries as well as defend their native sands. During
the early days of Islamism, a vast number of women, many belonging to
the highest rank, followed their relatives to battle, and fought for or
against the Koran as bravely as the men--nay, more than once it was the
valour of the Arab women that retrieved the fortunes of the day.

The Prophet had many obstacles to overcome before converting the
great majority of his countrymen to the new faith. Scarcely had he
promulgated his new doctrines, and gathered round him a few faithful
adherents, when the neighbouring chiefs rose up, sword in hand, to
stifle the new movement, ere it attained more dangerous dimensions.
His principal opponent during the first few years of the Hegira was
Abu Sofian, chief of the Koreishites, who were, to a man, idolators.
The first military exploit of the Islamites was despoiling a wealthy
caravan, led by that great chieftain, in the valley of Bedar. Abu
Sofian, with three thousand soldiers, avenged this insult on Mount
Ohud, where the Prophet, who had only nine hundred and fifty men,
was defeated and wounded; barely escaping with his life. In this
action, fought in the third year of the Hegira (A.D. 611), Henda, the
wife of Abu Sofian, commanded the reserve of the Koreishites. She was
accompanied by fifteen other women, of high rank. By exhortation and
singing they animated the men to fight well. Indeed, the ultimate
success of Abu Sofian was due, in a great measure, to their presence.

Another of Mohammed's early opponents was Forka, an Arab lady
possessing a castle and immense wealth. She was a kind of feudal
peeress, and retained a body of soldiers to defend her domain. For
some years she defied the Islamites; but at last Zeid, one of the
principal Moslem leaders, was despatched to seize her castle. Forka
defended herself for some time with obstinacy and resolution; but,
after a troublesome and lengthy siege, the fortress was taken by storm,
and Forka was slain, together with the best part of the garrison. Her
daughter, with all her wealth, became the prey of the victors.

The rapid success of Mohammed induced many Arabs to take up the
prophetic office on their own account; imitators arose in various parts
of Arabia, sometimes achieving a temporary success almost rivalling
that of Mohammed. The most successful was named Mosseylemah, whose
head-quarters were the city and suburbs of Yemaumah. During the
life-time of Mohammed, little notice was taken of this rival by the
"true believers;" but after the death of _the_ Prophet, A.D. 632, the
Caliph Abubeker despatched Khaled, "the Sword of God," with a large
force to capture Yemaumah. Mosseylemah and nearly all his followers
were slain in a fierce action fought near the city. Mujaia, one of the
impostor's principal officers, who had been made prisoner before the
battle, wishing to save his fellow-citizens from total extermination,
told Khaled that the city was still crowded with brave warriors ready
to shed the last drop of blood in defence of their homes; and he
recommended the Arab general to open negotiations at once. Leaving the
latter to consider his advice, Mujaia found means to communicate with
the inhabitants, whom he sent word to arm all the women and girls in
helmets and mail, and to distribute them, armed with spears and swords,
on the walls.

Khaled perceiving the ramparts bristling with arms, began to fear that
an assault on a stronghold so well defended might become an enterprise
of some magnitude. So--though contrary to his pet war-cry, "No quarter
given, and none received,"--the ruthless Islamite thought it best to
accept a capitulation on comparatively mild terms.

On entering Yemaumah, Khaled soon saw the deception practised upon him.
But, with a generosity of which he was not often guilty, he permitted
the people to enjoy the benefits of the treaty.

During the siege of Damascus by Khaled, A.D. 633, several instances
occurred of female heroism, both on the side of the Arabs and that of
the Greeks. One day the governor of Damascus marched out to dislodge
the besiegers; the latter, pretending to fly, led the Greeks to a
considerable distance from the city. Then turning upon the foe, they
assailed him on every side. Seffwaun the Salmian, a distinguished
Moslem chief, seeing a Greek officer conspicuous for the splendour of
his armour, knocked him down with a blow of his mace. He was about to
strip the fallen chief, when he found himself fiercely attacked by the
widow, who had accompanied her husband into battle, and whose death
she now prepared to avenge. Seffwaun, wishing to avoid the dishonor
of shedding the blood of a woman, contrived by dexterous manipulation
of his sword to frighten his frail antagonist without wounding her or
being himself wounded. She was soon compelled to retire for safety
behind the swords and spears of her friends.

Another day some Arab women were captured by the Greeks during one of
the skirmishes. While the Greeks were carousing in their tents, a girl
named Khaullah, one of the prisoners, urged her sisters in captivity to
arm themselves with tent-poles, and brain anybody who approached them.
She set the example by shattering the skull of a Greek soldier who was
so imprudent as to venture within reach of her arm. A general conflict
ensued; ending by Khaled and several Arab horsemen coming to the rescue
and carrying off the Islamite damsels.

Either this heroine, or another of the same name afterwards turned the
fortunes of the day in the battle of Yermouks, which decided the fate
of Syria. The Arabs, far out-numbered by the Greeks, fled to their
tents, and refused to stir, despite the alternate taunts or encouraging
words of the women. The latter at last, in despair, armed themselves,
and withstood the foe till night closed in to end the combat. Next day,
led by Khaullah, sister of one of their principal commanders, the women
again marched to the attack. In leading the van, Khaullah was struck
down by a Greek; but Wafeira, her principal female friend, ran to her
aid and cut off the soldier's head. The Arabs, shamed into their former
courage by the noble conduct of the women, attacked the Christians with
such fury that the latter were speedily routed, with a loss, it is
said, of one hundred and fifty thousand slain and about fifty thousand
made prisoners.

Khaullah, the leading heroine of this fight, was afterwards married to
the ill-starred Caliph Ali.

In the year 647, Abdallah, the Moslem governor of Alexandria, crossed
the Libyan Desert and appeared before the walls of Tripoli, at that
time the most important city on the Coast of Barbary. After surprising
and cutting to pieces several thousand Greeks who were marching to
reinforce the garrison, the Arabs, frustrated in an attempt to storm
the massive fortifications, prepared to lay formal siege. The city was
strengthened very soon by Gregorius, the Greek prefect, who arrived
at the head of one hundred and twenty thousand men. He rejected
indignantly the option of the Koran or tribute. For several days both
armies engaged in deadly combat, from dawn till the hour of noon, when,
from fatigue and thirst caused by the blazing sun, they were compelled
to seek shelter and refreshment.

The daughter of Gregorius, a young girl of great beauty, fought by her
father's side throughout every engagement. She had been trained from
early youth to excel in warlike exercises; and by the splendour of her
arms and apparel she was conspicuous amidst the dust and confusion
of the fight. Gregorius, to excite his soldiers to deeds of bravery,
offered her hand and one hundred thousand pieces of gold to the man who
brought him the head of Abdallah, the Moslem general. When the Arabs
heard this they compelled their leader to withdraw from the field.

The Moslems, discouraged by the absence of their chief, were rapidly
giving way; but the counsels of Zobeir, a brave Arab warrior, turned
the fortunes of the day.

"Retort on the infidels," cried he, "their ungenerous attempts.
Proclaim throughout the ranks that the head of Gregorius will be repaid
with his captive daughter, and the equal sum of one hundred thousand
pieces of gold."

This was accordingly proclaimed. At the same time Zobeir resorted to
a stratagem which took the Greeks completely by surprise, and gained
an easy victory for the Arabs. The contending armies having, as usual,
separated after the engagement, were retiring to their respective
camps overcome by fatigue, when the two Moslem chiefs, who had placed
themselves in ambush with fresh troops, rushed out upon the exhausted
Greeks and routed them with fearful slaughter. The prefect himself was
slain by the hand of Zobeir; his daughter, while seeking revenge or
death in the thick of the fight, was surrounded and captured.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ayesha, daughter of Caliph Abubeker, was the favourite wife of the
Prophet. After the death of her husband she lived in retirement, for
twenty years, at Medina. But she possessed a restless, ambitious
spirit, and had no inclination for a life of repose and obscurity.
After the sudden murder of Caliph Othman, in 654, when Ali was
elected, she refused to acknowledge the latter, and declared her belief
that he had a share in the murder of his predecessor. The nation,
divided into opposing factions, was soon plunged into civil war. The
malcontents, headed by Ayesha, assembled in thousands at Mecca, and
marched thence to Bassorah, where they expected to find warm support.

Arrived before Bassorah they were astounded to find the gates shut
against them. Ayesha, mounted on a camel, advanced to the walls and
harangued those assembled on the battlements. But she was old and
crabbed, with sharp features and a shrill voice--rendered even more
shrill by the rapidity with which she spoke,--so the people only
laughed at her. The louder they laughed, the shriller her accents grew.
They reproached her for riding forth, bare-faced, to foment dissension
among the Faithful; and they jeered at her followers for bringing their
old grandmother in place of their young and handsome wives.

However, a number of the citizens were secretly in favour of the
malcontents; and the friends of Ayesha seized the palace one dark
night, bastinadoed the governor, plucked out his beard, and sent him
back to his master. Great, however, was the dismay of Ayesha when the
Caliph encamped one morning before Bassorah; but, resolved not to give
way, she rejected the proposals of Ali, and plunged both armies into
a fierce engagement before very well knowing what she was about. But
terrified at the horrors of war, to which until this day she was almost
a stranger, the old woman besought Kaub, who led her camel, to throw
himself between the combatants. In trying to obey her command he was
slain.

The large white camel of Ayesha soon became the rallying-point of the
insurgents, around which the fury of the battle concentrated. The
reins were held alternately by the Modian Arabs, who chanted pieces of
poetry; and it is said that out of the tribe of Benni Beiauziah alone
not less than _two hundred and eighty_ lost a hand on this occasion.
The howdah, pierced all over with arrows, had something the appearance
of a porcupine or a giant pincushion.

After the battle had raged for several hours, the Caliph, seeing
plainly that it would go on so long as the camel remained alive,
ordered his chiefs to direct all their efforts towards cutting down the
beast. First one leg was cut off; but the camel maintained its erect
position. Another leg was cut off; yet the animal remained immovable.
For a moment the soldiers of Ali thought the camel was a sorcerer or a
genie. But a third leg was cut off, and the camel sank to the ground.

The battle soon ended; all resistance ceased when the insurgents knew
that their leader was taken. Ali treated his prisoner with that true
chivalry which had already sprung up amongst the Arabs. He sent her
home to Medina, escorted by female attendants disguised as soldiers,
and while he lived she was not permitted to meddle in politics. After
the murder of Ali she resumed her former position. Many years after,
when Moawyah wished to make the Caliphate hereditary in his family, he
purchased the influence of Ayesha by the gift of a pair of bracelets
valued at one hundred and fifty thousand dinars, or nearly seventy
thousand pounds.

The "Battle of the Camel," as it is generally styled by Oriental
historians, was fought in December, A.D. 656, (A.H. 36.)

       *       *       *       *       *

During the reign of Caliph Abdul-Malek the Islamites in northern Africa
found a most formidable opponent in Cahina the sorceress, Queen of the
Berbers. Under the lead of this pseudo-prophetess, the original natives
of Barbary made a determined stand for many years against the Koran.

Cahina directed her followers to lay waste the lands that lay between
Egypt and her dominions, telling them that it was the fruitfulness of
those districts which caused the Arab invasions. Her commands were only
too faithfully executed. Cities, towns, and villages were destroyed;
fields desolated, trees cut down, and the entire face of the land
changed from a beautiful garden planted with waving palms and lovely
flowers, into an arid waste with scarcely a tree or blade of grass to
be seen.

But this scheme ultimately proved the ruin of Cahina. The natives
of the ruined districts joyfully welcomed the Moslems on their next
invasion. Cahina again took the field with all her forces; but her
ranks this time were thinned by desertion. She was speedily defeated
and made prisoner with her principal advisers. Rejecting the proposals
of the Arab general--the Koran or tribute--her head was cut off, put in
a camphor-scented casket of great price, and sent to the Caliph.

       *       *       *       *       *

Although Persia was one of the earliest conquests effected by the
followers of Islam, scarcely two centuries had elapsed before it was
divided into a number of independent states, ruled by Arab, Turkish,
or Persian princes. Towards the close of the tenth century, Queen
Seidet, widow of one of these independent monarchs, governed the state
as regent for her son, who was a minor. She ruled with so much wisdom,
and under her guidance the kingdom flourished so greatly, that she had
every reason to be offended when her son, grown old enough to take the
reins of government, appointed Avicenna, the family physician, to be
his Grand Vizier, and committed everything into his hands. Avicenna
treated the queen with so little respect that the latter retired from
court, raised troops, and marched against her son, whose forces she
easily routed. Not wishing, however, to deprive him of the throne, she
merely acted as his chief adviser, and aided him with salutary counsels
so long as she lived.

Sultan Mahmoud, founder of the Gaznevide dynasty, held Seidet in the
deepest respect. While she lived he refrained from attacking her son's
dominions; but after her death he annexed them without scruple.

       *       *       *       *       *

In these days few persons, save students of Oriental history, have
even so much as heard of Kharezme, in Tartary; yet in the eleventh
and twelfth centuries it was considered by surrounding nations as the
most powerful state in Asia, and its court the most magnificent. At
the beginning of the thirteenth century, it was actually, although not
nominally, governed by Turkhan Khatun, mother of the reigning Sultan.
In those days the Mongols, under the irresistible Jenghiz Khan, were
advancing with rapid strides towards Europe. It was not long before
they besieged the capital of Kharezme. The city held out for twelve
months against the Mongol hordes commanded by the three sons of
Jenghiz Khan. The inhabitants, male and female, made a defence worthy
of their ancient fame. Even the women aided in the numberless sorties
made from the city. But at last, despite their bravery, the place
was taken by storm. Men and women alike fought hand to hand with the
Mongols, and retired from street to street, till scarcely any remained
alive.

According to the lowest computation more than one hundred thousand
Kharezmians were slain during the siege. The valour displayed by the
women became so famous throughout Asia, that many Oriental historians,
by way of accounting for it, gravely assert that the people of Kharezme
were descended from the Amazons.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Palgrave, who travelled through Arabia in 1862-3, says that it is
customary amongst the Bedouin Arabs, when they go into battle, to have
their army preceded by a maiden of good family, styled a Hadee'yah,
who rides on a camel into the midst of the fight, encouraging the men
to fight bravely by reciting pieces of extempore poetry, satirical or
heroic, as best suits the occasion. Very frequently the Hadee'yah is
slain. Such was the fate of a brave girl, noted for her eloquence and
gigantic stature, who led on the Amjan Bedouins at Koweyt rather more
than twenty years ago, against Abd-Allah, heir to the throne of Nejed.
This "Arabian Bellona" was slain by the lance of a Nejdean warrior, and
her death is said to have been the principal cause of the final rout of
the Amjan army.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




V.

     Libyssa and Valasca, Queens of Bohemia--Wanda, Queen of
     Poland--Moors in Spain--Women of Tudmir--Female Knights
     of Tortosa--Alleged Origin of the word "Infantry"--Queen
     Carcas--Elfrida, Daughter of Alfred the Great--Igor, Grand Duchess
     of Russia--Richilda, Countess of Hainault.


EUROPE, during the two or three centuries after the downfall of the
Roman Empire, bears a strong resemblance to Greece during the heroic
age. In the Nibelungen, the Iliad of those days, we read of godlike
heroes, Herculean warriors, giant princes, and Amazon queens. That was
an age when might constituted right, when rulers led their own armies
in the field, where the lead was given to the strongest or the most
daring.

The Salique law seems in those days to have been very generally
disregarded--if indeed it had been introduced as yet; for we read of
more than one queen who ruled alone over the more or less barbarous
kingdoms of Europe. AEneas Sylvius narrates how a warlike queen named
Libyssa ascended the throne of Bohemia on the death of her father,
King Crocus. Her husband, Przemislas, whom she espoused in 632,
being originally only a peasant, was probably a humble, weak-minded
individual, ruled by his wife; for the queen proceeded to enrol the
greater number of her female subjects into a species of militia. They
were trained, like the Amazons, to the use of arms and to ride on
horseback. After the death of Libyssa, the narrator further says that
the principal favourite of the queen, Valasca, with the assistance of
the female troops, seized the throne, and held it until her death,
which occurred seven years later. Resolved to form a nation of Amazons,
Valasca passed a law that all male children should have their right
eyes put out and their thumbs cut off, to keep them from using bow and
arrows. And this barbarous order was rigorously enforced while Valasca
lived, the men not daring to raise any complaint. The demise of this
Amazon-queen soon restored everything to its natural order.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wanda, the first Queen-Regnant of Poland, was unanimously elected by
the people on the death of her father, Cracus, about the year 700. She
was a talented woman, and esteemed herself fully capable of conducting
the government without the assistance of a husband. To the numerous
offers of marriage she received, a refusal was the invariable answer.
At last Rudiger, a German prince, hoping to bring about a happy union
by force of arms, invaded Poland with a great army.

Wanda raised troops, and advanced to meet the invaders. When the
opposing armies came in sight, Rudiger, believing that his warlike
preparations must needs have terrified the queen, besought her to
accept him, and thus save the lives of their soldiers. Wanda answered
that no man should ever share her throne, because he would love her
kingdom better than herself. When this spirited answer was spread
amongst Rudiger's officers, they refused to fight against so heroic a
queen. Surrounding the prince, they endeavoured to dissuade him from
risking a battle; but finding their remonstrances vain, they refused to
second his efforts, and Rudiger, in despair, flung himself on his sword.

Wanda returned in triumph to Cracow. She never received another
proposal of marriage.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the year 711 the Moors, commanded by Tarik, crossed the Straits of
Gibraltar and invaded Spain. Even after the defeat and death of their
king, the Goths disputed every foot of ground before giving way to the
Infidels. The latter, impeded at every step, were glad to grant peace
on almost any terms. One of the principal Gothic leaders was Theodomir,
or Tudmir Ben Gobdas, a Spanish noble belonging to one of the most
honourable families in the land. He possessed large estates in the
South, and his authority over them was so great that not only was the
district named after him, the Land of Tudmir, but he was styled King.
Having been totally routed in a battle, when the greater number of his
soldiers were slain, he escaped to the fortified citadel of Tudmir,
where he was soon besieged by the Moors.

Finding his position grow daily more and more untenable, Theodomir
resorted to an expedient, already practised by the people of Yemaumah
when besieged by Khaled. He commanded all the women to put on male
attire, to tie their hair under their chin (to imitate long beards),
and to appear, armed with bows and arrows, lances, swords, and shields,
on the towers and battlements, in sight of the Moors. He himself, with
his few remaining soldiers, stood in front, to conceal as much as
possible these feminine guards.

The Moors, overrating the strength of the garrison, offered Theodomir
advantageous terms, which he accepted. Although they afterwards
discovered the fraud, the Infidels scrupulously observed the treaty.

The women of Tortosa distinguished themselves so highly in some
skirmishes with the Moors, that a military Order of Knighthood was
conferred upon them.

The word "Infantry" is said to owe its origin to one of the Spanish
Infantas, who, hearing that her father had been defeated by the Moors,
raised a body of foot-soldiers, and placing herself at their head,
defeated the infidels. In memory of her bravery, foot-soldiers were
henceforth styled Infantry.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Moors never could obtain a footing north of the Pyrenees; yet,
despite the invariable want of success attending their attempts,
they made constant incursions into France, besieging towns, burning
villages, and ravaging the open country. Amongst other cities besieged
by them was Carcassonne, situated on the banks of the river Aude,
governed in those days by queen Carcas, famous for her military
prowess. When Charlemagne, a few years previously, besieged the city,
it was defended so courageously that he permitted the queen to retain
the sovereignty.

The Saracens, ridiculing the notion of a female warrior, declared that,
in place of fighting, she ought to be spinning. This contemptuous
speech, spoken immediately under the city walls, was overheard by queen
Carcas. Arming herself with a lance, to which, as if it had been a
distaff, she attached a quantity of hemp, she set the hemp on fire,
and rushed into the midst of the Saracens, who fled, terrified, in all
directions.

The shield and lance of queen Carcas may yet be seen at Carcassonne.
Over the city gate there is an effigy of the royal heroine, with the
inscription "Carcas sum."

       *       *       *       *       *

While the South of Europe was overrun by the Saracens, England,
Ireland, and Scotland were harassed by the terrible Danes, who for
several centuries kept these islands in constant terror. The most
powerful opponent of the Danes in England was, as everyone knows, King
Alfred the Great. During the latter years of his reign, the land was
tolerably secure from invasion; but after his death the Vikings and
their wild followers came swarming over the country again, burning,
plundering, massacring, just as they had done before Alfred drove
them away. Elfrida, the eldest daughter of King Alfred, inherited all
her father's courage and warlike spirit, and, like him, proved an
implacable foe to the Danes. She was married early to Ethelred, Earl
of Mercia; and on his death the government of the province devolved
upon the widow. And nobly did she fulfil her trust. Mercia was greatly
harassed by the Danes--as, indeed, was the entire country in those
days. The Welsh joined in alliance with the invaders, and would have
marched to their aid but for the promptitude of Elfrida, who entered
Wales, 916, at the head of an army, and took Brecknock by storm,
capturing therein Queen Anghared and many of her attendants. The "Lady
of Mercia" had another motive in this invasion, which rendered Wales
tributary to the Saxons; and this motive was the desire to avenge the
death of the good Abbot Egbert, whom the Welsh had slain.

King Owen fled to Derby, where he was kindly received by the Danes.
When Elfrida learned this she marched thither, and captured the city
"before Lammas," 918. So reckless was she of her own safety on this
memorable day, that it had almost proved to be her last. Pressing
at the head of her troops through the narrow gateway where a vast
multitude of Danes barred the way, many of her principal officers were
struck down, and four of her guards were slain by the hand of the Welsh
king. Gwynne, lord of Ely, and steward of Elfrida, perceiving the
danger of the princess, set the gates on fire, and rushed furiously
upon the Welsh and Danes, who gave way before his onslaught.

Owen, unable to escape, preferred to fall by his own hand than yield
himself prisoner to a woman.

Two years later, in 920, Elfrida recaptured Leicester and York from the
Danes; and besides repairing the fortifications of the former city,
encompassed it with a massive wall of such strength that Matthew Paris
styles it _indissoluble_.

Shortly after this, and before the war was over, Elfrida died at
Tamworth, in Staffordshire, leaving an unmarried daughter named
Elswina. She was buried at Gloucester, in the porch of St. Peter's
monastery, a building erected at her own expense.

This heroine has been praised by all the old historians for her
prudence, courage, and talent for governing. Ingulphus says that
considering the great actions of her life, the cities she built, the
castles she fortified, and the armies she raised, Elfrida "might have
been thought a man." She was generally styled queen by the Mercians,
who regarded themselves as her subjects.

       *       *       *       *       *

According to tradition it was the same wild Vikings, the terror of our
land, who founded the mighty Russian empire; and their successors,
the Grand Dukes and Czars, have ever since retained that thirst for
conquest which distinguished the roving Normans. The Grand Duke Igor
was one of the first among the successors of Rurik who caused the
Russian standard to be feared by surrounding states. After subduing
most of the neighbouring towns, his victorious career was suddenly
brought to a close in 945, during an expedition against the Drevlians,
by whom he was surrounded, and put to the sword with all his troops.

Igor was succeeded by his son Sviatoslaf, the first Christian sovereign
of Russia. The prince being too young to conduct the government, his
mother, Olga, undertook the regency. The Drevlians, fancying the royal
widow would be easily intimidated, sent to demand her in marriage for
their prince. But Olga, after causing their ambassadors to be slain
(by various quaint stratagems which Nestor has preserved) called out
her troops, placed herself at their head, and marched against the
Drevlians, taking her son with her to teach him the art of war. After
destroying all the towns and villages of the enemy, she laid siege
to Karosten, their capital, which was built entirely of wood--the
very name signifying "wall of bark." Finding the city too strong and
too well defended, she made proposals of peace to the inhabitants,
declaring that she would be satisfied with three sparrows and a pigeon
from each house, as tribute. The people joyfully complied, and sent
the birds to the Russian camp. Olga caused the birds to be let loose,
with lighted torches tied to their tails; they, of course, flew back
to their nests in the house-eaves of Karosten. The town was soon in
a blaze from end to end. The terrified inhabitants, flying to escape
the flames, were met by the swords and lances of the Russians. The
Drevlian prince and his court perished in the massacre, as indeed, did
nearly every one in the city, save the dregs of the population.

Having glutted her thirst for revenge, Olga made a progress through
Russia, taking Sviatoslaf with her. Towns and villages arose at her
command, taxation was regulated on a better footing; and by various
measures highly beneficial to the prosperity of the country, the
Grand Duchess proved herself a most able ruler. In 955 she went to
Constantinople to be baptised a Christian, and in the course of a
few years the Greek faith spread through the land, and paganism was
abolished.

When Sviatoslaf grew old enough to rule his own dominions, Olga
resigned the reins of government. She lived in retirement for several
years, and died in 968 at an advanced age.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Middle Ages, chemistry and mathematics were things known to few
people except the monks; any man who studied the sciences was styled
an alchemist, and suspected of being in league with the Evil One. When
it was a woman who gave herself up to learned studies, the people
could scarcely be withheld from tearing "the sorceress" to pieces.
Occasionally, however, despite what the world said, noble ladies,
especially on the Continent, did apply their minds to what in those
days went by the name of the Black Art. Amongst these was Richilda,
Countess of Hainault, who married Baldwin the Good, eldest son of
Baldwin, Marquis of Flanders, one of whose daughters, Matilda, became
the wife of William the Conqueror, and another of Tosti Godwinsson, son
of the powerful Earl Godwin. The fame of Richilda as a wicked sorceress
caused her to be anything but a favourite in the country; and when her
husband died, Robert le Frison, Count of Friesland, and brother of the
deceased, endeavoured to wrest Flanders from her young son Arnulf, or
Arnoul, who was little more than a boy. William the Conqueror espoused
the cause of Richilda, and sent over Fitz-Osbern, Earl of Hereford,
the tyrant of the Welsh, to her aid. The Countess also implored the
assistance of her liege lord, the king of France.

A battle took place on St. Peter's Day, 1071, at Bavinchorum, near
Cassel; Richilda and Fitz-Osbern commanded their troops in person. The
left wing of the foe was routed, and Robert le Frison made prisoner and
sent to St. Omer. But this success was counterbalanced by the death of
Fitz-Osbern and young Arnoul. Richilda's forces fled in confusion, and
the heroine was made prisoner.

An exchange was effected, by which Richilda and the Frison regained
their liberty. The countess immediately set about raising fresh troops
to avenge the death of her boy. The contending armies met again;
this time at Broqueroi, near Mons, where the troops of Richilda were
routed with so terrible a slaughter that the scene of the conflict was
afterwards known under the name of "the Hedges of Death." All hope now
fled the breast of Richilda. Escaping from the field, she took refuge
in a convent, where the rest of her days were passed under the severest
penances--to atone, as folks said, for her past dealings with the
Prince of Darkness.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




VI.

     The Crusades--French, German, and Genoese Amazons--Eleonora of
     Aquitaine--Matilda of Boulogne--Empress Maud--Aldrude, Countess
     of Bertinoro--Empress Constantia--Nichola de Camville (Barons'
     Wars)--Blanche of Castille, Queen-Regent of France--Women of
     Culm--Blanche de Rossi--Black Agnes, Countess of March--Countess
     de Montfort--Julia du Guesclin--Jane de Belleville, Lady of
     Clisson--Marzia--Margaret, Queen of Denmark, Norway, and
     Sweden, the Semiramis of the North--Fair Maiden Lilliard (Chevy
     Chase)--Lady Pelham--Philippa, Queen of Denmark.


IT would be difficult at the present day to appreciate the wild
enthusiasm spread throughout Europe by the preaching of Peter the
Hermit. Thousands from all classes--kings, princes, nobles, priests,
peasants, beggars, all alike impelled by the same blind impulse, many
amongst them scarcely knowing where they were going or for what they
went to fight,--hastened to take up arms against the Infidel. The
enthusiasm was not, as it would probably in our days, confined to one,
nor even to three or four nations. "There were men," says Robert of
Gloucester:--

    "Of Normandy, of Denmark, of Norway, of Bretagne,
     Of Wales, and of Ireland, of Gascony, of Spain,
     Of Provence, of Saxony, and of Allemayne,
     Of Scotland, and of Greece, of Rome and Aquitaine."

Ay, and women too. The first Crusading armies which set out in the
spring of 1096, commanded by Peter the Hermit, Gaultier-sans-Avoir, and
other leaders of less reputation, comprised nearly as many women as
men. Even where they did not contend hand to hand with the Saracens,
these heroines cheered the warriors by marching with them in the ranks,
by carrying food and ammunition to the battle-field, by speaking with
enthusiasm of the cause for which they had armed. It was, indeed,
owing as much to the courage and endurance of the women, who suffered
without a murmur the miseries of cold, hunger, and want of clothing,
as to their own indomitable bravery that the Templars owed the capture
of Antioch. William of Tyre, speaking of the grand review held before
Nice in 1099, says that exclusive of the cavalry, who, to the number of
one hundred thousand were well armed in helmets and mail, there were
found six hundred thousand Crusaders of both sexes, many of them little
children.

When the second Crusade was preached, many ladies, especially in France
and Germany, formed themselves into squadrons and regiments of Amazons,
and assumed the arms and armour of the Templars. The commander of the
German Amazons, who, says Michaud, was more admired for her dress
than her courage, received the title of the "Golden Footed Dame," or
the "Lady with the Golden Legs," on account of her magnificent gilded
buskins and spurs. She enrolled her troop under the banner of the
emperor Conrad, who started for the East 1147. The French Amazons were
commanded by their queen, Eleonora of Aquitaine (afterwards wife of
Henry II. of England). Forming themselves into a squadron of light
cavalry, they went through a regular course of military training, and,
by constant exercise, they acquired tolerable proficiency in the use of
arms.

Mezerai, speaking of these "squadrons of females," declares that by
their valour they "rendered credible all that has been said of the
prowess of the Amazons;" but, certes, those who followed King Louis
to the Holy Land rendered themselves more notable for rashness and
folly than manly courage. They set out in the year 1147, with the bold
determination to share all the fatigues and brave all the dangers
incident to a crusade; but their first essay in the presence of the
enemy proved sufficient to put an end to their gallant resolutions and
cover their leader with ridicule. The corps of Amazons, escorted by a
band of sterner warriors commanded by a distinguished knight, had been
sent on in advance, with strict orders from the king to encamp on the
heights of Laodicea, and there await his arrival. They reached the spot
as the sun was setting, and the black, dreary rocks appeared to the
romantic, but inexperienced eye of Eleonora, an exceedingly uninviting
situation for a resting place. With the haughty imperiousness of her
nature, she insisted on turning aside to a beautiful valley watered
by cool streams, and overshadowed by lofty palms, where, despite the
warnings and expostulations of the brave captain who led her escort,
she encamped.

In this charming but unprotected dale they were soon attacked by a
party of Saracens. King Louis arrived barely in time to save the corps
of Amazons from capture. Compelled to hazard an engagement under
peculiarly disadvantageous circumstances against an enemy who received
reinforcements from moment to moment, Louis was so near being made
prisoner as to be obliged to seek refuge in a tree. The Christians were
victorious, but it was with heavy losses. Eleonora and her followers
retired to the court of her cousin Raymond, Prince of Antioch, and
there passed the rest of the season.

While the Crusades lasted, ladies continued to accompany husbands
and lovers to the East. In the arsenal of the palace at Genoa there
are, or were some few years since, several light cuirasses, made for
a band of Genoese ladies, who, towards the close of the thirteenth
century, wished to join in a crusade against the Turks. However, by the
entreaties of Pope Boniface VIII., who wrote an autograph letter for
the purpose, they were persuaded to relinquish their design.

Pierre Gentien, an old French poet, who flourished at the latter end of
the thirteenth century, has left a species of epic in rhyme, wherein
he describes a tournament held by certain noble dames who were about
departing with the knights beyond the seas. In this poem the author,
describing how the combatants, to acquire proficiency in the use of
arms, disputed the prize of valour with all the courage and enthusiasm
of the knights of those days, takes the opportunity to name forty or
fifty, the most beautiful ladies of their time. His poem has been
therefore admired rather as being a memoir of the old French families
than for the excellence of the poetry.

       *       *       *       *       *

The somewhat ridiculous termination to her first essay in presence of
the foe did not entirely quench the military ardour of Eleonora of
Aquitaine. After she had been for some years the wife of king Henry
II., she stirred up her sons, Richard and John, to rebellion against
their father; and went so far as to appear in masculine attire, at the
head of their forces in Aquitaine. And thus clad, she was made prisoner.

When Prince Arthur was prosecuting his claims on the English crown,
Philip Augustus, the French king, sent him with a military retinue into
Normandy, then in the hands of the English. The French barons laid
siege to Mirebeau, a fortified town near Poitiers. It was defended for
King John by Eleonora, who, though she had then attained the age of
four-score, was as active as ever, and had only just returned from a
journey into Spain--a matter of some difficulty in those days. When the
French had captured the town, the veteran Amazon threw herself into a
strong tower which served as a sort of citadel; and here she held out
bravely till the arrival of John with reinforcements, on the night
between July 31st and August 1, 1202; when the besiegers were compelled
to surrender.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the wars between the Empress Maud and Stephen, the latter was
ably seconded by his queen, Matilda of Boulogne. For the first five
years of his usurpation, the king was disturbed only by the revolt of
Baldwin, Earl of Exeter, and the invasion of David, King of Scotland.
Matilda showed herself to be an able politician and a brave soldier.
In June, 1137, she laid siege to Dover Castle, which had been seized by
the rebels, and, at the same time, sent orders to her Boulogne subjects
to blockade the fortress by sea.

In July, 1139, the empress, escorted by her brother Robert, Earl of
Gloucester, landed in England. After several battles, of which little
is known, she defeated and captured King Stephen near Lincoln, 1141.
The empress was at once proclaimed queen of England, and after sending
Stephen in irons to Bristol, she entered London. Matilda made humble
suit for the liberty of her lord, and offered, in his name, to resign
all claim to the crown; but the empress refused, save on the petitioner
also surrendering her inheritance of Boulogne. The queen refused;
and with the assistance of William of Ypres, Stephen's talented but
unpopular minister, she raised the standard of the king in Surrey and
Kent, where a large party were in favour of the royal captive.

"In the pages of superficially-written histories," remarks Miss
Strickland, "much is said of the prowess and military skill displayed
by Prince Eustace at this period; but Eustace was scarcely seven years
old at the time when these efforts were made for the deliverance of his
royal sire; therefore it is plain to those who reflect on the evidence
of dates, that it was the high-minded and prudent queen, his mother,
who avoided all Amazonian display by acting under the name of her son."

The empress, being warned that the Londoners, weary of her insolence,
had a mind to serve her as she had served Stephen, fled from the city
by night, and laid siege to Winchester Castle. The men of London and
Kent, headed by Matilda, Eustace, and William of Ypres, were soon at
the city gates, and Maud was closely invested for several days in
her palace. To escape the horrors of a city in flames, the empress
feigned herself dead, and her body was conveyed to Gloucester. Robert,
her brother, was made prisoner, and his liberty was purchased by the
release of Stephen.

From this time the fortunes of the empress rapidly declined. She was so
closely invested in Oxford during the inclement weather of 1142, that
she was compelled to dress herself and her attendants in white, which,
as the ground was covered with snow, more readily escaped observation,
and so steal away from the town. The war continued to rage with the
utmost fury for the next five years; but Maud, weary at last of the
miserable struggle, returned to Normandy in 1147.

Queen Matilda died at Henningham Castle, in Essex, on May 3rd, 1151, a
little more than three years before her husband. The empress outlived
both her rivals, and died abroad, September 10th, 1167.

       *       *       *       *       *

The famous contest between the Guelfs and the Ghibelines, which for
nearly three hundred years devastated Italy, broke out early in the
twelfth century. The struggle was at first hardly more than a feud
between two powerful families; but it soon developed into an obstinate
war between two political parties--the Guelfs, who formed the papal and
Italian party, and the Ghibelines, who favoured the German Emperors.

One of the leading events of this war was the siege of Ancona, in 1172,
by the Archbishop of Mentz, Frederic Barbarossa's deputy in Italy,
backed by all the power of Ghibeline Tuscany. The citizens, reduced
to the direst extremities, applied for aid to William degli Adelardi,
a noble and influential citizen of Ferrara, and to the Countess de
Bertinoro. Aldrude, the countess, who belonged to the illustrious
house of Frangipani, has been immortalized by the Italian writers of
those days, on account of her personal beauty, her generosity, and the
magnificence of her court, which was the favourite resort of Italian
chivalry, poetry, and art. She was married young to the Count de
Bertinoro, who died, and left her a widow in the bloom of youth.

The Countess and Adelardi, with their combined forces, hastened to
the relief of the beleaguered city, near which they arrived at sunset.
Having pitched their camp on a hill overlooking the Ghibeline tents,
the soldiers were assembled, and harangued with exciting speeches,
which they received with loud applause, mingled with the clashing of
arms. However, they gained a bloodless victory. The besiegers, alarmed
at the strength of the foe, struck their tents, and retired under cover
of night.

The famished Anconians, relieved from the presence of the imperial
army, received a fresh stock of provisions. They came out to thank the
countess and her ally, and offered them magnificent presents.

On her homeward march, the countess fell in with a party of retreating
Ghibelines. Numerous skirmishes took place, in which the troops of
Aldrude were uniformly victorious.

The date of this heroine's death is unknown.

       *       *       *       *       *

The designs of the Hohenstaufen on the throne of Sicily drew their
attention for a time from Lombardy. Henry VI., who ascended the
imperial throne of Germany on the death of his father, Frederick
Barbarossa, established a claim on the crown of the Two Sicilies in
right of his wife, the daughter of King Roger. Constantia became the
rightful queen of Sicily on the death of William the Good in 1189;
but the throne was usurped by Tancred, her natural brother. Henry
invaded the Neapolitan states in 1191; but though successful at first,
a terrible mortality in his camp compelled him to raise the siege of
Naples and retire from the country.

After the death of Tancred, his widow resigned all claim to the crown;
stipulating that her infant son, William, should be left in possession
of Tarentum. But the cruel and perfidious emperor, who had failed in
all his attempts on Naples and Sicily during the life-time of the king,
cast the boy into prison, after putting out his eyes, imprisoned the
queen and the princesses in a convent, and carried the royal treasures
to Germany.

When the emperor returned to his own land, Naples and Sicily rose
against his tyranny. Hastening back with a mighty army, Henry defeated
the rebels, and commanded that the leaders should suffer the most
excruciating tortures. Constantia, shocked at his barbarity, quarrelled
with her husband, cast off her allegiance, and stirred up the Sicilians
to a fresh rebellion. Thousands flocked to her standard, and the
empress, at this time fifty years old, led them against the German
troops. Henry, who had sent away most of his soldiers to the Holy
Land, was defeated, and compelled to submit to the terms dictated by
Constantia.

The emperor died at Messina in 1197, shortly after the conclusion of
the treaty, and his wife has been accused of administering poison,
to rid her people of a cruel and vindictive tyrant. After his death,
Constantia lived peacefully in Sicily as regent of the island and
guardian of her infant son, the Emperor Frederick II. She died three
years later, in the year 1200.

       *       *       *       *       *

Returning to England, we find Dame Nichola de Camville, a noted heroine
of those days, personally engaged on the royal side during the Barons'
wars. Nichola de Hara, widow of Gerard, Lord Camville was co-sheriff
for the county of Lincolnshire. She held the Castle of Lincoln for King
John against Gilbert de Gaunt, who had captured the city; and after the
death of John she defended it for his son, Henry III. Shortly after the
death of King John, the Count de la Perche, a French knight commanding
the Confederate Barons, marched to Lincoln at the head of six hundred
knights and twenty thousand soldiers, and besieged the castle. It was
defended by Dame Nichola till the arrival of the Earl of Pembroke in
May, 1217, when the battle, afterwards known as "Lincoln Fair," quelled
for a time the rebellion of the English barons, and established Henry
III. on the throne.

Turn which way we will, we see nothing but civil wars and struggles
for supremacy between crowned heads and nobles. Crossing to France,
some nine or ten years later, we find the great vassals of the throne
conspiring to deprive Queen Blanche of the regency. However, Blanche
of Castille was not a woman easily intimidated. At the head of a large
army, she went with the young king (her son) to Brittany, the seat of
the conspiracy. The malcontent nobles, not being prepared to meet the
royal forces in the field, submitted for a time.

In the following year, 1227, the royal troops defeated and captured
Raymond, Count of Toulouse, leader of the Albigeois, and the queen
treated her noble captive so harshly that the French lords again took
up arms, led by the Duke of Brittany. Despite the severity of the
winter, the queen-regent and her son marched into Brittany; and after
surmounting terrible obstacles from the cold, and from the snow and
ice, which stopped both roads and rivers, laid siege to the stronghold
of Bellesme. This fortress which from the thickness of its walls, was
supposed to be impregnable, had a garrison of Bretons, supported by a
body of English auxiliaries. The besieged were in hopes that the royal
army, horribly decimated by the severe weather, would be compelled
soon to retire. But the queen was not the one to yield when she had
once resolved on anything. To preserve her soldiers, hundreds of
whom perished from the bitter cold, she caused immense fires to be
kept constantly blazing, and offered high rewards to all who brought
wood into camp. To encourage the men she slept in the open air by the
bivouac fires, conversed with the troops, and encouraged officers and
privates alike by her affability and condescension.

Queen Blanche pressed the siege with unyielding determination. After
two assaults had been made the great tower was dismantled, and the
garrison surrendered. The Duke of Brittany was made prisoner, though,
through motives of policy, he was speedily set at liberty. The queen
next took Nantes and Acenis; and the revolt was brought to a close in
1230 by the surrender of the Count de Marche.

From the courage and military tact displayed by the queen during the
siege of Bellesmes, she received the complimentary title of "the Great
Captain."

The regency of Blanche ended in 1235, and Louis IX. took the government
into his own hands; but she again took up the regency in 1248, when her
son set forth on his crusade. She died in 1252, before St. Louis came
home from his ill-starred expedition.

So deep was the respect entertained for the memory of Blanche of
Castille, that many of the queen-dowagers of France assumed the surname
of Blanche, as the Roman emperors took the title of Augustus.

Until the thirteenth century, Prussia was inhabited by heathen
barbarians. In 1226, Conrad of Masovia gave the Teutonic Knights a
strip of land on the Vistula, that they might protect Poland from the
Prussian savages. For more than half a century the knights carried on
a war of extermination against the natives; again and again were the
Prussian tribes vanquished, again and again they rebelled. In 1240 a
general insurrection of greater magnitude burst forth, and nearly all
the knights were massacred. Those who escaped--principally the Knights
of the Cross--took refuge in the castles of Thorn, Reden, and Culm,
where they were soon beleaguered by the Prussians. The knights in
Culm were induced by a stratagem to come out, when they fell into an
ambuscade, and were all slain. The city would have fallen had not the
women closed the gates, clad themselves in mail, and mounted the walls
with spears in their hands. The Prussians, deceived by this stratagem,
withdrew their forces, believing that Culm was still strongly
garrisoned by sturdy knights.

Prussia was at last converted to Christianity, and adopted the manners
and customs of Germany, of which it is now the leading State.

The contests between the Guelfs and Ghibelines proved fatal to Italian
liberty. Might became right, tyrants arose on every side, and either
by open force or by fraud, possessed themselves of the sovereign power
in some one of the Lombardian cities and the adjacent territories.
The various military leaders, whether Italians or Germans, were mere
freebooters, accountable to no one for their acts, permitting the
utmost license to themselves and their followers. One of the most
infamous of these mercenaries was Acciolin, who was not a brutal and
rapacious robber, but a man of refined cruelty. His favourite mode of
torture was to fasten his prisoners to half-putrified corpses, and
leave the living and the dead to rot away together.

In 1253, this fiend in human shape captured Bassano by storm, after a
tiresome siege. The garrison was commanded by John Baptista de Porta,
who was either governor or lord of the place. Blanche de Rossi, his
wife, a native of Padua, put on armour, mounted the ramparts, and
fought by the side of her husband. When the town fell the governor
was slain, and Blanche, after making a desperate resistance, was made
prisoner and led in triumph before Acciolin. Directly the villain set
eyes upon his beautiful captive, he was seized with a violent passion
for her; and to escape him, she sprang, clad as she was in armour,
through a window. But in place of death, she only met with a sprained
shoulder. Directly she recovered from her swoon the tyrant sent for
her again, and finding his renewed protestations were repulsed with
loathing, he obtained by force what was denied to his prayers. Blanche
then withdrew to the place where her husband's body had been thrown,
and flinging herself into the open grave, was crushed to death by the
falling earth and stones.

In the year 1333, King Edward III., espousing the cause of Edward
Baliol, invaded Scotland. The battle of Hallidon Hill, July 29th, in
which the Regent Douglas was defeated, placed Baliol on the throne;
and Edward, carried away by his ambitious designs upon the French
throne, left his army in charge of the Earls of Arundel and Salisbury,
and returned to England. Montague, Earl of Salisbury, laid siege to
the castle of Dunbar, a place of great importance, esteemed as the
key of Scotland, on the south-east border. It had been fortified
very recently; and in the absence of the Earl of March, was defended
by the countess, who, from the dark colour of her complexion, was
popularly styled "Black Agnes." She was the daughter of Randolph, Earl
of Moray, and inherited from her father a fierce, intrepid spirit.
During the five months' siege she performed all the duties of a bold
and skilful commander, and the garrison had the utmost confidence in
her abilities. Constantly on the ramparts, she derided the English with
biting sarcasms. When the battering-engines hurled stones against the
walls, she scornfully told one of her female attendants to wipe off the
dust with her handkerchief.

The Earl of Salisbury knew well the kind of foe he had to deal with.
One day he was superintending the siege operations, when an arrow from
the castle whizzed past and struck a knight who stood by, piercing
through his chain-mail haubergeon, and killing him on the spot.

"There comes one of my lady's tire-pins," exclaimed the Earl. "Agnes's
love-shafts go straight to the heart!"

A monster called the "sow," a huge engine covered with hides, somewhat
resembling the testudo of the Romans, was at last rolled to the foot
of the walls. When the countess saw this ponderous machine coming, she
cried in a loud, mocking voice:--

"Montague, beware! your sow shall soon cast her pigs!"

She quickly verified her words by hurling an immense piece of rock upon
the "sow," crushing both it and its occupants to pieces.

Salisbury finding he could not succeed by fair means, bribed the
gate-keeper to leave the gates open on the following night. The porter
disclosed this to the countess, who directed him to keep to his bargain
and say nothing about it. The Earl, who commanded the party that were
to seize the castle, rode through the darkness at the head of his
soldiers, found the gates open according to agreement, and was about
to enter, when one of his men, John Copeland, passed in front of him.
The portcullis was suddenly dropped; Copeland, mistaken for his master,
remained a prisoner. The Earl was saved by his men, who dragged him
back just in time. Agnes, from a high turret, saw that the general had
escaped.

"Farewell, Montague!" she cried. "I intended that you should have
supped with us to-night, and assisted in defending the fortress against
the English."

Salisbury, despairing of being able to take the place, either by
treachery or by storm, turned the siege into a blockade, closely
investing the castle by sea and land, and tried to starve the garrison
out into a surrender. Alexander Ramsay, hearing of the extremities to
which Black Agnes was reduced, embarked with a party of forty resolute
men, eluded the vigilance of the English, and entered the castle, under
cover of night, by a postern next the sea. Sallying out again, they
attacked and dispersed the advanced guard of the besiegers. Salisbury,
disheartened by so many reverses, withdrew his forces, after having
remained before Dunbar for nineteen weeks.

About this time the duchy of Brittany was the subject of contention
between two rivals, John, Count de Montfort, son of the late duke, and
Charles of Blois, who had married the duke's granddaughter. Philip de
Valois, King of France, decided the dispute in favour of Charles, and
despatched a large army to establish him in the capital. Edward III.,
of England, at once declared for the Count de Montfort, as an enemy to
the house of Valois, which he--King Edward--wished to drive from the
throne of France.

The count was betrayed into the hands of his rival by some malcontent
nobles. But Jane, the brave countess, sustained his sinking fortunes
"with the courage of a man and the heart of a lion." Directly the
news of her husband's capture arrived at Rennes, where she resided,
the countess assembled the citizens, showed them her infant son, and
entreated them not to desert the last male heir of their ancient dukes.
Her eloquence, beauty, and courage produced a magical effect. The
people swore to defend her and her son to the last extremity.

The countess next visited all the strongholds throughout Brittany, and
excited the people to resist the French, and to adopt the requisite
measures of defence. Then, sending her boy to England, she shut herself
up in Hennebonne, and there awaited the reinforcements promised by King
Edward.

Charles of Blois entered Brittany, captured Rennes, and despatched
a force, commanded by Prince Louis of Spain, to besiege Hennebonne.
The garrison, animated by the presence of the valiant countess, made
a resolute defence. Jane herself performed prodigies of valour.
Clad in armour from head to foot, she stood foremost in the breach,
sustaining every attack of the foe with the utmost _sang froid_, or ran
from post to post, according as the troops required encouragement or
reinforcement.

One day the besiegers, engaged in an attack on the town, left their
camp totally unprotected. The countess, perceiving their neglect,
sallied forth by a postern-gate at the head of five hundred picked
men, set fire to the enemy's baggage and magazines, and created such
universal alarm that the besiegers gave over their assault on the town
to intercept her return. Jane, seeing that her retreat was cut off that
way, galloped towards Arrai, where she arrived in safety. In five days
she returned, cut her way through the camp of Charles, and re-entered
the town. By this time, however, the breaches in the walls had grown
so numerous that the place was deemed untenable. The bishop of Leon,
despite the entreaties, the prayers of Jane, resolved to capitulate,
and opened negotiations with the enemy. Jane mounted the highest turret
and turned her eyes towards the sea, with a last hope of seeing her
deliverers. She descried some small specks far away in the distance.
Rushing down into the street, she cried, with transports of joy:--

"Succours! Succours! The English succours! No capitulation!"

The English fleet soon entered the harbour, and a small but valiant
body of English, headed by the chivalrous Sir Walter Manny, cast
themselves into the town. The negotiations were at once broken off,
and the besiegers, balked of their prey, renewed the attack with more
determined vigour than ever.

Sir Walter and his companions were at dinner with the countess when
a huge mass of stone crashed through the roof of an adjoining house,
terrifying the ladies assembled in the castle hall. Starting from his
seat, Sir Walter vowed to destroy the terrible engine which had thrown
this missile. In a few moments the English sallied forth, hewed the
monster catapult in pieces, burned the sow, and threw the enemy's camp
into confusion. The foe, recovering from their first astonishment,
tried to surround the returning warriors; but the English knights stood
their ground till the archers and men-at-arms had re-crossed the
ditch. Then driving back their assailants they crossed the draw-bridge,
and were received with acclamations by the townspeople, while the
countess herself "came down from the castle to meet them, and with a
most cheerful countenance kissed Sir Walter and all his companions, one
after another, like a noble and valiant dame."

Prince Louis abandoned his camp the same evening, and retired to that
of Prince Charles before the Castle of Arrai.

Charles, though unsuccessful in his attack on Hennebonne, soon became
master of nearly the whole of Brittany. During the truce between
England and France, the Countess de Montfort came to London, and asked
King Edward to grant her further assistance. He commanded Robert of
Artois to return with her, accompanied by a strong force, to Brittany.
They encountered the French fleet near Guernsey; and during the
engagement Jane displayed her accustomed bravery. The contending fleets
were at last separated by a storm, and the English sailed to Brittany,
took Vannes by storm, and massacred, not only the garrison, but even
the townspeople. The French soon recaptured the town, when Robert of
Artois was slain.

Edward III. landed in Brittany in 1345, with twelve thousand men, but
was not at first very successful. In June he was obliged to conclude
a short truce with France, during which the Count de Montfort was set
at liberty; but he died of a fever on Sept. 20th, when his son John
was proclaimed duke. At the end of July, 1346, the English invaded
Normandy. The Countess de Montfort, assisted by an English force under
Sir Thomas Dagworth, defeated Charles of Blois, who was made prisoner.

Charles was set free in May, 1360, when peace was concluded between
France and England. The treaty, though it did not interfere with
Brittany, brought about an arrangement some months later, by which the
duchy was divided between the rival claimants.

But Charles broke faith, and renewed hostilities with the assistance
of France. The struggle was at last decided in favour of the Count de
Montfort, by the death of Charles and his son John, both of whom were
slain in the battle of Arrai, gained by the English, September 20th,
1364, the same day of the month on which his rival died.

The French heroine of this war was Julia du Guesclin, sister of the
great Constable. When the English invaded Brittany to support the Count
de Montfort, Julia, who was living with her sisters in a convent, was
obliged to take refuge in the fortress of Pontsorel, which was soon
besieged by the English. The garrison was small and the besiegers
were many, but Julia, with a courage worthy of her brother Bertrand,
persuaded the French not to surrender. Clad in a coat of mail (one
of her brother's) she stood on the ramparts and hurled back all who
attempted to scale the walls. Animated by her courage, the French
made so sturdy a defence that the English were compelled to retire,
discomfited. Julia then commanded the garrison to throw open the gates
and pursue the foe. The retreating army, confronted unexpectedly by a
strong force commanded by the Constable himself, who was returning to
Pontsorel, and surrounded on all sides, were nearly all slain, while
their commander was made prisoner.

When the war was over, Julia returned to her convent, where she passed
the rest of her days.

       *       *       *       *       *

Another heroine of this war was Jane de Belleville. Her husband,
Oliver, Lord of Clisson, was accused of holding secret intelligence
with the English; and in 1343 Philip de Valois, without waiting
till the evidence should be well substantiated, caused him to be
decapitated. The widow, burning for revenge, sold her jewels, and with
the proceeds equipped three vessels. After sending her son, a lad of
twelve, to England, to ensure his safety, Jane cruised about the coast
of Normandy, attacking every French ship which came in her way, and
ravaging the country for a mile or so inland. This female corsair was
frequently seen, with a sword in one hand and a torch in the other,
amidst the smoking ruins of a castle, or the smouldering heaps of a
destroyed village, directing with inhuman exultation the ferocious
cruelties suggested by her thirst for vengeance.

       *       *       *       *       *

While King Edward and Philip de Valois were devastating France in their
contests for the crown, the Romagna was the scene of a fierce struggle
between the Pope, the Visconti, and the various nobles and cities of
Italy. After having lost a great part of his territories, Innocent II.
reconquered the States of the Church by means of the Cardinal Legate
Egidius Albornez. But the Papal governors were so tyrannical that the
nobles of the Romagna, with few exceptions, fought desperately to
maintain their independence. Francesco d'Ordelaffi, lord of Forli, was
the last to give way. He was ably seconded in his brave resistance
by Marzia, his wife, a member of the house of Ubaldini. While he was
defending Forli he entrusted the town of Cesena to his wife; and in
the beginning of 1357 the husband and wife separated. Marzia took up
her station in Cesena, with a garrison of two hundred knights and an
equal number of common soldiers. She was accompanied by her son and
daughter, and by Sgariglino de Petragudula, the wise counsellor of the
Ordelaffi family.

The town was soon invested by a force ten times as numerous as the
garrison. At the end of April some terrified burgesses opened the gates
of the lower town. But Marzia, recollecting the words of her husband,
who declared that unless the Pope offered him honourable terms he would
sustain a siege in every one of his castles, that when they were all
taken he would defend Forli, the walls, the streets, his own palace,
even to the last tower of his palace, before surrendering his rights,
retreated to the upper town with those soldiers and townspeople who
remained faithful. Sgariglino having proved to be a traitor, she caused
him to be executed; his reeking head was flung from the battlements
amongst the besiegers.

Marzia took upon herself all the duties of governor and military
commander. She wore her helmet and cuirass day and night, and scarcely
closed her eyes at all. At last she was compelled to retire into the
citadel with four hundred soldiers and citizens who swore to stand by
her to the death. But the citadel, undermined by the Papal engineers,
almost hung in the air. Marzia's father, permitted by the legate,
entered Cesena and besought her to surrender. Her answer was firm and
simple. Her husband gave her a duty to perform, and she must obey
implicitly.

At last the people began to murmur. Marzia was compelled to surrender.
She conducted the negotiations herself; and so skilfully did she
manage, that the Legate, afraid of driving her to despair, consented
that her soldiers should return home unmolested, with their arms and
accoutrements. On the 21st of June she opened the gate of the citadel.

She had disdained to make terms for herself, so the legate cast Marzia
and her children into prison.

It is curious to note that there are now no remains of Cesena to
commemorate the heroic valour of Marzia.

       *       *       *       *       *

The illustrious northern heroine, Margaret, whose military achievements
gained for her the title of "Semiramis of the North," was daughter of
Waldemar, King of Denmark, and was born at Copenhagen in 1353. On the
death of her father, Margaret, through her exceeding popularity with
the people, succeeded in placing Olaus, her son, on the throne. Haquin,
King of Norway, Margaret's husband, died in 1380, and Olaus in 1387.
The election of a female sovereign was not yet authorised by custom;
but Margaret's superior talents, her beauty, and her profuse liberality
prevailed, and she was chosen Queen of Denmark, and, soon after, she
was elected Queen of Norway.

By taking advantage of the internal dissensions in the kingdom of
Sweden, Margaret gained over a faction of the nobility, who offered her
the crown. She marched into Sweden with a large army, and after a war
of seven years defeated and captured King Albert at Falkoeping. She
kept him a prisoner seven years longer, at the expiration of which he
resigned all claim to the Swedish crown.

To effect a permanent union of the three Scandinavian crowns, Queen
Margaret concluded the famous Union of Calmar, 1397. She restored
tranquillity at home, and was successful against all her enemies
abroad; but her latter years were disturbed by the ingratitude of Eric,
whom she had chosen as her successor. She died in 1412.

       *       *       *       *       *

According to Border tradition, a Scottish maiden named Lilliard
fought at the battle of Otterburn ("Chevy Chase") on the 19th of
August, 1388, and displayed the same style of valour attributed to the
gallant Witherington, who fell in the same battle. It is said that the
following inscription was, till within a few years ago, to be seen on
her tombstone:--

    "Fair Maiden Lilliard lies under this stane,
     Little was her stature, but great was her fame,
     On the English lads she laid many thumps,
     And when her legs were off, she fought upon her stumps."

One of the most faithful adherents of Henry Bolingbroke in his days of
adversity was Sir John de Pelham, who had been squire to old John of
Gaunt. When Lancaster was banished by king Richard, Pelham followed
him abroad, leaving Pevensey castle in charge of his wife, Lady Joan.
Sir John was one of the fifteen lances who disembarked at Ravenspur,
in July, 1399, with Henry; and on the 4th of the same month, while
he was sharing the fatigues and perils of what seemed then a rash
enterprise, the partizans of Richard II. laid siege to Pevensey castle.
Lady Joan, a noble and spirited woman, took upon herself the conduct
of the defence, and directed all the efforts of the garrison with such
prudence and decision that the besiegers were forced to retire.

When the Duke of Lancaster ascended the throne as Henry IV., he
remembered the services of his faithful adherents. Sir John de Pelham
was created a Knight of the Bath, and appointed royal sword-bearer,
treasurer-at-war, and chief butler to the king. The king further
displayed his confidence in Sir John by sending James I. of Scotland
as a prisoner to Pevensey castle. The courage of Lady Joan was also
publicly recognised and applauded.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eric, Margaret's successor on the Scandinavian throne, proved to be a
very inferior ruler to his illustrious aunt. Nearly all his reign was
taken up with an inglorious war for the Duchy of Schleswig. The quarrel
was decided in favour of Denmark by the Emperor Sigismund; but the
Count of Holstein refused to accept the imperial decree, and the war
waxed fiercer every day. The Hanseatic League, whose fleet then ruled
the Baltic, joined the alliance against Denmark; and in 1428 a powerful
armament, commanded by Count Gerard of Holstein, invested Copenhagen.
The city would doubtless have fallen but for the courage of Eric's
queen, Philippa, who was the daughter of Henry IV. of England. Throwing
herself into the city, the queen, by her exhortations and example,
inspired the garrison with such enthusiasm and patriotic fervour, that
the foe were compelled to retire discomfited.

Elated by her success, Philippa now resolved to carry the war into
the enemy's country. So, while Eric was endeavouring to gather
reinforcements of men and money in Sweden, the queen, with a fleet
of seventy-five sail, invested Stralsund. But this time fortune was
against the heroine. The Danish navy was almost entirely destroyed in a
great sea-fight. Eric, without reflecting that he had himself suffered
many a worse defeat, flew into a rage when he heard of this disaster;
and carried away by his blind fury, he even struck the queen. The
high-spirited Philippa, unable to forgive this brutality, retired to a
convent, where she died shortly after.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




VII.

     Jeanne d'Arc, the Maid of Orleans--Margaret de Attendoli, Sister
     of the great Sforza--Bona Lombardi and Onerata Rodiana, Female
     Condottieri--Marulla (Turks in Europe)--Margaret of Anjou--Jeanne
     Hachette--Dona Aldonza de Castillo, and Dona Maria Sarmiento
     (Civil Wars in Castile)--Isabel the Catholic--Caterina Sforza.


AT the beginning of the fifteenth century there dwelt in the little
village of Domremy, on the banks of the Meuse, Jacques d'Arc, or Darc,
a peasant, and Isabeau Romie, his wife. Though comparatively poor, they
had the respect of their neighbours as being a hard-working, honest
couple. They had three sons and two daughters, all of whom were bred,
like their parents, to humble occupations. Joan, Jeanne, or Jehanne was
born, according to different writers, in 1402, 1410, or 1412. She was
exceedingly beautiful, with fine expressive features, and jet black
hair. She was about the middle height, with a delicately moulded frame.
Her education was the same as that of most peasant-girls, French or
English, in those days--spinning, sewing, and repeating her Paternoster
and Ave Maria. From her infancy Jeanne was employed in various duties,
the chief of which was driving the cattle to and from pasture. She was
of a religious, imaginative disposition, and as early as her thirteenth
year began to indulge those superstitious reveries which afterwards
made her famous. Although her gentleness caused her to be universally
beloved, she shunned girls of her own age, and took but little interest
in the amusements of others. While her young friends were playing under
the "Fairies' Tree" near the fountain of Domremy, Jeanne was dancing
and singing by herself in pious fervour, or weaving garlands for the
Holy Virgin in the small chapel of Notre Dame de Bellemont.

The villagers of Domremy were, without exception, staunch Royalists,
while those of the neighbouring hamlet were zealous Burgundians. A very
bitter hostility prevailed between the rival parties. On one occasion
a band of troopers invaded Domremy and drove all the people from their
homes. The family of Jeanne found shelter for a few days at an inn;
whence arose the mistake of the English chroniclers, who state that
the maiden was in early life an innkeeper's servant.

For a quarter of a century, France had been torn by civil war, and
the death of Charles VI. in 1422 plunged the country into hopeless
confusion and anarchy. According to the Treaty of Troyes (concluded in
1420), Henry VI. of England was proclaimed King of France, which his
uncle, the Duke of Bedford, governed as regent. Queen Isabella and the
Duke of Burgundy joined England; and the Dauphin, abandoned by his own
mother, had a very small party indeed. The English army was commanded
by several brave and talented warriors--the Earls of Salisbury,
Somerset, Warwick, Suffolk, Shrewsbury, Arundel, and many gallant
knights.

The Dauphin, at the age of nineteen, was crowned at Poitiers, as
Charles VII. On the 12th of October, 1428, the Earl of Salisbury laid
siege to Orleans, the last stronghold of any importance held by the
Royalists. It was bravely defended by Glaucour, Lahyre, and Dunois.
Repeated messages were sent to the king imploring assistance. The city
was naturally strong, and well-garrisoned, but the English commenced an
elaborate system of counter-fortification, and cut off the supplies of
the besieged.

Jeanne d'Arc watched with eager anxiety the siege of Orleans. Even
as a child she had learned to detest the English; and now she felt
herself commanded, by frequent visions and supernatural admonitions,
to undertake the deliverance of her king and country. Believing
firmly that Heaven destined her to save France, she refused more
than one advantageous offer of marriage. In February, 1429, being
then, according to the most reliable authorities, barely eighteen,
she was commanded by a vision of Our Lady to raise the siege of
Orleans, and afterwards conduct Charles to Rheims to be crowned in
state. She presented herself before Robert de Baudricourt, governor
of Vaucoulour, a town situated a few miles from Domremy, and related
her mission. Believing her to be insane, the governor twice sent
her away, threatening the second time to box her ears; but when she
returned a third time he thought it best to send her with letters of
recommendation to the Dauphin, at Chinon, in Touraine.

The fame of Jeanne d'Arc preceded her; and the king awaited with
impatience the arrival of his extraordinary visitor. Although Charles
disguised himself and mixed with his courtiers, Jeanne singled him out
at once, and addressed him as king of France.

After being subjected to the most severe examination during three
weeks, by divines, counsellors of parliament and learned men, the
king was satisfied that her story was true, and consented to accept
her aid. She was furnished with a suit of armour, and armed with a
sword marked on the blade with five crosses, taken by her directions
from the tomb of an old warrior in the church of St. Catherine at
Fierbois. In company with several nobles she was sent to the camp at
Blois, thirty-five miles from Orleans. Her presence produced the most
miraculous effect upon the drooping spirits of the soldiers. The French
generals resolved now to make some great effort for the relief of
Orleans; and ten thousand men, commanded by St. Severre, Lahyre, and
the veteran Dunois were despatched to its aid. Most of the soldiers
retreated in dismay when they saw the strong towers of the besiegers,
but La Pucelle, followed by a small party, forced her way through the
English camp, and entered Orleans on the 29th of April, 1429. She was
clad in armour and mounted on a snow-white horse; her head was bare,
and the long raven tresses, parted across her forehead, were tied at
the back with ribbon. In her right hand she grasped a lance; by her
side hung the consecrated sword and a small battle-axe.

On the 4th of May a sortie was made against the English bastille
of St. Loup, but the French were driven back with great slaughter.
Jeanne, hearing the noise of the fight, mounted her horse and galloped
to the spot, when she rode into the midst of the battle. The French,
re-animated by her presence, again charged the English, drove them
back, and captured the bastille.

After this first success the rest was comparatively easy. On the 6th
and 7th the remaining bastilles on the south bank of the Loire were
carried by storm. The most important, that at the head of the bridge,
defended by Sir William Gladsdale with five thousand picked men,
yielded after an attack of fourteen hours. During the attack on this
tower, Jeanne, having placed a ladder against the walls, was attempting
to scale the battlements, when she was struck in the neck by an arrow.
She plucked out the weapon immediately, but the loss of blood compelled
her to leave the field. However, when she heard that her absence
dispirited the soldiers, she insisted upon returning to the scene of
action.

The Earl of Salisbury died during the siege; and the Earl of Suffolk,
who succeeded to the command, raised the siege on the 8th of May, and
beat a hasty retreat.

Jeanne d'Arc, the "Heaven-sent Maid," had now fully entered upon her
extraordinary career of victory. The universal belief in her elevated
mission--as much amongst the English as the French--produced marvellous
results. Resolute and chivalrous, pious and gentle, she won the hearts
of all,--even the roughest and most sceptical veterans. However, it was
only in matters of moral discipline that she was implicitly obeyed;
oaths or foul language were severely censured when they reached her
ears. She compelled the entire army, generals and soldiers alike,
to attend regularly at confession; and at every halt she ordered an
altar to be established and the Holy Sacrament administered. But the
generals, while they skilfully employed her to animate the soldiers,
did not implicitly follow her counsels in military matters.

Her tactics were very simple. "I used," she said, "to say to them 'go
boldly in among the English,' and then I used to go boldly in myself."
Her duties were chiefly confined to bearing at the head of the army
the consecrated sword and the sacred banner--the latter made of white
satin, semee with fleurs-de-lis, with the words "Jesus Maria," and a
representation of Our Saviour in his glory embroidered on its surface.
Her conduct was never stained by unfeminine cruelty. It appears from
the documents relative to her trial, that, although she was herself
wounded many a time, she never shed the blood of anyone. Some French
historians, however, aver that she did sometimes, when hard pressed,
use the consecrated sword as a weapon of offence.

When the Earl of Suffolk retired from before Orleans he established
his head-quarters at Mehun-sur-Loire, and afterwards at Jargeau.
Jeanne hastened to Tours, where Charles was residing with his court,
and urged him at once to go to Rheims to be crowned. The royal
advisers, however, were afraid to venture on such a step when Rheims
itself, together with all the intermediate towns, was still held by
the English. The French next attacked the towns in possession of the
English on the banks of the Loire. During the assault on Jargeau, which
was taken by storm, La Pucelle, leading on the French, was seen on the
highest step of one of the scaling-ladders, waving her banner over her
head. A stone from the English engines struck her so violent a blow on
the head, that her helmet was shattered, and she fell heavily to the
foot of the wall. Rising on the instant, she cried:--

"Amis, amis! sus, sus! Notre Seigneur a condamne les Anglais. Ils sont
a nous. Bon courage!"

The Earl of Suffolk was made prisoner during the assault.

Beaugency and Mehun capitulated shortly after the fall of Jargeau; and
the English, commanded by Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury, the "English
Achilles," retreated towards Paris. They were pursued and overtaken in
April, 1429, at Patai, by the Maid of Orleans. Sir John Fastolfe, one
of the bravest knights of his day (whatever Shakespeare may declare to
the contrary), advised Talbot to continue his retreat with all speed;
but the Earl scorned to fly before his enemies, even though, as on this
occasion, they were twice as numerous as his own men. The English,
struck with a superstitious dread of La Pucelle, fled, after making
little resistance; and Talbot, after losing twelve hundred men, was
captured. Eight hundred English were slain in the pursuit. Sir John
Fastolfe, with a prudence long stigmatised as rank cowardice, continued
his retreat to Paris, where he arrived safely without the loss of a man.

Jeanne now insisted that the royal coronation should be no longer
delayed. Every obstacle vanished at her approach. Troyes, Chalons, and
other cities in rapid succession opened their gates; the people of
Rheims expelled the English garrison, and Charles entered in triumph,
July 16th, 1429. The consecration took place next day in the cathedral.
The Maid stood by the side of Charles, clad in armour; and, taking the
office of High Constable, held the sword over the king's head.

Her mission being now concluded, Jeanne d'Arc entreated the king's
permission to "return to her father and mother, to keep her flocks
and herds as before, and do all things as she was wont to do;" but
her presence was considered so necessary to animate the troops, that
she was prevailed upon to stay. In September, Jeanne was wounded in
an unsuccessful attack on Paris, when she requested, a second time,
to be allowed to retire from the war. But she was again overruled.
In December, a patent of nobility was conferred upon her; she was
first styled Dalis, then Dulis, and finally Dy Lys. Her coat of arms
contained two golden lilies and a sword, pointing upwards, bearing a
crown. She obtained for the villages of Domremy and Greux an exemption
from taxation, which they enjoyed until the equalisation of public
imposts in 1789.

In the spring of 1429, the Duke of Burgundy besieged Compiegne. Jeanne
d'Arc threw herself into the town on the 21st of May. Believing that
her presence now would work the same miracles as of old, she insisted,
the evening of her arrival, that the garrison should make a sortie.
After some hard fighting the French took to flight. Jeanne took the
command of the rear-guard, and tried to rally her countrymen. A
Burgundian archer pulled her from her horse; and while lying on the
ground she was obliged to surrender to Lyonnel, the Bastard of Vendome.
There is good reason for supposing that Guillaume de Flavy, governor of
the fortress, envious of her military renown, betrayed Jeanne into the
hands of her enemies.

The English purchased Jeanne from the Duke of Burgundy for ten thousand
livres; and Henry VI. also settled an annuity of three hundred francs
upon her captor. Through many weary months the Maid of Orleans dragged
out a miserable existence in a dungeon. In place of being treated as
a prisoner of war, she was handed over to ecclesiastical justice,
charged with heresy and blasphemy. At the instigation of several
Frenchmen a process was instituted by the Bishop of Beauvais, in whose
diocese she had been captured. The process lasted three months and had
sixteen sittings. Jeanne denied resolutely the accusations of sorcery
and witchcraft, and named St. Michael, St. Margaret, and St. Catherine
as the bearers of the heavenly messages.

The Bishop's Court, representing the Church and the University of
Paris, condemned Jeanne d'Arc as a sorceress and a heretic. Charles
VII. made little or no efforts to save her; and after four months'
imprisonment, the innocent enthusiast was sentenced to be burned alive
at Rouen. She was cut off from the Church, and delivered to the secular
judges.

On the 24th of May, 1431, she was carried to the stake, which had
been erected in the Vieux Marche of Rouen. At sight of the pile her
courage deserted her. She submitted to the Church, and confessed that
her visions were the work of Satan. Her punishment was commuted to
imprisonment for life, but it was not considered expedient to let her
live; so she was condemned as a relapsed heretic, and dragged to the
stake, May 30th. She was dressed in female attire; and on her head was
a mitre, covered with the words "Apostate," "Relapse," "Idolatre,"
"Heretique."

She met her fate this time with terrible calmness. While they were
putting the cap on her head, she said to one of the Dominican friars
who stood by her side:--

"Maitre, par la grace de Dieu, je serai ce soir en paradis."

Falling on her knees, she prayed fervently for a few moments, not for
herself only, but for the ungrateful king who had so cruelly deserted
her. The judges, even the stern Bishop of Beauvais, were moved to
tears. She was burned by a slow fire, and the pile was so high that her
agony lasted for a considerable time. Her ashes were gathered together
and flung into the Seine.

There is a legend that, as she expired, a white dove rose from the
flames. Another tradition says that after her ashes were removed, the
heart was found entire.

The Rouen theatre now occupies that part of the public square on which
the stake was erected. It was remarked as a curious coincidence that
when Soumet's tragedy of "Jeanne d'Arc" was performed at Rouen, in
the autumn of 1865, the last act, which represents the death of the
Maid, was played on the identical spot where the real tragedy had been
enacted in 1431.

Jeanne's father died of grief at her cruel fate; her mother survived
for many years, supported by a pension from the city of Orleans. In
1436 an impostor started up, who pretended to be the Maid of Orleans,
giving a plausible account of her escape. She was for sometime
successful, being acknowledged, even by the brothers, as the heroine
herself. Within the last few years this idea of Jeanne's escape
has been revived. Many French writers assert that there is ample
documentary evidence to prove that the Maid of Orleans lived to be
comfortably married, while another girl took her place at the stake.
This notion is gaining ground, both in France and England.

Among all the divines who condemned Jeanne, there was only one
Englishman--the Bishop of Winchester, Cardinal Beaufort.

In 1450 and 1451 measures were taken to revise the process of
condemnation. In 1456 a court, presided over by the Archbishop of
Rheims and the Bishops of Paris and Coutance, decided that Jeanne d'Arc
was entirely innocent, and declared her to have been falsely condemned.

The citizens of Orleans celebrate the annual Festival of Jeanne d'Arc
on the 8th of May; the villagers of Domremy hold an annual fete on the
6th of January, the birth-day of the heroine. It is said that the girls
of the village have so much military _esprit_ that they will hardly
deign to look upon a lover who has not served some years in the wars.

The memory of Jeanne d'Arc has been preserved in France by several
monuments. Louis XI. erected a figure of the heroine in front of her
father's house; and in September, 1820, another memorial was raised
in Domremy, with Jeanne's bust carved in marble. In the market-place
of Rouen stands another figure of the Maid. In front of the Marie
of Orleans is a statue, modelled by the Princess Marie, daughter
of the Citizen King. In April, 1855, a colossal equestrian figure
was uncovered in one of the public squares of Orleans, on the exact
spot where she animated the French soldiers to attack the foe. It
was remarked as a sign of the times that not only the English flag,
but also the Turkish crescent stood out prominently from amongst the
numberless standards which surrounded the monument.

It has lately been proposed by the Bishop of Orleans, the Cardinal
Archbishop of Rouen, and others, to add Jeanne d'Arc to the calendar of
French saints. Shakespeare may thus prove once more a prophet; he has
put into the mouth of King Charles, the words:--

    "No longer on Saint Denis will we cry,
     But Joan la Pucelle shall be France's saint."

During the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries Italy was terribly
harassed by bands of mercenary soldiers, who sought service in every
war, and fought neither through patriotism nor for the love of glory,
but merely for pay and the opportunity of plunder. These bands, who
counted their numbers by hundreds or thousands, according to the
reputation of the Condottiere (leader) under whom they fought, offered
their services to the prince or city that paid them best, without
regard to law or justice. Many of the Condottieri, such as the Count
of Werner, Montreal, Bracchia de Montone, and Francesco Sforza, became
famous throughout Italy, not only as able generals, but sometimes even
as skilful statesmen; yet, mostly they were ignorant, brutal men, with
nothing to recommend them beyond reckless bravery.

Sforza had a sister named Margaret de Attendoli, who shared his warlike
spirit and enterprising courage. The family was of humble origin, but
through the military genius of Francesco it rose, by rapid strides,
to the highest rank and eminence. Before he assumed the sovereignty
of Milan, Sforza was grand-constable of Naples; and in this capacity
he was sent to meet the Count de la Marche, the betrothed husband of
the Neapolitan queen. The count, dreading the power of Sforza, caused
him to be cast into prison, with many of his relations. Sforza's
sister was at Tricario with her husband, Michael de Cotignola, when
the intelligence of Francesco's arrest reached her. The relatives
speedily assembled an army, Margaret took the command, and a revolt
began. According as the Count de la Marche grew more brutal towards
his queen and more despotic to her subjects, the insurrection became
more general; and at last Count Jaques was besieged in his castle. The
besiegers demanded that Sforza should be set at liberty, and that the
count should be content with the title of lieutenant-general of the
kingdom; but he, knowing the value of his prisoner as a hostage, sent
threatening messages to Margaret, demanding that Tricario should be
given up, unless she would wish to be the cause of her brother's death.
Margaret, indignant at the proposal, took the bold step of imprisoning
the deputies, whose families, alarmed for their safety, importuned the
count night and day, till he consented to set Sforza at liberty, and
reinstate him in all his honours.

       *       *       *       *       *

Female Condottieri were by no means uncommon in those days; and some
of the women acquired celebrity, even beyond the Italian borders, for
their prowess and military skill. The story of one of these female
soldiers is interesting.

About the year 1432, Captain Brunoro, a Parmesan gentleman by birth,
and a Condottiere by profession, was appointed by Piccinio, the
Milanese general (who had just driven the Venetians from Vatellina),
to maintain a camp in Morbego, as a central position whence he could
command the conquered territory. While thus employed, he occupied his
leisure time with hunting, and various open air amusements. One day,
being tired, he stopped to rest in a sylvan grove, where some peasants
were celebrating a rustic festival. Doubtless there were many pretty
faces there; but one amongst them struck him more than all the rest.
He entered into conversation with this pretty girl, who charmed and
surprised him by her lively, spirited answers.

On his return home he learned that the pretty peasant was quite a
celebrity in the neighbourhood. Her name was Bona Lombardi (or, as some
give it, Longobarba), and she was born in 1417, in the little village
of Sacco, in Vatellina. She was the only daughter of humble people, of
whom little is known except that her father, Gabriel Lombardi, was a
private soldier in one of the Italian armies, and died while Bona was
a child. Her mother did not long survive; and the little girl was left
to the care of her uncle, a poor priest, and her aunt, an industrious
countrywoman.

Captain Brunoro remained in Morbego during the summer, and had thus
frequent opportunities for meeting with Bona Lombardi. At last he
decided that she was the woman of all others to make him happy, and
they were married. The marriage was kept secret for some time; but to
avoid even a temporary separation, Bona dressed herself in the costume
of a Condottiere, and accompanied her husband in all his expeditions.

Like all Condottieri Brunoro was obliged to adopt various masters;
and thus he very often found himself opposed to one of his former
employers. Once he made an enemy of Alexander, King of Naples, who
took him prisoner by means of an ambuscade, and cast him into prison.
He would probably have ended his days in a Neapolitan dungeon, but for
the untiring efforts of his wife. Money, entreaties, threats, all were
employed; till at last she procured his release.

Bona learned the art of war to perfection. Her courage and military
skill were so highly esteemed by the Venetians that they confided to
her and her husband the defence of Negropont, against the Turks, who
in those days were dreaded by the Christians as much as the Goths and
Vandals were in ancient times. More than once she displayed valour and
prudence of a superior order. During the Milanese war, the Venetians
having been repulsed in an attack upon the Castle of Provoze, in
Brescia, Brunoro was captured. Bona arrived soon after with a small
body of fresh troops. Rallying the discomfited Venetians, she led
them in person to a second assault on the castle. This time they were
successful, and Bona had the pleasure of releasing her husband with the
rest of the prisoners.

Brunoro died in 1468, and Bona Lombardi, declaring that she could not
survive her husband, built a tomb for the reception of their mutual
remains. When it was finished, she sank into a state of languor, from
which she never recovered.

       *       *       *       *       *

Onerata Rodiana, another female Condottieri, was, in addition, a
celebrated painter. She was born, in the early part of the fifteenth
century, at Castelleone, and while yet a girl her reputation as a
painter became so great that the Marquis Gabrinio, tyrant of Cremona,
engaged her to decorate his palace.

One day, while thus occupied, a dissipated courtier, who happened to
see her painting the walls of a room, attempted to take liberties. A
struggle ensued, which was terminated by Onerata drawing a stiletto
and stabbing her antagonist. She then fled from the palace, disguised
herself in male attire, and quitted the city. Meeting with the band of
Oldrado Sampuynano, the Condottiere, she enlisted under his banner.

The marquis was furious when he discovered the flight of his
court-painter, and he despatched soldiers in pursuit. Soon relenting,
however, he issued a proclamation, in which he promised full pardon
on condition that Onerata would return to her professional labours.
But she preferred the life of a soldier, so she remained with her new
comrades. By her courage she soon rose to the post of captain; and for
thirty years she led the roving life of a free-lance, painting and
fighting alternately. When Castelleone, her native town, was besieged
by the Venetians in 1472, she hastened with her band to its assistance.
She was victorious; but during the action she fell, mortally wounded.

       *       *       *       *       *

In those days the Grecian isles were a constant subject of contention
between Venice and the Turks. The latter, growing stronger every
day, soon made their name the terror of southern Europe. A few years
after the fall of Constantinople (captured by Mohammed II. in 1453),
the Ottomans besieged Coccino, capital of the isle of Lemnos, in the
AEgean Sea. The city was defended with the most obstinate bravery by
the inhabitants, men and women. Amongst the bravest of the women was
Marulla, a beautiful, noble-looking creature, barely in her twentieth
year. Her father, Demetrius, slew such numbers of the Turks that the
gateway was half-blocked up with turbaned corpses. At last, pierced
with myriad wounds, he fell on the bodies of his foes. Marulla, flying
to her father's rescue, was wounded by the same blow which proved fatal
to him; but so far from giving way to useless lamentations, she seized
his sword, sprang from the walls, and fiercely attacked the Turks.
Her fellow-citizens, inspired by her fire, drove the Turks away with
terrific slaughter, and compelled them to take refuge in their ships.

When the Venetian admiral arrived next day with the fleet, in place
of a beleagured town he beheld the citizens in their holiday attire,
headed by the magistrates in their robes of state, marching in
procession to meet him, conducting the heroine Marulla, their deliverer.

To reward her bravery, the Venetian commander ordered each of his
soldiers to give her a present, and he promised that she should be
adopted by the Republic. He offered her the hand of any one of his
captains that she might prefer. But Marulla replied that "it was not
by chance that she should choose a husband; for the virtues of a camp
would not make a good master of a family; and the hazard would be too
great."

When the Venetian senate received the news of Marulla's bravery, they
decreed that various privileges and exemptions from taxes should be
settled upon her and her children for evermore.

       *       *       *       *       *

Henry VI., after losing the crown of France through a female warrior,
very nearly saved the crown of England through another; and, what
is more remarkable, both were Frenchwomen. But the high-spirited,
fierce Margaret of Anjou, though fully as brave, was very different
from the peaceful, the angelic Maid of Orleans. However, had the king
possessed half the spirit of his wife, the Wars of the Roses might have
terminated very differently. When the feeble, almost imbecile king,
wishing for peace at any price, publicly acknowledged the Duke of York
as heir-apparent to the throne, Margaret refused her consent, and the
war was renewed. Henry was made prisoner in the battle of Northampton;
but the queen assembled a formidable army at York, where she awaited
her rival.

On the last day of the year 1460, the battle of Wakefield was fought.
Within half-an-hour of the onset, nearly three thousand Yorkists lay
dead on the field. This battle, in which Margaret is said to have taken
an active part, terminated in a complete victory for the House of
Lancaster. The Duke of York, covered with wounds, fell into the hands
of the victors. His dying moments were embittered by the taunts of his
captors; and afterwards, it is said, his head was cut off by order of
the queen, crowned with a paper crown, and placed on one of the gates
of York.

The next year, 1461, Margaret defeated the Earl of Warwick in the
second battle of St. Alban's, and recovered the king, who was now
merely a passive agent in the hands of friends or foes. She advanced
to London; but Edward, Earl of March, son of the Duke of York, having
gained a victory at Hereford almost the same day as the battle of St.
Alban's, obliged her to retreat towards the north. He then entered
London, where a few days later, March 4th, 1461, he was proclaimed King
of England, as Edward IV.

Margaret soon increased her army to sixty thousand men, and Edward
was obliged to hasten to the north. At Pontefract he passed in review
nearly forty-nine thousand men. The armies met at Towton, in Yorkshire,
March 29th, 1461. This was the bloodiest battle fought during the war.
No quarter was given or expected on either side. The Lancastrians,
routed with fearful slaughter, were intercepted in their flight by
the river; and the pursuit of the Yorkists was unrelenting. The slain
amounted to thirty or forty thousand. Henry VI. and his brave queen
fled to Scotland.

After vainly soliciting aid from the Scottish court, Margaret went over
to France, and by promising to give up Calais, obtained ten thousand
men. With these she landed in Scotland, where she was speedily joined
by many of her partisans, and also by a band of freebooters. With these
she entered England, and advanced to Hexham, where she was totally
defeated, May 15th, 1464, by Lord Neville.

The unhappy queen, compelled to fly with her son, with difficulty
reached the coast, after suffering indignities at the hands of the wild
freebooters who infested the kingdom, and sailed for Flanders. The
rebellion of Warwick the King-Maker, in 1470, restored Henry VI., for
a few short months, to the throne. Edward IV. fled to the Continent;
Margaret and her son landed at Weymouth on the very day (April 14th,
1471) that the Earl of Warwick was defeated at Barnet.

When Margaret heard the news of her champion's defeat her courage
seemed at first to forsake her. She took refuge with her son in the
sanctuary of Beaulieu, in Hampshire. But her undaunted spirit once
more led her to the field. She re-assembled her partisans and marched
to Tewkesbury, where she was encountered by King Edward on the 4th
of May, 1471. The total defeat of the Lancastrians was the result,
and Margaret, with her son, was made prisoner. The latter was cruelly
murdered, and Margaret was placed in the Tower of London.

After remaining a prisoner for nearly four years, Queen Margaret was
ransomed by Louis XI. for fifty thousand crowns. She died in 1482, "the
most unfortunate Queen, wife, and mother," says Voltaire, "in Europe."

       *       *       *       *       *

Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, one of the greatest warriors of
the Middle Ages, was brother-in-law to Edward IV., whom he assisted,
in 1471, with men and arms; the English King promising, in return, to
aid Charles against his great enemy, Louis XI. The French King was
terribly afraid of the Duke; and had not the latter been so rash and
the former so crafty, King Louis might have lost his crown. In 1472
Charles crossed the Somme at the head of eighty thousand men, and
after capturing Nesle, where he massacred the people and burned the
town, he laid siege, in June, to the town of Beauvais, in Picardy. The
inhabitants were devoted to Louis XI., and, besides, they knew from the
fate of Nesle, where the blood flowed "ankle-deep" in the street, what
they might expect in the event of capture. So the defence was as stout
as the attack was fierce.

There dwelt in Beauvais a girl named Jeanne Fourquet, born November
14th, 1454, the daughter of an officer in the king's guards. She
was adopted, after her father's death, by a lady named Laisne. From
childhood Jeanne had taken a great interest in tales of warlike
valour; she always revered Jeanne d'Arc as a saint. She now displayed
her military tendencies in such a way as to save her native town and
immortalise her name. Arming herself with a _hachette_, or small axe,
she placed herself at the head of a band of women, and led them to the
ramparts, where they occupied themselves loading the cannon, pouring
hot water, boiling oil, or molten lead on the heads of the besiegers,
supplying the archers with arrows, or performing any other service
their strength would allow.

The Burgundians at last planted their ladders, and commenced scaling
the ramparts; but the first man who planted the flag of Charles was
hurled from the battlements by Jeanne Fourquet, who snatched the
standard from his hands, and waved it over her head. This deed so
animated the defenders of Beauvais, that they gallantly repulsed every
assault. After a fierce contest of nine hours, the besieged were
reinforced by the garrison of Noyen, and on the two following days by
troops and provisions from Amiens, Genlis, and Paris.

Charles battered the walls with heavy guns for nearly a month, and
almost destroyed the town with fire-balls. Finding his troops still
held at bay, he ordered a general assault on the 10th July, at seven
in the morning. The attack was fierce, but the defence was resolute.
The women, still led by Jeanne, displayed the same courage as before.
Thrice the Burgundians scaled the walls, and planted their flag on the
battlements; thrice they were repulsed with terrible losses. After the
assault had lasted four hours, the Burgundians saw their efforts were
fruitless, and sounded a retreat. During the night of the 22nd they
broke up their camp, and marched away towards Normandy.

Jeanne Fourquet deposited the flag she had taken in one of the churches
of Beauvais--doubtless that of the Jacobins, where it was preserved for
many years. It may now be seen at the Hotel de Ville. Louis XI. granted
to her the privilege of bearing this standard at the head of the French
army. Some years after this great event, Jeanne married Collin Pillon,
when, not only was she herself exempted from taxation, but the same
immunity was granted to her descendants.

It is neither by the name of Fourquet nor Pillon that the heroine is
famous. The weapon with which she was armed gave her a more illustrious
surname; and since that valiant deed, for which her countrymen must
ever remember her with gratitude, she has been known as Jeanne Hachette.

Her portrait may still be seen at Beauvais; and in commemoration of
her bravery, the anniversary of July 10th is celebrated by an annual
procession, in which the women march before the men.

Napoleon III., when President of the French Republic, inaugurated a
statue of Jeanne Hachette at Beauvais.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the civil wars which agitated Castile towards the close of the
century, the fortress of Toro was, by a curious coincidence, twice
defended by female commanders, the wives of two brothers opposed to
one another in politics. In 1475 it was held for Isabel the Catholic
by Dona Aldonza de Castillo, wife of the Alcayde, Don Rodrigo de
Ulloa, governor of the fortress. After the retreat of Ferdinand,
husband of Isabel, she was compelled to surrender. In the following
year the fortress was defended against the troops of Ferdinand and
Isabel by Dona Maria Sarmiento, wife of Don Juan de Ulloa. All hopes
of assistance having been dispelled, she obtained honourable terms of
capitulation.

       *       *       *       *       *

The same year, 1476, Isabel the Catholic having received intelligence
that the Portuguese meditated invading her dominions, resolved to
superintend in person the defence of the frontiers. Despite the
remonstrances of her council, she set out for Estramadura in the
summer of 1477, and, after capturing several fortresses, and placing
strong garrisons in Badajoz, Ciudad Rodrigo, and other frontier towns,
established her head-quarters at Seville.

Queen Isabel again displayed her wish to be a warrior during the
contest between Ferdinand and the Moors. In 1487 and 1489 she
encouraged the Spanish soldiers by her presence in the camp. In 1491
Ferdinand commenced the siege of Granada. Isabel arrived towards the
close of May. Attired in a magnificent suit of armour, and mounted on a
richly caparisoned horse, she rode through the ranks, greeted on all
sides with joyful acclamations.

Wishing to obtain a nearer view of the renowned red towers of the
Alhambra, the queen rode forward on the 18th June, escorted by the
entire Spanish cavalry, to the village of La Zubia, situated at a short
distance from Granada. But her curiosity was very near being the cause
of her capture. A large body of Moorish troops sallied out from Granada
and attacked the body-guard of the queen. Matters were growing serious,
when the Marquis de Cadix came to the rescue with twelve hundred
lances, and put the Moors to flight.

During the conflict Isabel did not display exactly the courage of a
heroine. Struck with abject terror, she remained on her knees all the
time, praying earnestly; and made a vow that if she escaped she would
erect a monastery on the spot.

       *       *       *       *       *

Most of the great Sforza's immediate descendants were more or less
distinguished for military talents. Caterina, or Catherine, the natural
daughter of Galeas Sforza, was remarkable for valour, military skill,
and also for her personal beauty. She was the wife of Jerome Ricario,
Prince of Forli; and some time after their marriage he was assassinated
by Francis Del Orsa, who had revolted against him. Caterina and her
children fell into the hands of the assassin, but she soon escaped to
Rimini, which still remained faithful. She defended the town, in 1466,
with such determination that the besiegers, to frighten her into a
surrender, threatened to put her children to death.

Caterina was at last restored to sovereign power, and married John de'
Medici, a man of noble family, though not very distinguished for genius
or bravery. In 1500 she defended Forli against the talented Caesar
Borgia; being compelled to surrender, she was imprisoned in the castle
of San Angelo, at Rome. Soon, however, she was restored to liberty; but
her dominions were never given back to her. She died shortly after her
release.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




VIII.

     Maria d'Estrada, and other Spanish Women serving
     under Cortez--Catalina de Erauso, the Monja Alferez
     (Nun-Lieutenant)--Dona Maria Pacheco (Confederacy of the Holy
     Junta)--Eleonora of Toledo, Grand-Duchess of Tuscany--TURKS IN
     HUNGARY--Courage of a Jewess at Buda--Bravery of the Women of
     Temesvar, Erlau, Valpon, Agria, and Szigeth in Hungary and of
     Famagosta in Cyprus--Louise Labe--Mary of Hungary--Granu Weal--THE
     REFORMATION--Kenan Simonz Hasselaar--Women of Alkmaar--Mary,
     Queen of Scots--Magdalaine de Saint-Nectaire--Constance de
     Cezelli--Christine de Lalaing, Princess d'Espinoy--Queen
     Elizabeth--English and Scottish Border Heroines--Barbara of
     Ernecourt (Thirty Years' War)--Christina of Sweden.


THE discovery of America opened up a new field of enterprise for those
brave, reckless, ne'er-do-weel soldiers of fortune by whom the Old
World was overrun. Adventurers sailed from various ports of Europe,
under the command of audacious leaders, such as Balboa and Pizarro,
whose daring spirit and enterprising disposition gave them authority
over their companions. Numbers of women, imbibing the spirit of the
times, accompanied those bands of adventurers--sometimes disguised in
male attire, but more frequently in the garments of their own sex.

When Cortez sailed from Cuba, in 1518, on that voyage which terminated
in the conquest of Mexico, he was followed by six hundred soldiers,
many of whom were accompanied by their wives. These Castilian dames,
preferring to endure the hardships of a campaign than be separated from
their husbands, and probably feeling curious to see for themselves
those marvels of the New World about which all Europe was talking, in
no way disgraced the name of Spaniard by any feminine timidity. In the
camp before Mexico, which Cortez was besieging, 1521, it was their
fortitude which kept up the spirit of the soldiers, who, repulsed in
several assaults on the city, and suffering from famine, had become
gloomy and despondent. Several examples have been preserved of the
bravery displayed by these Spanish wives. One of them would frequently
mount guard to relieve her tired husband; another, seeing the Spaniards
repulsed in an attack, hastily donned a soldier's _escaupil_, snatched
up a sword and lance, rallied the retreating Christians and led them
once more against the Mexicans.

Cortez had requested the women to remain behind, at Tlascala, but they
proudly answered him that "It was the duty of Castilian wives not to
abandon their husbands in danger, but to share it with them--and die
with them if necessary."

The name of one of these female warriors was Maria d'Estrada, who
fought by the side of her husband through every campaign, displaying
the same courage as her companions in arms.

Another Spanish-American heroine was Catalina de Erauso, the "Monja
Alferez," or Nun-Lieutenant. Her life was the most romantic that could
be imagined. She has written her own history in pure and classic
Spanish, displaying as much literary ability in its composition as,
in her warlike career, she had shown heroic valor, mixed with savage
cruelty.

She was born in 1592, daughter of a Spanish hidalgo of St. Sebastian,
Don Miguel de Erauso, an officer in the royal army, and, after the
fashion of those days, was destined for the Church. So, at the early
age of four, she was sent to the Dominican convent, the prioress of
which was her aunt. Here she remained till her fifteenth year; but
during all these years she acquired so inveterate a dislike for the
cloister that she contrived to make her escape from the convent,
shortly before the day on which she was to take the veil. She hid in a
chestnut grove for three days, cut her hair short, made her petticoats
into male attire, and then started on her travels.

She passed through various romantic adventures in Spain, acting in the
different capacities of page, clerk, and servant. Thus disguised, she
joined an expedition to South America, where she became a soldier. At
different times she assumed one name or another; but that under which
she was best known, and was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, was
Alonzo Dias. Under this alias she was the victor in several skirmishes.
So clear was her judgment that her opinion was frequently asked by the
generals at their councils of war.

During the intervals of military duty, Catalina gambled, drank, robbed,
assassinated, cursed and swore, and behaved altogether very like an
Alsatian bully. She chose for her associates the most desperate and
reprobate characters, and seemed to take a fiendish delight in outdoing
them. Sometimes she would pay attentions to a simple girl, and when the
wedding-day was fixed she would disappear.

One night, in a gambling-house in Chili, she quarrelled with, and
stabbed a gentleman of great importance in the city. The relatives
made the place so hot for Catalina, that she was compelled to make her
escape across the Andes, into another province. Her lawlessness once
brought her under the hands of the hangman; and a reprieve arrived
just as, with the noose round her neck, she was about to be launched
into eternity. She wandered over every part of Spanish America, taking
up, at random, the profession of soldier, sailor, or even lawyer.

The discovery of her sex was brought about by a curious accident. Her
violent deeds having again provoked the guardians of the law, she was
compelled to fly for refuge for sanctuary to a church at Guamango, in
Peru. The bishop, a pious man, tried to convert the young criminal,
animadverting on the wicked life the latter had been leading, and
exhorting her to repentance. The stubborn heart of Catalina, inured to
every kind of reproach and harsh language, was touched by the kindness
with which the bishop spoke. For a few moments she maintained a dogged
silence; then, falling on her knees and bursting into tears:--

"Father," she sobbed. "I am a woman!"

She then told the astounded prelate her extraordinary story. He pitied
the unhappy young woman, and by his influence she was pardoned and
permitted to return to Spain. She arrived at Cadiz in 1624, whither
her fame had preceded her. During her journey through Spain and Italy
the streets were crowded by wondering spectators. Pope Urban VIII.
allowed her to retain her masculine costume for the rest of her days.
It is not known in what year she died; according to an old manuscript
preserved in a convent at Vera Cruz, she devoted her latter years to
trade, and assumed the name of Antonio de Erauso. Her portrait was
taken at Seville by Pacheco, a Spanish painter.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the early years of the Emperor Charles V.'s reign, the nobles of
Castile formed a confederacy called the Holy Junta, and took up arms
to recover their traditional rights and privileges. John de Padilla,
a young noble, was at the head of this insurrection; but it was his
wife, Dona Maria Pacheco, who really conducted the confederacy. She
was highly gifted and extremely ambitious, though, like most ambitious
people, not at all scrupulous as to the means employed, so long as the
event turned out according to her wishes.

The Junta soon began to languish for want of money, so Dona Maria
persuaded the people to strip the cathedral at Toledo of its plate and
jewellery. In 1521 Padilla was captured, and sentenced to death. He
wrote to his wife, telling her not to grieve, but rather to consider
his death as his deliverance from a weary life. But his capture proved
fatal to the confederacy. Toledo, the head-quarters of the rebels,
was soon invested by the king's troops. Dona Maria used every means
to secure her position. She even wrote to the French general on the
Spanish frontier, inviting him to invade Navarre. By keeping the death
of Padilla fresh in the minds of the citizens, she incited them to make
a resolute defence. Sorties attended with varied success were made,
sometimes daily, from the garrison.

At last the canons of the cathedral, whom she had offended, worked
on the minds of the ignorant, credulous multitude, telling them that
Maria's influence over them was due entirely to witchcraft. The loss of
three hundred men in a desperate sortie so humbled the citizens that
they drove Maria into the Alcazar, and opened the gates to Charles's
troops.

Maria defended herself four months longer in the citadel. But at last,
reduced to the utmost extremities, she fled into Portugal, where many
of her relatives and friends resided, and there passed the remainder of
her days in great poverty.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eleonora of Toledo, the first Grand-Duchess of Tuscany, was a woman
possessing great courage and a powerful, ambitious intellect. In 1543
she married Cosmo de'Medici, Duke of Florence. Eleonora took an active
part in the wars between her husband and his hereditary enemies, the
Strozzi; and in the bloody and terrible battles fought during the
struggle, she never left him. Her courage aided greatly to turn the
fortune of war. One day, while riding out with an escort of fifteen
horsemen, she encountered Philip Strozzi, commander of her husband's
enemies, reconnoitring the Florentine camp. Although he had a guard of
forty-five men, Eleonora, with her accustomed bravery, attacked him,
slew nearly all his men, and took himself prisoner. Philip, knowing
that he could not expect quarter--which had never been granted to
prisoners on either side during the war--committed suicide sooner than
perish ignominiously on the scaffold. Eleonora was so shocked that she
prevailed on her husband to spare the lives of his prisoners henceforth.

Eleonora also took a leading part in the war between Charles V. and
Francis I. Together with her husband she was actively engaged in the
storming of Sienna. She urged Cosmo to have himself crowned king; but
he was unable to carry out her project. Pope Pius V. at length changed
his title from Duke of Florence to Grand-Duke of Tuscany.

Eleonora's ambition being now satisfied, she gave up the rest of her
life to the encouragement of the fine arts, national education, and
founding charitable institutions. The date of her death is unknown.

       *       *       *       *       *

Under Solyman the Magnificent, the Turks conquered the greater part of
Hungary; whose king, Louis II., was routed and slain in the disastrous
battle of Mohacz, 1526. And during the next hundred and fifty years
Hungary was the scene of endless strife between the Crescent and the
Cross. For a long time victory inclined to the side of the infidels.
Women, as usual, took a prominent share in the terrible scenes of
bloodshed and carnage. Wherever there was a town to be defended, women
immediately took up arms and aided the men to keep off the common enemy.

This female courage showed itself on both sides during these dreary
wars. In 1529, during the absence of Solyman, the Christians laid siege
to Buda, the capital of Hungary. One day, having overpowered the Turks,
they were rushing into the town, when a Jewess tearing a strip of rag
from her gown, lighted it, and fired off an immense cannon which the
Ottomans in their flight had overlooked. It caused such havoc amongst
the Hungarians that they were paralyzed with terror--thus gaining time
for the Janizaries to rally; and the result was the final repulse of
the Christians.

Tradition declares that Solyman, when he heard of this courageous act,
ordered the Jewess's gown to be girt with a circle of pure silver.

In 1552 Solyman besieged Temesvar, which was defended by the brave
Lasonczy. The wife of the latter led an army to the relief of her
husband, and attacked the Turkish camp, but she was soon defeated.
The revolt of the German garrison soon after compelled Lasonczy to
surrender.

The town of Erlau, besieged at the same time, withstood gallantly
the repeated assaults of a numerous army. Its fortifications were of
the poorest description, and the garrison small, but the valour, the
patriotism of the townspeople supplied every deficiency. Old men and
young girls, sword and spear in hand, aided in the defence. One woman
was fighting beside her husband when he fell, pierced by a Turkish
bullet. Her mother, who was also assisting to defend the wall, now
wished to remove the body, and suggested that they should devote
themselves to seeing it honourably interred. But the young widow
refused to leave the scene of action.

"May God," she cried, "never suffer the earth to cover my husband's
corpse, till his death has been amply avenged. This is the hour of
battle, not a time for funeral and for tears."

She seized the shield and sword of her dead husband, and rushing upon
the Turks, refused to leave the breach, till by the slaughter of three
infidels she had satisfied her thirst for revenge. Then she raised the
corpse of her lord, and bore it to the principal church in the town,
where she paid to it the last honours with great splendour.

When the Turks were besieging Alba, several women, whose husbands had
been slain, volunteered to defend the walls. The Turks were amazed at
the cool bravery with which these female warriors defended the various
posts assigned to them. For several hours they held a bastion, the
possession of which was deemed highly important by both Turks and
Christians. Every Turk who endeavoured to scale the bastion had his
head struck with a scythe.

For more than three months, thanks to the valour of the women, the town
of Valpon set the Mussulman power at defiance, backed though the latter
was by all the appliances of war.

The same resistance met them at Agria, not far from Valpon, where the
wives and daughters of the citizens carried oil, pitch, boiling water,
molten lead, etc., to pour on the heads of the Turks. One woman was
struck down by a cannon ball just as she was about to hurl a big stone
on the skulls of the infidels. Her daughter, seeing her fall, was
filled with the thirst for revenge. Rushing to the breach, she fought
with the desperate bravery of a lioness deprived of her cubs, slaying
and wounding on all sides. At last she was herself slain. One of the
citizens fighting on the ramparts observed his son-in-law struck dead
by a musket-ball. Turning to his wife, he asked her to carry away the
corpse and render to it the last offices.

"There is another duty more pressing," replied she. "That of defending
our religion and our country comes before love. To them I will give the
last drop of my blood."

During the siege of Szigeth, in 1566, which cost the Turks twenty
thousand men, orders were given one day for a general assault. A
Hungarian officer, wishing to save his wife from falling into the hands
of the infidels, took the cruel resolution of putting her to death. But
his young wife, less attached to her life than to her husband, declared
that she would accompany him to battle, there to receive death or
glory. Dressing herself in a suit of his clothes, she armed herself and
went with him to the field. No one displayed greater courage than she
did. Without once quitting her husband, she slew every Turk who came
within reach of her sword. She continued to fight with the same ardour
till the close of the engagement, and wherever she was seen a Turkish
corpse remained to mark her presence. At last her husband was slain,
and she herself, severely wounded by the Turkish arrows, lay on her
husband's breast. After receiving the last sacrament, she expired in
great agony.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the siege of Famagosta, in Cyprus, by Mustapha Pacha, in 1571,
the noblest Cypriote dames, undismayed by the iron fire of the Turkish
batteries, aided to defend the city. Not only did they carry round
food and ammunition to the soldiers, but, during the assault, they
rolled huge stones on the heads of the Turks assembled in the ditch
below or climbing to the attack.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the annals of French poetry few names stand higher than that of
Louise Labe, _La Belle Cordiere_. She was born at Lyons in 1526 or
1527. Nature was lavish in her gifts; to personal beauty and an
exquisite voice, were added talents for literature and music. Her
education included music, languages, riding, and military exercises.
The last named acquirement excited in the mind of Louise a wish to
enter the army. At the age of sixteen she served, under the name of
Captain Loys, in the campaign of 1542, which ended in the siege of
Perpignan. Some say she followed her father, others her lover to the
field; but whatever was the cause of her presence in camp, she earned
great praises for her courage. But the French were obliged to raise the
siege; and Louise Labe, after sharing in the fetes and tournaments held
by the Dauphin, gave up the military profession, henceforth devoting
her time to music and poetry.

She married Ennemond Perrin, a wealthy rope-maker, and thus acquired
the opportunity to follow her literary inclinations. She possessed a
valuable library of books in Greek, Latin, Spanish, and Italian, which
languages she knew perfectly. Her spacious and tastefully laid-out
gardens became the resort of nobles, poets, savants, wits, artists,
musicians, and men of genius of every kind; and at these re-unions the
musical skill of _La Belle Cordiere_ showed to advantage. She excited
at the same time the admiration of the poets and the envy of the
ladies. The street in Lyons where she lived was christened after her.
She died in 1566, one year after her husband, who had left her sole
heir to his large property.

Her chief works were an "Epistle to Clemence de Bourges," the "Debat
de la Folie et de l'Amour," a drama in prose, three elegies, and
twenty-four sonnets. The first edition of her writings appeared in 1555.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mary of Hungary, wife of the unfortunate Louis II., who was slain in
the battle of Mohacz, was celebrated throughout continental Europe for
her military prowess and her love of field-sports. From the latter
she acquired the soubriquet of Diana, while from her habit of mixing
with the soldiers she was styled (like the Empress Victoria) "Mother
of the Camp." She was the daughter of Philip I. of Spain, and handsome
even for a Spanish princess, majestic in her carriage, yet affable and
charming in her manners. Her brother, the Emperor Charles V., had so
high an opinion of her political abilities that he entrusted to her
charge the government of the Netherlands; and her court soon became
famous for the magnificence of its tournaments and spectacles.

Mary commanded during several expeditions against the troops of France;
and during the various battles and skirmishes which ensued, she would
frequently march on foot, or ride with the soldiers to encourage them
by her presence. In 1553, when Charles V. was besieging Metz, which was
defended by the Duke of Guise, Mary caused a diversion, by invading
Picardy, to prevent Henry II. from succouring the besieged. By this
raid she caused terrible havoc, destroying seven or eight hundred
villages, and burning Folembrai, a favourite palace of Francis I.

Henry II., in retaliation, burned some of the most populous towns in
the Netherlands, together with the royal palace of Bains, which was one
of the architectural wonders of the age. Mary vowed that France should
repent this deed. She kept her word; and more than once her conduct
savoured of gross cruelty. Henry directed his soldiers to try their
utmost to make Mary a prisoner; for, said he, he would like to try
whether she would retain, in captivity, her haughty, courageous spirit.

Mary resigned the government of the Netherlands in 1555, and returned
to Spain, where she died three years afterwards.

Graine-ni-Mhaile, Granu Weal, or Grace O'Malley, a famous Irish heroine
who lived during the latter half of the sixteenth century, was daughter
of Owen O'Malley, a noted chief who commanded a small navy. He used
to make voyages from port to port, partly for commerce, but more
especially for piracy. During childhood, Grace frequently accompanied
her father on his expeditions. After his death, her brother being a
minor, she took command of the galleys, and made several voyages. Her
chief rendezvous was at Clare island, off the coast of Mayo, where she
kept her larger vessels moored. Here, too, she had a fortress. Her
smaller ships she kept at Carrigahooly Castle, which was her favourite
residence, and chief stronghold.

Her piracies at length became so frequent and so daring that a reward
of five hundred pounds was offered by the English Government for her
apprehension. Troops were sent from Galway to Carrigahooly; but after
a siege of more than a fortnight, they were compelled to retire. The
people of Connaught relate numerous adventures and extraordinary
actions performed on the high seas by Granu Weal.

Her first husband was O'Flaherty, chief of West Connaught. After his
death she married Sir Richard Burke, and became reconciled to the
English. After her second marriage, she frequently assisted the
English with her troops in Connaught; for which Queen Elizabeth wrote
her an autograph letter, thanking her and inviting her on a visit to
the court, at London. Graine-ni-Mhaile, with several galleys, sailed
to London in 1575. She was received with great distinction by the
queen, who offered to make her visitor a countess; but Grace declined
this honour, and answered with much spirit, that both of them being
princesses, they were equal in rank, and could not therefore confer
titles or honours upon each other. But, she said, her majesty might
confer any rank she pleased on young Burke (son of Grace), who was
born on board ship during the voyage to England; named from this
circumstance, Tioboid-na-Lung, signifying Theobald of the Ships. Queen
Elizabeth, it is said, knighted him under the title of Sir Theobald
Burke; he was afterwards created Viscount of Mayo by Charles I.

On her voyage home Granu Weal landed at Howth for provisions. She was
greatly surprised to find the gates of the castle closed, because
the family were at dinner. Indignant at this dereliction from Irish
hospitality, Granu seized a little boy whom she found playing with
an attendant near the sea-shore. Finding that he was the infant heir
of Howth, she brought him to Connaught: refusing to restore him till
Lord Howth had entered into an agreement that his gates should never
again be closed during dinner. The abduction of the infant heir of St.
Lawrence forms the subject of a painting at Howth Castle.

Grace O'Malley was buried in a monastery which she had herself endowed,
on Clare island. There are yet some remains of her monument to be
seen there. Her name has always been familiar in the mouths of Irish
peasants; and she is still sung as a heroine in various ballads,
English and Irish.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the fiercely contested wars brought about by the efforts of
the Roman Catholic princes to stop the Reformation, women, as usual,
took their share of the dangers and privations endured by all for the
sake of their faith. They displayed as much courage and fortitude as
the men, whether, as the wives and daughters of citizens they aided to
defend their homes, or whether as princesses they boldly headed their
troops in defence of their religion and their dominions.

Kenan Simonsz Hasselaar was heroine of the famous siege of Haarlem.
The revolting cruelty of Spain in her first efforts to stamp out the
rebellion in the Netherlands, only stimulated the Dutch to bolder
and more desperate efforts for freedom. Haarlem was one of the most
important cities; and the Spaniards, resolved to capture it at any
price, despatched twelve thousand men, commanded by Frederic of Toledo,
to besiege the city in December, 1572. On the 12th, during a severe
frost, the place was invested. Bravely did the inhabitants, both
soldiers and citizens, resist the Spaniards. Women cheerfully shared in
all the toils and dangers, the manifold privations of the defence.

Kenan Simonsz Hasselaar, a widow about fifty years old, of a noble
family, raised a troop of three hundred women for the defence of the
walls. At the head of her corps she was constantly seen pressing
forward to attack the Spaniards, or aiding in the erection of new
defences. Even the besiegers, who were repulsed with great slaughter in
several assaults, could not help admiring the courage of this Amazon
band.

Holland still holds the name of Kenan Hasselaar very dear. One of the
ships launched from the government dock-yards every year receives her
name. A huge painting suspended in the hall of the Haarlem Stadthuis
transmits her glorious deeds to posterity; and her portrait hangs in
the Treasure Chamber of the Municipality, amongst the commanders of St.
John, the relics of the Spanish wars, the town insignia, and the other
precious nick-nacks and antiquities collected together, accumulated by
generations of thrifty and patriotic burghers.

The women of Alkmaar (which was besieged by Don Frederic immediately
after the fall of Haarlem) displayed the same courage. During the
general assault made by the Spaniards on the 18th September, 1573,
the women aided the soldiers by hurling down fragments of stones and
red-hot iron, and pouring boiling oil, molten pitch, rosin, and lead on
the besiegers, of whom a terrible carnage was made.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mary Queen of Scots, the unfortunate rival of Elizabeth, was a
high-spirited, courageous woman, possessing great talents for ruling;
and had she lived before the Reformation, she might possibly have
been more successful than her ancestors, most of whom came to an
untimely end. But the bitter hostility of John Knox was too powerful
for the queen, though for some years she contrived to keep her throne.
In 1565, shortly before her ill-starred marriage with Darnley, the
Congregational citizens of Edinburgh, stirred up to rebellion by the
secret machinations of the queen's "base brother, Moray," turned out in
hostile array, and encamped at St. Leonard's Crags. Mary, undismayed by
the fierce looks and big words of these staunch Protestants, rode to
meet them at the head of a mere handful of troops. The rebel leaders
fled, and the rest, under promise of pardon, returned to their homes.

In July of the same year the queen wedded Darnley. This was the
signal for an open insurrection on the part of the Scottish nobles.
Again Queen Mary showed herself a worthy descendant of the Stuarts.
"She acted in this emergency," remarks Miss Strickland, "with energy
and spirit indicative of the confidence inspired by her popularity,
and showed herself no whit behind the most distinguished of her
predecessors in courage and ability." At the head of five thousand men
she left Edinburgh, August 26th, together with her husband, the lords
of the council, and her ladies-in-waiting. She was attired in a scarlet
and gold-embroidered riding-habit, which, it was said, covered a light
suit of armour, while her hood and veil were understood to conceal a
steel casque. Pistols hung at her saddle-bow. Darnley, with a vanity
inherent in his nature, wore a gorgeous suit of gilded armour.

On the 29th the queen reached Glasgow; and next day the rebels
retreated from Paisley towards Hamilton. The queen set out in pursuit.
The confederate lords, disappointed in their expectations of a general
Protestant rising, were obliged to retreat from place to place before
the queen and her army. The bravery and endurance of Mary gained the
love and respect of many amongst her subjects.

Mary returned to Edinburgh for a short time; and on the 8th of October
she marched again, this time at the head of eighteen thousand men, to
renew the war. The rebel lords, terrified at the approach of their
royal mistress, fled across the English border, and took refuge in
Carlisle.

Queen Mary had no further opportunity of displaying her courage till
after the murder of Darnley, in 1567, when the base conduct of Bothwell
and the consequent insurrection of nearly all the Scottish nobles
forced her once more to take the field in person. When the opposing
armies met, June 14th, at Carberry Hill, she rode with her followers
to the field, though neither she nor they had broken their fast that
morning.

After this followed the captivity of Mary in Loch-Leven Castle. In 1568
she made her escape, and assisted by a few friends, made a last effort
to recover her throne. The Earl of Murray (regent during the minority
of king James), with a large army intercepted the queen's march at
Langside, two miles from Glasgow.

It is not quite clear whether Mary took an active part in the battle
of Langside, which for ever crushed her hopes. Brantome declares "the
Queen-mother of France assured him that Mary mounted her good hackney
and rode into the battle like another Zenobia, to encourage her troops
to advance, and would fain have led them to the charge in person. But
she found them all quarrelling among themselves, and insensible to her
eloquence, and more inclined to exchange blows with each other than to
attack the rebel host."

According to the popular tradition, however, it was beneath the
spreading boughs of a hawthorn, which is still known as "the Queen's
thorn," halfway up the green hill behind Castlemilk, that the
unfortunate sovereign stood and watched the battle, surrounded by her
ladies and a few devoted adherents. Legend also points out another
"Queen's thorn" on the hill behind the ruins of Cathcart Castle.
According to a local history, Lord Livingstone, at the head of "the
bairns of Falkirk," rode with the queen to the battle-field, and
afterwards aided her to escape; and this would seem to corroborate what
Brantome has said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Amongst those heroines who distinguished themselves during the
religious wars in France, was Magdalaine de Saint-Nectaire,--also
called Se' nectaire, or Sennetaire. She was a staunch Protestant, and
after the death of her husband, Gui di Saint Exuperi, she retired to
her chateau at Miremont, in Limousin, armed sixty of her retainers,
and commenced a series of raids against the Roman Catholics. In
1575, during the reign of the weak and frivolous Henry III., Montal,
Lieutenant du Roi, in Limousin, whose soldiers had often been defeated
by Magdalaine, resolved to besiege the heroine in her chateau. With
fifteen hundred foot and two hundred horse he arrived before the gates.
Magdalaine made a sally, and cut to pieces a detachment of fifty men;
but on her return she found that the chateau had been captured. She
gallopped to Turene, a neighbouring town, to gather reinforcements,
returning thence with four companies of mounted arquebusiers. Montal
awaited her in a defile of the mountains; but he was vanquished and
mortally wounded. His soldiers, discouraged by the fall of their
leader, withdrew the same evening to a neighbouring castle, where
Montal died four days later.

The year of this heroine's death is not recorded.

       *       *       *       *       *

Another heroine of these wars was Constance de Cezelli, a loyal
supporter of Henry IV. When that monarch, after his accession to the
throne, was struggling for supremacy with the League, the troops of
the latter, in 1590, besieged the town of Leucates, in Languedoc.
It was defended by the Huguenots, under the command of M. de Barri,
governor of the place. The latter was captured by means of a pretended
conference; but he contrived to write to his wife, Constance de
Cezelli, bidding her to take the command and defend the town so long as
there was any hope of success. Constance, according to his commands,
maintained order in Leucates, and encouraged the soldiers by frequently
appearing on the walls with a pike in her hand. When the Leaguers
discovered who it was that commanded the garrison they thought to
frighten her into a surrender by threatening to put her husband to
death if she did not give up the town. She possessed much private
property, which she offered as ransom for her husband; but she declared
that she could never purchase his life by an act of treason.

M. de Barri was put to the torture, for the besiegers thought that
he would command his wife to open the gates. But he braved all their
menaces, and when they were compelled, soon after, to raise the siege
the governor of Leucates was strangled.

Although Constance was overwhelmed with grief and horror, she would not
allow the soldiers to avenge the death of M. de Barri on some Roman
Catholic prisoners.

Henry IV. sent Constance de Cezelli a commission appointing her
governor of Leucates, with a reversion in favour of her son. She held
this office for twenty-seven years, and proved herself thoroughly
competent for the duties of governor.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the 26th July, 1581, the United Netherlands declared their
independence, and invited the Duke of Anjou to rule over them. But,
although the prince entered the country with five thousand horse and
twelve thousand foot, the military genius of Alexander Farnese, the
Spanish governor, together with the vacillating conduct of the Dutch
themselves, frustrated all his efforts, and he was compelled to disband
his forces and leave the country. The greater number of his soldiers
joined the standard of the Prince d'Espinoy, governor of Tournai.

Alexander Farnese laid siege, on the 1st of October, to the important
city of Tournai. In the absence of the Prince d'Espinoy, the Princess,
Christine de Lalaing, took the command, and conducted the defence in
a manner worthy of her distinguished relatives Count Horn and Admiral
de Montmorency. The Prince of Parma summoned Tournai to surrender,
but Christine gave him a defiant refusal, and set so courageous
an example to the soldiers that they made a resolute defence. The
princess superintended all the defences in person, and directed all the
officers. She appeared daily on the walls; and in one of the assaults
was wounded in the arm, though, despite this, she refused to retire
till the Spaniards had been repulsed.

After a siege of two months' duration, it became impossible to hold the
place any longer. The walls were gradually undermined from without,
and the fidelity of the garrison was tampered with by Father Gery, a
Dominican friar. The Protestants in the city, not knowing what moment
an insurrection would break out amongst the Catholic inhabitants,
insisted upon surrendering the place. Christine finding herself
deserted by both Protestants and Catholics, obtained honourable terms,
and left the city with all the honours of war, carrying all her
personal property with her. Farnese, moreover, accepted one hundred
thousand crowns in place of sacking the city.

As the princess passed through the gates she was received with an
outburst of applause from the Spanish army, with whom she had acquired
a high reputation through her courage. Parma entered the city on
November 30th.

In September, 1863, a statue was raised to Christine de Lalaing in the
city, which, nearly three centuries before, she had so nobly defended.

       *       *       *       *       *

In 1588 a panic flew from one end of England to the other on the
threatened invasion of the Spanish Armada. As it was supposed that
the invaders would attempt to sail up the Thames, several thousand
volunteers were assembled at Tilbury, under command of the Earl of
Leicester. "Vnto the sayd army," says Richard Hackluyt, "came in proper
person, the Queen's most roiall Maiestie, representing Tomyris, that
Scythian princesse, or rather diuine Pallas her selfe."

On the 8th of August, Queen Elizabeth, mounted on a white charger, a
marshal's _baton_ grasped in her hand, rode through the camp, where
she was received with enthusiastic acclamations by both volunteers
and regulars drawn up on a hill near Tilbury church. Forbidding any
of her retinue to follow her, she was attended only by the Earls of
Ormonde and Leicester, the latter bearing before her the Sword of
State. She was also followed by a page, who had the honour of carrying
her "white-plumed regal helmet." The queen's costume was a mixture of
the military uniform and the fashionable ladies' attire of the period.
Beneath a corslet of polished steel descended "a farthingale of such
monstrous amplitude, that," observes Miss Strickland, "it is wonderful
how her high-mettled war-horse submitted to carry a lady encumbered
with a gabardine of so strange a fashion."

Riding bare-headed through the ranks, she addressed the warriors in an
oration well calculated to inspire them with enthusiasm. It concluded
amidst vociferous and long continued cheering.

After the dispersion of the Invincible Armada, Elizabeth celebrated a
triumph, in imitation of the ancient Romans. She rode in a triumphal
chariot from her palace to St. Paul's cathedral, where the "enseignes
and colours of ye vanquished Spaniards," were displayed to the
delighted gaze of the citizens.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the Border Wars between England and Scotland women had frequent
opportunities of local distinction. Holinshed, speaking of a skirmish
which took place at Naworth, in 1570, between Lord Hursden and Leonard
Dacres, says the latter had in his army "many desperate women, who
there gave the adventure of their lives, and fought right stoutly."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Duchy of Lorraine, or Lothringen, was, for many centuries, a
subject of contention between France and Germany. It was for a
long time a fief of the German empire; but from the middle of the
sixteenth century, the royal family of France became connected with
its rulers, and assumed thenceforth a right to interfere in its
internal arrangements. During the Thirty Years' War the French drove
Duke Charles from his throne, on account of his close connection with
Austria.

It was during this war that Madame St. Balmont, who has been styled a
second Joan of Arc, performed the gallant deeds for which she became
so famous. Barbara of Ernecourt, was born in 1609, at the Castle of
Neuville, situated between Verdun and Bar. She belonged to a good
family in Lorraine, and from her earliest childhood she trained herself
in military exercises and the use of arms. Her chief delight was
hunting, and every kind of field sport, which the Abbe Arnould remarks,
"is a kind of war." One day when she was engaging in her favourite
pastime, she met with the Count de St. Belmont, and, being mutually
charmed, they married shortly after.

Barbara was scarcely more than a girl when she married, and at this
time her face was excessively pretty, though it was afterwards spoiled
by the small pox--when, so far from being made unhappy by the loss of
her beauty, "she was as pleased," says the Abbe Arnould, "to be marked
with it as other women are afflicted on a similar occasion, and said
that it would enable her to look more like a man." Her figure, however,
was small and clumsily made; but she was robust, and able to bear a
considerable amount of fatigue without being overcome by it.

When the French invaded Lorraine, the Count de St. Belmont, who had
always occupied a high place in the estimation of the duke, now
actively employed himself resisting the invaders, while Barbara
remained as custodian of his castle and estates. Unfortunately, the
duke's high opinion of M. de St. Belmont's military talents led the
latter into a serious dilemma; for, being given the command of a
fortress, he felt himself bound in honour to defend it for several
days against the French. In those days there was, it would seem, a
rigid code of the military law--doubtless first introduced through
humane feelings--by which officers in charge of strongholds refusing
to surrender, after all hope of success was gone, were to be punished
in the most degrading manner. When this feeble stronghold was taken,
the French leaders seriously debated the expediency of hanging their
antagonist.

Meanwhile the countess, having been contemptuously treated by a cavalry
officer who had taken up his abode on one of her husband's estates,
despatched a cartel, signed "Le Chevalier de St. Belmont," purporting
to be written by her husband's brother. They crossed swords, and
Barbara almost immediately disarmed her opponent; then, picking up his
sword and handing it to him with a gracious smile, she said:--

"You thought, sir, I make no doubt, that you were fighting with Le
Chevalier de St. Belmont; it is, however Madame de St. Belmont of that
name who returns you your sword, and begs you in future to pay more
regard to the requests of ladies."

The officer, not caring to show his face in the vicinity, disappeared
immediately and was never heard of again.

Barbara's reputation was considerably raised by this duel; several
gentlemen in the neighbourhood took refuge in the village and put
themselves under her orders. At their head she made frequent raids
into those parts of the country occupied by the French. She was always
victorious, and almost invariably brought home some trophies in arms
or baggage, for, in addition to courage, she possessed great prudence
and foresight.

The Peace of Westphalia, in 1648, put an end to the Thirty Years' War,
and settled, for a time, the affairs of Lorraine. Barbara laid down
the sword and took up the pen, which she wielded quite as skilfully.
Her first work, "Les Jumeaux Martyrs," appeared in 1651; other works
of equal merit followed. After the death of her husband she gave
herself up entirely to religion, to which she had always been devotedly
attached, and retired into a convent. She died before taking the veil,
May 22nd, 1660, at the age of fifty-one.

Although there was none of that unfeminine coarseness which so often
attaches to women who pass the greater part of their lives in camps,
Barbara was always more at her ease in male society than in that of
her own sex, in which she felt embarrassed, awkward. While her courage
rendered her famous throughout France and Germany, her charity and the
zeal which she displayed in the service of the poor, rendered Madame de
St. Belmont respected and beloved by persons of every rank who dwelt in
the neighbourhood.

       *       *       *       *       *

Christina of Sweden, daughter of Gustavus Adolphus, the great
Protestant hero of the Thirty Years' War, inherited her father's native
love for battles, soldiers, even the smell of powder--all, in fact,
that pertains to a warrior's life. When she was about two years old,
her father took her to Calmar. The governor did not know whether to
give the customary salute, afraid lest the child might be frightened
by the noise of the cannon. But Gustavus, whom he consulted, replied,
after a moment's hesitation:--

"Fire! The girl is the daughter of a soldier, and should be accustomed
to it early."

The salute was therefore given. Christina clapped her hands in delight.

"More! More!" she cried.

Pleased to see her evident predilection for the taste of gunpowder,
Gustavus Adolphus took his daughter, soon after, to see a grand review.
She displayed even greater delight than before, and Gustavus said, with
a smile:--

"Very well; you shall go, I am resolved, where you shall have enough of
this."

However, the early death of Gustavus Adolphus hindered him from ever
fulfilling this promise; and Christina, in her memoirs, regrets that
she was not permitted to learn the art of war under so illustrious a
master.

In 1647, at the age of twenty-nine, Christina resigned the crown of
Sweden. Passing through Denmark and Germany, she proceeded to Belgium;
and from Innspruck she went to Rome, which she entered in state,
attired in the costume of an Amazon, and mounted on a war-horse.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




IX.

THE AMAZONS IN SOUTH AMERICA.


DOWN from the lofty Andes rolls the majestic Amazon, the largest river
in the world. From its sources to the Atlantic the length is upwards of
four thousand miles. The banks are clothed with immense impenetrable
forests of pine, cedar, red-wood, holly, and cinnamon, affording a
haunt to savage jaguars, bears, leopards, tigers, wild boars, and a
great variety of venemous serpents; and abounding, too, in birds of the
most beautiful plumage, and apes of the most fantastic appearance. The
waters swarm with alligators, turtles, and almost every description of
fish. The shores and islands were formerly peopled by numerous tribes
of Indians, who have either become extinct or retired further up the
mountains.

This majestic river was first explored in 1540-41, by Francisco
Orellana, a Spanish adventurer. Gonzalo Pizarro, brother of the Marquis
of Pizarro, started with Orellana from Zumaque, where they met by
accident. Together they descended the river Coca in search of the
wondrous El Dorado, which, they had been told, was situated on the
banks of a great river into which the Coca flowed. During the voyage
they met with innumerable difficulties, and suffered great hardships,
especially from the want of provisions. Several of their followers
fell ill; and at last Pizarro constructed a brigantine, and embarked
his invalids on board, with two hundred thousand livres in gold. He
gave Orellana the command, and remained behind with the rest of the
adventurers; desiring Orellana, if successful, to return with supplies.
The latter, having entered at last a broad river, whose shores were so
distant from each other that the waters seemed like those of an inland
sea, was certain he had almost reached El Dorado. On the last day of
December, 1540, he resolved not to turn back; so, letting himself go
with the current, he abandoned his comrades under Pizarro to their fate.

At the mouth of the Nayho, Orellana was cautioned by an old Indian
chief to beware of the warlike women. At the River Canuriz, between the
mouth of the Xingu and the Rio Negro, he encountered a hostile tribe
of Indians who opposed his landing. Blows were exchanged; several fell
on each side. Amongst the slain were several women, who had fought
quite as bravely as the men. Orellana was, of course, the victor, and
lived to carry home to Europe an account (improved and embellished) of
a nation of Amazons who lived in South America, and made war on the
Indians.

Thenceforth a legend existed among the European adventurers that
a nation of female warriors dwelt somewhere on the South American
continent. The river, hitherto called the Maranon, from its first
discoverer, was re-christened as the Amazons' river; and a large tract
of country, with indefinable limits, was set down in the maps under the
somewhat vague denomination of Amazonia.

Whether the natives first told the Europeans, or whether the latter,
with a view to increase the wonders of the New World, invented the
story and told it to the natives, none can tell; but even before the
voyage of Orellana, a tradition existed amongst both natives and
colonists that a nation of armed women dwelt somewhere in America.
Christopher Columbus was told that the small island of Mandanino, or
Matinino (Montserrat), was inhabited solely by female warriors.

Since the days of Orellana, there have been found plenty of travellers
to confirm the story and add their testimony to its truth. Hernando de
Ribeira, a follower of Cabega de Vega, the Conquistador of Paraguay,
asserted in 1545 that he had been told of a nation of Amazons who lived
on the western shore of a large lake poetically termed "The Mansion of
the Sun," because that orb sinks into its waters every evening. Father
d'Acugna, in his "Discovery of the River Amazon," declares that the
various tribes of Indians (amongst others, the Toupinambous) dwelling
around the Amazon, assured him again and again that a republic of
female warriors did exist in that region; several chiefs said they
themselves had been in the country of the Amazons on a visit. If, says
d'Acugna, the tradition is not true, it is certainly the greatest of
all the fables invented about the New World. The Indians all believed
that the Amazons possessed vast treasures, sufficient to enrich many
kingdoms; but no one dared to attack so warlike a nation, to whom
liberty was dearer than all the riches in the world, and who knew how
to send their poisoned shafts straight to the heart. D'Acugna fixes the
residence of the Amazons on the banks of the Canuriz, on lofty, almost
inaccessible mountains.

"When their neighbours visit them," he says, "at a time appointed by
themselves, they receive them with bows and arrows in their hands,
which they exercise as if about to engage with enemies. But knowing
the object of their visitors, they lay these weapons down, and welcome
as their guests the strangers, who remain with them a few days."

Andre Thevet, in his work "Les Singularites de la France Antarctique,"
Paris, 1558, makes the arrival of the Amazons' guests the subject of a
pictorial illustration.

In 1595, Sir Walter Raleigh, wishing to make a fortune in a hurry,
undertook an expedition to Guiana to seek for the golden city of Manoa.
Most probably he had read Thevet's work, an English translation of
which, by Bynneman, appeared in 1568; and he made the most careful
enquiries after the Amazons. But, like his predecessors, he was doomed
to disappointment.

"I made inqvirie," says he (in his book 'The Discourie of the Large,
Rich, and Bewtifvl Empire of Gviana') "amongst the most ancient and
best traueled of the _Orenoqveponi_, and I had knowledge of all the
riuers betweene _Orenoqve_ and _Amazones_, and was uery desirovs to
vnderstand the trvth of the warlike women, bicavce of some it is
beleeved, of others not; though I digresse from my pvrpose, yet I will
set doune what hath been deliuered to me for troth of those women, and
I spake with a _Casiqve_, or lord of the people, that told me he had
been in the riuer, and beyond it also, the nations of those women are
on the sovth side of the riuer in a prouince of _Topago_, and their
chiefest strength and retraicts are in the Islands scitvate on the
sovth side of the entrance, some sixty leagves within the movth of the
said riuer."

After entering into some details about the reception of their guests in
the month of April, when, he says, "this one moneth they feast, davnce,
and drinke," he gives an account of the treatment of children, which
bears a suspicious resemblance to the stories related of the ancient
Amazons. He further tells us the South American Amazons were "said to
be very crvell and bloodthirsty, especially to svch as offer to inuade
their territories."

In 1599 an abridged Latin translation of Raleigh's work appeared at
Nuremberg, at the cost of Levinus Hulsius, geographer and collector.
It was illustrated by five coloured plates; the third representing
the joyful reception of the Amazons' visitors, and their subsequent
amusements; the fourth showing the treatment bestowed on prisoners of
war, who are seen hung up by the heels to trees, where they serve as
targets for the skill of their captors, while their ultimate fate is
hinted by the figures of several Amazons preparing huge fires.

At the close of the seventeenth century, Father Cyprian Baraza, a
Jesuit missionary who went among the South American Indians, gave
an account of some Amazonian tribes who dwelt to the west of the
Paraquay, in 12 deg. south latitude. M. de Condamine, who read a "Relation
abregee d'un Voyage," etc., before the Academie des Sciences in 1745,
brought forward several testimonies to the existence of the Amazons,
whom he described as a society of independent women, who were visited
by the sterner sex during the month of April only. Amongst other
authorities he mentions Don Francisco Diego Portales, and Don Francisco
Torralva, two Spanish governors of Venezuela, who agreed in declaring
that a tribe of female warriors lived in the interior of Guiana.

Thirty years later he was supported by a Portuguese astronomer, Don
Ribeiro de Sampeio ("Diario da Viegem, no anno de 1774 et 1775") who,
however, spoke only by hearsay. Gili, the missionary, was told by
an Indian of the Quaqua tribe that the Aikeambenanos ("women living
alone") dwelt on the banks of the Cuchinero, which falls into the
Orinoco opposite the island of Taran, between Cayeara and Alta Gracia.

Count Pagan, in his "Relation de la Riviere des Amazones," after
testifying to the existence of the nation, observes, in his florid
style "Que l'Asie ne se vante plus de ses comptes veritables ou
fabuleuses des Amazones. L'Amerique ne lui cede point cet avantage....
Et que le fleuve de Thermodoon ne soit plus enfle de la gloire de ces
conquerantes les guerrieres."

The Abbe Guyon, in his "Histoire des Amazons," Paris, 1740, expresses
great faith in the story of these South American dames; and suggests
that they were colonised by the African Amazons, who might, he
suggests, have passed from the Old to the New World by the now
submerged isle of Atlantis. But his testimony is of little value, as it
evidently rests almost entirely upon D'Acugna's report.

Even within the last twenty or thirty years, many Indian tribes have
expressed their belief in the existence of the Amazons. Those who dwell
on the Essequibo, the Rupunni, and the lower Corentyn, gravely assured
Sir Robert Schomburgh, in 1844, that separate tribes of women still
lived on the upper part of the Corentyn, in a country called Marawonne;
and the narrators went so much into detail that Sir Robert and his
companions were almost inclined to believe them. The natives further
told them that when they had journeyed some distance above the great
cataracts of the Corentyn, at a point where two gigantic rocks (named
by the Indians Pioomoco and Surama) rose from either shore, they would
be in the country of the Woruisamocos, or Amazons.

Sir Robert, while travelling over the vast savannahs, frequently came
upon heaps of broken pottery, which the Macusion Indians said were
relics of the Woruisamocos, who had formerly dwelt there. The Caribs
were especially persistent in declaring that an Amazonian republic
still existed in the centre of Guiana "in those districts which no
European had ever visited."

The explorers of the river Amazon were formerly stopped by the great
cataracts on the Rio Trombetas, and in many instances they were
murdered by ferocious Indians who inhabit the upper branches. Naturally
those parts of the river which remained unexplored were supposed to be
the land of the "bellicose dames." In 1842-44 M. Montravel, commander
of the French war-ship "La Boulonnaise," surveyed the Amazon from
the sea as high up as the Rio Negro, and heard the same tale in the
region of the Rio Trombetas. Thus, from the west as well as from the
north, Europeans heard of a nation of Amazons dwelling in the central
districts of Guiana.

Humboldt believed to a certain extent in the tradition. His idea
was that women, in various parts of South America, have now and
then wearied of the degrading condition in which they are held,
and occasionally united themselves into bands, as fugitive negroes
sometimes do, and that the necessity of preserving their independence
has made them warriors.

Southey, in his "History of Brazil," makes a very trite observation
concerning the female warriors of the New World. "Had we never," says
he, "heard of the Amazons of antiquity, I should, without hesitation,
believe in those of America. Their existence is not the less likely for
this reason, and yet it must be admitted that the probable truth is
made to appear suspicious by its resemblance to a known fable."

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




X.

     Lady Offaley (Irish Rebellion, 1641)--Lady Arundell--Lady
     Bankes--Countess of Derby (Civil Wars in England)--Helena Zrinyi,
     Wife of Tekeli--Incident at the Coronation of William and
     Mary--Mademoiselle de la Charce.


"THERE are three sorts of things in the world," says the Abbe Brotier,
"that know no kind of restraint, and are governed by passion and
brutality--family quarrels, religious disputes, and civil wars." The
truth of these words is undeniable, more especially as the last is
very frequently brought about by its forerunners. The war between
Charles I. and the Parliament was prosecuted on both sides with so much
bitterness, that, in certain instances, the conduct of the officers and
generals savoured more of private feud than public zeal.

The Irish Rebellion of 1641 was one of many unfortunate occurrences
which precipitated the revolution at home, for not only did the
Republican party take advantage of the King's difficulties to increase
its own power, but the Irish rebels envenomed the bitterness between
King and Commons by declaring that they were empowered, by Royal
Commission, to defend his Majesty's prerogatives against a Puritanical,
levelling Government.

The Irish rebels stormed many a castle belonging to English nobles or
gentry. Amongst others, they beleaguered, in April, 1642, the Castle of
Geashill, in King's County, the residence of Lettice Digby, Baroness
of Offaley. This lady, though upwards of sixty years old, and a widow,
retained all the fire and energy of youth. She closed the gates,
and made a most resolute defence, refusing to hear any proposal for
surrender, for the castle, being defended on all sides by bogs and
woods, was very difficult of access. She was at last relieved by the
approach of Viscount Lisle and Sir Charles Coote with one hundred and
twenty foot and three hundred horse. The castle having been provisioned
and supplied with ammunition, Lady Offaley chose to remain there for a
time; but being again menaced by the rebels, she was relieved by Sir
Richard Grenville, in October of the same year, when she retired to
her mansion at Coles Hill, in Warwickshire, where she died, December
the 1st, 1658.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the 25th of August, 1642, King Charles raised his standard at
Nottingham. He was at once joined by thousands of Cavaliers; amongst
others, by the Earl of Arundell, one of his most staunch adherents.
The latter made himself so troublesome to the Parliament that they
determined to seize Wardour Castle, his mansion. In 1643, they sent
orders to Sir Edward Hungerford, commander-in-chief of their forces in
Wiltshire, to accomplish this design. He arrived before the castle on
the 2nd of May, and as Lord Arundell was absent, the Puritans expected
an easy conquest. But Lady Blanche, who had been left in charge, was
well supplied with provisions and ammunition: and although the garrison
consisted of barely twenty-five fighting men, she resolved to make a
brave defence.

Sir Edward Hungerford, on the arrival of Colonel Strode with
reinforcements, summoned the castle to surrender, pretending that it
contained men and arms, money, and plate which he was ordered, by a
warrant from Parliament, to seize. Lady Arundell declined to comply
with his demands. Sir Edward immediately ordered up his heavy guns,
and commenced a bombardment which lasted from Wednesday the 3rd to the
following Monday. The besiegers, moreover, ran two mines under the
walls, and so terrific was the explosion that the fortress was shaken
to its foundations.

During the siege, Sir Edward offered again and again to grant quarter
to the ladies and children if the castle would surrender; but Lady
Arundell and the other ladies rejected the proposal with disdain. The
latter, too, together with the women-servants, aided in the defence in
various ways; they loaded the muskets, and carried round refreshments
to their gallant defenders.

According as the garrison, exhausted by the continued struggle, relaxed
in its efforts, the Parliamentary soldiers redoubled their attacks.
They applied petards to the garden-door, they flung balls of wild-fire
through the dismantled windows, causing much damage to the apartments
in the castle, destroying valuable pictures, rich carvings, statuettes,
costly vases, chairs and couches, mirrors, and various works of almost
priceless worth.

After the siege had lasted nine days, Lady Arundell, finding the castle
was no longer tenable, demanded a parley. Articles of surrender were
drawn up, by which it was stipulated, firstly, that the garrison and
all the inmates of the castle should be granted quarter; secondly,
that the ladies and servants should have all their wearing apparel,
and that sixty serving-men, chosen by the ladies themselves, should
be permitted to attend them wherever they might please to retire;
thirdly, that the furniture of the castle was to be saved from plunder
or destruction.

The Puritans violated, without scruple, the treaty, destroyed or
mutilated everything of value in the castle, and left with the inmates
nothing but the clothes they wore. Lady Arundell, with the women and
children, was carried prisoner to Shaftesbury. Thither, too, five
van-loads of costly furniture were borne in triumph as the spoils of
the vanquished.

The loss to Lord Arundell by the devastation and plunder of Wardour
Castle was estimated at one hundred thousand pounds.

The Parliament, thinking their prisoners were insecure at Shaftesbury,
wished to remove them to Bath. But the town was infected with small-pox
and plague; and Lady Arundell refused so stubbornly to consent, that
her captors left her where she was, but took her children to Dorchester.

Lady Arundell survived the siege only five years; and at her death, she
was buried, with her husband, in the chapel of Wardour Castle.

       *       *       *       *       *

In point of heroic valour, Lady Arundell was outdone by Lady Mary
Bankes, wife of Sir John Bankes, Lord Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas. In August, 1643, Parliament despatched Sir William Earle with
a strong force to reduce Corfe Castle, the family residence of Sir
John, in the Isle of Purbeck. Thinking to gain possession by stratagem,
Sir William sent a party of forty sailors to demand four field-pieces
which were in the castle. Lady Bankes, suspecting their real object,
went to the gate, and requested the sailors to show their warrant. They
produced one, signed by several Parliamentary Commissioners. Thereupon
Lady Bankes retired into the castle; and although there were only five
men within the walls, they mounted the field-pieces with the assistance
of the female servants, and having loaded one of them, fired it off,
and drove the sailors away.

Sir William Earle now tried to starve the castle into a surrender.
Lady Bankes affected a wish to treat for the surrender of the guns;
but her real object was, that the besiegers, relaxing in their careful
blockade, would give greater facilities for introducing fresh supplies
to the garrison. The event justified her hopes. She also obtained the
help of Captain Lawrence, commanding a company of Royalists.

The Puritans, about six hundred in number, assaulted the castle, and
endeavoured to carry it by a _coup de main_. But the brave little
garrison, sallying forth, drove away the besiegers and brought back
nine oxen. Again the besiegers tried to take the castle by storm.
Dividing their forces, one party attacked the middle ward, which was
defended by Captain Lawrence and his company, while the other division
assaulted the upper ward, held by Lady Bankes with her daughters, her
female servants, and five soldiers, who hurled down huge stones and
red-hot coals on the heads of the storming party. At last, after losing
one hundred men in the assault, the Parliamentary forces retreated from
before Corfe Castle. The blockade had lasted, altogether, six weeks.

Lady Bankes lived to see the Restoration, and died in April, 1661.
She was interred in the south aisle of Rislipp church. The following
inscription was placed upon her monument by her eldest son:--

    "To the memory of

"The Lady Mary Bankes, the only daughter of Rafe Hawtrey, of Rislipp,
in the County of Middlesex, Esquire, the wife and widow of the
Honourable Sir John Bankes, Knight, late Lord Chief Justice of his
late Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, and of the Privy Council to his
late Majesty King Charles the First, of blessed memory; who, having
had the honour to have borne, with a constancy and courage above her
sex, a noble proportion of the late calamity, and the happiness to have
outlived them so far as to have seen the restitution of the government,
with great peace of mind laid down her most desired life the 19th day
of April, 1661. Sir Ralphe Bankes, her son and heir, hath dedicated
this. She left four sonnes--first, Sir Ralphe; second, Jerome;
third, Charles; fourth, William (since dead, without issue); and six
daughters."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Earl of Derby was one of the most prominent Cavalier leaders. In
1643, while awaiting a siege at Lathom House, Lancashire, his family
mansion, the earl received intelligence that Parliament had despatched
troops to annex his miniature kingdom, the Isle of Man. Wishing to
preserve the island as a final retreat for his royal master, in case of
misfortune overtaking him, he left Lathom House in charge of Charlotte,
his countess, and set off to the Isle of Man.

On the 27th of May, 1643, Mr. Holland, governor of Manchester,
despatched a messenger to Lathom, commanding Lady Derby either to
subscribe to the propositions of Parliament or surrender the mansion.
She refused compliance with either alternative; and for nearly a year
contrived, though closely blockaded, to keep the enemy from coming to
open hostilities. At last, on the 24th of February, 1644, Parliament
despatched three colonels to Lathom House. Before their arrival, the
countess hastened to lay in provisions and ammunition, and to arm a
sufficient number of retainers to serve as a garrison.

The countess determined not to surrender on any terms, and rejected
every proposal. "Though a woman," said she, "and a stranger divorced
from her friends and robbed of her estates, she was ready to receive
their utmost violence, trusting in God for protection and deliverance."

Hostilities having commenced, the Parliamentary army pushed the siege
with great vigour. The countess conducted the defence in person; but,
though she took the office of commander, she was not unmindful of the
spiritual welfare of her people. She was present four times a day at
public prayer, attended by her little daughters, Catherine and Mary.

A few days after the opening of the siege, Sir Thomas Fairfax, the
Parliamentary general, received a letter from the Earl of Derby, in
which the latter, dreading the extremes to which his wife and children
might be reduced, requested for them a free pass through the camp of
the besiegers. When this was communicated to the countess, she thanked
Sir Thomas for his courtesy in forwarding the missive; but replied
that "she would willingly submit to her lord's commands, and therefore
willed the general to treat with her; but till she was assured that
such was his lordship's pleasure, she would neither yield up the house
nor desert it herself, but wait for the event according to the will of
God."

She forwarded a similar message to her husband at Chester.

On the 25th of April, Colonel Rigby despatched a peremptory message,
demanding the surrender of Lathom House immediately. The countess
refused: and the siege was prosecuted with renewed vigour; while the
garrison, animated by the presence of Lady Derby, continued to defend
the house with unabated courage. At last, on the 23rd of May, they
learnt, to their inexpressible relief, that Prince Rupert and the Earl
of Derby were in Cheshire, marching to their aid.

When the Puritans heard of the approach of Prince Rupert, they
retreated to Bolton. On the 29th, Prince Rupert "not only relieved, but
revenged the most noble lady, his cousin," leaving one thousand five
hundred of the besiegers dead on the field, and taking seven hundred
prisoners. The next day he presented the countess with twenty-two of
those standards which, three days previously, had been proudly waving
before Lathom House.

The countess and her children accompanied the earl to the Isle of Man,
leaving the mansion in charge of Colonel Rawstone. The latter defended
it till the following December, when the decline of the Royal cause
obliged him to open negotiations with Fairfax. Before they were brought
to a satisfactory conclusion, the house was treacherously surrendered
by an Irish soldier.

The earl and countess, in the midst of their devoted adherents in the
Isle of Man, defied the threats of Parliament. The earl was one of
the first to join the standard of Charles II. in 1651. Captured on the
borders of Cheshire, he was carried to his own town of Bolton-le-Moors,
where he was beheaded, October 15th. Misfortune never comes
unaccompanied. The bereaved countess was betrayed, with her children,
by a false friend, and thrown into prison. She regained her liberty at
the Restoration; and for the rest of her life dwelt, with her remaining
children, at Knowsley, near Lathom, where she died in 1663.

       *       *       *       *       *

Although the Turks were expelled from Hungary in the sixteenth century,
they by no means gave up their ambitious designs on that country.
Taking advantage of the cruelty and oppression exercised by Austria
towards the Hungarians, they secretly stirred up the nobles to revolt
against their harsh masters. In 1678, an able leader was found in
Emeric Tekeli, or Tokolyi, who, weary of vainly soliciting the Emperor
Leopold to restore his paternal estates, resolved to take them for
himself, together with the crown of Hungary. Setting up his standard
in Transylvania, he was soon joined by thousands of malcontents. Day
by day the revolt gathered strength; and had not the Emperor resorted
to the arts of cunning and bribery, it is probable the rebellion would
have terminated in a revolution.

Tekeli was husband of Helena, widow of Francis Ragotsky (who died in
1667), and daughter of Peter, Count Zrinyi, Ban of Croatia, who, with
others, lost his head in 1671 for conspiring against Leopold. Helena
was as brave as she was beautiful. By her first husband she had two
sons, of whom the eldest, Francis, afterwards took a conspicuous part
in the affairs of Hungary.

Tekeli commenced the war in 1678, and in 1682 he entered Buda in
triumph, where he was inaugurated Prince of Upper Hungary by the nobles
and the Turkish Bashaw. In the following year, the Turks, following
up these successes, advanced to Vienna, which would have fallen, but
for John Sobiesky and his Poles. Leopold took care to foment the
growing jealousies between Tekeli and the Turks; and on the failure
of the Hungarian leader in an attack on Cassau, the Bashaw of Great
Waradin sent the hero in chains to Constantinople. He was released
the following year; but during his imprisonment the Turks were driven
from Hungary and the rebellion crushed. Helena continued to defend the
rock-fortress of Mongatz (or Munkacs) with great courage for two years
after the arrest of her husband; but in 1688 she was overpowered by
superior numbers, and reduced to capitulate and throw herself with her
sons under the protection of the Emperor.

Helena was thrown into a convent, while her children were educated
under the auspices of Leopold. After a time she was exchanged for
an Austrian general, and permitted to join her husband in Turkey.
The Sultan, Mustapha, conferred upon Tekeli, Widdin, and some other
districts, as a sort of feudal sovereignty; but he was afterwards
neglected by the Turkish government, and compelled to start as a
vintner in Constantinople, where he died in 1705, in his fiftieth year.
Helena, after sharing the misfortunes and vicissitudes of his life,
died two years before him, in 1703.

       *       *       *       *       *

A somewhat ludicrous affair happened at the coronation of William and
Mary, April 23rd, 1689. The champion of England, according to custom,
entered Westminster Hall, and throwing down his mailed glove, gave
the customary challenge to any one who should dare to dispute their
Majesty's claim to the crown. An old woman came in on crutches (which
she left behind her), snatched up the gauntlet, laid her own glove in
its place, and made off as fast as she could, before any one was able
to stop her. In the glove was found a challenge for the champion to
meet her the following day in Hyde Park. This matter occasioned much
merriment at the lower end of the hall.

Next day an old woman, similarly dressed, was seen waiting at the
appointed ground, and was conjectured by those who saw her, to be
a soldier in disguise. The champion, however, wisely declining
any warlike contest with one of the fair sex, refused to keep the
appointment.

       *       *       *       *       *

Madlle. de la Tour du Pin Gouvernail, better known as Madlle. de
la Charce, heroine of the war between Louis Quatorze and the Duke
of Savoy, was the daughter of Pierre de la Tour du Pin, Marquis de
la Charce, lieutenant-general of the king's armies. In 1692 the
Piedmontese invaded Dauphine. Madlle. de la Charce, arming the
villagers on her estates, placed herself at their head, and harassed
the enemy in the mountains; her mother, meanwhile, addressed the people
in the plains, exhorting them to remain faithful. The sister of Madlle.
de la Charce caused the cables of the enemy's vessels to be cut. This
brave family contributed so greatly towards driving the Duke of Savoy
from Dauphine, that Louis XIV. granted Philis a pension, the same as he
would have given to a brave general, and allowed her to place her sword
and armour in the treasury of St. Denis.

Madlle. de la Charce was fond of literature, and composed some very
pretty verses. An anonymous work appeared in 1731, under the title
of "Memoires de Madlle. de la Charce." This little romance, says
Langlet-Dufresnoy, is well written, and contains many historical
anecdotes connected with the reign of the Grand-Monarque.


    END OF VOL. I.


    PRINTED BY TAYLOR AND CO.
    10 LITTLE QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN'S INN FIELDS.




TINSLEY BROTHERS' NEW NOVELS.


A new Story of Modern Society, by the Author of "Jennie of 'The
Prince's,'"

GREAT GRENFELL GARDENS:

A Story of Modern Society.

By B. H. BUXTON,

Author of "Nell--On and Off the Stage," "Jennie of 'The Prince's,'"
"Fetterless," "Won," etc. 3 Vols.


By the Author of "Denis Donne."

A LONDON SEASON.

By ANNIE THOMAS (Mrs. PENDER CUDLIP). Author of "Called to Account,"
"Sir Victor's Choice," etc. 3 Vols.


By the Author of "An Innocent Sinner."

OUR BOHEMIA.

By MABEL COLLINS, Author of "An Innocent Sinner," "In this World," etc.
3 Vols.

"You shall see great difference betwixt our Bohemia and your
Sicilia."--_Winter's Tale._


MOLLY CAREW: a New Novel.

By E. OWENS BLACKBURNE,

Author of "A Woman Scorned," "Dean Swift's Ghost," "Philosopher Push,"
"The Quest of the Heir," etc. 3 Vols.


By the author of "The Hazelhurst Mystery."

RUTH EVERINGHAM.

By JESSIE SALE LLOYD,

Author of "The Hazelhurst Mystery," etc. 3 Vols.


By the Author of "Woman and Her Master."

THE FREEMASON'S DAUGHTER:

A New Novel.

By J. F. SMITH,

Author of "Minnigrey," "Woman and Her Master," "Stanfield Hall," etc. 3
Vols.


By the Author of "Estella."

MARGARET DUNBAR.

By ANNABEL GRAY,

Author of "Estella," etc. 3 Vols.


GRACE.

By HENRY TURNER.

2 Vols.


THE BACHELOR:

An Original Novel.

By ARTHUR MONTAGU BROOKFIELD.

2 Vols.

"Equal in power to anything that many of our well-known and
best-established authors have written."--_Bells Weekly Messenger._


PAOLO GIANINI:

A new Novel.

By PERICLES TZIKOS.

3 Vols.

"Is an interesting and promising romance."--_Athenaeum._

"We can recommend it cordially to those who like a novel which treats
of scenes and persons removed from the commonplace class of incidents
and personages which form the stock of most English stories of the
day."--_Morning Post._


    TINSLEY BROTHERS, 8, CATHERINE ST., STRAND.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page xi, "Dona" changed to "Dona" (Dona Maria Pacheco)

Page xiv, "theGirondists" changed to "the Girondists" (of the
Girondists)

Page xv, "SavageAfria" changed to "Savage Africa" (Savage Africa)

Page xvi, "Ec." changed to "Etc." (Etc. etc.)

Page 13, "vogage" changed to "voyage" (a separate voyage)

Page 26, word "of" added to text original read (one the principal
officers)

Page 26, "paramont" changed to "paramount" (soon ruled paramount)

Page 34, "a" changed to "at" (at the hands of)

Page 34, "like" changed to "life" (their mode of life)

Page 54, "siezed" changed to "seized" (Iceni, seized all his)

Page 68, "ursurper" changed to "usurper" (usurper, Tetricus)

Page 87, "twelth" changed to "twelfth" (eleventh and twelfth centuries)

Page 95, "massacreing" changed to "massacring" (burning, plundering,
massacring)

Page 96, "Efrilda" changed to "Elfrida" (Elfrida recaptured Leicester)

Page 97, "Elfleda" changed to "Elfrida" (Elfrida died at Tamworth)

Page 97, "Elfleda" changed to "Elfrida" (Elfrida "might have been)

Page 126, "heorine" changed to "heroine" (Another heroine of this war)

Page 147, "Mairie" changed to "Marie" (the Marie of Orleans)

Page 155, "though" changed to "through" (England through another)

Page 171, "activly" changed to "actively" (was actively engaged in)

Page 173, "corse" changed to "corpse" (my husband's corpse, till)

Page 186, "surrrounded" changed to "surrounded" (surrounded by her
ladies)

Page 191, "addresed" changed to "addressed" (addressed the warriors)







End of Project Gutenberg's Female Warriors, Vol. I (of 2), by Ellen C. Clayton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FEMALE WARRIORS, VOL. I (OF 2) ***

***** This file should be named 43646.txt or 43646.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/6/4/43646/

Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
