The Project Gutenberg EBook of Willis's Current Notes, No. XIII., January
1852, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Willis's Current Notes, No. XIII., January 1852

Author: Various

Editor: George Willis

Release Date: September 13, 2013 [EBook #43708]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILLIS'S CURRENT NOTES, JAN 1852 ***




Produced by Emmy, Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







[Transcriber's Notes: There are two letters with macrons above them.
These are represented by brackets and an equal sign. [=x]]


    WILLIS'S
    CURRENT NOTES:

    A SERIES OF ARTICLES
    ON

    Antiquities, Biography, Heraldry, History, Language,
    Literature, Topography, Curious Customs, &c.

    SELECTED FROM
    ORIGINAL LETTERS AND DOCUMENTS
    ADDRESSED DURING THE YEAR
    1852,

    TO THE PUBLISHER,

    G. WILLIS,
    GREAT PIAZZA, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON.
    MDCCCLIII.




PREFACE.


ENTERING as we now are upon the publication of a third volume of the
"Current Notes," the Second Volume of which we have herewith the
pleasure of presenting in a complete form to the Public, our first
duty as it is our pleasure is to thank our Subscribers most cordially
for the very liberal support we have received from them during its
progress. It is so seldom that the productions of the Customer and the
Tradesman form part of the same Periodical, that it is no wonder if
the Publisher of the "Current Notes" feels a little elated by seeing
his humble efforts for the entertainment of the Public in such good
company. But this patronage, so far from dulling his exertions in his
legitimate pursuit--that of promoting the diffusion of Books in their
widest extent--will only stimulate him to fresh efforts, and while he
continues to place before his Customers the best Books, he trusts that
they will be as liberal as hitherto in their contributions of _Current
Notes_.

The _Price Current of Literature_, indeed, now occupies a position
distinct from that of any other Bookseller's Catalogue ever presented
to the public, for it not only furnishes a monthly list of the
principal New Publications, followed by a constant succession of
Standard Works in every department of Ancient and Modern Literature,
selected with care and judgment, but it likewise presents a medium for
Literary Inquirers to prosecute their researches and interchange their
opinions. Nor is this correspondence confined to our own land. From the
Colonies and America, over which it ranges in its wide circulation,
we continue to receive gratifying testimonials to its usefulness, as
well as accessions to its columns, and have reason to believe it is
duly appreciated by those whose favour it is our study to deserve and
interest to secure.

The aim of the publisher has been to establish a literary organ of
communication amongst his numerous Subscribers and Friends, by inviting
their correspondence, and throwing open his columns to their inquiries
and suggestions, and thus by propounding queries, solving difficulties,
and eliciting new facts, rendering some slight service to the cause
of Historical and Literary Truth. So cordially have they responded
to this invitation, that the task of selection has been sometimes
a difficult, though always a pleasing one. If there have been any
communications from Correspondents which have not met with due regard
and consideration, it must be pleaded in apology that this miscellany
of curious information necessarily embraces so wide a field, that in
gathering in the harvest it is not surprising if a few ears of corn
escape the gleaner's hand. If it be said that occasionally too much
notice has been taken of "unconsidered trifles," and that the objects
regarded were too minute and insignificant to justify the patient
attention bestowed upon them; the saying of Dr. Johnson may be adopted
as a justification, that "the man who removes the smallest obstacle in
the pathway of Literature becomes its benefactor." History is built up
of fragments as the pyramid is formed of single stones; and if we have
only laid bare one doubtful point, or elucidated one novel fact,--if we
have but stripped off the moss clinging to some ruined archway of the
past, or decyphered one mouldering inscription,--then our work has been
accomplished, and our toil repaid.

The publisher wishes it to be distinctly understood that he is not
the author of any representations or opinions which may appear in the
_Current Notes_. Every statement, therefore, is open to correction
or discussion, and the writers of the several paragraphs must be
considered alone responsible for their assertions. Holding himself
aloof from the bias of all personal interest or party feeling, the
publisher can make due allowance for difference of opinion, and
like heralds in the tournament, after proclaiming the titles of the
respective champions, quietly retires and awaits the issue of the fray.
If in the heat of this literary joust of arms, the combatants have
broken spears somewhat too hotly, let it be remembered that he is only
a spectator of the chivalrous feud--which, after all, has for its sole
object the rescue of Truth, in the words of the old knightly motto,
"sans tache et sans reproche."

It is a mournful task to record the death of the gifted--to follow
Genius to its grave. Our Obituary of the past year chronicles the death
of many who were giants in the realms of thought, and whom the world of
science and learning could ill afford to lose. WELLINGTON, of whom (as
was said of Caesar) it is difficult to decide whether he fought or wrote
with the greater spirit; Eliot WARBURTON, the Historian and Novelist;
MACGILLIVRAY, the Naturalist; SCROPE, the Deerstalker; JOHANNOT, the
Artist; the gay and accomplished COUNT D'ORSAY; LANDSEER, the Engraver;
MANTELL, the Geologist--are now numbered with the dead. PUGIN, too,
has passed away--he, whose whole life was but one continued aspiration
after the Beautiful in Christian Art; the harp of MOORE is silent, and
awakens no echoes in the tomb.

Upon one occurrence of the past year, however, the publisher has
particularly to congratulate his Subscribers; namely the Free Trade
movement which has broken up the monopoly of the Booksellers'
Association, increased the sale of books, and imparted new vigour
and activity to the cause of literature. Cheapness in the price of
books becomes an important auxiliary in the diffusion of knowledge.
It is not merely a trade, but a social question, on account of the
power it possesses of advancing intellectual improvement. The thirst
for knowledge must be considerably influenced by the means we have
at hand to supply and satisfy its craving. Long before Lord Campbell
pronounced his judgment, the publisher was impressed with the truth
of these views, and had steadily adhered to them as the basis of his
business. The recent Postal Regulations have also tended to facilitate
the purchase of books. By their means he has been enabled not only to
forward the _Price Current_ to his Subscribers at a trifling cost, but
to execute and transmit orders from a thin pamphlet to a ponderous
volume. Facilities of a like nature now exist for sending books to
the Colonies; and instead of being obliged to forward as heretofore,
even the smallest book as a package at a high charge for conveyance,
any moderate-sized volume, if left open at the ends, will reach its
destination in the letter-bags, at a very trifling cost.

The publisher thinks it not inappropriate to reprint in this place the
following NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS.

    G. WILLIS begs to express his acknowledgments for
    the numerous interesting communications which have
    been forwarded to him, and will feel obliged by the
    receipt of any original articles on subjects, either
    of a literary or an antiquarian nature. Woodcuts,
    illustrative of subjects requiring them, will be
    executed at his expense.

    All communications intended for insertion in the
    "_Current Notes_" must be accompanied by the Writer's
    real name and address, which are merely required as a
    guarantee of his good faith, and not for publication,
    except at his desire.

While cordially reiterating the sentiments expressed in the first of
the preceding paragraphs, the publisher can assure his Subscribers that
the work, intended as a boon to themselves, has proved an equal source
of gratification to him; and so, with mutual good wishes, trusts they
may long continue, in the words of Milton, "with plain and lightsome
brevity to relate well and orderly things worth the noting."




INDEX.

(_The Articles marked thus * are illustrated by wood engravings._)


    Abracadabra, 22.
    Adelgitha, 78, 88.
    Advertisements, 56.
    Albums, _see_ Hood, Hook, Shee, Southey.
    Alchemists, 64, 75, 88.
    Allegory of Mortality, 90.
    American Eloquence, 69.
      ----Go-a-Headism, 69, 87.
      ----Improvement of English Language, 63.
      ----Free Libraries, 96.
      ----Shaksperian Club, 38.
      ----Testimonial, _see_ Clarke.
    *Antiquities, sale of, 27.
    Apograph, 75.
    Archaeological Associations, 22, 58.
    Archaeological Publications, 6, 12, 25, 34, 35.
      ----Societies, 29, 34.
    Architectural Restorations, Ireland, 5.
      *----Slang, 70.
      ----Terms, 76.
    Archiduc d'Autriche d'Este, 76.
    Arctic Expedition, 32.
    ****Arms of Isle of Man, 18, 79, 90, 91, 101, 102.
    Ashbury, Joseph, 78, 93.
    Assignats, 82, 83.
    Athenaeum, _see_ Eboracon.
    Athens, _see_ Tomb.
    Atlas of Epochs, 58, 71.
    Auctions, Literary, 8.
    *Author of Narrative of Transactions in British India, 75.
    Autographic Biography, 6, 15, 31.
    Autograph, _see_ Holograph.
    *Autographs, Admiralty, 85.
    Automaton Chess Player, 64, 71, 78, _see_ Advertisements.

    Ballads, Rare, 100.
    **Bawdrick, 5, 9.
    Bibliomaniacs, _see_ Smith, Richard.
    Blackwood's Magazine, 2, 12.
    Blair's Monument, 31.
    Bobart's Dragon, 53.
    Boddington, Mrs. 31, 39.
    Boccaccio's Decamerone, 31.
    Bones, Fossil Human, 83.
    Booksellers and Publishers, 38.
      ----in Seventeenth Century, 97.
    *Booth, Bishop, 67.
      ----Family, 80.
    Botany of the Bohereens, 88, _see_ Wild Flowers.
    Brasses, Monumental, 2, 15, 29.
    Brougham, Lord, on France, 39.
    Brown, Dr. Thomas, _see_ Paradise of Coquettes.
    Bruce, J. 8.
    Burns's MSS. 96.

    Campanalogia, 20.
    Capping a story, 7.
    Castle Cornet, 94.
    Caussin's Holy Court, 2.
    Cavendish, _see_ Wolsey.
    *Chair, Ancient, 95.
    Cheques, crossed, 58.
    Chinese Literature, 87.
    Clarke, Mrs. Cowden, 3, 13.
    *Coins, 3, 21, 81, _see_ Phoenician--Hebrew Harp.
    Coleridge, _see_ Penny Postage.
    Copyright, American Opinion on, 34.
    Coronation by a Pope, 98.
    Cow Chase, 62.
    Crabb, Mrs. 24.
    Cromwell, Print of, 7, 15, 21, 30.
    Current Notes and Americanisms, 7.

    Daniel O'Rourke, 18, 55, 61, 73.
    Darwin, _see_ Steam.
    *Denham, W. 31, 36.
    Dental Surgery, 6.
    Devonshire Collection, _see_ Coins.
    *Doorway in Woking Church, 33.
    Dowden, Alderman, 79.

    Earl St. Vincent's Motto, 73.
    Eboracon, 69.
    Eburacum, 58.
    *Engraved portrait, 71, 75.
    Engraving, 39.
    Enquiry, 55.
    Ethnology, 4, 9.
    Evelyn, John, 90.
    Execution of Charles I., Warrant for, 65.

    Father Tom and the Pope, _see_ Blackwood.
    Father Mathew, _see_ Hayes.
    First Love, _see_ Scott.
    Flags, _see_ Arctic Expedition.
    Franks, 38, 74, 85, 98.
    Fraser's Magazine, 2.
    French Revolutionary Dates, 78, 82, 83.
    **Fresco Paintings, 57, _see_ Mural.
    Fribbleriad, 86.
    F. W. W., To, 80.

    *Gems, 63, _see_ Rhyming Legends.
    Gent, Thomas, 94.
    Gibson, Bishop, 22.
    Gold Discoveries, 87.
    **Golden Lion, Fulham, 28.
    Grailey, John de, _see_ Enquiry.
    Greene, General, 27.

    Halliwell, _see_ Shakespeare.
    Haunted House, 94, 99.
    Hayes, Catherine, 4.
    Healing the Sick, _see_ Rembrandt.
    *Hebrew Harp, 25.
    *Herbert, _see_ Massinger.
    Heralds' College, _see_ Advertisements.
    Highest Price for a volume, 20.
    Hill, Rowland, 6.
    Hoblyn, Richard, 11.
      ----Robert, 7, 11.
    Holograph, 55, 58, 72, 74, 75.
    Holy Grahl, 7.
    Hone, _see_ Parody.
    Hood, Thomas, 2, 12, 66.
    Hook, Theodore, 64, 94.
    Human Progress, 68.

    India, 71, 75, 84.
    Information, 78.
    Inscriptions, 23, 90.
    Isle of Man, _see_ Arms.

    Jewish Superstitions, 22.
    Jokeby, 62.

    Katy-did, 13.
    Key, Ancient, 7.
    Kilkenny Archaeological Society, 34.
    **King of Pamunkie, 99.

    La Fayette, General, 27.
    Laud, _see_ Ballads.
    Lavers, the Bookseller, 11.
    Lettres Cherakeesiennes, 72.
    Liberty stone, Liverpool, 7.
    Library, Jarvis, sale of, 4.
    Lincolnshire, _see_ Brasses.
    *Literary Residences, 49.
    Lithography, 12, 23.
    London Environs, _see_ Peel.
    L'Orloge de Sapience, _see_ Auctions.
    Lowth, W. _see_ Enquiry.

    Mahon (Lord), 27, 70.
    Mary, Queen of Scots, _see_ Ring.
    Massinger, 54.
    Meadley, G. W. 23, 37.
    Methodists' Periodical Press, U. S., 4.
    Middle Ages, 12.
    Milton, _see_ Washington.
    Mistletoe, 67.
    Monogram, 23.
      *----of Christ, 68.
    Morris, General, _see_ Woodman.
    Mummies, Mediaeval, 17.
    ***Mural Paintings, 66, 76, 77.
    Museum, British, 6.

    Nelson's Funeral, 83.
    Noah, Sons of, 3.
    Notes on the Notes, 71.
    Notice to Correspondents, 16, 24, 32, 40, 56, 64, 72, 80, 88, 98,
        104.
      ----Subscribers, 1.
    Nursery Rhymes, 76, 90.

    Order of the Royal Oak, 33.
    Obituary, Literary and Scientific, 8, 16, 24, 32, 40, 56, 64, 72,
        80, 88, 96, 104.

    Packet Station, 58.
    Paradise of Coquettes, 38, 55, 56.
    Parody, 72, 95.
    Pearle of Prayer, 62.
    Peel, Sir Robert, Letter of, 1.
    Penny Postage, 22, _see_ Hill.
    Percy Society, 31, 39.
    *Phoenician Coin, 51.
    Pigmies, _see_ Ethnology.
    *Pilgrim's Badge, 7, 53.
    Popular Rhymes, 70.
    Portland Castle, 65.
    Prinsep, _see_ India.
    Punch of the Commonwealth, 92.

    Queries, 31.
    **Querns, 59.
    Records, Public Admission to, by literary Inquirers, 8.
    Rembrandt, 38.
    Rhyming Legends, 76.
    Rhyming Tokens, 60, 80, 86.
    Richard III., 3.
    Richardson, Novelist, 63, _see_ Literary Residences.
    *Ring of Mary Queen of Scots, 16, 23.
    "Robbed between sun and sun," 6, 15, 62.
    *Roman Remains at Ashtead, 21.

    Saint Luke's Day, print of, 7.
    Saldanha, Wreck of the, 35.
    Sale of rare books, 16.
    Scott's, Sir Walter, First Love, 95.
    Scraps from America, 13.
    *Seal of Whitgift's Hospital, 14.
    Seasons, _see_ Arms of Isle of Man.
    Segar, Sir W. 94, 103.
    Sexagenarian, Beloe's, 87.
    Shadoof, 12.
    Shakespeare's Irishman, 31.
      ----Bust, 38.
      ----House subscription, 79.
      ----lame, 87, 89.
      ----New Edition, 57, 71, 82.
      ----Society, 53.
      ----Will, 38.
    Shee, Sir Martin Archer, 78.
    Sheridan, T. Verses by, _see_ Saldanha.
    Shovel Board, 23, 37.
    Signature Collectors, 75.
    *Signet, ancient, 10.
      ----*Punic, 38.
    Slogans of the North, 6.
    Smiths, History of the, 7.
      ----James, 7, 20.
      ----O., 20.
      ----Richard, 103.
      ----Roach, _see_ Pilgrim's Badge.
    Smoking in the West of England, 95.
    Snaith, F., to, _see_ Seasons.
    Societies, Learned, 26, 64.
    Society of Antiquaries, Newcastle, 6.
      ----Scotland, 55.
      ----Historical, of Lancashire and Cheshire, 5, 10, 19.
    Southey on Albums, 55.
    Sportsmen's Terms, 88.
    Spunging House, 96.
    State of France, _see_ Brougham.
    Steam, Prophecy on, 87.
    Sterne, 54.
      ----*Autograph, 2, 12, 35.
      ----Eugenius, 54, 61.
    Superstitions: Cockney Land, 104.
      ----Jewish, 22.
    Sword, _see_ Wellington.
    Symbol, 82.

    Talavera, 83.
    *Taw, 55, 62, 68.
    Threlkeld, Dr., 63.
    Tobacco, 19.
    **Tokens, 11, 19, 30, 52, 76, 92;
      _see_ Rhyming.
    Tomb, English, at Athens, 40.
      ----of St. Berichert, 3.
    Travelling Name, 7, 16.
    Treasure Trove, 36.
    Tree at Pains Hill, 84.
    Tristram Shandy, 35.
    Tuckers of Lamerton, 103.
    *Turkish Coin, _see_ Coin.
    Turnbuckle, 5.
    *Turner, Artist, 1, 10.

    Uncle Tom's Cabin, 85.
    Under the Rose, 58.
    Union Jack, 20, 28, 29.

    Veterans of Royal and Antiquarian Societies, 72.
    Vincart, John, 55, 63.

    Ward's Grand Rebellion, 2.
    Warrant for Execution of Charles I., 65.
    Washington, 94.
    Waterloo, 84, 95, 99.
    Wellbeloved, _see_ Eburacum.
    Wellington, 84;
      _see_ Tree.
    *West Horseley Church, 86.
    **Westons, 61, 67.
    W(h)ig, 36.
    Whitehall Reliques, 96.
    *Wierx, 29, 39.
    Wild Flowers, 70.
    Wilkins, Sir Charles, 53, 78.
    Wolsey, 15.
    "Woodman, spare that tree," 4.
    Worcester, Marquis of, 10.

    Yankee Doodle, 26.





  WILLIS'S CURRENT NOTES
  FOR THE MONTH.

  No. XIII.]                               [JANUARY, 1852.
  "I will make a prief of it in my Note-Book."--SHAKSPERE.





NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS

TO THE "PRICE CURRENT OF LITERATURE."


G. WILLIS gratefully acknowledges the various interesting documents
and letters he has received. He is anxious that it should be perfectly
understood that he is not the author of any statement, representation,
or opinion, that may appear in his "Current Notes," which are merely
selections from communications made to him in the course of his
business, and which appear to him to merit attention. Every statement
therefore is open to correction or discussion, and the writers of the
several paragraphs should be considered as alone responsible for their
assertions. Although many notes have hitherto appeared anonymously, or
with initial letters, yet wherever a serious contradiction is involved,
G. Willis trusts that his Correspondents will feel the necessity of
allowing him to make use of their names when properly required.




THE ENVIRONS OF LONDON.


_Original Letter from the late Sir Robert Peel._

                                            Whitehall, July 7th, 1840.

MY DEAR SIR,

Do not you think a very interesting work might be written, to be
entitled an Historical Account of the celebrated Villas in the
neighbourhood of London. I mean rather the Villas that have been--than
those that now exist.

Look at Horace Walpole's Song on Strawberry Hill. How many places are
there mentioned which have historical recollections connected with
them, which it would be worth preserving.

There must be always great interest about the localities in the
neighbourhood of the metropolis. In that song alone are mentioned

    Gunnersbury,
    Sion,
    Chiswick,
    Strawberry Hill,
    Greenwich,
    Marble Hill,
    Oatlands,
    Clermont,
    Southcote,

you might add Wanstead, Wimbledon, Holland House, and a hundred
others--many with very curious anecdotes of local and personal history
connected with them.

Perhaps I overrate the interest with which such a book would be read. I
certainly do not, if it would equal that, with which I myself read the
account of places in the neighbourhood of Paris, remarkable in history,
but the traces of which--many of which at least--are fast fading away;
such as

    Maisons,      Sceaux,
    Meudon,       Chantilli,
    &c.           &c.

Hampton Court, the ancient Palace at Richmond, Kew, &c. &c. might enter
into the work.

                                         Very truly yours,
                                                ROBERT PEEL.

The County Histories would form a substratum for the work--but every
thing would depend upon the liveliness and accuracy of the details.




THE LATE J. M. W. TURNER, ESQ. R.A.

[Illustration]


SIR,--As it appears from the public Prints that the late eminent
artist, J. M. W. Turner, never sat for his Portrait;--and the only
likenesses of him were taken by stealth, I send you a rude sketch which
I took of him in the same way, about the year 1805 or 6. He was then on
a visit at Mr. Fawkes's, of Farnley, where a number of grouse shooters
had assembled,--and Turner had adopted the garb of a sportsman. His
appearance, as well as his exploits on the moors, were the subject of
much mirth.

One day we accompanied him on an excursion, for the purpose of taking a
sketch of the magnificent scenery of Gordale, in Craven, from which he
afterwards produced a finished painting.

My rude sketch of his person was considered a characteristic
resemblance at the time; and though it has the air of a caricature, yet
was not meant as such when it was drawn.

If you think it would interest the readers of your "Current Notes," you
will perhaps give it as an illustration. If not, I will thank you to
return it to me.

                                             Yours, &c.
                                                    I. T. A.




MONUMENTAL BRASSES REMOVED FROM THE CHURCHES OF FULHAM AND CHELSEA.


Mr. GEO. WILLIS,--Your Correspondent, under the head of "Antiquarian
Sacrilege," (_Current Notes for December, p. 91,_) seems not to be
aware that almost all Church Brasses, with very few exceptions, were
torn from their places by the sectarian soldiers in Cromwell's time,
who affected to consider such things idolatrous. They were for the
most part sold for old brass, and some authority (I forget who at
this moment), tells us that, in consequence of the number at one
time brought into the market, the price of brass was decreased in
proportion. There were very few Antiquaries in those days, consequently
a very small number of these desecrated Brasses have been preserved,
and for those we possess we are indebted to such men as Ashmole, Lilly,
and others of that class, who, though sufficiently fantastic and
visionary in their pursuits, were still men of some learning and taste.

Some, if not the whole of the lots alluded to by your Correspondent,
came into the possession of the late John Meyrick, Esq., through an
ancestor of his wife, whose name was "Rush," and the only sacrilege
committed by the late Mr. Meyrick seems to have been the preservation
of these things from destruction.

I have frequently heard the late Sir S. R. Meyrick mention these
Brasses, and regret they were not in his possession.

                                         ONE OF HIS EXECUTORS.




STERNE'S AUTOGRAPH.


MR. GEO. WILLIS,--I have never met with the fact in print, that some
few of the first editions of Tristram Shandy have the autograph of the
author at the head of the first chapter in some or one of the volumes,
a facsimile of which, in the 7th volume of the copy in my possession, I
send you.

[Illustration: L. Sterne]

Whether this was done for the gratification of Sterne's particular
friends, or for what other purpose, I am ignorant; perhaps some of your
correspondents can throw some light upon the subject.

                                                          A. C. K.




WARD'S "GRAND REBELLION."


I was rejoiced at the first glance at F. C. B.'s communication (p. 88
"Current Notes" for November), but doubts very soon arose, whether some
oversight had not occurred in taking the portrait of _Robert_ Bertie,
for that enquired after, which is _Montague_ Bertie. On turning to
Granger I found this to be the case, for the portrait which F. C. B.
has, is there given as _Robert_, so that I fear the right one remains
yet _non est inventus_, for I do not consider "A Dealer," as speaking
from any distinct recollection of such a portrait, which must be an
8vo. one, whereas Faithorne's is in 4to.

                                                              A.

_Oak House._




DATE OF THOMAS HOOD'S DEATH.


    Dec. 26th, 1851.

SIR,--I find, on referring to a biographical sketch added to an
autograph of the late Thos. Hood, at the time of his death, that that
event took place, as surmised by your correspondent C. ("Current
Notes," p. 90), on 3rd May, 1845.

                                         Yours obediently,
                                                       S. S.

  Mr. Willis.



Mrs. Fenwick observing in Willis's "Current Notes" that some one
enquires when Hood died, she writes to say, he expired on the 3rd May,
1845. The above information Mr. Willis may depend upon being correct,
as it is from the late Mr. Hood's daughter, who is married to the Rev.
S. Broderip, Rector of Cossington, Somersetshire.

Three Rock Houses, Tenby, Jan. 15, 1852.




BLACKWOOD'S MAGAZINE.--I. P. (Philadelphia, Nov. 18, 1851), writes to
G. W.:


"Can you tell me who contributed to Blackwood's Magazine, May, 1838,
the pleasant paper, 'Father Tom and the Pope; or a Night at the
Vatican?' The impression prevails here that it was written by Maginn."


_It was understood at the time to be a Mr. Ferguson, a writer in some
Dublin paper,--a Wexford man._

                                                              F. M.




FRASER'S MAGAZINE.


SIR,--Your correspondent, A. K., ("Current Notes" for December, p.
90), will find in Fraser's Magazine, No. 121, Vol. 21, a list of the
portraits published in that periodical.

                                                              A.

  Mr. Willis.



CAUSSIN'S HOLY COURT.


                                         Landscape Terrace, Cork,
                                              Dec. 29. 1851.

DEAR SIR,--For the information of your two correspondents, "A
Subscriber," and "R. O. W." ("Current Notes" for December, p. 95),
I beg to repeat my assertion that there was an edition of "The Holy
Court," by N. Caussin, published in _Corke_. In fact, (if I mistake
not), there were two editions, one in 1765, without plates; and one in
1767, with very excellent plates. I can procure an imperfect copy of
the former for either of your correspondents for one shilling; and a
fine copy of the latter for thirty to thirty-five shillings, full calf,
with plates.

The work was printed in Broad-lane--(perhaps so called quasi "lucus a
non lucendo," as the lane is certainly rather narrow)--and was very
well got up. The date and place of printing are thus given in the first
edition: Corke: "Printed anno Domini 1765."

                                     I am, Sir, yours very truly,
                                                       WM. C. NELIGAN.

  Mr. Willis.





THE SONS OF NOAH.


                                                        Dec. 22nd.

SIR,--I have examined Parkhurst's Hebrew Lexicon with reference to O.
S.--your correspondent's query, (see "Current Notes" for November, p.
85), concerning Shem, Ham, and Japhet, and cannot discover the names
to have any such primary meaning as was there ascribed to them; though
perhaps by a little straining, and a few far-fetched ideas, such an
interpretation might be given--but it is so wholly unworthy of any one
to torture his imagination to suppose that the original signification
of words should have been framed to suit a climate, that nothing more
need be said.

                                    I remain, Sir,
                                         Your obedient servant,
                                                           C. M. J.

  Mr. Willis.




TURKISH COIN.


    Southwick, near Oundle,
    Jan. 1st. 1852.

SIR,--In Kitto's Cyclopaedia of Biblical Literature, vol. 2. p. 379,
there is a coin illustrated thus: "5. supposed ancient Jewish coin,
representing drums." Kitto gives his authorities at the end of the
article on Musical Instruments.

[Illustration]

Allow me to give the figure of the coin, and its interpretation:

Read from left to right, the letters, or rather words, are: S F T R Ch
N: in Turkish it reads, _The Boundary of the Turks_; and the two drum
sticks ! are the pillars of Hercules, or the Calpe columna, and the
Abyla columna.--_N.B._ The _S_ (for _sh_) is a Cuneiform letter.

                                                T. R. BROWN.

  Mr. Willis.




THE DEVONSHIRE COLLECTION.--In reply to the inquiry of Mr. Willis's
correspondent, "A Young Numismatist," ("Current Notes" for December, p.
95), he is informed that the Duke of Devonshire's Collection of Coins
was sold by auction a few years ago, and produced a very inconsiderable
sum, to the surprise of everybody. This was accounted for by the
manner in which the Coins were catalogued. It was well known as "The
Devonshire Collection."

                                                       S. H. H.




DISCOVERY OF THE TOMB OF ST. BERICHERT, OR, BERECHTUNE.--Mr. Windele
the local historian of Cork, has circulated among his friends a
Lithographic drawing of this very interesting monument, which he found
at Tullilease, a small hamlet on the border of the Counties of Cork
and Limerick, within a mile of Dromcolleher. The tomb is a much more
highly ornate specimen of an ancient cross than any of those engraved
in Dr. Petrie's work on the Round Towers of Ireland. At Tullilease
there are the ruins of an old Romanesque church, which was dedicated to
St. Berichert or Berihert, a Saxon, whose name is now Anglicised into
Benjamin, and whose death is recorded at A.D. 839, in the Four Masters.
The Legend on the stone is in Latin, (but very sorry Latin), and in
the Irish character. It reads, "QUICUNQUE (for ae) HUNC TITULUM LEGERIT
ORAT (for _orate_ or _oret_) PRO BERECHTUNE." On the upper part of the
stone, in one corner, are the letters p[=p]s or pp[=s].




RICHARD III.


                                                 January 10th, 1852.

SIR,--All our historians assert that Richard, Duke of Glo'ster paved
his way to the crown by bastardizing, imprisoning, and assassinating
his two nephews, Edward Prince of Wales and Richard Duke of York. How
then are we to account for the provision made in the Wardrobe Roll
for the Coronation of Richard III., July 3rd, 1483, (published in the
Antiquarian Repertory, Vol. I. p. 29, 1807;) "_The deliveree of divers
Stuff delivered for the use of Lorde Edwarde, son of late Kyng Edward
the Fourthe, and of his Henxemen?_" Then follows a particular account
of the materials for the "_apparaill and array_" of "_Prince Edward_"
and his "_Henxemen_." Was he really present at his uncle's coronation?
There is no mention of the Duke of York. The Declaration of Tyrrell and
Dighton, published in the ensuing reign by Henry VII., says, the young
princes were murdered in July, 1483. If the words did not expressly
state "_Edwarde, son of late Kyng Edwarde the Fourthe_," I should have
concluded that it meant Richard III.'s own son Edward, by Lady Ann
Nivelle, at that time about nine years of age.

                                          Yours, &c.      O. S.




AMERICAN TESTIMONIAL TO MRS. COWDEN CLARKE.


                                       New York, 13th December, 1851.

About the time you receive this, you will probably hear of an American
testimonial to that amiable woman, Mrs. Cowden Clarke, to be presented
to her by the American Minister, Mr. Abbot Lawrence, in the name of the
subscribers, at the head of whom stands America's greatest and best
statesman, Daniel Webster.

This testimonial is in the shape of a magnificent Rosewood Library
Chair, richly carved, and covered with the finest French Satin Brocade.
It is at this moment _on_ the Atlantic, _in_ the "Atlantic," and
insured by the Atlantic Insurance Company, for three hundred dollars.

As THE FAME OF SHAKSPERE is world-wide, subscriptions of five
dollars each came in from all parts of the American Union--from
the most northerly of all, Maine,--to Mexico. From Wisconsin,
in the _far_-far-FAR West, to the shores of the Pacific, at San
Francisco--they are thousands of miles apart from each other.

Why have you left it to us poor Yankees "to take the wind out of your
sails," in presenting a testimonial to the authoress of the Concordance
to Shakspere? Mr. Payne Collier, and such like dear fellows, who know
so many eminent wealthy literati, ought, _now_ that we have set you the
example, to get up a subscription, and present Mrs. Clarke with some
better Shaksperean testimonial than a Chair! What say you to a 'FIRST'
Best Bed? But if the hangings of it beat our satin brocade cover, why
I'll hang myself in despair--no I won't, but I'll eat it--bed--feathers
and all. The Chair was to have been covered with the richest silk Genoa
velvet, of a regal scarlet or crimson, but the lady of our Secretary
of State, Mrs. Daniel Webster, would have it, that velvet covers were
quite old-fashioned; and as ladies best know what will suit ladies, she
was asked the favour to select the cover, and _I guess_ you will admire
it.

Now for the _freedom_ of America. Collins gave the Chair _free_
passage. Edwards, Sandford and Co. conveyed the case to the ship, and
will convey it from Liverpool to London, _free_. They are Express men,
and thus do we "go a-head."




CATHERINE HAYES AND FATHER MATHEW.


G. W.'s Correspondent adds:--

"I receive your 'Notes' regularly. The story about Katy Hayes in your
November Number, p. 88, is somewhat embellished by '_your New York
Special Reporter_.' I regret to tell you that she, poor girl, has quite
_put her foot in it_ here, and I am afraid will return poorer than
when she came. She or her agent or agents, pursued a silly course by,
_it is said_, keeping almost open house to her countrymen at the Astor
house, a very expensive hotel, where she ran up an enormous bill, and
being unable to pay, the sheriff's officers carried off the receipts
at some of her concerts--particularly that which she gave for that
humbug hypocrite Father Mathew. There has been a great deal about it in
our papers. Doctor Joy returned to England some time ago in disgust.
Mathew absolutely had the temerity to make it appear that he could work
miracles, _publicly_, in the face of a large Catholic congregation, by
restoring the sick and lame to health!"




ETHNOLOGY.--"G.W.'s New York Special Reporter," whose embellished style
has been questioned in the preceding paragraph, states, that he has
forwarded a pamphlet, for which he will be duly thanked when it is
received, "giving an account of a _pretended_ journey to the city of
Eximaya, in Central America, by an Englishman and two Spaniards, who
are all 'gone dead.'" Observing that, "It is a good Arabian Night's
hoax. You will see," he remarks, "the pamphlet is dated 1850, but the
children have only been exhibited here this week. There is _no mistake_
about them, they are evidently children of a distinct and unknown
race, come from whence they will. The recession of their foreheads
is extraordinary. Their heads are wonderfully small, and in exact
proportion to their bodies and limbs. They are not dwarfs but pigmies;
about twelve years of age, lively and playful. They are not at Barnum's
Museum, but at the rooms of the Society Library, and are exciting very
great attention."




THE JARVIS LIBRARY SALE.


This Sale, which has so long attracted the attention of American
Bibliopoles, commenced on Tuesday, Nov. 4th. It was the means of
drawing together agents for the most prominent Libraries in the United
States. Among others, the following Colleges and Institutions were
represented:--Smithsonian Institution, Harvard College, Yale College,
General Theological Seminary of New York, College of New Jersey,
Brown University, Rochester University, Andover Theological Seminary,
New York State Library, New York Society Library, and the Historical
Society of New York.

The sale being the largest that ever took place in America, of any
private library, the books brought fair prices. A volume of Tracts,
containing the American Whig, &c. sold for 22 dollars 75 cents, to
Bancroft, the historian. Byzantinae Historiae Scriptores, a unique
set, containing a beautiful MS. translation of the third volume of
Nicephorus Gregoras, sold for 475 dollars, to Prof. Ticknor, of Boston.
Biblia Sacra Polyglotta, being the celebrated COMPLUTENSIAN POLYGLOTT,
130 dollars, to the Rochester University. The Paris Polyglott, 100
dollars, to Geo. Livermore, Esq. Boston. Vetus Testamentum Graecum,
40 dollars, Harvard College. Muratori, 37 vols. folio, 207 dollars,
to the Theological Seminary, New York. Cranmer's Bible, 26 dollars,
to Rochester University. Tyndale's Translation of the Pentateuch, 41
dollars, to John Wiley. Duchesne's Historical Collections, 24 dollars
50 cents, to Brown University, &c. &c.




THE PERIODICAL PRESS OF THE METHODISTS IN THE UNITED STATES.


The _Christian Advocate and Journal_ has a circulation of from 25 to
29,000 copies. The _Missionary Advocate_ circulates 20,000 copies, and
the _Sunday School Advocate_ no less than 65,000 copies, with a yearly
sale of Sunday School Books amounting to upwards of L1000, or 5000
dollars.




"WOODMAN, SPARE THAT TREE."


GENERAL Morris, who is associated with Mr. N. P. Willis as Editor,
and publisher of the "Home Journal," in New York, was, as all the
world knows--or at least, as the United States ought to know, for it
is something to be proud of to be possessed of a real living poet
in these days--was the author of the words of a charming ballad,
entitled, "Woodman, spare that Tree," which was sung effectively by an
illustrious scion of the house of Russell. The parentage of this lyric
having been claimed by a respectable Boston paper, (_The Sunday News_),
on behalf of a deceased literary gentleman named Woodward, who is said,
in an unguarded moment, to have pawned his reputation upon the Woodman,
to the gallant General, for a glass of grog; the General indignantly
repudiates the whole statement; repeating that, "a slander well hoed
grows like the devil;" and labours to establish the fact, that the
American General Morris is not to be by posterity identified with the
English Captain of the same name--as a song writer.

                                                            FUSBOS.



THE BAWDRICK OR BALDROCK. (_Illustrated._)


                              The Rectory, Clyst St. George, Topsham,
                                             Jan. 2, 1852.

SIR,--You are publishing, in your "Current Notes," some nice little
cuts of interesting relics of antiquity, for which all who delight in
such things must feel thankful to you.

May I ask you to put into your cutter's hands the rough sketch which I
send with this; and will you allow it to be introduced to the notice of
your readers, as an illustration of the Bawdrick, or Baldrock, which
is the leather gear, with its appurtenances of the upper part of the
clapper in old black-letter bells, and about which your readers may
have seen a discussion, with extracts from old Churchwarden's accounts,
in another valuable periodical of like character to your own, but in
which at present no illustrations of any kind are admitted. You will
oblige one of your subscribers.

                                                        H. T. E.

  Mr. Willis.



SKETCH OF THE GEAR OF AN OLD BELL CLAPPER.


[Illustration]

A. Crown Staple.

B. Bawdrick or Baldrock of old Churchwarden's books, viz. stout white
leather straps, shewing how fitted with intervening piece of _hard wood
and pin_.

C. Clapper, with stirrup top.

D. "_Busk Board_" which at the lower end is tied round the stem of the
clapper, and by the pin above keeps the wood and leather all steady
together, and the clapper works or swings on the _crown_ staple, having
leather on the upper side, and hard wood _under_.

                                                         H. T. E.




TURNBUCKLE AND LATCH.--The figure you have engraved on p. 91 of your
December "Notes," as a _Turnbuckle_, is the common casement _latch_
of the 17th century; which may be found attached to the iron frame of
casement windows in many old farm houses.

A latch is not a turnbuckle, and no ironmonger's apprentice would
confound the two. A latch is a bar moving up and down in a limited
space--or, if backwards and forwards, as in some locks--it is called
the latch-bolt. A turnbuckle, as its name implies, turns round, and
is only limited by the notch, &c. by which it holds. They are chiefly
of two kinds: one is a spindle, with a knob or ring at one end, and
a tongue or buckle at the other; another is a handle with a tongue
attached, moving together freely round, upon a pin or rivets. This
latter kind has taken the place of the casement latch represented in
your "Current Notes" in present use.

                       ONE WHO HAS BEEN AN IRONMONGER'S APPRENTICE.




ARCHITECTURAL RESTORATIONS IN IRELAND.


A small subscription, which was raised for the purpose of sustaining
the failing walls of Buttevant Abbey, in the County of Cork, is about
to be followed by Mr. Thomas Tobin, of Ballincollig, taking measures to
uphold the Castle of Buttevant.

The same good spirit animates Mr. Odell, the proprietor of Ardmore, in
the County of Waterford, who has determined to preserve the west gable
of the Old Church, which is covered over with figures that, according
to Ryland's History of Waterford, "with a good imagination, and some
knowledge of the ancient Scriptures, may be made to exhibit an epitome
of the history of the Old Testament."




THE HISTORICAL SOCIETY OF LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE.


                                                16th January, 1852.

SIR,--If your refer to your "Current Notes" for April last, you will
find engraved, at p. 27, a tobacco pipe, found when the Golden Lion Inn
at Fulham was pulled down in April, 1836. Now, Sir, it appears to me
that this drawing of mine has been copied, without acknowledgment, from
your Notes, in the Transactions of the Historical Society of Lancashire
and Cheshire, Session iii. 1850-51, to illustrate a paper by Andrew
James Lamb, Esq. Plate IV. No. 14. If not, I humbly conceive that Mr.
Lamb, or the Rev. Dr. Hume, the Secretary, on behalf of the Society,
is bound to state where the original pipe which figures in their
Transactions exists, and how and when Mr. Lamb obtained his drawing
or knowledge of it. This alone can disprove the charge which I make
against the Historical Society of Lancashire and Cheshire, of _copying
without acknowledgment_, my sketch _from Willis's Notes_.

                                                           T. M.




ARCHAEOLOGICAL PUBLICATIONS.--In addition to those enumerated in G. W.'s
"Current Notes" for December (p. 93), the first Number of "_Reliquiae_
Antiquae Eboracenses, or Remains of Antiquities relating to York," has
appeared.

In answer to W. B.'s communications, G. W. conceives that the best mode
of making a local work of this nature known, would be by a circular
letter addressed to the resident Nobility, Clergy, and Gentry of
Yorkshire, soliciting their countenance and support.

The information desired respecting the publications of the
Archaeological Societies named, may be obtained by W. B. addressing
himself to their respective Secretaries, _viz._

    M. A. LOWER, Esq., Lewes.
    REV. DR. HUME, Liverpool.
    WILLIAM AYRTON, Esq., Chester.
    SAMUEL TYMMS, Esq., Bury St. Edmunds, and
    HENRY HARROD, Esq., Norwich.




SOCIETY OF ANTIQUARIES OF NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE.


Mr. Willis is informed with reference to a paragraph which appeared
in his "Current Notes" for December, p. 93, that the Society of
Antiquaries of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, whose issues have been suspended
since 1846, will forthwith resume publishing.




THE SLOGANS OF THE NORTH OF ENGLAND have been published by Mr. G. B.
Richardson, of Newcastle-upon-Tyne.




THE BRITISH MUSEUM.--A recent resolution of the Trustees of this
National Establishment has been considered, in certain Antiquarian
circles, to present "_a fair specimen of double-dealing_."

                                         AN IRISH NUMISMATIST.




AUTOGRAPHIC BIOGRAPHY.


                                                   January 3rd, 1852.

SIR,--I trust I shall not trespass upon the limits of your courtesy, if
I beg your assistance with regard to the accompanying list of names,
about whom I am anxious to gain any information as to dates of birth,
death, or any subject of interest connected with the individuals.

As I live in the country and have not the facility of access to a
library for reference, I avail myself of the medium of your instructive
and valuable publication, and beg to subscribe myself, with all good
wishes,

                                        Your obedient servant,
                                                           ELLEN F.

    Symonds' Inn.    24th April, 1787. Edward Montagu.
                        No date. Marquis de Spinola.

    St. Petersburg.  24th Jan. 1805. C. A. Pozzo di Borgo.
                        No date. Geo. R. Collier, Commodore.

    London.          13th March, 1820. W. Plumer.
                     20th May, 1829. Jno. Bruce.
                        No date. P. P. Jacob.




ROWLAND HILL AND THE PENNY POSTAGE.


The following is the commencement of a leading article on the Penny
Postage, contained in the "_Times_," of Saturday, 9th August, 1851:--

    "A traveller sauntering through the Lake districts of
    England some years ago, arrived at a small public-house
    just as the postman stopped to deliver a letter. A
    young girl came out to receive it. She took it in her
    hand, turned it over and over, and asked the charge.
    It was a large sum--no less than a shilling. Sighing
    heavily, she observed that it came from her brother,
    but that she was too poor to take it in, and she
    returned it to the postman accordingly. The traveller
    was a man of kindness as well as of observation; he
    offered to pay the postage himself, and in spite of
    more reluctance on the girl's part than he could well
    understand, he did pay it, and gave her the letter. No
    sooner, however, was the postman's back turned, than
    she confessed that the proceeding had been concerted
    between her brother and herself, that the letter was
    empty, that certain signs on the direction conveyed
    all she wanted to know, and that as they could neither
    of them afford to pay postage, they had devised this
    method of franking the intelligence desired. The
    traveller pursued his journey, and as he plodded over
    the Cumberland fells, he mused upon the badness of a
    system which drove people to such straits for means
    of correspondence, and defeated its own object all
    the time. With most men such musings would have ended
    before the close of the hour, but this man's name was
    ROWLAND HILL, and it was from this incident and these
    reflections that the whole scheme of Penny Postage was
    derived."

I should be glad to know if there is any doubt as to the truth of this
statement, as I fancied it had been contradicted. Could any of your
Correspondents oblige me by giving me information on the subject, I
should feel obliged.

                                                             I. E.




ENQUIRY.


                                            Boston, January 15th, 1852.

SIR,--I send you a query for "Current Notes."

    "Robbed between Sun and Sun."

Can any of your communicants favor me with the origin of this
expression? It was employed to describe the late Revolution in Paris,
by the "Examiner," and I have seen it as a quotation in a work of old
date.

                                                          Y. S. N.




DENTAL SURGERY.--In the observations on the progress of Geography and
Ethnology, by Mr. John Russell Bartlett, read at the Meeting of the New
York Historical Society in November and December, 1846, it is mentioned
that in the exploration of a tumuli carried on by Dr. M. W. Dickeson,
in the South-western States, chiefly in Mississippi, although in some
instances extending to Alabama, Louisiana, and Texas, he found that
Dentistry had been extensively practised by this ancient people, as
plugging the teeth and inserting artificial ones, were common. In one
instance five artificial teeth were found inserted in one subject.

                                                         T. C. B.




CAPPING A STORY.--Rogers, the poet, was fond of telling the story
of a gentleman who lost a shilling in Covent Garden Market, just at
the corner of the Great Piazza, and on his return from India some
five-and-twenty years afterwards, on passing the spot where he supposed
the loss had taken place, remembered the circumstance, and looking
about him on the pavement, picked up his shilling. Here Rogers, in his
own inimitable way of telling a story, would pause, and then add--"IN
HALFPENCE, _wrapped up in paper_."

"I knew the man," said a witty friend to the poet, "but you have
forgotten the most singular point of the story about the recovery of
this lost shilling _just at the door of Willis the bookseller's place
of business_."

"I thought it sufficiently odd," replied the poetical banker, "our
friend having found his shilling after so long a period, and only wish
that my lost notes may turn up again in the same unexpected and amusing
manner--_that notes turn up to me from Willis_."

"Then you must have heard the whole story, and the very remarkable fact
to which I refer? That in the paper which contained the four-and-twenty
halfpence he found another filled with farthings, the exact amount of
which when calculated, proved to be that of compound interest upon the
shilling for five-and-twenty years one month and thirteen days."

Mr. Rogers has never since told the story.




ROBERT HOBLYN.


SIR,--Through the medium of your publication, can you tell me anything
about "Robt. Hoblyn;" and what works he has published? I believe they
were of a classical nature; and he was living in 1825.

                                           Yours truly,
                                                      A. K.

  Jan. 2, 1852.




A TRAVELLING NAME.--I have heard or read somewhere of a story about one
of the authors of the "Rejected Addresses"--indeed, I now remember that
he told it to me himself--how that he once travelled in a stage coach
with a very agreeable old lady, who was well acquainted with London
society, and with whom he conversed for a considerable time about
various mutual friends and circumstances that could only be known to
them, or to their immediate circle, with so much familiarity, that the
old lady's curiosity being roused, she ventured to inquire his name.
"James Smith, madam," was the reply. "Oh, that's your travelling name,
is it? But it won't do for me."

                                                                J.




SMITH.--Has not some one written, or is not some one going to write, a
history of the Smiths? It really might be made a very amusing book, and
some one--I forget who--actually told me that "the far-famed Ruffian of
the Adelphi," (O. S.) was collecting materials for or from such a book.
I subscribe my real name--identify, if you can, Mr. Willis.

                                                       JOHN SMITH.




PILGRIM'S BADGE?--A Correspondent has kindly transmitted to G. W. a
rubbing from which the annexed woodcut has been made, of a small brass
ornament, found at Launde Abbey, in Leicestershire, which abbey or
priory was founded by Rd. Basset, in the reign of Henry III. dissolved
by Henry VIII., and Cromwell, Earl of Essex, had a grant of it. In
the Chapel (all that remains of the Priory) is a monument to his son
Gregory, Lord Cromwell, of the date of 1551. The ornament is supposed
to be a Pilgrim's Badge, brought from Rome, and probably was buried
with him.

[Illustration]

                                                       M. C. S.

  1st January, 1852.




ANCIENT KEY.--I. D. is thanked for the drawing of an Ancient Key found
in October last, in the parish of Stoke Holy Cross, near Warwick; but
as no particular interest attaches to this key in an antiquarian point
of view, it is not worth engraving.




THE LIBERTY STONE IN CASTLE STREET, LIVERPOOL.--T. B. B. (Burnley, 1st
December) thanked, but the space at G. W.'s command does not permit of
his inserting the extract forwarded to him from the _Liverpool Albion_.




PRINTS OF OLIVER CROMWELL AND "ST. LUKE'S DAY."


A "Young Print and Portrait Collector" would be obliged by any
explanation respecting a portrait of Oliver Cromwell, of an allegorical
nature, surrounded by various emblems and devices, which evidently bear
upon the events of his life. He is represented standing between two
columns, in armour, with a wreath of laurel in place of a helmet. This
print has neither name or date of any kind upon it.

[Illustration]

Another print is one marked published 1816, by J. T. Smith, called
"St. Luke's day," a "poor painter removing;" is this intended as a
caricature upon some artist of the time?

  Jan. 6th, 1852.




D. E., 47, _Blessington Street, Dublin,_ thanked for his suggestions.
The R. I. A.--T. C. D. and the Dublin Society, however, cannot in the
slightest degree influence the conduct of G. W.'s "Current Notes."

If these learned bodies regard their own situation, they will not
object to "any slang, coarseness, or Americanisms." They should
rather reflect how much America has and _probably_ will teach young
Ireland--BUT NOT _through_ their agency, as publishers.




THE HOLY GRAHL, [Greek: Delta]. as confessedly "made up of quotations,"
is an article not suited to G. W.'s "Current Notes."




ADMISSION OF LITERARY INQUIRERS TO THE PUBLIC RECORDS.


Regulations under which permission will be given to Literary Inquirers
to make searches among the Public Records, without payment of fees,
contained in a letter addressed by the Right Honourable Sir John
Romilly, Master of the Rolls to Sir Francis Palgrave, K.H., the Deputy
Keeper of the Public Records: dated at the Rolls House, 4th December,
1851:--

1st. That the individuals seeking to avail themselves of the permission
shall address a letter to the Deputy Keeper, stating generally their
objects of research, so as to show that the applications are really
and _bona fide_ for literary purposes, and that the applicant shall
also attend the Deputy Keeper personally thereon, and give such further
explanation as may be required; and that thereupon the Deputy Keeper
shall, if he be satisfied with the statement and explanation, authorise
the Assistant Keepers to allow the applicant to inspect such Indexes
of Records, and also such Original Records, and to make such copies or
extracts in pencil required by the applicant as the Deputy Keeper may
think advisable.

  This mode of proceeding, which is equally required for
    the security of the Records, and for the protection of
    the business searchers, will in fact be beneficial to
    Literary Inquirers; for the more fully they explain
    their objects, the better will the Deputy Keeper and
    the other officers be able to direct them to the
    documents which may be useful to them.

2ndly. That all the applications before mentioned be entered in a book,
and be reported to the Master of the Rolls.

3rdly. That a book be kept at each branch office, in which the
Assistant Keeper shall enter a note or particular of the Rolls,
Records, Books, or Documents, called for, inspected, or used by the
applicant, nearly in the same manner, _mutatis mutandis_, as is
practised with respect to Manuscripts in the British Museum.

  But this book is to be considered as confidential,
    and not to be shown to the public without express
    permission of the Master of the Rolls or Deputy Keeper.

4thly. That, in case of any impropriety or abuse of the privilege, the
Assistant Keepers do forthwith report the same to the Deputy Keeper, in
order that he may bring the same before the Master of the Rolls.

It will be necessary also to explain to the Literary Inquirers that
the time of the various officers and other persons employed in the
Public Record Office is so wholly engrossed by the performance of
their present duties, that it will not be possible for the officers to
assist any Literary Inquirers beyond the production of the documents,
and giving a general explanation, if needed, of their character and
nature. No applicant ought to present himself who is not sufficiently
acquainted with the hand-writing, abbreviations, and language of
ancient documents, so as to be able to read and decipher their contents.

The Literary Inquirer will have free access to the documents, but, this
being done, he will have to conduct the inquiry from these documents
in such manner as his own knowledge and capacity may best enable him to
do.




_G. W. is informed that the reading Public are indebted to John Bruce,
Esq., the Treasurer of the Society of Antiquaries, for this important
concession on the part of the Master of the Rolls; and it has been
suggested that a suitable testimonial should be presented to Mr. Bruce
by those historical inquirers who are likely to derive such valuable
aid from his exertions._

                                                        F. S. A.




LITERARY AUCTIONS.--That there is no lack of enthusiasm among amateurs
for the possession of rare and curious works, is evidenced by the
prices which some books of this class brought at a sale just concluded
by Messrs. Sotheby and Wilkinson, being the first sale of importance
this season. Among them may be noticed the following:

ORLOGE (l') DE SAPIENCE, folio, _nouvellement imprimee a Paris_, 1493.
A VERY SPLENDID SPECIMEN OF PRINTING ON VELLUM, _from the celebrated
Press of_ VERARD, _ruled with red lines, bound in red morocco extra,
gilt edges, by Bauzonnet, with a well made pigskin case to contain it_.

Of this singular Ascetical Romance, M. Van Praet states that six
copies are known as being printed on vellum: of these three are in the
National Library at Paris, all of which are more or less adorned with
miniatures, two of them, like the present, having the summary of the
chapters (left blank for the insertion of the miniatures) written in
a contemporary hand on the margins. The Harleian copy, afterwards in
the collections of Count Macarthy and Mr. Hibbert, was adorned with
thirteen miniatures: the present beautiful volume has SIXTEEN, the
additional ones being at the commencement of the chapters, in which the
same subjects are treated in a different manner. THE whole of the fine
miniatures are in the best style of French art. THIS LOT SOLD FOR L45.




Literary and Scientific Obituary.


    CHILDREN, John George. Science. Late Secretary R.S.
      Halstead, Kent.

    GRAEFE, Dr. Christian. Greek and Roman Antiquities. St.
      Petersburgh. 11th December.

    JACOB, William. F.R.S. Political Economist. 31, Cadogan
      Place. 17th December. Aged 89.

    LUTTRELL, Henry. Wit and Poet. Brompton Square. 19th
      December. Aged 86.

    SADLIER, Rev. Dr. Provost, Trinity College, Dublin.
      14th December.

    STEEL, James. Editor and Proprietor Carlisle Journal.
      Carlisle. 16th December. Aged 55.

    TURNER, Joseph Mallord William. R.A. 47, Queen Anne
      Street (Chelsea?). 19th December. Aged 76.

    WARBURTON, Eliot. Historian and Novelist. Lost in the
      wreck of the Amazon. 4th January.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Willis's Current Notes, No. XIII.,
January 1852, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILLIS'S CURRENT NOTES, JAN 1852 ***

***** This file should be named 43708.txt or 43708.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/7/0/43708/

Produced by Emmy, Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
