Project Gutenberg's Willis's Current Notes, No. XVI., April 1852, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Willis's Current Notes, No. XVI., April 1852

Author: Various

Editor: George Willis

Release Date: September 13, 2013 [EBook #43710]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILLIS'S CURRENT NOTES, APRIL 1852 ***




Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Emmy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










WILLIS'S CURRENT NOTES FOR THE MONTH.


    No. XVI.]            [APRIL, 1852.
    "I will make a prief of it in my Note-Book."--SHAKSPERE.




NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS

TO THE "PRICE CURRENT OF LITERATURE."


G. WILLIS gratefully acknowledges the various interesting documents
and letters he has received. He is anxious that it should be perfectly
understood that he is not the author of any statement, representation,
or opinion, that may appear in his "Current Notes," which are merely
selections from communications made to him in the course of his
business, and which appear to him to merit attention. Every statement
therefore is open to correction or discussion, and the writers of the
several paragraphs should be considered as alone responsible for their
assertions. Although many notes have hitherto appeared anonymously, or
with initial letters, yet wherever a serious contradiction is involved,
G. Willis trusts that his Correspondents will feel the necessity of
allowing him to make use of their names when properly required.




THE ANCIENT HEBREW HARP.


[Illustration]

SIR,--In Kitto's Biblical Cyclopaedia, vol. 2. p. 373, we find the
following coin, on which is engraved an ancient harp surrounded by the
letters, Fllth Chtr Phl, which may be construed thus:--

    'THE FELATAH CITHARA OF PUL.'

After referring the readers of "Current Notes" to the "London
Encyclopaedia," word _Falasha_, and Prichard's Physical History of
Mankind, vol. 1, "On the Races of People in the Interior of Africa,"
let us have recourse to Etymology for a further elucidation of this
singular coin, and the Semi-Jewish tribe whose name it bears.

Felatah.--Hebrew [Hebrew: phalat] _phalat_, which by comparison with
its cognates signifies, _to separate from_, _retire into_, (another
country); and with its affix [Hebrew: phalatah] _phalatah_, or
_Felatah_, signifying _evasio_, _liberatio_, _residuum_, _&c._

Cithara.--Greek [Greek: kithara]. Hebrew and Chaldee [Hebrew: chatar]
_chatar_, _a stick_, (plectrum), _to beat with a stick_; therefore
the instrument cannot be the [Hebrew: asor] _asor_, _decachordon_; but
properly, I think, the harp or lyre that was beaten with the _plectrum_.

Pul.--Hebrew [Hebrew: phul] _phul_, or _Pul_, (Isaiah lxvi. 19.)
"AFRICA, _ea pars quae apud Fesam_."

Such is the value of rightly interpreting the ancient coins of various
nations.

    Yours truly,
           T. R. BROWN.

Southwick, Oundle, March 27th, 1852.




ARCHAEOLOGICAL PUBLICATIONS.


_In compliance with the wish very generally expressed by G. W.'s
Subscribers and Correspondents, particularly by S. E. ("Current
Notes" for March, p. 22,) G. W. has collected the titles of the chief
Archaeological publications in England, and in France and Germany. The
former he believes to be nearly correct, but the latter is necessarily
very imperfect, with the exception of the North of France. Very few
foreign Antiquarian publications find their way to this country, as
reference to the libraries of the British Museum and the Society of
Antiquaries will prove._


PUBLICATIONS OF ANTIQUARIAN SOCIETIES, ETC. IN ENGLAND AND IN FRANCE.

    "Archaeologia" of the Society of Antiquaries of London.
      Part I. Vol. XXXIV. 4to. 1851. Half a volume
      published yearly.

    "Vetusta Monumenta" of the same Society; suspended for
      some five or six years, folio.

    "Proceedings of," in 8vo. published for the Fellows,
      quarterly, Vol. II. No. 29, 1852.

    Catalogue of the Kerrich Collection of Roman Coins,
      8vo. 1852.

    "Archaeologia AEliana" of the Society of Antiquaries of
      Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Vol. IV. Part 1, 4to. 1846.

    This work has been suspended since 1846.

    Archaeologia Scotica of the Society of Antiquaries of
      Scotland, suspended for many years, or, it may be
      said, defunct; it extends only to Part II. Vol. IV.
      1833.

    Journal of the British Archaeological Association, Vol.
      VII. 8vo. complete, 1852.

    Archaeological Journal of the Archaeological Institute,
      Vol. VIII. 8vo. complete, 1852.

    (Vol. 1 of this work was compiled chiefly by Members
      of the Association, and records the Proceedings of
      the original institution before the secession and
      formation of the Institute.)

    Sussex Archaeological Collections, published by the
      Sussex Archaeological Society, Vol. IV. 8vo. 1851.

    _Original Papers_, published by the Norfolk and Norwich
      Archaeological Society, Vol. III. Part 3. 8vo. 1852.

    Proceedings of the Bury and West Suffolk Archaeological
      Institute, established 1848, Vol. I. Part 5. 8vo.
      1851.

    Proceedings and Papers of the Historic Society of
      Lancashire and Cheshire, Vol. II. Part 1. 8vo. 1851.

    "Archaeologia Cambriensis," and Journal of the Cambrian
      Archaeological Association, Vol. III. (new series)
      Part 2. 1852.

    Journal of the Chester and Cheshire Architectural
      Archaeological Society, Vol. I. Part 1. 8vo. 1850.

    Proceedings of the Kilkenny Archaeological Society?

    Museum of Classical Antiquities, Part I. Vol. II. 8vo.
      1852.

    Collectanea Antiqua (by C. Roach Smith,) Part IX. Vol.
      II. 8vo. 1852.

    Reliquiae Antiquae Eboracenses, (by W. Bowman,) Part II.
      4to. Leeds, 1852.

    Numismatic Chronicle and Journal of the Numismatic
      Society, Vol. XV. No. 1, 1852.

There are numerous other local Societies in England, but as they have
never printed any proceedings they can scarcely be regarded as more
than nominally Archaeological Societies.


FOREIGN SOCIETIES, ETC.

    Society of Antiquaries of France, Proceedings,
      (Bulletin Monumental), 8vo. annually to 1851.

    Society of Antiquaries of Normandy (Caen) Memoires, 2e
      Serie, 9e Vol. 4to. (Vol. XIX of the Collection,)
      1852.

    Society of Antiquaries of Picardy (Amiens,) Vol. XI.
      8vo. 1851.

    Society of Antiquaries of the West (Poitiers), Vol.
      XVIII. 8vo. 1848.

    Society of Antiquaries of the Morini (St. Omer), Vol.
      VIII. 8vo. 1850.

    Society of Emulation of Abbeville, Vol. VI. 8vo. 1851.

    Societe E'duenne des Lettres, Sciences et Arts,
      (Autun), Vol. II. 8vo. 1849.

    Society for Historical Researches, etc. of the
      Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg, Vol. III. 4to. 1847.

    Revue Numismatique (quarterly), commenced in 1836,
      8vo. This work is very valuable, not only for the
      excellent papers it contains, but also for the
      numerous illustrations. Edited by MM. E. Cartier and
      de la Saussaye.

    Revue Archeologique (quarterly), commenced in 1844.
      8vo. Leleux, Paris--Curt, London. Also a valuable
      periodical.

    Annalen des Vereins fuer Nassauische Alterthumskunde und
      Geschichtsforschung (Wiesbaden), 8 vols. 8vo. to 1850.

    Zeitschrift des Vereins zur Erforschung der Rheinischen
      Geschichte u. Alterthuemer in Mainz, (Mayence), in
      8vo. and 4to. 1850.

    Jahrbuecher des Vereins von Alterthumsfreunden im
      Rheinlande, No. XVI. 8vo. 1851. Bonn.

    Geschichte der vormaligen freien adeligen
      Benedictiner-Abtei Sunnesheim von Karl Wilhelmi, from
      1831 to 1851, in 8vo. Sinsheim.

Most of these German publications are in thin yearly volumes without
indices.


THE LEARNED SOCIETIES AND PRINTING CLUBS _of the United Kingdom_,
as existing in 1847, have been classified in an 8vo. volume of 307
pages, by the Rev. Dr. Hume, to which those who require information
respecting their Origin, History, Objects, and Constitution, are
referred. It contains full details as to Membership, Fees, their
published Works, Notices of their Periods and Places of Meeting, with a
General Introduction, and a good Index. As a book of reference, it is
absolutely necessary for all public libraries.




THE ORIGIN OF YANKEE DOODLE.--The "Transcript," (American paper), of
28th February last, contains the following pungent verses respecting

THE ORIGIN OF YANKEE DOODLE,

AFTER THE MANNER OF THE OLD CONTINENTAL BALLAD WRITERS, BY GEORGE P.
MORRIS, ESQ.

    Once on a time old Johnny Bull,
      Flew in a raging fury,
    And swore that Jonathan should have
      No trials, sir, by jury:
    That no elections should be held,
      Across the briny waters:
    "And now," says he, "I'll tax the tea
      Of all his sons and daughters,"
    Then down he sat in burly state,
      And blustered like a grandee,
    And in derision made a tune
      Called "Yankee Doodle dandy."
    "Yankee Doodle"--these are facts--
      "Yankee doodle dandy:
    "My son of wax, your tea I'll tax--
      "Yankee doodle dandy."

    John sent the tea from o'er the sea
      With heavy duties rated;
    But whether hyson or bohea,
      I never heard it stated.
    Then Jonathan to pout began--
      He laid a strong embargo--
    "I'll drink no tea, by Jove!" so he
      Threw overboard the cargo.
    Then Johnny sent a regiment,
      Big words and looks to bandy,
    Whose martial band, when near the land,
      Play'd "Yankee doodle dandy."
    "Yankee doodle--keep it up!
      "Yankee doodle dandy!
    "I'll poison with a tax your cup,
      "Yankee doodle dandy."

    A long war then they had, in which
      John was at last defeated--
    And "Yankee doodle" was the march
      To which his troops retreated.
    Cute Jonathan, to see them fly,
      Could not restrain his laughter:
    "That tune," says he, "suits to a T,
      I'll sing it ever after."
    Old Johnny's face, to his disgrace,
      Was flushed with beer and brandy,
    E'en while he swore to sing no more,
      This "Yankee doodle dandy."
    "Yankee doodle--ho! ha! he!
      "Yankee doodle dandy--
    "We kept the tune, but not the tea,
      "Yankee doodle dandy."

    I've told you now the origin
      Of this most lively ditty,
    Which Johnny Bull dislikes as "dull
      And stupid!"--what a pity!
    With "Hail Columbia!" it is sung,
      In chorus full and hearty--
    On land and main, we breathe the strain,
      John made for his tea-party.
    No matter how we rhyme the words,
      The music speaks them handy,
    And where's the fair can't sing the air,
      Of "Yankee doodle dandy!"
    "Yankee doodle--firm and true--
      "Yankee doodle dandy--
    "Yankee doodle, doodle doo!
      "Yankee doodle dandy."




LORD MAHON AND GENERAL GREENE AND LA FAYETTE.--C. F. D. presents
his compliments to Mr. Willis, and with reference to the fifth
paragraph headed "Scraps from the United States," which appeared in
"Current Notes" for February last, p. 13, forwards him the following
communication, which from the initials he presumes is from the pen of
Mr. Hildreth, the historian:--

    "The fifth and sixth volumes of Lord Mahon's History of
    England from the peace of Utrecht, have for a leading
    subject the early years of the American Revolutionary
    War. Writing from the English point of view, the
    proceedings of Parliament and the English side of the
    story naturally form the foreground of the picture,
    while the affairs of the colonies themselves--certainly
    the most interesting as well as the most important,
    not for Americans only, but for all historical
    students--fall into a distant perspective. The American
    part of Lord Mahon's book is very slight in its
    execution, made up mostly of anecdotes and extracts
    of letters, good as illustrations, but hardly as
    substance; indicating often but a superficial knowledge
    on the part of the writer, and conveying to the reader
    no distinct or connected idea of the American side of
    the story. With a great show of candour, 'My Lord'
    also evinces throughout a somewhat anxious desire to
    depreciate the 'rebels.' Thus Franklin is pursued
    with pitiful but persevering rancour, charged with
    falsehood and duplicity, because he, like most of the
    other Americans of that day, arrived at the point of
    separation and independence only by gradual steps;
    because his opinions and views of 1769 and 1775 did
    not correspond altogether with those of 1795; and
    because he appears to have spoken--as what was more
    natural?--with somewhat more of freedom and with
    greater dislike of the British connexion among his
    intimate associates than when addressing himself to the
    British ministry or to British statesmen.

    A curious instance of this sort of spitefulness, which
    constantly exhibits itself throughout the book, occurs
    in the case of Gen. Greene, of whom Lord Mahon writes:
    "The command of this important post (Brooklyn) was
    entrusted by Washington to Gen. Greene, an officer of
    bravery and enterprise, '_but of intemperate habits_;'
    and he adds, in a note, '_Greene, un general souvent
    ivre_.' These are the words of La Fayette; Mem. et
    Corresp. Vol. I. p. 21, ed. 1837." The edition in the
    original French here quoted is not at hand, but in that
    published the same year at New York and London, in
    England, and like the French edition under authority
    of La Fayette's representatives, the entire passage
    above referred to, reads as follows: After an account
    of the appearance of the American army as first seen
    by La Fayette in the summer of 1777--about 11,000
    men, ill armed, and still worse clothed, and very
    deficient in tactics, La Fayette adds: 'Lord Stirling,
    more courageous than judicious, _another General who
    was often intoxicated_, and Greene, whose talents were
    only then known to his intimate friends, commanded as
    Major Generals.' The other General here referred to
    was Stephen, who was cashiered not long after on that
    very ground, for his misbehaviour at the Battle of
    Germantown. And as there can scarcely be a doubt that
    this version gives the correct sense of the French
    original, there is room for apprehension that Lord
    Mahon is not only incorrect in giving only a part of a
    sentence, thus putting into La Fayette's mouth what he
    never said, but that even the order of the words has
    been changed, the name of Greene being removed from the
    end to the beginning of the quotation. Upon this point
    I will add something further, so soon as I can obtain
    the French original."

                                                H. H.




THE SALE OF ANTIQUITIES, &c. which took place at Messrs. Sotheby
and Wilkinson's rooms, on the 5th of this month, and two following
days, although one made up by the dealers in such articles, attracted
considerable attention, and many things, if not bought in, realised
considerable prices; the total produce of the sale being, it is said,
upwards of twelve hundred pounds.

In the first and third day's sale several lots of articles, well
known to Archaeologists as Celts, and of which the usual appearance
may be recognised from figures 1 and 2, sold on the average for about
half-a-crown each. A large quantity of antique gems--none of any
extraordinary merit--in modern setting of gold, ranged from about ten
shillings to two guineas each. There were some specimens of Irish ring
money, which sold or were bought in at very high prices; and some
appeared to have been tampered with, if not manufactured for the market.

[Illustration: fig. 1.]

[Illustration: fig. 2.]

The second day's sale contained many good Etruscan and Roman bronzes.
A Winged Victory (Lot 222) was knocked down at L5. A Lamp with the
original chain for suspension (Lot 238) at L5. 8_s_. An Etruscan
stew-pan (Lot 256) at L5. 10_s_. And the Leg of a Roman Warrior, the
foot sandalled (Lot 234) at L7. 7_s_. But the great object of the day
was (Lot 266) a bronze figure of an Archer, which was stated to have
been discovered in July, 1842, while excavating for making a sewer in
Queen Street, Cheapside, London, and which, if standing erect, would
have been fifteen inches, but in its stooping posture the perpendicular
height was about eleven inches. It has been described and figured in
the Archaeologia, vol. xxx. plate xxii. p. 544.

This really fine work of art was put up at 30 guineas, and, after a
slight struggle, knocked down to Purnell B. Purnell, Esq., of Stancombe
Park, Dursley, Gloucestershire for 125. The Etruscan fictile vases sold
for about as many shillings as forty years ago they would have brought
pounds, but the miscellaneous articles brought extraordinarily high
prices. Two Necklaces of common Venetian beads (Lots 351 and 357) worth
about half-a-crown each, were eagerly contended for, and the hammer
fell at L2. 6_s_. The second day's sale closed with a struggle for
various gold Etruscan fibulae and ornaments, which went at high prices,
and it was understood in the room that an Etruscan gold necklace, with
a head of Medusa attached, was bought in at no less a sum than L50.

The third day's sale was less attractive. An exceedingly curious Lamp
in bronze (Lot 470), of oval form, with four burners issuing from the
sides, the handle formed of figures of grotesque animals, and stated to
have been found near London Bridge, produced four guineas. There were
a few (eight) illuminated Manuscripts, but none sold for extravagant
prices. An Etruscan gold wreath, composed of masks and foliage worn
round the helmet, from the Canino Collection (Lot 529) was secured by
T. Crofton Croker, Esq., for L19. 10_s_. With the disposal of some
Shaksperian relics this very miscellaneous sale closed, but they did
not appear to be much coveted.

There were some fine and many desirable specimens, with a few of
very doubtful character, and some unquestionable forgeries. The Earl
Cadogan, Sir Gardiner Wilkinson, Dr. Henderson, and other amateurs
of Art and Archaeology, seemed to watch the progress of the sale with
considerable interest.

                                                       N.




[Illustration]

THE GOLDEN LION, FULHAM, "should not," writes G.W.'s Correspondent,
T. C. C. "be confounded with the Golden Lion, Brompton, the exterior
decoration of which was figured in 'Current Notes,' No. III. for March,
1851, p. 22, with a facetious reference to Sir Charles Eastlake's
speech at the Macready dinner." And it appears to G. W.'s Correspondent
that T. M. in "Current Notes" for March last, No. XV. p. 19, and the
Rev. Dr. Hume, of Liverpool, February, No. XIV. p. 10, are both in
an unnecessary "_fume_" about what easily admits of explanation; if,
indeed, the history of an old tobacco pipe required one. "Suppose,"
says T. M. "that I was in a hoaxing humour, and that no such Inn
ever existed at Fulham as the Golden Lion?" "Now," continues our
Correspondent, "I may as well suppose that no such person ever existed
as T. M., but to prove that such an Inn existed at Fulham as the Golden
Lion, I send you a series of twelve sketches which were presented to me
by Mr. Henry Warren, the President of the New Society of Watercolour
Painters, and which were made of and in it in April, 1836, previous to
the old hostelrie being pulled down and replaced by a modern public
house bearing the same name. You have my permission to engrave any
one or two of these studies, and I have been assured that the oak
panneling of some of the principal rooms was purchased by a dealer, and
re-sold to the Earl of Ellenborough for the fitting of his Lordship's
residence, Southam House, Cheltenham."


[Illustration]

_Availing himself of this permission, G. W. has caused first to be
engraved_ the Chimney Piece of the back room, ground floor, South
side, _and opposite_ the Chimney Piece, back room, first floor, _as
characteristic specimens of this curious old house_.




FORMATION OF THE UNION JACK.


                              Esplanade, Sidmouth, March 27th, 1852.

SIR,--The annexed may possibly be of use to H. M. in your "Current
Notes" for March, but I am not able to refer to the work from which it
is taken.

                                                 Yours obediently,
                                                       W. G. CLARKE.

Mr. WILLIS.


_St. George's red cross on a white ground, and St. Andrew's white cross
(diagonally) on a blue ground. In 1800, St. Patrick's red cross, on a
white ground, was added._

_The flag should be constructed to shew the three crosses distinctly._


THE UNION JACK.

Yarmo, March 29th. 1852.

SIR,--"H. M." of the March "Current Notes," p. 20, enquires "the
formation of our British Union Jack." To describe it in heraldic terms
is as follows: Az. a cross saltire argent encalved gules; over all a
common cross, the same as first. I believe there are no given rules
as to its proportion. This appears to be the best, viz. the breadth
three-fourths of the length. But the inclosed, forwarded to H. M., will
suffice for all.[A]

                                                             W.


THE UNION JACK AND MONUMENTAL BRASSES.

                                    11, Montpelier Square, Brompton,
                                                 March 28th, 1852.

SIR,--Your Correspondent, H. M. will find a very curious history of
the origin and formation of the Union Jack in Brayley's "Graphic
Illustrator:" it is written by the late Sir Harris Nicolas, and the
"absurd arrangement" of the National Flag elucidated by nine heraldic
woodcuts.

Perhaps you will permit me to embrace this opportunity of saying a few
words on the abstraction of Monumental Brasses from churches, which
has attracted the attention of some of your Correspondents lately; one
of whom throws the blame almost wholly on "the sectarian soldiers of
Cromwell's time."[B] I am not desirous of defending these men, but I
_am_ desirous that modern Churchwardens should not screen their neglect
by such an excuse. A slight research among our topographical works will
prove, that a very large abstraction and destruction of such memorials
has taken place in comparatively recent times. In the introduction to
Cotman's "Brasses of Norfolk and Suffolk," he notes that "in 1800 the
chancel of Ingham was completely swept of all its beautiful memorials
of the Stapleton family. They were sold as old metal, and it was
commonly reported by whom they were bought and sold; but nobody sought
to recover them; neither minister nor churchwarden cared for any of
these things." The beautiful brass (engraved in this same work) of
Robert Attelath, Mayor of Lynn in 1374, was about forty years ago
"given out of the church by the Churchwardens to a person who sold it
for five shillings to a brass founder." The collection of rubbings
from Brasses made about the same time and bequeathed to the British
Museum by the late Francis Douce, present several since destroyed. The
Journal of the Archaeological Association narrates the fact of several
removed from a country church because their rivets became loose, and
"tripped up the old women who came to the fore seats in the aisle."
I remember several instances of Brasses thus loosened, taken up and
thrown in vestries or belfries, until they were sufficiently forgotten
to be carried out and sold to the metal-founder. Some few Antiquaries
have argued that they are better taken care of in their museums than
thus exposed to destruction; and churchwardens being willing "to get
rid of the ugly old things," many have disappeared this way. Let me,
however, record one instance of honourable restitution. The effigy of
an armed knight, of the Bacon family, (temp. Edw. I.) in Gorleston
Church, Suffolk, engraved by Cotman, "in 1810 was gone, and supposed to
be irretrievably lost; but at the sale of Mr. Craven Ord's curiosities,
it was purchased by John Gage, Esq., who, with correct feeling and
good taste, gave it back to the church, and Dawson Turner, Esq., at
his expense, had it replaced in its original position." Surely, the
soldiers of Cromwell have sins enough to answer for, without heaping
those of modern Churchwardens on their heads.

                       I am, Sir, yours very truly,
                                                 F. W. FAIRHOLT.

MR. G. WILLIS.




MONUMENTAL BRASSES OF LINCOLNSHIRE.


The Lincolnshire Architectural Society propose to superintend the
publication of the most interesting Monumental Brasses of that County.
The work to be comprised in 12 parts, containing about five plates
each; and published at intervals of two months: with a small volume of
descriptive letter-press at the close of the series.

Brasses from the following churches (among others) will be included
in this series:--Barton, Boston, Buslingthorpe, Great Coates, Croft,
Covenham, Grainthorpe, Gunby, Hainton, Irnham, South Kelsey, Linwood,
South Ormsby, Spilsby, Tattershall, Wrangle, &c.

The Rev. F. P. Lowe, Saltfleetby, Louth, is the Hon. Sec. of the
Lincolnshire Architectural Society. But the work will not be issued
till a sufficient number of subscribers, at L1 4_s_, or at about 6_d_
per plate, has been obtained to ensure the Society against any loss.




ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETIES, AND THEIR WORKS.


                                      Northampton, March 14th, 1852.

SIR,--I am rather amused (see p. 12 "Current Notes" for February last)
at the apparent strength of Architectural Science in the Midland
Counties. There are, it seems, _four_ Societies, and in one year
they publish almost one volume! If _four_ Societies can only produce
one "handsome octavo volume" in so long a period, I should suggest
their dissolving themselves, and let some _one_ active and competent
member do the work. The truth is, half of these _Societies_ are merely
architectural Mrs. Harrises--talked about, but seldom or never seen.
One liberal man, who would give a couple of hundred of pounds towards a
work published by some creditable architect, would beat them all.

                                        I am, Sir, yours truly,
                                                       ANTI-SOCIALIST.

MR. WILLIS.




WIERX, THE ENGRAVER.


                                                    April 2nd, 1852.

SIR,--I shall be obliged by any reference you can give me, through your
interesting columns, to the works and date of an old engraver, "H.
Wierx," and oblige

                                                 Yours,
                                                     W. W. C.

Mr. WILLIS.




THE PILLAR PRINT OF OLIVER CROMWELL.


                                       Brompton, April 10th, 1852.

DEAR SIR,---As this famous Portrait seems to be an object of interest
to several of your subscribers, I take the liberty of adding my mite
of information concerning it. In the March Number of "Current Notes,"
p. 21, it is stated that Caulfield valued a good impression of it at
L36, but your Correspondent remarks, that "this was all very well for a
dealer's valuation," adding, that the one sold at the Strawberry Hill
sale was bought by a printseller for L7. 15_s_. That Caulfield was
nearly right in his appreciation, I find confirmed by reference to the
Catalogue of the 'extensive and choice collection of Prints' formed by
my uncle, the late Robert Morse, Esq. of Clarges Street, Piccadilly,
which was sold by auction by the well-known Dodd, May 15th, 1816, and
27 following days. This portrait (Lot 1335), described as "an excellent
impression and of the utmost rarity," sold for L30 19_s_ 6_d_. This,
it is true, was in the high and palmy time of print-collecting, as the
prices of a few others will testify. James I. by W. Pas, sold for L14
3_s_ 6_d_. Edward Somerset, Earl of Worcester, by Simon Pas, for L9
9_s_. Edmond Baron Sheffield, for L10. Sir Julius Caesar, by Elstracke,
for L10 10_s_. Frances Bridges, Countess of Exeter, by Faithorne, for
L10. Lot 3602, Strutt's Dictionary of Engravers, illustrated by 2820
prints, exhibiting specimens of the works of 1680 different engravers,
bound in 18 vols. sold for L288 15_s_. Lot 3600, Vandyck's Works, a
magnificent collection of engravings after his paintings, for L198; and
others in the same proportion.

                    Your obedient servant and collaborateur,
                                                     CHARLES EDMONDS.

Mr. WILLIS.




TOKENS OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY.


The notice of Tradesmen's tokens, inserted in the "Current Notes"
of Feb. 25th, has attracted more attention than I expected, as
besides the letters published in the Notes of March 25th, I have had
direct communications from Andover and Downpatrick. In reply to the
obliging letter of "K. L." Dublin, I beg to say, that I had seen the
engraving of the Cork farthing in Mr. Lindsay's work, but as I did not
sufficiently express my meaning, I will now explain what I meant by
"_the Commonwealth Arms_," viz. that the two shields of Arms of England
and Ireland were side by side, as shewn on the Token engraved in the
"Notes," and precisely in the form they appear on the Coins of the
Commonwealth, not separate as on the Cork farthing, one shield on the
obverse, the other on the reverse side. They are all scarce: I do not
know a single example of these Arms on an English token. Dr. Smith's
Catalogue of Irish Tokens was unknown to me; I shall take the first
opportunity to procure a copy.

My chief object in writing the notice was to get any information
concerning the Tokens of Scotland, whether there are any besides the
Royal tokens. The Scotch tokens of the 18th Century, mentioned by your
correspondent "M. A. M." are well known, and engraved in the excellent
work by Charles Pye, on the "Provincial Coins and Tokens issued from
the year 1787 to 1801, Birmingham, 1801."

The following passage from Thoresby, the Leeds historian, who was a
celebrated Numismatist in his day, gives the best information I can
find on the subject: he says:--

"When private persons first obtained liberty of having their own names
inscribed on the Tokens, I cannot learn. Sir William Dick had that
favour in Charles I.'s time, but that was in Scotland. It seems to have
been otherwise in England. I have by me a copy of an order in Council,
whereby it appears that only the King's farthing tokens should be
current here,[C] and the privilege of coining them was granted to the
Duke of Lennox, and the Marquis of Hamilton, under the Great Seal."

The passage is obscure, and does not sufficiently give the information
wanted, as the great bulk of these tokens were issued during the time
of the Commonwealth and the reign of Charles II.

The study of Tradesmen's tokens has met with such unmerited contempt
from some of our ablest antiquaries, that it seems rash to attempt an
apology for them; but any one who is well acquainted with them knows
the fund of amusement and instruction that may be derived from them,
and if they continue to be slighted as they have been, many specimens
will be irretrievably lost to future antiquaries. A few further remarks
on them may be interesting to your general readers.

After a careful calculation, I cannot estimate the number of these
tokens at less than 40,000, and I think that number less than the
real quantity; from various correspondence with collectors, I always
find that they have a large number different to mine. Mr. Akerman has
described 2461 in his list of London Tokens only. The great loss to the
public compelled the Government to put them down under the severest
penalties: very large numbers may be picked out of a collection,
which would require a dozen to weigh a modern halfpenny; their paltry
intrinsic value, no doubt, prompted many unprincipled shopkeepers to
issue them, from the profit they derived from the quantity which would
be lost, owing to their small size. There is scarcely a village that
had not its local currency. I possess tokens of 684 cities, towns, and
villages.

Amongst the different trades and professions which appear on the
tokens, that of a Musician is seldom met with: the following is an
interesting example, and furnishes an early example of Punch--

[Illustration]

Henry Laude, Newark, says, "Noe want where these are." The cruel sport
of cock fighting is on the token of William Docker, of Leeds, drawer.
Gateshead has a punning coat of arms--a goat's head: to the lovers of
Heraldry there is a fund of amusement; besides the Arms of the Trading
Companies of London, we have the Arms of Corporations, and families.
Many of the Corporations issued their tokens: Wotton-under-Edge has,
"This farthing token will be owned by the Mayor and Aldermen." The
Bristol Corporation farthing is of good size and execution: many
different dies were used. It is an exceedingly common token, and
remarkable, as being the only one issued in that important commercial
town. Many names of towns appear on these tokens, which would puzzle a
gazetteer to find out: two names occur to me at this moment, OZED and
FAIREFAX.

To those who are interested in Tokens, I would recommend the "Reliquiae
Antiquae Eboracenses, or Remains of Antiquities in Yorkshire," which can
be supplied by you: two numbers are published, each containing a plate
of Yorkshire Tokens.

                                                 WILLIAM BOYNE.

Leeds, April 1852.




THE PERCY SOCIETY have resolved "that considering the present
circumstances of the Society, it is expedient that the Society be
dissolved at the close of the current year, (30th April next); and
that the Books which remain in hand be divided amongst those Members,
then not in arrear of their subscriptions, so far as the stock will
allow, and with advantage of priority in proportion to the period of
subscription."




MONUMENT TO THE POET BLAIR.--"The Glasgow _literati_ propose to erect a
monument at Athelstaneford, to the memory of Blair, the author of "The
Grave," and other poetical works. Blair was long the parish Minister of
Athelstaneford, and is buried in the grave-yard there."--_Sunday Times,
11th April._




BOCCACCIO'S DECAMERONE.


Your Correspondent W. B. M. ("Current Notes" for March last, p. 20),
will find a curious account of the auction sale of the _Boccaccio_,
in the third volume of Dibdin's Bibliographical Decameron, and a
minute description of the precious volume itself in the Bibliotheca
Spenceriana, Vol. iv. It is not however "unique." There was a copy in
the Blenheim Collection, and another somewhat defective and "cruelly
washt and cropt," in the Royal Library at Paris,

                                                 Yours truly,
                                                      A BOOKWORM.

MR. WILLIS.




WILLIAM DENHAM.--Who was a Member of the Goldsmith's Company in
the reign of Elizabeth. F. R. S. enquires, "Can any of G. W.'s
Correspondents give me any particulars respecting him? If so, I should
feel much obliged."




SHAKESPEARE'S CHARACTERS.


                                       Gainsborough, March 15, 1852.

SIR,--There has gone the round of the papers a paragraph, stating that
though individuals of almost every nation appear as characters in one
or other of Shakespeare's Plays, yet there never occurs an Irishman.
I do not know whether this has been contradicted or not; but it is
capable of contradiction, as a distinguished Prelate proved to me by
taking down his volume of Shakespeare, containing the Play of Henry
V. There in the 3rd Act, Scene 2nd, Fluellen, the Welchman, holds an
animated and very characteristic conversation with Capt. Macmorris, an
Irishman. The original can be consulted. The Irish peculiarities are
well hit off. So much for the charge of omission which has been brought
against our great Bard,

                           I am, Sir, yours, faithfully,
                                                    C. S. B.

MR. WILLIS.


QUERIES.


SIR,--I shall be greatly obliged if you will permit me to propound the
following queries in your "Current Notes:"

1. Is any endeavour being made to complete that vast work, the "Acta
Sanctorum," the last volume of which was published at Brussels in 1845?

2. Where can I see a list of the persons on whom it was proposed by
Charles the Second to confer the Order of the Royal Oak?

3. Is there any English translation of the "Aurea Legenda" besides the
one by Caxton, and has that translation ever been reprinted?

                                                     E. P.




AUTOGRAPHIC BIOGRAPHY.


                                                     March 6, 1852.

SIR,--I have taken some little pains to find out S. S.'s quere
("Current Notes," Feb. p. 15), without further success than to presume
(in the absence of a facsimile) that the "Orford" must be the Earl
created 1742, there being a "Kendal" title then in existence: extinct
1743. Your correspondent can, without great difficulty, compare it with
those mutilated documents, I should say, that have been so frequently
dispersed at the various sales from the stock of Messrs. Upcott, Cole
& Co., originally in the Exchequer State Paper Office, from whence no
doubt it came.

                                                 Yours,
                                                      "MAGOG."

Mr. WILLIS.




MRS. BODDINGTON.


                                                 29th March, 1852.

SIR--Perhaps some of your readers will kindly afford me some
information relative to Mrs. BODDINGTON, authoress of _The Gossip's
Week_, _Reminiscences of the Rhine_, _Sketches of the Pyrenees_, and a
volume of _Poems_, published by Longman & Co. in 1839?

                                             Yours obediently,
                                                             W.




THE ARCTIC SEARCHING EXPEDITION.--No less than twenty Flags have been
presented to Captain Sir Edward Belcher, designed and embroidered by
the fair fingers of his relatives and friends. Previous to the sailing
of the "Assistance," they were displayed on the quarter-deck of that
ship, for the inspection of the distinguished visitors who repaired on
board to take leave of this distinguished, gallant, and enterprising
officer. The following list of their devices and mottoes may not be an
uninteresting record:--

1. Black pouncing eagle, white ground, scarlet border. Motto, on
scarlet ground,

    "SPEED TO THE RESCUE."      C. B.

2. Golden lion, blue ground, scarlet border. Garter enclosing, with
motto in black,

    "WHILST I BREATHE, I HOPE."      M. R.

3. Gold anchor, blue ground. Motto,

    "HOPE ON--HOPE EVER."      E. M.

4. White bear, blue ground. Motto,

    "BEAR AND FORBEAR."      C. M.

5. Spade, ice-saw, pickaxe, bright green ground. Motto, on black scroll,

    "PERSEVERE AND PROSPER."      S. C. M.

6. Gold star, crimson ground,

    "LEAD THOU US ON."      S. A. W.

7. White dove, blue ground. Motto, on scarlet,

    "GO FORTH IN FAITH."      M. L.

8. Gold star, blue ground. Motto,

    "FAITHFUL AND TRUE."      E. B.

9. Green wreath, crimson ground. Motto,

    "NONE BUT THE BRAVE DESERVE THE CROWN."      I. W.

10. Gold lion, scarlet. Motto, on blue garter,

    "DANGERS DO NOT DAUNT ME."      F. E. P.

11. Fleet greyhound, blue ground. Motto,

    "SWIFT ON MY COURSE."      C. G. P.

12. Family crest, blue ground. Family motto, on garter,

    "LOYAL AU MORT."      H. B.

13. Purple, crimson ornament, blue ground. Motto,

    "SUCCESS TO THE BRAVE."      M. B.

14. Orange silk. Motto, in purple,

    "BE OF GOOD COURAGE."      M. L. B.

15. Crown in centre. Swallow-tail shape. Gold and blue. Motto,

    "SUCCESS TO THE BRAVE."      A. S. B. T.

16. Enclosed in a garter, a setting sun; on the garter, a white daisy.

    "I WATCH FOR YOUR RETURN."      M. A. P.

17. White centre, scarlet border. Motto, in purple,

    "BY FAITH AND COURAGE."      C. T.

18. Star, white and silver, blue ground. Motto,

    "NEVER DESPAIR. VICTORY FOLLOWS THE BRAVE."      F. M. H.

19. Greek oak wreath, "BLANCHE" in centre, maize ground. Motto,

    "BRIGHT EYES FOR BRAVE HEARTS."      B. T.

20. An eagle on rock, breaking his chain, light blue; in the four
corners, the initials H. D.--I. D.--S. D. and U. D., light blue ground.
Motto,

    "ADVERSA REPELLO VIRTUTE."      L.

This flag was understood to have been the work of the Hon. Misses
Denison, and to have been presented to Sir Edward Belcher by Lady
Londesborough.

The flag, said to have been presented, with the motto, "GO IT, NED,"
was not among the number exhibited.

    AN EASTER MONDAY VISITOR TO WOOLWICH.




TO CORRESPONDENTS.


    ORIENTALIS.--In type; must stand over.

    THE DRAMATIC REGISTER FOR 1851, received.

    Mr. MEADLEY.--Four communications, W. S. G., "WM.
      DODD," G., and "A BOOKWORM," in type, but must stand
      over.

    PILGRIM'S BADGE, Venice, 26th February, 1852.--Ditto.

    AN ARTIST.--Doorway in Woking Church, Surrey, must, and
      will, be considered.

    R. B., New York, 19th March.--Received, and will be
      attended to.




Literary and Scientific Obituary.


    ANDERSON, Rev. Christopher. Gaelic Scholar, "Annals of
      the English Bible," &c. Edinburgh. 18th Feb. Aged 70.

    BROWN, Samuel, Captain Sir. Inventor of Chain Cables,
      Bridges and Piers of Suspension. Vanbrugh Lodge,
      Blackheath. 13th March. Aged 76.

    BUCHANAN, Alexander of Govan. Lyric Writer in Glasgow
      periodicals. 15th February. Aged 38.

    CAVE, M. Formerly Director of the Fine Arts in the
      Ministry of the Interior. Paris. Recently.

    DRECHSLER, Joseph. Musical Composer and Writer. Vienna.
      Recently. Aged 70.

    GAY, Madame Sophie. Journalist. Paris. 4th March.

    JONES, Rev. Evan. Welsh Scholar. Editor of various
      Welsh periodicals. Cardiff. 23rd Feb. Aged 32.

    LANDSEER, John, A.R.A. Engraver and Archaeologist. March
      29th. Aged 91.

    MARCHETTI, Giovanni. Italian Poet. Bologna. Recently.

    MARRAST, Armand. Editor of the _National_ before the
      Revolution of 1848. Paris. March.

    MERLE, M. Dramatic Critic. Paris. 27th February. Aged
      67.

    RAUPACH, Ernest. Dramatic Writer. Berlin. 18th March.

    SAINT-EDME, M. Author of the "Dictionnaire des Peines
      et des Delits de l'Europe," and joint author with M.
      Sarrut of the "Biographie des Hommes du Jour." Paris.
      Recently (by his own hand).

    SEDDELER, M. Military Encyclopedia. St. Petersburgh.
      3rd March.

    SHOBERL, Frederick, jun. Printer. 51, Rupert Street,
      Haymarket. 22nd March. Aged 48.

    TAILLEFER, M. Ex-curator of the Lyceums of Versailles,
      and of Louis-le-Grand. Paris. Recently.

    TUCKER, John, Montmorency. (Colonel late 27th
      Enniskilleners and a Waterloo Officer.) "Biographies
      of Wellington and Nelson," &c. Huggens's Asylum,
      Northfleet, Kent. 22nd February. Aged 72.

    WATTS, W. Engraver. Cobham, Surrey. 7th December. Aged
      99.

    WEST, Jane, Mrs. Poetry and Novels. Little Bowden,
      Market Harborough. 25th March. Aged 93.

    WINTERFELDT, Rodolphe de. Musical Writer. Berlin.
      Recently. Aged 67.

    WRIGHT, Andrew Biggs. History of Hexham, &c. Bexley
      Heath, Kent. 3rd March.


       *       *       *       *         *

FOOTNOTES:

[A] _H. M. will find the drawing so kindly forwarded addressed to him
at the Publisher's._

                                                 G. W.


[B] See communication from "One of the Executors" of the late Sir
Samuel R. Meyrick, printed in "Current Notes" for January last, p. 2.

[C] The word "here" is ambiguous; I suppose "in Scotland" is intended.

       *       *       *       *         *

Transcriber's Notes: Obvious punctuation errors repaired.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Willis's Current Notes, No. XVI.,
April 1852, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILLIS'S CURRENT NOTES, APRIL 1852 ***

***** This file should be named 43710.txt or 43710.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/7/1/43710/

Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Emmy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
