The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Vegetarian Cook Book, by E. G. Fulton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Vegetarian Cook Book
       Substitutes for Flesh Foods

Author: E. G. Fulton

Release Date: October 3, 2013 [EBook #43879]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VEGETARIAN COOK BOOK ***




Produced by Feorag NicBhride, Petra A and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  [Transcriber's Note: Italic text is represented by _underscores_.
  Small capitals in the original have been converted to all capitals.]




    SUBSTITUTES FOR FLESH FOODS

    Vegetarian
       Cook
       Book


    _By_ E. G. FULTON


    PACIFIC PRESS PUBLISHING COMPANY
        OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA


    _Entered According to Act of Congress in the year 1904, by_
        PACIFIC PRESS PUBLISHING COMPANY

    _In the Office of the Librarian of Congress, Washington, D. C._

        ALL RIGHTS RESERVED




WHY I WAS IMPRESSED TO WRITE A COOK BOOK.


It must appeal to the judgment of every thinking man and woman that the
human family are more in need of sound, wholesome advice as to what
they should eat and drink than ever before. The number of physicians
and dentists increases each year at an alarming rate, but the aches
and ills of the suffering people do not lessen. Thousands of people
find themselves in a deplorable condition, with stomachs almost worn
out, having depended largely upon predigested foods and a long list of
so-called "dyspepsia cures."

The amount of patent medicines, "sure cures," consumed by the people in
the United States is enormous, and is increasing every year. It must
be apparent to all students of the past century that the people of the
present are not enjoying the same degree of health as our ancestors,
nor have we any assurance that things will improve unless some radical
change is made.

Disease among cattle, poultry, and fish has increased so alarmingly
in the last few years that we should no longer depend on the animal
kingdom for food. We should look to the grains, nuts, vegetables, and
fruits for a better dietary than can be prepared from the flesh of
animals likely to be contaminated with tuberculosis, cancer, and other
diseases.

In writing this book, the author has treated the subject from the
commonly accepted definition of the term vegetarianism, which means
to abstain from flesh food, but allows the use of eggs, milk, and
its products. After years of experience in conducting vegetarian
restaurants in several cities and making a study of the food question,
he thinks he can bestow no greater gift upon the people than to place
before them a book containing instruction in the preparation of
wholesome dishes that will build up in place of tearing down the body.

In this work I do not claim to have reached perfection, nor to have
exhausted the category of wholesome preparations and combinations
within the domain of vegetarianism. In our efforts to teach how to live
without the use of flesh foods, we find we have only begun to discover
the inexhaustible resources of the great vegetable kingdom in the
boundless wealth of varied hygienic foods.

E. G. F.




CONTENTS


  BAKERY AND BREAKFAST DISHES .... 196-201

  BEVERAGES ...................... 173-176

  CAKE ........................... 235-238

  CEREALS ........................ 180-184

  EGGS ........................... 163-170

  ENTREES ........................  67-114

  HYGIENE OF COOKING .............    9-12

  NUT BUTTER ..................... 241-245

  PIES ........................... 225-232

  PUDDINGS ....................... 205-221

  SALADS .........................   17-28

  SALAD DRESSINGS ................   31-36

  SOUPS ..........................   40-64

  SAUCES ......................... 149-159

  TOASTS ......................... 188-192

  VEGETABLES ..................... 115-146




_HYGIENE OF COOKING_


GOOD COOKING

Good cooking is not the result of accident, a species of good luck,
as it were. There is reason in every process; a law governing every
chemical change. A course of medical lectures does not make a
physician, nor will a collection of choice recipes make a cook. There
must be a knowledge of compounding, as well as of compiling; of baking,
as well as of mixing; and above all, one must engage in the real doing.
Theory alone will not suffice; but experience, which practice only can
give, is of the utmost importance.

Mention will be made under this head of those forms of cooking only
which enter into vegetarian cooking as usually understood.


BOILING

The term "boiling," as applied to cookery, means cooking in a boiling
liquid. Many kinds of food need the action of water or other liquid,
combined with heat, to cook them in the best manner, and boiling is
one of the most common forms of cookery. When water becomes too hot
to bear the hand in it with comfort, it has reached one hundred and
fifty degrees, or the scalding point. When there is a gentle tremor
or undulation on the surface, one hundred and eighty degrees, or the
simmering point, is reached. When there is quite a commotion on the
surface of the water, and the bubbles breaking above it throw off
steam or watery vapor, two hundred and twelve degrees, or the boiling
point, is reached. After water reaches the boiling point it becomes no
hotter, no matter how violently it may boil. The excess of heat escapes
in the steam. This important fact is rarely understood by the average
cook, and much fuel is often needlessly wasted because of the mistaken
idea that rapidly boiling water cooks food more quickly.

In all ordinary cooking, simmering is more effective than violent
boiling. The temperature of the water may be slightly raised by
covering the kettle. If sugar or salt or anything to increase its
density, is added to water, it takes longer for it to boil, but
its boiling temperature is higher. This explains why boiling sugar
syrup and boiling salt water are hotter than boiling fresh water.
Boiling effects partial destruction or removal of organic and mineral
impurities found in water, hence the importance of boiling the water
where such impurities exist. Boiling also expels all the air and the
gases which give fresh water its sparkle and vitality. Therefore, the
sooner water is used after it begins to boil, the more satisfactory
will be the cooking.

Fresh water should be used when the object is to extract the flavor, or
soluble parts, as in soups and broths. Salt water should be used when
it is desired to retain the flavor and soluble parts, as in most green
vegetables. Cold water draws out the starch of vegetables. Boiling
water bursts starch grains, and is absorbed by the swelling starch, and
softens the cellulose in cereals and vegetables.


MILK

In cooking some kinds of food, milk is used instead of water. Milk
being thicker than water, less of the steam escapes, and it becomes
hot sooner than water, adheres to the pan, and burns easily. At its
boiling temperature (214 degrees), the casein contained in milk is
slightly hardened, and its fat rendered more difficult of digestion.
By heating milk in a double boiler, these dangers are avoided. It then
only reaches a temperature of 196 degrees, and is called scalded milk.
The process is a form of steaming.


STEAMING

Steaming is a process of cooking food over boiling water. It is a very
satisfactory and convenient method, without much loss of substance. It
takes a longer time than some other ways of cooking, but requires less
attention. There are two methods of cooking by steam: (1) In a steamer,
which is a covered pan, with perforated bottom. This is placed over
boiling water, and the steam carries the heat directly to the food. (2)
By means of a double boiler. By this method the heat is conveyed from
the boiling water, through the inner boiler to the food. When cooking
by steam, the water should boil steadily until the food is done. Watery
vegetables are made drier by steaming, and flour mixtures develop a
different flavor than when baked.


STEWING

Stewing is cooking in a small quantity of water at a low temperature
for a long time, and is a form of boiling. The food loses less
nutriment when stewed than when rapidly boiled.


BAKING

Baking is cooking by means of dry heat, as in a close oven. The
closely-confined heat of the oven develops flavors which are entirely
different from those obtained by other forms of cooking. The baking
of many kinds of food is as important as the mixing, and every cook
should thoroughly understand how to regulate the oven. Nearly all
flour mixtures, as bread, cakes, and many kinds of pudding, are more
wholesome when baked than when cooked in any other way.


BRAIZING

Braizing is a combination of stewing and baking. Meat cooked in a
closely-covered stew-pan, so that it retains its own flavor and those
of the vegetables and flavorings put with it, is braized. Braized
dishes are highly esteemed.


BROILING

Broiling, meaning "to burn," is cooking directly over, or in front of,
the clear fire, and is the hottest form of cooking. The intense heat,
combined with the free action of the air, produces a fine flavor quite
unlike that obtained in any other way. Pan broiling is broiling on a
hot surface instead of over hot coals.




_SALADS_


SALADS

All green vegetables that are eaten raw and dressed with acid, salt,
and oil, are included in the list of salads, and they should always be
served crisp and cool. Wash salad greens carefully, allowing them to
stand in cold or iced water until crisp. Drain and wipe dry with a soft
towel, taking care not to bruise the leaves, and keep in cool place
till serving time. If they are not thoroughly dried, the water will
collect in the bottom of the dish and ruin any dressing used.

Pare cucumbers thickly, and remove a thick slice from each end; cut
into thin slices, or into one-half inch dice, and keep in cold water
until ready to serve, then drain thoroughly; crisp celery in cold water
also.

Pare tomatoes, and keep in a cold place, and sprinkle with chopped ice
at serving time. The list of vegetables suitable for salads is so long
that the question of kind is wholly a matter of choice. Asparagus,
peas, string beans, beets, cauliflower, etc., are all well utilized
in salads. Freshly cooked vegetables or left-overs may be used, but
all cooked vegetables must be cold and perfectly tender. By deftly
combining these left-overs with the favorite dressing, there is
material for a delicious and economical salad, to which the somewhat
aristocratic name of macedoine salad may be given. This salad may
consist of a few or many kinds of vegetables, any combination pleasing
alike to the eye and the palate being permissible, and if care is taken
in the arrangement, it may be made a very attractive dish.

To the dressing of salads one must give utmost care and attention, as
upon their excellence the success of the dish principally depends.
While rules for dressings are innumerable, there are, after all, only a
few really good ones. The French dressing and the mayonnaise are most
generally known, the former being the simplest and most commonly used
of all dressings. And it is quite the favorite for lettuce, cresses,
chicory, and other vegetable salads. As the salad wilts if allowed to
stand in the dressing, it should not be added till just at the moment
of serving, and it is for this reason that it is frequently made at the
table.

One of the most difficult things to prepare is a perfect mayonnaise,
but once the knack is acquired, failure afterwards is rare. One
essential point is to have all the materials cold. Chill in the
refrigerator both the bowl and oil an hour or more before using. In
warm weather it is advisable during the mixing to stand the bowl in
a larger one of cracked ice. This dressing, if covered closely, will
keep several days or longer in the ice-box. Keep in a cold place till
wanted, as it liquefies as soon as mixed with meat or vegetables. To
tone down the taste of the oil, and thus make more delicate salads, one
may add to the dressing, just before it is used, a little cream beaten
stiff and dry. This dressing is used with nut and fruit salads, and
may be used with potatoes, tomatoes, celery, and other vegetables.

Most cooked vegetables intended for salads are moistened with a French
dressing and allowed to stand an hour or more, or until well seasoned,
in a cold place. To this process the term marinate is applied. Just
before serving, pour off all the marinate that is not absorbed, and
combine with the mayonnaise. A mistake frequently made in preparing
salad dressing is that of using too much acid. The acid flavor should
not predominate, but other flavors should also have their value.


VEGETARIAN CHICKEN SALAD

    Chopped protose, 1/2 pound.
    Chopped celery, 2/3 cup.
    Grated onion, 1 small teaspoonful.
    Chopped nuttolene, 1/4 pound.
    Lemons, juice of 2.
    Salt.
    Mayonnaise, 2 tablespoonfuls.

Mix all together, adding mayonnaise dressing last. Serve on lettuce.


ALMOND SALAD

    Olives, 18.
    Celery, 1-1/2 cups.
    Blanched almonds, 1-1/2 cups.
    Salad dressing.
    Lettuce.

Stone and chop the olives. Add the almonds chopped, also the celery cut
fine. Mix with salad dressing and serve on lettuce.


NORMANDIE SALAD

    Walnut meats, 1 cup.
    French peas, 1 can.
    Mayonnaise.
    Lettuce.

Place walnut meats in scalding water about fifteen minutes, then remove
the skins, and cut into pieces about size of a pea. Scald the French
peas, and set aside for a while. Drain the water off the peas, and let
them get cold; then mix with the walnuts. Pour mayonnaise dressing over
all, and mix thoroughly. Serve on lettuce.


BRAZILIAN SALAD

    Ripe strawberries, 1-1/2 cups.
    Fresh pineapple, cut in small cubes, 1-1/2 cups.
    Brazil nuts, blanched and thinly sliced, 12.
    Lemon juice, 4 tablespoonfuls.
    Lettuce.
    Dressing, 1 spoonful.

Cut the strawberries and pineapples into small cubes, and add
thinly-sliced Brazil nuts that have been marinated in lemon juice.
Arrange lettuce in rose-shape, and fill the crown with the above
mixture, and cover with a spoonful of mayonnaise or golden salad
dressing.


NESSLERODE SALAD

    Red cherries, 1/2 cup.
    Black cherries, 1/2 cup.
    Red currants, 1/2 cup.
    White currants, 1/2 cup.
    Sugar, 1-1/2 cups.
    Red raspberries, 1/2 cup.
    Black raspberries, 1/2 cup.
    Strawberries, 1/2 cup.
    Lemon juice, 1/2 cup.

Pit the cherries, keeping them as whole as possible. Put a layer of
fruit in the salad bowl, then a layer of sugar, then another layer of
fruit, and so on, till all the fruit is used, finishing with a layer of
sugar. Pour over all one-half cup of lemon juice. Shake the bowl gently
from side to side, to draw out the juice until it nearly covers the
fruit.

More sugar may be used if needed. This salad should be made two hours
before using, and kept on ice.


FRUIT SALAD

    Apples, cut in half-inch cubes, 1 cup.
    Bananas, cut in half-inch cubes, 1 cup.
    Oranges, cut in half-inch cubes, 1 cup.

Mix all together and serve with golden salad dressing.


WALDORF SALAD

    Apples, cut in dice, 1-1/2 cups.
    Lemon juice, 1/2 cup.
    Lettuce.
    Celery, cut in dice, 1-1/2 cups.
    Mayonnaise dressing.

Mix apples, celery, and lemon juice well together, and pour mayonnaise
dressing over. Serve on lettuce.

In making Waldorf salad use only crisp, white, tart apples, and the
tender, white heart of the celery. The celery should be cut a little
smaller than the apples. Use only white mayonnaise.

Drain off the lemon juice before adding the dressing, or it will ruin
the mayonnaise.


PROTOSE SALAD

    Protose, cut in small dice, 1 pound.
    Cold, boiled potatoes, cut into dice, 2.
    Finely cut celery, 1/2 cup.
    Finely minced onion, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt.
    Celery salt, 1/2 teaspoonful.

Mix thoroughly with mayonnaise, and serve on lettuce leaves.


PROTOSE AND CELERY SALAD

    Diced protose, 2-1/2 cups.
    Grated onion, 1 tablespoonful.
    Oil salad dressing.
    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.
    Crisp celery, 1-1/4 cups.
    Lettuce or celery leaves.

Cut protose into half-inch dice, add a little salt, grated onion,
and celery cut into the same size as protose. Set in ice-box, and
just before serving pour over some of the oil salad dressing, and mix
all together lightly. Serve on lettuce leaves or garnish with celery
leaves.


PEA AND ONION SALAD

    Peas, canned or stewed, 4 cups drained.
    Grated onion, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Lettuce leaves.
    Mayonnaise.

Let peas drain half an hour, then add the onion. Mix well. Set in a
cold place, and when ready to serve pour over the mayonnaise. Mix all
together lightly, and serve on lettuce leaves.


ENGLISH SALAD

    Chopped lettuce, 1 cup.
    Chopped celery, 1 cup.
    Mayonnaise, 1 tablespoonful.
    Lemons, juice of 2.

Mix lettuce, celery, and lemon juice thoroughly, then add mayonnaise
and salt to taste.


WATER LILY SALAD

    Lettuce leaves.
    Mayonnaise dressing
    Eggs, hard-boiled, 8.

Cut crisp lettuce leaves into pointed strips, like the outer leaves of
a water lily. Cut the whites of hard-boiled eggs also into strips, to
make the petals. Mash all but two or three of the yolks, mix them with
the mayonnaise, and fill in the center of the white petals. Take the
remaining yolks and put through a fine sieve, and scatter this over the
yellow center and white petals to resemble pollen of the flower.


NUT AND FRUIT SALAD

    Diced pineapple (canned), 1 cup.
    Chopped walnuts, 1-1/2 cups.
    Diced oranges, 1 cup.
    Diced dates, 1 cup.

Mix all together, and add golden salad dressing one hour before serving.


NUT SALAD

    Apple, 1 small.
    Lettuce, 1/2 cup.
    Onion juice, 1 teaspoonful.
    Oil of cloves, 7 drops.
    Salt.
    Almonds, 1/2 cup.
    Brazil nuts, 1/2 cup.
    Sugar, 1 teaspoonful.
    Lemon, juice of 1.

Chop all the ingredients moderately fine, and mix well with plenty of
mayonnaise dressing.


TOMATO MAYONNAISE

    Tomatoes, 2.
    Oil, 1/2 cup.
    Onion juice, 3 or 4 drops.
    Hard-boiled eggs, 2.
    Raw egg, 1.

Peel the tomatoes, cut them in halves, and press out all the seeds,
retaining only the solid, fleshy portion. Chop this fine; press through
a sieve and drain.

Mash very fine the hard-boiled yolks of the eggs, and add the raw
yolk. When thoroughly mixed, add the oil, a few drops at a time. When
thick and smooth, add the dry pulp of the tomato, a little at a time.
Stir in the onion juice. Serve on sliced protose or nuttolene.


LIMA BEAN SALAD

    Lima beans, 2 cups.
    Strained tomatoes, 1-3/4 cups.
    Hard-boiled yolks, 2.
    Lettuce.
    Nut butter, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Minced parsley, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt.
    Sliced tomatoes.

Cook beans till well done, strain off the water, and set aside to cool.
Mix nut butter as for table use, and thin it down with the tomato
juice. Add the minced parsley and a little salt; turn this mixture on
the beans, and stir well without breaking the beans. Mince the yolks of
the hard-boiled eggs and sprinkle over the salad. Garnish with lettuce
and sliced tomatoes, and serve.


PEA AND TOMATO SALAD

    Tomatoes, 6.
    Nuttolene, 1 cup.
    Salad dressing.
    Green peas, 2 cups.
    Lettuce.

Peel the tomatoes and scoop out the inside. Fill up with green peas and
bits of nuttolene. Place each tomato on a lettuce leaf, and cover with
salad dressing.


LETTUCE

Separate the leaves and carefully wash to remove every particle of
grit. Shake the water off the leaves. Place on a plate or in a salad
dish, and send to the table for each to prepare as preferred.

Dress with lemon, salt, or olive oil. A mayonnaise or lettuce dressing
may be provided for the table. If preferred, lettuce may be cut fine
before being sent to the table.


CABBAGE SALAD

    Cabbage chopped very fine, 1-1/2 cups.
    Chopped walnuts, 1/2 cup.
    Cream, 1/2 cup.
    Lemon, juice of 1.
    Sugar, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt.

Beat cream, sugar, and lemon juice together; then pour over the
walnuts, cabbage, and salt, which have been thoroughly mixed.


SALAD LA BLANCHE

    Lima beans, 1 cup.
    Minced celery, 1 cup.
    Hard-boiled eggs, 2.
    Minced lettuce, 1 cup.
    Nuttolene, 1/4 pound.

Boil the beans till tender, drain, and cool. Chop them rather fine, and
add the minced celery, minced lettuce, nuttolene cut into small dice,
and hard-boiled eggs finely chopped. Serve with La Blanche dressing.


BEET SALAD

    Cold, boiled beets.
    Hard-boiled eggs.
    Salt, olive oil, lemon juice.
    Lettuce.

Arrange alternately slices of cold, boiled beet with slices of
hard-boiled eggs on a plate. Season with salt, olive oil, and lemon
juice poured over. Serve on lettuce.


CARROT AND BEET SALAD

    Carrots, 2.
    Lettuce.
    Dressing.
    Beets, 2.
    Celery.

Arrange alternately slices of cold, boiled carrots and beets. Serve on
a lettuce leaf, garnish with finely-chopped celery.

Dress with olive oil, lemon juice, or French salad dressing.


STUFFED BEET SALAD

Boil the beets whole till tender, selecting those of uniform size. Cut
a slice off the bottom, so that they will stand upright, and scoop the
inside out carefully. Take pains not only to avoid breaking the shell,
but to keep the inside as nearly whole as possible. Peel the shells,
and let them get perfectly cold. Cut the centers into tiny cubes, using
an equal amount of parboiled potatoes and white celery cut to same
size; mix well with mayonnaise or French dressing, and fill the shells,
laying a slice of hard-boiled egg on top of each, and serving on a bed
of tender lettuce leaves.


TURNIP AND BEET SALAD

    Turnips, 1-1/4 cups.
    Green peas, 2 cups.
    Mayonnaise.
    Beets, 1-1/4 cups.
    Lettuce.

Cook both vegetables separately till tender; dice and set on ice, until
ready to serve. Place a spoonful of the mixed vegetables on a leaf of
lettuce, border with green peas, and put a spoonful of mayonnaise on
top.


ASPARAGUS AND PROTOSE SALAD

    Asparagus, 1-1/2 cups.
    Protose, 1-1/2 cups.
    Salt.
    Mayonnaise.

Wash the asparagus and cut into pieces half an inch long. Boil in
salted water till tender. Drain off the water, and when cold put into
salad dish with protose cut into dice. Season with salt. Serve on a
lettuce leaf with mayonnaise.


BEET AND POTATO SALAD

Cut with a vegetable cutter or slice cooked beets and potatoes; arrange
on a dish alternately, dress with cream salad dressing.


BEET AND POTATO SALAD NO. 2

    Beets, 1 cup.
    Protose, 1/2 cup.
    Onion juice, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Hard-boiled egg sliced, 1.
    Mayonnaise.
    Potatoes, 1 cup.
    Egg yolks, 1/2 cup.
    Salt.
    Chopped parsley, 1/4 cup.
    Lettuce.

Cut the beets, potatoes, and protose into small dice. Mix all together
and serve on a lettuce leaf; one slice of egg to each portion.


ASPARAGUS AND CAULIFLOWER SALAD

    Asparagus tips, boiled and drained, 2 cups.
    Cauliflower, boiled, drained, cut in small pieces, 2 cups.

Dress with cream salad dressing.


ASPARAGUS SALAD

Cut cooked asparagus tips into three-inch lengths, and serve on lettuce
leaf with cream dressing.


BRUSSELS SPROUTS SALAD

Put plain boiled Brussels sprouts into the ice-chest to get cold. Dress
with olive oil and lemon juice. Serve on lettuce.


DATE AND CELERY SALAD

Chop dates and celery, and serve with golden salad dressing.


MACEDOINE SALAD

This is a mixture of any kind of cooked vegetables. Cover with French
salad dressing, and serve on lettuce leaves.




_SALAD DRESSINGS_


MAYONNAISE DRESSING

    Egg yolk, 1.
    Cooking or olive oil.
    Lemon juice.
    Salt.
    Sugar, 1 tablespoonful.

Into a saucer break the yolk of a fresh egg; add to it a large pinch
of salt, and with a fork stir the yolk till it begins to stiffen.
Gradually add to the yolk, a drop at a time, cooking oil or olive oil,
stirring well after each drop is added. Continue this process till the
mixture becomes too stiff to stir, then thin it with lemon juice, and
add more salt. The salt helps to stiffen it. Thicken again with oil in
the same manner as before, and thin again with lemon juice. Continue
this till the desired amount is made. When stiff enough to cut with a
knife, add one tablespoonful of sugar.

This will keep for a number of days, if set on ice. Success in making
this depends upon the care with which the oil is added; at first, a
drop at a time, and towards the last adding two or three drops, and
perhaps half a teaspoonful at a time.

Note.--To make it keep well, add one tablespoonful boiling water,
beaten in quickly. To keep from curdling, put lemon juice and oil on
ice for fifteen minutes before using.


WHITE DRESSING

    Egg yolk, 1, light colored.
    Salt.
    Cracked ice.
    Cream, whipped to stiff froth, 6 tablespoonfuls.
    Oil, 6 tablespoonfuls.
    Lemon juice, 1 tablespoonful.

Drop the yolk into a cold bowl, mix lightly, add a small pinch of salt;
then add the oil drop by drop. The dressing should be very thick. Stand
the bowl in another containing a little cracked ice, so that you may
be constantly reducing the color of the egg. Now add slowly the lemon
juice, then stir in the whipped cream. This dressing, if properly made,
should be almost as white as whipped cream, while having the flavor of
mayonnaise. Serve with Waldorf salad.


BOILED SALAD DRESSING

    Eggs, 5.
    Melted butter, 1/4 cup.
    Lemon juice, 4 tablespoonfuls.
    Salt, 1 level teaspoonful.
    Sugar, 1 level teaspoonful.
    Rich cream, 1 cup.

To the yolks add the salt and sugar; beat with an egg whisk until
thick and light, then add gradually the melted butter and lemon juice.
Cook over hot water until the mixture thickens and falls away from the
sides of the pan. Take from stove, put into a glass jar, and when cool
cover closely. When ready to use pour into it lightly the rich cream
whipped to a stiff, dry froth. If whipped cream can not conveniently be
obtained, plain sweet or sour cream may be used in the dressing, but it
will not be so light and flaky.


CREAM SALAD DRESSING (PLAIN)

    Lemon juice, 1/2 cup.
    Sugar, 1 tablespoonful.
    Rich milk or cream, 1/2 cup.
    Olive oil, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.
    Eggs well beaten, 2.

Put the lemon juice into a granite dish on the stove, and add the olive
oil, sugar, and salt. Put the milk or cream on the stove in another
saucepan, and when hot add the beaten eggs. Let cook smooth, but do
not allow it to boil or it will curdle. Remove from the stove, and
when partially cool beat the two sauces together. This is a very nice
dressing for vegetable salads.


CREAM SALAD DRESSING

    Cream, 1 cup.
    Milk, cold.
    Butter, size of walnut.
    Salt, 1 level teaspoonful.
    Lemon juice, 4 tablespoonfuls.
    Corn starch, 1 rounded teaspoonful.
    Eggs, 2.
    Sugar, 1 level teaspoonful.

Put the cream into a double boiler; when scalding hot add the corn
starch dissolved in a little cold milk, and cook about five minutes,
stirring constantly. Then add the butter. To the yolks of the eggs add
the salt and sugar; beat till light and thick, then add alternately
the lemon juice and the hot cooked mixture. Fold in the stiffly beaten
whites, and set aside to become cold.

This dressing may be used the same as mayonnaise.


WHITE CREAM SALAD DRESSING

Make same as cream salad dressing, omitting the yolks of the eggs.


FRENCH SALAD DRESSING

    Oil, 3 tablespoonfuls.
    Salt.
    Lemon juice, 1 tablespoonful.
    Onion juice, 1/4 teaspoonful.

Mix and pour over the salad.


LETTUCE DRESSING

    Hard-boiled eggs, 3.
    Lemon juice, 1/2 cup.
    Lettuce.
    Olive oil, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt.

Mash the yolks smooth and fine, add the olive oil and salt. Mix well,
and add gradually the lemon juice. Beat thoroughly, then pour the
dressing over the lettuce. Cut the whites of the eggs into rings and
lay on top. Serve as soon as dressed.


GOLDEN SALAD DRESSING

    Pineapple juice, 1/4 cup.
    Lemon juice, 1/4 cup.
    Beaten eggs, 2.
    Sugar, 1/3 cup.

After beating the eggs well, add the pineapple juice, lemon juice,
sugar, and small pinch of salt. Beat together and cook in double
boiler. Let boil about two minutes.


NUT OR OLIVE OIL SALAD DRESSING

    Olive oil, 1/2 cup.
    Water, 1/4 cup.
    Lemon juice, 1/4 cup.
    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.
    Beaten eggs, 3.

Beat all well together in the dish; set dish in hot water over the
fire, and stir constantly till thickened. As soon as it begins to
thicken remove from the fire and place in a dish of cold water,
stirring until it cools, and set on ice till cold. It is then ready for
use.


OIL SALAD DRESSING (SOUR)

    Lemon juice, 2 teaspoonfuls.
    Olive oil, 1/4 cup.
    Salt, 1/2 teaspoonful.
    Water, 2 teaspoonfuls.
    Eggs, 2.

Heat together in double boiler, stirring constantly. When it begins to
thicken, place into cold water and stir until cold.


GREEN MAYONNAISE

Make as ordinary mayonnaise. Use two light-colored yolks and six
tablespoonfuls of oil. Chop enough parsley to make one tablespoonful;
put it into a bowl, and with a knife rub it to a pulp. Then add
gradually to the mayonnaise. Add a teaspoonful of the lemon juice. Use
for fruit salad, white grapes, and pulp of shaddock. Mix, and serve on
lettuce leaves.


DRESSING LA BLANCHE

    Butter, 1-1/2 dessertspoonfuls.
    Flour, 1 heaped dessertspoonful.
    Salt.
    Egg, 1.
    Lemon juice, 1/4 cup.

Melt the butter in a frying-pan, but be careful not to brown it.
When hot, stir in the flour, well-beaten yolk, lemon juice, and salt
to taste. Stir this dressing through the vegetables, and serve on a
garnish of crisp lettuce.




_SOUPS_


SOUPS

Cream soups are seasonable at any time, using any vegetable in its
season. Canned goods may be used when the fresh article is not
obtainable.

Vegetables that are too tough and old to cook in any other way may be
used in soups to advantage. If it can be afforded, a teaspoonful of
whipped cream may be dropped into each plate, and will be found very
delicious.

By a puree is meant a thick soup; it differs but little from cream
soup, being perhaps a trifle thicker. If properly made, cream soups and
purees are dainty, delicious, and nourishing.

Fruit soups are in favor during hot weather, for dinners and luncheons;
they are very easily made, and are wholesome and refreshing. Any
desired fruit juice may be thickened with corn starch, sago, or
arrowroot, and served with or without fruit.

Fruit soup should always be served cold, in glass sherbet cups, with a
layer of chipped ice on top.


KINDS OF SOUP

Observing these proportions and following the foregoing directions,
delicious cream soups are made of rice, squash, celery, peas,
asparagus, cucumber, spinach, peanuts, potato, corn, lima beans,
cauliflower, beets, tomato, salsify, chestnut, mushrooms, onions,
baked beans, lentils, macaroni, spaghetti, watercress, string beans,
sago, tapioca, barley, carrots, etc. All vegetables should be cooked
very tender in boiling salted water, drained, and rubbed through a
sieve. Rice, sago, tapioca, and barley should be boiled slowly till
each grain is soft and distinct. Roasted peanuts are chopped fine;
chestnuts are boiled and mashed; macaroni and spaghetti are cut into
very small pieces, after boiling till tender. String beans are to be
minced before adding to the soup.


CREAM SOUPS, FOUNDATION OF

Rub one heaping tablespoonful of butter and two of sifted flour to a
cream; melt in a saucepan over the fire, and add slowly four cups milk,
stirring constantly. When it thickens add salt and whatever seasoning
and ingredient is desired to make the soup.


CROUTONS FOR SOUP

Take thin slices of bread, cut them into little squares, place them in
a baking pan, and brown to a golden color in a quick oven.


EGG BALLS FOR SOUP

    Egg yolks, hard boiled, 6.
    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.
    Flour, 1/2 tablespoonful.
    Egg yolks, raw, 2.

Rub the hard-boiled yolks and flour smooth, then add the raw yolks and
the salt. Mix all well together, make into balls, and drop into the
soup a few minutes before serving.


EGG DUMPLINGS FOR SOUP

    Milk, 1 cup.
    Flour.
    Eggs, 2.

Beat the eggs well, add the milk and as much flour as will make a
smooth, rather thick batter, free from lumps. Drop this batter, a
tablespoonful at a time, into the boiling soup.


NOODLES FOR SOUP

Beat one egg till light, add a pinch of salt and flour enough to make
a stiff dough. Roll out very thin; sprinkle with flour to keep from
sticking. Then roll up into a scroll, begin at the end, and slice into
strips as thin as straws. After all are cut, mix them lightly together,
and to prevent their sticking together keep them floured a little till
you are ready to drop them into the soup, which should be done a few
minutes before serving. If boiled too long they go to pieces.


VEGETABLE BOUILLON

    Vegetable soup stock, 2 quarts.
    Cooked and strained tomatoes, 2 cups.
    Bay leaves, 2.
    Salt, 1 tablespoonful.
    Onions, grated, medium size, 2.

Mix all the ingredients together, and let simmer slowly two or three
hours. There should be about one quart of soup when done; strain,
reheat, and serve.


NUT CHOWDER SOUP

    Nuttolene or protose, 1/4 pound.
    Hard-boiled eggs, 3.
    Browned onions, 3.
    Sage, 1 teaspoonful.
    Thyme, 1 teaspoonful.
    Bay leaves, 2.
    Salt, 1 tablespoonful.

Chop all together till fine, then add to strained boiling tomatoes,
four cups; add boiling water, one cup; thicken with flour, one
tablespoonful; reheat and serve.


NUT FRENCH SOUP

    Vegetable soup stock, 1-1/2 quarts.
    Tomatoes, cooked, strained, 2 cups.
    Sage, 1/4 teaspoonful.
    Browned flour, 1 tablespoonful rounded.
    Onions, large, 1.
    Bay leaves, 2.
    Thyme, 1/2 teaspoonful.
    Salt to taste.

Slice the onion and mix all the ingredients together, excepting the
salt; boil slowly one hour; strain, reheat, salt, and serve. This soup
requires plenty of salt to bring out the flavor.


MOCK CHICKEN SOUP

    Butter, 1/4 cup.
    Onion, medium size, 1.
    Celery stalks, 1.
    Milk, 1-1/4 quarts.
    One egg.
    Flour, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Parsley, chopped fine, 1 teaspoonful.
    Nuttolene, 3 tablespoonfuls.
    Flour.

Put butter in saucepan with the onion, parsley, and celery; cook it to
a golden brown color; add the flour and cook until brown, being careful
not to scorch. Now add the milk boiling hot and stir briskly to prevent
lumping. Add the nuttolene. Beat the egg with enough flour to make
a stiff batter, but thin enough to pour; pour this into the boiling
stock, stirring at the same time. This will appear as small dumplings
in the soup. Let simmer twenty or thirty minutes; salt, and serve.


MOCK CHICKEN BROTH

    Small white beans, 2 cups.
    Small onion, 1.
    Salt.
    Hot water, 8 cups.
    Celery salt.
    Butter.

Wash, then stew the beans in hot water with the onion for three hours,
stewing down to six cups; strain, and add a pinch of celery salt and a
small piece of butter. Salt to taste. This broth may be served to the
sick instead of beef tea.


PLAIN VEGETABLE SOUP (1)

For soup stock.

    Water, 6 cups.
    Strained tomatoes, 2 cups.

Shave in fine shreds, add to soup stock, and cook moderately for two
hours.

    Carrot, 1.
    Potato, 1.
    Leek, 1.
    Turnip, 1.
    Onions, 2.
    Celery stalk, 1.

Add a little sage and thyme. When done, run through puree sieve or
colander, and add a little chopped parsley and salt to taste.


PLAIN VEGETABLE SOUP (2)

    Butter, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Flour, 1 tablespoonful.
    Chopped onion, 1.
    Chopped carrots, 1/2 cup.
    Chopped potatoes, 1/2 cup.
    Chopped turnips, 1/2 cup.
    Chopped celery, 1/2 cup.

Place in heated saucepan, stir often to prevent burning, add a little
more butter if necessary; brown till vegetables are quite soft, then add

    Strained tomatoes, 2 cups.
    Hot water to proper consistency.

Season with parsley and salt to taste. Simmer till done.


WHITE SOUBISE SOUP

    Bread, 4 or 5 slices.
    Onions, 4.
    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.
    Butter, 1 teaspoonful.
    Rich milk, 2 cups.
    Potatoes, 2.
    Flour, 1 teaspoonful.
    Water, 4 cups.

Soak the bread in the milk, boil onions and potatoes in water until
well done, and mix with the bread and milk; add salt and flour rubbed
in the butter; strain all through a fine sieve; bring again to the
boiling point, but do not allow it to boil; serve. If too thick, add a
little boiling water.


JULIENNE SOUP

    Fresh peas, 1/3 cup.
    Chopped potatoes, 3/4 cup.
    Tomato, 1/4 cup.
    Soup stock, 1 quart.
    Carrots cut in dice, 1/2 cup.
    Chopped turnips, 1/3 cup.
    Minced onion, 1.
    Chopped parsley.

Cook the turnips and carrots together in just enough water to prevent
scorching, the potatoes and onions in the same manner, the peas by
themselves. When all are done, mix together and add the soup stock,
salt, and parsley; reheat, and serve. The water the vegetables are
cooked in should be used in the soup.


TOMATO SOUP

    Soup stock, 3 cups.
    Nut butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Strained tomatoes, 2 cups.
    Salt.

Add tomatoes to soup stock, also the nut butter mixed smooth and thin
in a little of the tomato; heat to boiling, salt, and serve.


BEAN AND TOMATO SOUP

    Boiled beans, 1 cup.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Cooked rice, 1/4 cup.
    Salt.
    Stewed tomatoes, 1 cup.
    Flour, 1 tablespoonful.
    Boiling water to required consistency.

Rub beans and tomatoes through a sieve; add salt and butter rubbed in
flour; then add cooked rice and enough boiling water to make the proper
consistency; reheat, and serve.


TOMATO-VERMICELLI SOUP

    Strained tomatoes, 3 cups.
    Vermicelli, 1/2 cup.
    Water, 2 cups.

Cook the vermicelli in the tomato till done and add water; if too
thin, bind with a little thickening of butter and flour. A rounded
tablespoonful of each will be enough for each quart of soup.


TOMATO AND OKRA SOUP

    Onion, large, 1.
    Butter.
    Stewed tomatoes, 2 cups.
    Soup stock or water, 4 cups.
    Thinly sliced okra pods, 2 cups.
    Flour, 1 teaspoonful.
    Nut butter, 1 teaspoonful.
    Chopped parsley.
    Salt.

Brown onion in a saucepan with a little butter; add flour, nut butter,
tomatoes, parsley, and okra. Add the soup stock or water and cook
slowly for three hours. Season with salt, and serve.


WHITE SWISS SOUP

    Rice, 1/2 cup.
    Onion, small, 1.
    Rich milk, 1-1/2 cups.
    Flour, 1/2 teaspoonful.
    Water, 2 cups.
    Potato, 1.
    Egg yolk, 1.
    Salt.

Boil the rice in the water, and add the onion and potato. When the
vegetables are well done add the rich milk and bring to a boil. Beat
well the yolk of the egg with the flour and stir in the boiling soup.
Let it boil, season with salt, rub through a sieve; reheat, and serve.


CORN AND TOMATO SOUP

    Kornlet, ground fine, 1-1/2 cups.
    Strained tomatoes, 2 cups.
    Water, 1 cup.

Mix thoroughly, season with salt, heat to a boiling point, and serve.


CEREAL CONSOMME

    Cooking oil, 1/4 cup.
    Chopped onion, 1.
    Flour, 1 tablespoonful.
    Crushed protose, 1/2 pound.
    Caramel-cereal, 1 cup.
    Salt.
    Barley, 1/4 cup.
    Carrot, small, 1, finely chopped.
    Boiling water, 6 cups.
    Bay leaf.

Place in the soup kettle the cooking oil and barley; brown barley
till quite brown; add onion, carrot, flour, and brown the vegetables
till quite tender; add the protose and boiling water; let simmer very
gently for six hours, adding boiling water from time to time. Keep the
original amount. Stir often to prevent burning. Half an hour before the
soup is done add the caramel-cereal, bay leaf, and salt; press through
a fine colander, and simmer to six cups.


SWISS LENTIL SOUP

    Lentils, 1 cup.
    Small onion, 1.
    Browned flour, 2 rounded tablespoonfuls.
    Salt.

Put lentils to cook in a large quantity of boiling water; boil rapidly
a short time, then simmer without stirring. When they begin to get
tender and are yet quite moist, slice an onion and press into the
lentils until covered; keep the vessel over a slow, even fire, until
the lentils are well dried out. The drying-out may be finished in the
oven if the lentils are covered so that they will not harden on top.
When well dried add a little boiling water and rub through a fine
colander, removing the hulls. Into this pulp stir the browned flour.
Beat till smooth, then add gradually enough boiling water to make of
consistency of soup; salt, boil, and set where it will keep hot twenty
minutes to an hour, to blend ingredients.


SPRING VEGETABLE SOUP

    Green peas, 1 cup.
    Onion, 1.
    Egg yolk, 1.
    Soup stock, 3 cups.
    Salt.
    Shredded lettuce, 1 head.
    Parsley, 1 small bunch.
    Water, 1 cup.
    Butter, size of egg.

Put in the stew-pan the lettuce, onion, parsley, and butter, with the
water; let simmer till tender; season with salt; when done strain off
the vegetables and put two-thirds of the liquid in the stock. Beat up
the yolk with the other third. Put it over the fire, and at the moment
of serving add this with the vegetables to the soup.


TURNIP AND RICE SOUP

    Turnip, medium sized, 1.
    Milk, 3 cups.
    Butter.
    Washed rice, 1/3 cup.
    Cream, 1 cup.
    Croutons or toast.

Pare a medium-sized turnip, slice, and put with rice and butter into
saucepan with sufficient water to cook; let simmer till tender, rub
through a fine sieve and return to the saucepan. Mix in enough milk to
make of the proper consistency; stir over the fire and let simmer ten
or fifteen minutes; then stir in a lump of butter and cream; serve with
croutons.


GERMAN LENTIL SOUP

    Lentils, 3/4 cup.
    Carrot, a few slices.
    Nut butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Celery, one sprig, or a little celery salt.
    Salt.
    Water, 4 cups.
    Turnips, a few slices.
    Apple sauce, 1/2 cup.
    Onion, 1.

Boil lentils in the water with the onion, carrot, turnip, and celery;
boil gently about one and one-half hours; put through a sieve and
return to soup kettle; add nut butter and apple sauce. Bring to a
boil, salt, and serve.

If necessary, add a little boiling water or rich milk to thin the soup.


LENTIL AND TOMATO SOUP

    Lentils, 1 cup.
    Water, 4 cups.
    Nut butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt.
    Onion, 1.
    Stewed tomatoes, 2 cups.
    Browned flour, 1 tablespoonful.

Stew the lentils with the onion in the water one hour; add stewed
tomatoes, nut butter, and browned flour; bring to a brisk boil, season
with salt, press through a colander, reheat, and serve.


RICE AND NUT SOUP

    Vegetable stock, 5 cups.
    Sage, 1/4 teaspoonful.
    Rice, 3 tablespoonfuls.
    Salt.

Boil twenty minutes and serve.


BARLEY AND NUT SOUP

    Rice, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Vegetable stock, 4 cups.
    Barley, 1/4 cup.
    Salt.

Cook the barley and rice until perfectly done in about one and
one-half cups of water; add stock, salt to taste, reheat, and serve.


NUT AND OLIVE SOUP

    Soup stock, 4 cups.
    Ripe olives, chopped, 12.
    Browned flour, 1 tablespoonful.
    Tomato, strained, 1/2 cup.
    Lemon juice, 1 teaspoonful.
    Nut butter, 2 tablespoonfuls.

Emulsify the nut butter in a little of the stock, add the remaining
stock and the rest of the ingredients, except the browned flour, which
should be added after the soup has boiled. Salt, and serve.


LENTIL AND NUT SOUP

    Lentils, 3/4 cup.
    Oil, 1 tablespoonful.
    Large onion, 1.
    Vegetable stock, 4 cups.

Cook lentils till tender and put through a colander; in the meantime
brown the chopped onion in the oil; add to the lentil pulp, mix with
stock, salt, reheat, and serve.


NUT NOODLE SOUP

    Vegetable soup stock, 6 cups.
    Nut butter, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Noodles.

Mix the nut butter in a little of the stock until smooth and thin; then
add remainder of stock, salt, boil, add noodles, cook about twenty
minutes, serve.


NUT AND PEA SOUP

    Green peas, 4 cups.
    Vegetable soup stock, 6 cups.
    Salt, 2 tablespoonfuls.

Boil peas till tender, rub through a colander, and add to soup stock.
Salt, reheat, and serve.


NUT AND BEAN SOUP

    Beans, 1 cup.
    Salt, 1 tablespoonful.
    Vegetable soup stock, 4 cups.
    A little thyme.

Cook beans in just enough water to prevent scorching. When done rub
through a sieve or colander; add the vegetable soup stock, thyme, and
salt. Reheat, and serve.


NUT AND ASPARAGUS SOUP

    Finely cut asparagus, 4 cups.
    Vegetable soup stock, 4 cups.
    Salt.

Cook till asparagus is very tender; put through a sieve; add stock and
salt; reheat, and serve.


BROWN BEAN SOUP

    Water, 2 quarts.
    Tomatoes, 1 cup.
    Onion, 1/4.
    Small bunch of herbs, anise, laurel, etc.
    Salt.
    Brown beans, 1 cup.
    Leek, 1/4.
    Juice of 1 lemon.

Cook beans in water till soft, then add vegetables and herbs; after the
soup is boiled, add the lemon juice; rub through a sieve; salt, reheat,
and serve.


WHITE BEAN SOUP

    White beans, 1 cup.
    Onion, medium sized, 1.
    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.
    Water, 2 quarts.
    Nut butter, 1 tablespoonful.

Stew the beans and onions in the water until tender; add nut butter and
salt; press through a sieve, bring to a boil, and serve. The addition
of some cream will improve this soup.


SAGO SOUP

    Sago, 1/2 cup.
    Egg, 1.
    Boiling milk, 4 cups.
    Boiled cream.

Wash the sago, add it to the boiling milk, and simmer till the sago is
dissolved and forms a sort of jelly. At the moment of serving add the
beaten yolk of an egg and a little cream previously boiled.


BEAN TAPIOCA

    White beans, 3/4 cup.
    Tapioca, 1/2 cup.
    Salt.
    Water, 4 cups.
    Hot water.
    Cream.

Cook beans in water till well done; press through a strainer, add
tapioca, and cook till clear; add hot water to make of proper
consistency; season with salt and cream; heat well, and serve.


GREEN PEA SOUP

    Green peas, in pod, 4 quarts.
    Spinach leaves, 1 handful.
    Sliced lettuce, 1 head.
    Dash of lemon juice.
    Salt, 1/2 teaspoonful.
    Sugar, 1 teaspoonful.
    Boiling water, 6 cups.
    Cucumber sliced, 1/2.

Shell peas and throw into a dish of cold water; break the shells and
put them into a kettle with boiling water; set over the fire and simmer
half an hour. Remove pods, and add lettuce, spinach, salt and sugar.
Let boil till the spinach and lettuce are pulpy, take up, and run
through a puree sieve; boil the peas and cucumber in a little water,
mash and rub through a sieve; mix with the soup, season with salt and a
dash of lemon juice. Serve with croutons.


RICE SOUP

    Rice, 1/4 cup.
    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.
    Milk, 3 cups.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Water, 3 cups.
    Egg yolk, 1.
    Flour, 2 teaspoonfuls.

Boil the rice in the water for forty minutes, or until perfectly soft,
adding salt; add sufficient boiling water from time to time to keep the
original amount; press through a sieve and thicken with well-beaten
yolk of egg, milk, flour, and butter. Add a little more salt if
necessary; serve with toasted crackers or zwieback sprinkled with
crumbs of cottage cheese.


LIMA BEAN SOUP

Lima bean soup may be prepared same as white bean soup, omitting the
tapioca.


BREAD BISQUE

Dry sifted bread crumbs, one cup, added to cream soup, four cups.


TOMATO BISQUE NO. 1

    Tomatoes, 1/2 quart can.
    Flour, 1 tablespoonful.
    Nut butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Milk, 4 cups.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt.
    Bay leaf, 1.
    Onion, small, 1.

Place butter in pot, add one bay leaf, one small onion; let braize till
light brown, add flour, and stir until flour is well mixed; add hot
milk, slowly stirring constantly to keep smooth; add nut butter, which
should be emulsified first with the tomato, then add slowly stirring
briskly; salt, heat thoroughly, strain; reheat, serve.


TOMATO BISQUE NO. 2

    Strained tomatoes, 4 cups.
    Peanut butter, about 4 tablespoonfuls.
    Salt.

Put tomatoes in double boiler, set on the range, and when scalding hot
add the nut butter emulsified in enough water to pour readily, mix
together and salt to taste. Use plenty of salt to bring out the flavor.


ROLLED OATS SOUP

    Chopped onion, 1.
    Celery salt.
    Left-over porridge, 1 cup.
    Milk, 2 cups.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Bay leaf.
    Water, 2 cups.
    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.

Into a saucepan put the chopped onion and butter; cook carefully,
without browning the butter, until the onion is perfectly soft; then
add celery salt, bay leaf, and porridge; stir for a moment, then add
water and milk; bring to a boil and strain; add salt, reheat, and serve.


FAMILY FAVORITE

    Soup stock, 4 cups.
    Sliced okra, 1 pod.
    Salt.
    Stewed tomatoes, 1/2 cup.
    Water, 1 cup.

Mix all together and boil one hour; strain, reheat, and serve.


NUT MEAT BROTH

    Water, 4 cups.
    Almond meal, 1 cup.
    Gluten meal or browned flour, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Salt.

Let all boil together thoroughly, and serve.


PEA SOUP WITH VEGETABLE STOCK

    Scotch peas, 1 cup.
    Vegetable soup stock, 4 cups.
    Mint, 1/4 teaspoonful.
    Salt.

Cook peas till soft and put through a fine colander to remove the
hulls. Add soup stock and mint, reheat, salt, and serve.

A cup of cream is a great improvement to this soup.


SAVORY POTATO SOUP

    Vegetable soup stock, 4 cups.
    Potatoes, medium size, 2 or 3.
    Mint, 1/3 teaspoonful.
    Chopped onion, 1.
    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.
    Marjoram, 1/4 teaspoonful.

Cook the potatoes and onion till soft. Put through a colander, add the
soup stock, mint, marjoram, and salt, which have been simmered together
half an hour. Heat well, and serve.


CELERY AND TOMATO SOUP

    Celery heart, 1.
    Soup stock, 2 cups.
    Celery salt.
    Tomato, 2 cups.
    Salt.

Chop celery rather fine, and cook in a little water till tender; add
the tomato, salt, and soup stock; heat well, and serve.


NUT AND CREAM OF CORN SOUP

    Sweet corn rubbed fine, 1 quart can.
    Vegetable soup stock, 4 cups.
    Salt, 1 heaping tablespoonful.

Bring to a boil, rub through a colander, reheat, and serve.


ARTICHOKE SOUP

    Artichokes, 6.
    Onions, small, 2.
    Sage, 1/4 teaspoonful.
    Lemon juice, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt.
    Water, 2 quarts.
    Protose, 1/8 pound.
    Bay leaf.
    Browned flour, 1 tablespoonful.

Select prime, green, globe artichokes before they have developed; cut
off the stems, trim off the hard leaves round the bottom, and cut
off the upper quarter of the artichoke leaves. Put the water in soup
kettle; add the artichoke, onions, and protose. Let simmer gently for
two hours, then add sage, bay leaf, and lemon juice. Thicken with
browned flour. Let all boil together a few minutes, then press through
a colander, salt, reheat, and serve.


IMPROMPTU SOUP NO. 1

    Onion, 1.

Slice into heated saucepan with

    Savory or green herbs, 1 pinch.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.

Let brown two or three minutes, then add

    Nut butter, 1 tablespoonful.

Brown a little longer, then add

    Stewed tomatoes, 1 cup.
    Hot water, 3 cups.

Let all boil together and thicken with gluten; salt, strain, and serve.


IMPROMPTU SOUP NO. 2

    Malted nuts, 1/2 cup.
    Browned flour, 1 tablespoonful.
    Flour, 1 tablespoonful.

Mix, and dissolve in a little milk, then add

    Milk, 3 cups

and heat to boiling point, stirring often to prevent scorching; set
back far enough to keep from boiling, then whip into the broth

    Eggs well beaten, 4.

Salt, and serve.


CREOLE SOUP

    Water, 2 cups.
    Tomatoes, 1 pint.
    Clove of garlic, 1.
    Small turnip, 1.
    Boiled rice, heaped tablespoonful.
    Small carrot, 1.

Boil all together, season with a little salt, rub the vegetables
through a sieve, and thin to the consistency of cream with hot water or
nut cream.


PALESTINE SOUP

    Jerusalem artichokes, 12.
    Celery, 1 sprig.
    Boiled cream, 1 pint.
    Croutons.
    Leek, 1 sprig.
    Salt.
    Nutmeg.

Wash and peel the artichokes, put over them cold water sufficient to
cover, add leeks, celery, and salt. Simmer an hour and a half. Press
through a sieve, put back on the stove, and beat into it a pint of
boiled cream. Add a little nutmeg. Serve with croutons. If too thick,
add a little hot milk or cream.


FRUIT SOUP (PINEAPPLE)

Thicken pineapple juice with arrowroot. Serve cold with a bit of
pineapple glace in each cup.


CHOCOLATE SOUP

    Chocolate (Sanitas), 1/4 pound.
    Water, 2-1/2 cups.
    Sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Flour, 1 tablespoonful.
    Milk, 1 quart.
    Ground cinnamon, 1 teaspoonful.
    Whipped cream, 1 cup.

Soak the chocolate in two cups of the water; when soft put to cook;
when it boils add the sugar and flour rubbed smooth in the rest of the
water. Cook slowly for five minutes and add the hot milk. Strain, stir
in the cinnamon and whipped cream. Serve at once with crisps or wafers.
Blanched almonds toasted are served with the soup.


FRUIT SOUP

    Strawberry, or other juice, 1 cup.
    Pineapple juice, 1 cup.
    Lemon juice, 1 tablespoonful.
    Sago, 1 tablespoonful.
    Sugar, 1 tablespoonful.
    Chipped ice.

With the strawberry or other juice cook the sago; add the pineapple
juice and sugar; cool, and serve in sherbet cups with chipped ice.


FRUIT SOUP (SWEDISH)

Boil prunes and raisins slowly till tender, sweeten and save the juice;
boil sago till clear, mix with the fruit and juice, and serve very
cold.


FRUIT SOUP (ORANGE)

Thicken orange juice with arrowroot, and serve very cold in cups with a
bit of candied orange peel on top of each glass.


FRUIT SOUP (LEMON)

Make a strong lemonade, thicken with arrowroot, serve very cold with a
bit of candied lemon peel or candied ginger in each glass.


FRUIT SOUP (MARQUISE)

Take two parts red raspberry juice and one of currant, sweeten, thicken
with arrowroot and sago; candied orange peel or blanched and shredded
almonds are a dainty addition.


FRUIT SOUP (CRANBERRY)

Thicken some sweetened cranberry juice with arrowroot, and serve cold
in cups, as a first course at a Christmas or New Year's dinner.


FRUIT SOUP (GRAPE)

Thicken bottled grape juice with arrowroot, and serve cold with chipped
ice. This is refreshing for invalids.


FRUIT SOUP (CHERRY)

Thicken cherry juice with arrowroot, and serve with other fruit soups;
garnish with black cherries in their season.


FRUIT SOUP (STRAWBERRY)

Thicken fresh strawberry juice with arrowroot and put on ice to chill;
put a layer of chipped ice on top of each cup before serving, and lay a
ripe strawberry, stem and all, on top of each glass.


RAISIN, APPLE, OR PRUNE SOUP

Either seedless raisins, apples, or prunes may be added to sago soup.
The soup should then bear the name of the fruit used.




_ENTREES_


MOCK WHITE FISH

    Rice flour, 1/3 cup.
    Butter, 1 scant teaspoonful.
    Mace, 1/4 teaspoonful.
    Salt to taste.
    Milk, 1 cup.
    Onion grated, 1 tablespoonful.
    Potatoes, mashed, 3 cups.

Heat the milk to boiling, stir in the rice, flour, butter, onion, mace,
and salt. Cook all ten minutes, stirring frequently. Have the potatoes
ready, freshly cooked and mashed; while hot add the rice mixture, and
put into a pan to cool. When cool, cut in slices about five inches
long, dip in egg and crumbs, put in oiled pan, and bake until nicely
browned. Serve with parsley sauce.


FILLETS OF VEGETARIAN SALMON

    Milk. 1-1/2 cups.
    Farina, 1/2 cup.
    Tomatoes, cooked and strained, 1/2 cup.
    Egg, 1.
    Salt to taste
    Nuttolene, 1/2 cup.
    Eggplant, boiled and mashed, 1-1/2 cups.
    Bread crumbs, fine and dry, 1 cup.
    Color, vegetable red enough to make salmon color.

Cook and mash the eggplant, stir the nuttolene to a cream in a little
of the milk, then add the rest of the milk, the eggplant, tomatoes,
and salt. Set in double boiler; when scalding hot, add the farina and
bread crumbs. Mix thoroughly and let cook fifteen or twenty minutes.
Remove from the range, stir in the raw egg and the color, mixing till
the color is perfectly blended. Turn into a deep pan to cool; should be
about two inches deep. When cold cut into slices, egg, crumb, and bake.
Serve with parsley sauce.


PROTOSE ROAST WITH OLIVE SAUCE

    Protose, 3/4 pound.
    Chopped onion, small, 1.
    Parsley, 1 tablespoonful.
    Boiling water, 2 cups.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Bread crumbs, 2 cups.
    Eggs, 2.
    Salt to taste.

Put the onion, parsley, and butter into the boiling water, and thicken
with bread crumbs stiff enough to cut nicely when done. Into this
mixture put one hard-boiled egg chopped fine, and break in one raw egg
to make it hold together. Salt to taste. Put a layer of this filling
into a baking-pan, then a layer of protose cut in thin slices, then
a layer of the filling, and another layer of the protose, and last
another layer of the filling. Bake in a moderate oven one hour. Serve
with olive sauce.


MOCK TURKEY WITH DRESSING

    German lentils, 1 cup.
    Chopped walnut meats, 1/2 cup.
    Milk, 1 cup.
    Salt.
    Celery salt.
    Granola or bread crumbs.
    Minced onion, 1/4 cup.
    Chopped celery, 1 cup.
    Eggs, 2.
    Sage.
    Sliced bread.

1. Thoroughly wash the lentils and soak overnight. Boil slowly until
tender and run through colander. Add the walnut meats, one egg, and the
minced onion browned with the chopped celery in a little oil. Add salt
and sage to taste. Thicken with granola or bread crumbs.

2. Dip thin slices of bread in a mixture of one egg and a cup of milk,
or thin slices of nuttolene may be used instead.

Make alternate layers of 1 and 2.


DRESSING NO. 1

    Stale bread crumbs.
    Hot milk, 2 cups.
    Eggs, 1 or 2.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.

Mix bread crumbs with hot milk, eggs, and butter. Season with salt,
sage, and onions. Serve with cranberry sauce.


DRESSING NO. 2

    Large onions, 2.
    Fresh bread crumbs, 1 cup.
    Milk, 3/4 cup.
    Sage, 1 tablespoonful.
    Beaten eggs, 2.
    Chopped parsley, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Butter, 1/4 cup.
    Salt to taste.

Peel onions and parboil. Drain and chop fine. Soak bread crumbs in the
milk; then mix all ingredients together. Stir the mixture over the fire
until it is reduced to a thick paste, without allowing it to boil.

Serve a slice of the roast with a spoonful of dressing on one end and
cranberry sauce on the other.


ROAST DUCK (VEGETARIAN STYLE)

    Lentil pulp, 1-3/4 cups.
    Minced onion, 1/4 cup.
    Chopped parsley, 1/3 cup.
    Stale bread crumbs, ground fine, 1 cup.
    Eggs (one hard-boiled), 3.
    Butter, 1 teaspoonful.
    Chopped walnuts, 1/2 cup.

Take lentil pulp, one hard-boiled egg chopped fine, one beaten egg,
minced onion, and chopped parsley browned in a little oil, one
teaspoonful of butter, and salt to taste. Mix well and put one-half
of this mixture in an oiled baking pan, then a layer of the following
mixture: Stale bread crumbs soaked in hot water, chopped walnuts, a
little grated onion, one egg, and salt and sage to taste. Finish with
a layer of the lentil mixture. Bake, and serve with gravy.


NUTTOLENE ROAST

    Nuttolene, 1 pound.
    Bread crumbs.
    Hot water, 1 quart.
    Salt and sage to taste.

Put the nuttolene through a vegetable press, or work smooth with a
knife or spoon; add the hot water and beat to a cream. Add salt and
sage, and thicken with bread crumbs stiff enough to retain its shape
when moulded. Press into a deep buttered bread-pan and bake till nicely
browned. Turn out of the pan and slice. Serve with any good brown sauce
or walnut gravy.


MOCK VEAL LOAF

    Nuttolene, 1/4 pound.
    Minced protose, 1/2 pound.
    Egg, well beaten, 1.
    Milk, 1/4 cup.
    Sage, 1/4 teaspoonful.
    Ground mace, 1/4 teaspoonful.
    Butter size of an egg.
    1 small onion, braized in the butter.

Cracker or zwieback crumbs enough to make a stiff mixture. Mix all
together, salt to taste, and bake in a deep bread-pan. Garnish with
parsley or young celery hearts.


VEGETARIAN ROAST

    Nut food, 1/3 pound.
    Onion, 1/2.
    Egg, 1.
    Hot water, 2 cups.
    Butter, 2 teaspoonfuls.
    Bread crumbs or granola.

To the water add the nut food minced, minced and browned onion, and
butter. Thicken with toasted bread crumbs or granola until quite stiff.
Add the beaten egg, salt, and a little sage if desired. Put in oiled
pan and bake. Serve with gravy.


ROAST OF PROTOSE

    Protose, 1 pound.
    Strained tomato, 1/2 cup.
    Chopped onion, 1.
    Nut butter, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Browned flour, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Sage.

Cut the protose lengthwise through the center, then cut each half
in six pieces. Place in a deep baking-pan, let the first piece lean
slantingly against the end or side of the pan, the second against
the first, and so on. Sprinkle this with finely chopped onion, and a
little powdered sage, and pour over it a nut cream made of two heaping
tablespoonfuls of nut butter emulsified, in enough hot water to cover
the protose. Add to this the browned flour, rubbed smooth in a little
tomato. Salt to taste. A little celery salt may be used if desired.
Cover and bake till the gravy is thick and brown.


HAMBURGER LOAF

    Lentils, raw, 1 cup.
    Protose, 1/2 pound.
    Cooking oil, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Salt.
    Chopped onion, 1/2 cup.
    Eggs, 5.
    Bread crumbs.

Cook the lentils until tender, then simmer as dry as possible. Put
through a colander, brown the onions in oil, and add to the lentils,
together with the protose and two of the raw eggs. Mix salt to taste,
and add enough bread crumbs so that it will mold nicely.

Have the three remaining eggs boiled hard and the shells removed.
Put one-half the loaf mixture into a bread-pan, then put the three
hard-boiled eggs in a row through the center and cover with the
remaining mixture. Press down gently and bake. Serve with sauce
imperial.


NUT AND GRANOLA ROAST

    Minced nut food, 1/4 pound.
    Onion, 1.
    Oil, 1 tablespoonful.
    Egg, 1.
    Boiling water, 2 cups.
    Granola.

Brown the onion in the oil, then add the minced nut foods and boiling
water. Thicken with granola. Stir in the raw egg, and a little sage or
thyme if desired. Salt to taste. Put in oiled pan and bake. Serve with
gravy.


CREAM NUT LOAF

    Dried bread crumbs, 2 cups.
    Ground sweet corn, 1 cup.
    Ground Brazil nuts, 1 cup.
    Eggs, 2.
    Sage.
    Mashed peas, 1 cup.
    Mashed potatoes, 1 cup.
    Cream, 1/2 cup.
    Salt.

Mix all thoroughly together, press in a deep bread-pan, and bake a nice
brown. Serve with a sauce made of one part sweet cider and two parts
grape juice, thickened with a little corn starch.


IMPERIAL NUT ROAST

    Pea pulp, 1-1/2 cups.
    Chopped walnuts, 1-1/2 cups.
    Bread crumbs, 1 cup.
    Sage.
    Lentil pulp, 1-1/2 cups.
    Egg, 1.
    Salt.
    Milk to moisten.

Mix the peas, lentils, and walnuts with salt to taste. Put a layer in a
deep bread-pan, then put a layer made of the crumbs, eggs, milk, sage,
and salt. This should be just stiff enough to spread easily. Cover with
the remaining pea and lentil mixture. Baste with cream, put in the
oven, and brown.


WALNUT LOAF

    Chopped walnut meats, 1/2 cup.
    Egg, 1.
    Boiling water, 2 cups.
    Olive oil or butter, 1/2 tablespoonful.
    Bread crumbs, 2 cups.
    Salt to taste.

Mix walnut meats and crumbs together, pour over the boiling water, mix
well, add the raw egg, butter, and salt, stir thoroughly, press into
buttered bread-pan, and bake.


WALNUT ROAST

    Granola, 2 cups.
    Ground walnuts, 1 cup.
    Milk or cream, 1 quart.
    Eggs, 4.

Soak the granola in the milk or cream for ten minutes and add the
walnuts, eggs, salt, and a dash of nutmeg. Mix the preparation well.
Grease a baking-pan, turn in the mixture, and bake thirty-five to forty
minutes.


CEREAL ROAST

    Cream, 4 Cups.
    Nut meal, 1 cup.
    Onion, chopped fine, 1.
    Sage.
    Gluten, 1/2 cup.
    Bread crumbs, 1-1/4 cups.
    Salt.

Mix all together and bake in a moderately hot oven.


NUT AND TOMATO ROAST

    Celery, 1 root.
    Granola, 1-1/2 cups.
    Eggs, 5.
    Nuttolene, 1/2 pound.
    Tomatoes, 2 cups.
    Onions, 3.
    Protose, 1/2 pound.

Chop the celery and onions fine, put into a saucepan with enough
cooking oil to prevent burning, and cook until a rich brown, stirring
occasionally. Add to this one quart of boiling water and the tomatoes.
Boil for fifteen to twenty minutes. Then remove and strain as much as
possible through a soup strainer. Take three and one-half cups of this
gravy and mix with it the granola, eggs, and salt to taste. Have ready
the protose and nuttolene cut into thin slices. Put in a layer of the
granola mixture into a big baking-pan, then a layer of protose, then
granola, then nuttolene, and so on until all is used, finishing with
the granola mixture. Bake forty-five minutes or until a nice brown.
Remove from the fire, let cool a little, turn out on a platter, and
serve with the remaining gravy.


DRIED PEA CROQUETTES

    Dried peas, 1-1/2 cups.
    Egg, 1.
    Salt.
    Olive oil, 2 teaspoonfuls.
    Bread crumbs.

Cover the peas with water and soak overnight. Drain and cook in fresh
boiling water until tender. Drain, press through a colander, add a
little salt and olive oil. Mix thoroughly and form into small rolls
about three inches long. Dip in beaten egg, roll in bread crumbs, and
bake in a quick oven. Serve with tomato sauce.


CHICKEN CROQUETTES

    Mashed potato, 1/2 cup.
    Toasted bread crumbs, 1/2 cup.
    Nut butter, 1/4 cup.
    Hard-boiled egg, chopped fine, 1.
    Browned onion, 1/4 cup.
    Sage, 1 teaspoonful.
    Hot water, 1/2 cup.
    Chopped walnuts, 1/4 cup.
    Minced nuttolene, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Beaten egg, 1.
    Boiled rice, 1 cup.
    Salt, 3 teaspoonfuls.

Mix all together and form into croquettes; dip into beaten eggs and
milk, roll in browned bread crumbs which have been oiled or buttered,
and bake.


HASHED PROTOSE CROQUETTES

    Protose, 1 pound.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt.
    Potatoes, 1 pound.
    Eggs, 4.
    Mace.

Boil the potatoes, mash, add the minced protose, the yolk of three
eggs, salt, and mace. Mix thoroughly, form into oblong croquettes; egg,
crumb, and bake.


EGG MIXTURE FOR CROQUETTES, FILLETS, ETC.

Break an egg into a bowl or deep saucepan, break up with a fork, add
a tablespoonful of hot water to soften the albumen of the egg, and
mix till free from lumps, but do not beat in too much air. Dip the
croquettes in the egg, roll in crumbs, and bake.


PROTOSE WITH BROWNED POTATOES

Peel and slice potatoes three-fourths of an inch thick. Cut protose
in strips same thickness. Place in a pan two slices of potatoes and
one of protose, and repeat same until the pan is full. Pour over this
vegetable stock sufficient to cover. Bake in the oven till the potatoes
are done and nicely browned.


NUT FRICASSEE WITH BROWNED SWEET POTATOES

Cut some nut food into half-inch cubes and pour over it a thick, brown
or white gravy sufficient to cover well. Let it simmer about one hour.
Peel and steam or boil potatoes until tender, but not overdone. Put
them in a baking dish with a little butter or olive oil, salt, and bake
in a quick oven until nicely browned. Serve with the fricassee.


FRIJOLES WITH PROTOSE MEXICANO

    Mexican beans, 1/2 cup.
    Vegetable stock, 1 cup.
    Mace.
    Diced protose, 1/4 pound.
    Strained tomatoes, 1 cup.
    Salt.

Cook the beans in just enough water to prevent scorching. When done,
have ready a stock made of the vegetable stock, tomatoes, mace, and
salt. Pour over the beans, together with the protose, and let simmer
for an hour or more.


FRICASSEE OF PROTOSE WITH POTATO

Serve a spoonful of nice white mashed potato on an empty platter; press
a slice of broiled protose up against the potato, and serve with a
spoonful of brown gravy. Garnish with parsley.


GREEN CORN AND TOMATO

    Corn pulp, 3 cups.
    Strained tomatoes, 1 cup.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt.

Scrape the given amount of corn from the cob, add the tomatoes and
butter, simmer until the corn is tender; salt, and serve as a vegetable.

Cold boiled corn cut from the cob may be substituted for the fresh
corn, if desired.


MOCK CHICKEN RISSOLES

    Protose, 1/2 pound.
    Nuttolene, 1/2 pound.
    Milk, 1/2 cup.
    Mace.
    Flour, 1 tablespoonful.
    Butter, 1/4 cup.
    Salt.

Put the butter into a saucepan; when hot stir in the flour, and stir
until brown; add the hot milk, salt, and mace, and let cook a few
minutes. Chop the nut food fine and mix into the sauce. Have ready some
tart shells made of rich pie paste; fill with the mixture. The sauce
should be cool before adding the nut food.


NEW ENGLAND BOILED DINNER

    Potatoes, 4-1/2 cups.
    Turnips, 1 cup.
    Onions, 2 cups.
    Carrots, 1-3/4 cups.
    Cabbage, 2-1/2 cups.

Cut the potatoes, carrots, and turnips in three-quarter inch cubes;
slice the onions and cut the cabbage into pieces about one and one-half
inch square. Boil the potatoes and onions together. The carrots turnips
and cabbage may also be cooked together in salted water. When all are
done, mix together, and serve with slices of protose or other nut food
that has been braized in a tomato or brown sauce.


NUT AND VEGETABLE STEW

    Nuttolene, 1 cup.
    Turnips, 3/4 cup.
    Chopped celery, 1/2 cup.
    Bay leaf, 1.
    Salt.
    Carrots, 1-1/2 cups
    Potatoes, 1-1/2 cups.
    Onion, small, 1.
    Butter, 1 lump.

Put all on, except nuttolene and potatoes, and boil one hour. Then add
potatoes and nuttolene and cook slowly until potatoes are done. Salt to
taste. Thicken with a little flour, work smooth with a lump of butter.
A little protose might also be added.


STEWED PROTOSE (SPANISH)

    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Minced parsley, 1 tablespoonful.
    Tomatoes, 4 cups.
    Onions, 4.
    Flour, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Protose, 1 pound.

Put the butter into a saucepan and add the sliced onion, minced
parsley, and cook ten minutes. Then stir in the flour, mix well, and
add the tomatoes. Stir well to free from lumps. Cover and cook twenty
to thirty minutes. Slice the protose into small pieces and simmer in
sauce ten minutes. Salt, and serve.


PROTOSE FRICASSEE

    Tomatoes, 1 cup.
    Minced parsley, 1 teaspoonful.
    Protose, 1 pound.
    Vegetable stock, 2 cups.
    Mixed herbs, 1/2 teaspoonful.
    Onion, 1.
    Eggs (yolks), 2.

Mince the onion and braize in a little butter or olive oil five
minutes; add the minced parsley strained tomatoes, mixed herbs, and
vegetable broth. Bring to a boil and add the protose, cut into cubes or
diamonds of one-half inch. Cook for a few minutes and thicken with a
few spoonfuls of flour rubbed smooth in a little water. Salt to taste,
and serve. Just before serving add the beaten yolks.


PROTOSE STEAK SMOTHERED IN ONIONS

    Protose, 3/4 pound.
    Cooking oil, 1/2 cup.
    Salt.
    Onions, large, 6.
    Vegetable stock, 2 cups.

Cut the protose into twelve slices, lay half of them in an oiled
baking-pan; have the onions sliced and lightly browned in the oil.
Cook half of the onions over the protose, then put on the rest of the
protose, then the remainder of the onions, pouring the vegetable stock
over all. Salt to taste. Bake until the stock is reduced to a rich
brown gravy.


PROTOSE SMOTHERED WITH TOMATOES

    Protose, 3/4 pound.
    Butter, 1/2 cup.
    Salt.
    Tomatoes, 12.
    Sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Celery salt.

Cut protose into twelve slices and cut each tomato in half. Put one
slice of tomato in a baking-pan; on this put a slice of the protose,
then a slice of tomato on top, and so on, making twelve orders in all.
Chop the butter in little pieces and sprinkle over, also the salt and
celery salt. Cover and bake until the tomato is nearly done. Then
remove the cover and brown very lightly. Serve two slices to each
person, garnished with parsley.


PROTOSE POT ROAST

    Protose, 3/4 pound.
    Strained tomatoes, 1 cup.
    Vegetable soup stock, 2 cups.
    Salt to taste.

Mix the vegetable stock with the strained tomatoes, salt to taste,
and pour over the protose, which has been sliced and placed in a
baking-pan. Bake one hour.


BRAIZED PROTOSE AND CABBAGE

Braize protose according to the recipe, and serve with boiled cabbage.


PROTOSE STEAK WITH POTATOES SMOTHERED IN ONIONS

By putting a layer of sliced raw potatoes in the bottom of the pan and
covering with the protose, onions, and stock, we have protose steak and
potatoes smothered with onions.


PROTOSE PILAU

    Water, 3/4 pint.
    Rice, cooked, 1 cup.
    Butter, 1 teaspoonful.
    Protose, 1/2 inch cubes, 1/4 pound.
    Minced onion, 1 tablespoonful.

Let simmer ten or fifteen minutes; thicken with browned flour, two
heaping teaspoonfuls, mixed with strained tomatoes to consistency to
pour easily. Salt and celery salt to taste.


PROTOSE PATTIES (PLAIN)

    Protose, 1 pound.
    Salt.
    Cream, 3 tablespoonfuls.
    Eggs, 2.
    Bread crumbs.

Thoroughly crush the protose and mix with the salt and one egg. Form
into patties, roll in egg and cream, then in bread crumbs. Bake in
greased pan till lightly browned. If desired, the crumbs may be
slightly moistened with cream.


BRAIZED PROTOSE

    Protose, 12 slices.
    Vegetable stock, No. 2, 3 cups.
    Sage.
    Minced onion, medium size, 1.
    Butter.

Butter a deep pan and sprinkle with the minced onion and sage. On this
lay the slices of protose, cut a little less than half an inch thick.
Cover the pan and put into the oven to brown, turning the protose once,
and watching carefully that the onions do not burn. Remove from the
oven and cover with the vegetable stock. Cover and return to the oven,
and bake until the stock is reduced to a thick, brown gravy.


PROTOSE CUTLETS WITH MASHED POTATO

    Protose, 1/2 pound.
    Milk, 1 cup.
    Brown sauce.
    Egg, 1.
    Granose flakes.

Cut protose into six slices as for protose steak. Dip in beaten egg and
milk, and roll in granose flakes. Do this the second time, and bake in
brown sauce about thirty minutes. Serve with mashed potato.


NUT LISBON STEAK

    Protose, 6 large slices.
    Brown gravy, 3 cups.

Broil or fry the protose a nice brown (but do not burn) and drop into
the gravy (any good brown gravy will do); let simmer an hour or two.
Serve hot with a spoonful of the gravy.

More protose may be used if desired.


PROTOSE AND TOMATO

    Protose, 6 large slices.
    Tomato, cooked and strained, 2 cups.
    Corn starch, 1 teaspoonful.
    Salt to taste.

Cut the protose in rather thick slices and lay in a flat baking-pan
(one about two inches deep will answer nicely); boil the tomatoes and
thicken with the corn starch; add the salt, and pour over the protose.
Bake slowly in a moderate oven. Do not bake too dry. The protose should
be nice and juicy with the tomatoes when done. The corn starch may be
omitted if desired.


BAKED PROTOSE WITH MACARONI

    Macaroni (not cooked), 1-1/2 cups.
    Oil, 1 tablespoonful.
    Flour, 1/3 cup.
    Salt.
    Minced protose, 1 cup.
    Minced onion, medium size, 1.
    Milk, 2 cups.

Break the protose in one-inch lengths. Drop in three quarts of boiling
water, previously salted. Boil from one-half to three-quarters hour,
turn into colander, and pour cold water over it. Drain and turn into
baking-pan.


SAUCE

Put the oil in a stew-pan, add the onion, braize till nicely browned,
then add the flour, and stir until brown. Add the milk, then the
protose. Season with salt. Pour this sauce over the macaroni and
sprinkle with bread crumbs. Bake in a moderate oven till brown.


FRIZZLED PROTOSE IN EGGS

    Protose, 1 pound.
    Eggs, 8.
    Olive oil.

Cut the protose into small, thin, narrow strips; put into a frying-pan
with a little olive oil, and when hot pour the well-beaten eggs over
it, stirring constantly, until the eggs are set. Serve hot on toast.


ESCALLOPED PROTOSE

    Protose, 1 pound.
    Bread crumbs, 3/4 cup.
    Potatoes, medium size, 4.
    Brown sauce, sufficient to cover.

Slice one-half the potatoes in a baking dish, sprinkle one-half the
bread crumbs over them; on the crumbs put half the protose cut into
thin slices; pour over some of the gravy to moisten. Add the remainder
of the ingredients in the same manner, making two layers. There should
be sufficient gravy to cover and cook the potatoes and protose.


EGGPLANT BAKED WITH PROTOSE

    Eggplant, medium size, 2.
    Chopped onion, large, 1.
    Salt.
    Protose, 3/4 pound.
    Vegetable stock.

Peel and slice the eggplant in one-fourth inch slices, and cut the
protose into twelve slices. Put a layer of the eggplant in an oiled
pan, then a layer of protose, and sprinkle part of the onion over all.
Make another layer with the remainder and cover with vegetable stock.
Salt to taste, cover, and bake. Tomato may be used in place of the
stock if desired.


PROTOSE JAMBALAYA

    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Minced onion, 1.
    Minced garlic, small, 1.
    Flour, 1 tablespoonful.
    Tomatoes, 1-1/2 cups.
    Vegetable stock, 1-1/2 quarts.
    Rice, 1 cup.
    Minced protose, 3/4 pound.
    Minced celery, 1/4 cup.
    Salt, mace, and bay leaves.

Put the butter into a saucepan, heat, add the onion and garlic, and
brown, then add the flour and brown, add the tomato, and cook a few
minutes, stirring to prevent flour from lumping. When nice and brown,
add vegetable stock and the seasoning; boil until the ingredients are
well blended; add the rice and boil till the rice is tender, stirring
often. To this add the minced protose that has been heated in a covered
dish in the oven. Mix and serve.


RAGOUT OF PROTOSE

    Protose cut in irregular pieces, 1 pound.
    Hot water, 4 cups.
    Browned flour, 1 tablespoonful.
    Celery salt.
    Strained tomatoes, 1-1/2 cups.
    White flour, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt.

Put all together, except the flour, and let simmer thirty or forty
minutes, adding enough boiling water from time to time to keep the
original quantity. Thicken with the flour, and serve.


PROTOSE CUTLETS

    (1) Protose, minced, 1 pound.

Season with

        Salt.
        Lemon juice.
        Sage.

Add a little

        Chopped parsley.

Make a heavy white sauce with

    (2) Flour, 2 tablespoonfuls.
        Milk, 3/4 cup.

If desired, flour may be rubbed with

        Butter, 1 tablespoonful.

Add salt to taste.

Mix 1 thoroughly with 2. When cool, make into patties, cutlets, or
croquettes. Dip into beaten egg, roll in bread crumbs that have been
moistened with melted butter, and brown in the oven.


PROTOSE CHARTREUSE

    Vegetable stock, 2 cups.
    Egg, 1.
    Salt.
    Protose, 1/2 pound.
    Rice, cooked, 1 quart.
    Bread crumbs, sufficient to thicken.

To the stock add the protose, bread crumbs, the egg unbeaten, and salt.
Mix thoroughly. Line a baking-pan with part of the rice, and fill in
the center with the protose mixture; cover with the rest of the rice,
and press down gently. Bake, and serve with browned sauce.


PROTOSE STEAK

Split a pound of protose in two lengthwise, and cut into as many slices
as needed. Broil in a pan, and serve with brown sauce.


PROTOSE STEAK A LA TARTARE

    Minced protose, 1 pound.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Mayonnaise, 3 tablespoonfuls.
    Onion, 1.
    Eggs, 6.
    Onions and olives mixed, to garnish.

Put the butter in a saucepan and set on the range. When hot, add the
onion and cook until brown; add the minced protose, a pinch of salt,
and mix. Form into balls, making a depression in each ball, and drop
an egg yolk in each depression. Bake until the eggs are done. Chop the
onions and olives, add the mayonnaise, and use as a garnish.


PROTOSE OR NUTTOLENE CUTLETS

    Protose or nuttolene, 6 slices, each large enough for a cutlet.
    Eggs, 3.
    Cream or rich milk, 2 cups.
    Bread crumbs, buttered, 1-1/2 cups.
    Salt.

Beat the eggs, add the milk and salt, dip the slices of nut food in
this, and then in the buttered bread crumbs, and lay in a greased
baking-pan. Place the remaining bread crumbs with the milk, add salt,
and pour over the cutlets. If not enough to cover, a little milk may be
added. Put into the oven and bake till the mixture sets, or it may be
placed on the range, and when one side is browned turn and brown the
other side.


GOLDEN NUT CHARTREUSE

    Vegetable stock, 2 cups.
    Corn meal mush, 1 quart.
    Bread crumbs.
    Egg, 1.
    Protose, or other nut food, 1/2 pound.
    Salt.

Make the filling same as for protose chartreuse; line the pan with the
mush, put in the filling, and cover with mush. Bake, and when cold cut
into slices, egg, crumb, and bake. Serve with gravy.


LENTIL HASH

    Lentils, 1 cup.
    Potatoes, medium size, 2.
    Rice, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Egg, 1.
    Onion, large, 1.
    Tomato, 1.
    Cooking oil, 1/4 cup.
    Garlic, small piece.

Boil the lentil, onion, tomato, potatoes, and rice together till soft;
chop very fine and add the cooking oil, egg, and a very small piece of
garlic, and salt to taste. Put into oiled pan and bake until brown.


LENTIL FRITTERS

    Lentils, 1 cup.
    Rich milk, 1/4 cup.
    Egg, 1.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Flour, 3/4 cup.

Cook lentils until tender, drain, press through a colander, add the
milk, butter, flour, salt, and beaten yolk. Mix thoroughly and add the
stiffly-beaten white. Drop in spoonfuls on oiled griddle and brown on
both sides, or bake in the oven. Garnish with parsley, and serve with
marmalade or apple sauce.


WALNUT LENTIL PATTIES

    Cooked lentils, 2 cups.
    Eggs, 2.
    Chopped walnuts, 3/4 cup.
    Granola, or bread crumbs.

Rub the lentils through a colander and add the chopped walnut meats,
one egg, and a pinch of salt. Thicken with bread crumbs or granola.
Form into patties, roll in egg and buttered crumbs, and bake. Serve
with gravy.


LENTIL PATTIES ON MACARONI

    Lentils, 1 cup.
    Eggs, 2.
    Chopped parsley, 1 teaspoonful.
    Minced onion, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Olive oil, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Bread crumbs.

Cook the lentils until tender and put through a colander. To this pulp
add the rest of the ingredients, using sufficient bread crumbs to make
stiff enough to form into patties. Dip the patties in egg and crumbs.
Brown in the oven. Serve on a platter with creamed macaroni.


WALNUT LENTILS

    Lentils, 1-1/2 cups.
    Walnuts, 1 cup.
    Butter.

Cook the lentils in six cups of water until quite tender and the water
almost dried away. Press the lentils through a soup strainer. Grind
the walnut meats and add to the lentils. Add a little butter and salt
to taste.


LENTIL ROAST

    Lentils, 1-1/2 cups.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Granola, 1 cup.
    Eggs, 2.
    Onion, small, 1.
    Mixed herbs, 1 teaspoonful.
    Ground walnuts, 1 cup.
    Salt.

Cook the lentils in sufficient water to prevent burning. When tender,
add the sliced onion, butter, mixed herbs, and salt to taste. Cook with
the pot closely covered for twenty-five to thirty minutes longer.

Remove from fire, drain, press through a colander, and add the granola,
ground walnuts, and eggs. Mix well, press into a baking pan, and bake
forty-five minutes or until nicely browned.


LENTIL NUT ROAST

    Lentil pulp, 2 cups.
    Egg, 1.
    Toasted bread crumbs or granola.
    Nut butter, 1/2 cup.
    Dairy butter, 2 teaspoonfuls.

Emulsify the nut butter in enough water to mix easily. Mix all together
and thicken with toasted bread crumbs or granola. Salt to taste. Put
in oiled pan and bake. Serve with gravy. A little thyme or sage may be
used if desired.


RICE MOLD

    Rice, 1 cup.
    Milk, 2/3 cup.
    Lemon or vanilla flavoring.
    Egg, 1.
    Sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Stewed fruit.

Wash clean and boil the rice in two quarts of water until done. Drain
off the water well. Add, while hot, a custard made of the egg, milk,
and sugar. Flavor with lemon or vanilla. Form into molds, and serve
with stewed prunes, peaches, or any other kind of fruit.


RICE AND BANANA COMPOTE

    Rice, 3/4 cup.
    Milk, 3 cups.
    Vanilla.
    Bananas, 6.
    Sugar.

Bring the milk to a boil, thicken with corn starch or flour, and add
sugar to taste. Simmer the bananas in this sauce for half an hour. Add
vanilla.

Rice for bananas: Cook the rice in two and one-fourth cups of water
in a double boiler till done. The rice should be soft and each grain
standing out separate when done. Make a layer of the rice, and serve
the bananas on it.


RICE AND EGG SCRAMBLE

    Rice, 2 cups.
    Eggs, 4.
    Milk, 4 cups.

Thoroughly wash the rice and boil in salted water until tender and
drain. Scramble the eggs in the milk, add salt when nearly done, mix
with the rice, and serve hot.


SPANISH RICE

    Rice, 1 cup.
    Garlic, medium size, 1/2.
    Bay leaf, 1.
    Minced celery, 1 stalk.
    Tomatoes, 2 cups.
    Minced onion, small, 1.
    Oil, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Mace, 1/2 teaspoonful.
    Flour, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Salt.

Boil the rice until about half done, drain, and finish cooking in the
following sauce:--

Put the oil in a saucepan, add all the other ingredients except the
tomato and flour; set over the fire and stir occasionally, to prevent
burning, until brown. Then add the flour and stir till brown. Add the
tomato, let cook a few minutes, strain, and add to the rice.


CORN FRITTERS

    Green corn pulp, 1 pint.
    Milk, 4 tablespoonfuls.
    Flour, 1/2 cup.
    Eggs, 4.

Mix the corn, milk, flour, and yolks of the eggs together thoroughly.
Then fold in the well-beaten whites of the eggs, and fry by spoonfuls.


PROTOSE AND RICE CHOWDER

    Protose, 1/2 pound.
    Rice, cooked, 1 cup.
    Potatoes, 1/2 pound.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Vegetable stock, 1 cup.
    Bread, 1/4 loaf.
    Cream, or milk, 1 cup.
    Salt and mace to taste.

Put the butter in a deep dish, melt, then add a layer of the protose,
sliced quite thin, then sprinkle with mace, salt, and bits of butter.
Then add a layer of the sliced potatoes, sprinkle with part of the
rice, then a layer of bread, then more salt, bits of butter, and minced
onion. Add the remainder in the same order, and pour over all one cup
of hot vegetable stock. Cover, set on range, and let simmer one-half
hour, then pour over all one cup of hot cream or milk, and serve.


NOODLES

    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt, 1/4 teaspoonful.
    Eggs, 2.
    Flour, to make a very stiff dough.

Whip the egg until light, add the salt, and work in the flour, making
a smooth, stiff dough. Roll out thin, in a long narrow strip, sprinkle
with flour to prevent sticking, and roll up into a long roll, rolling
crosswise. Then with a sharp knife cut into very thin slices and drop
into boiling salted water. Cook about twenty minutes. Drain, pour over
the melted butter, and serve hot.


VEGETABLE OYSTER A L'ITALIENNE

Take macaroni broken into one-inch lengths, and boiled until tender,
and vegetable oyster which has been parboiled twenty minutes, and put
in alternate layers in a baking-pan. Pour over this a sauce made from
both of the liquors (macaroni and vegetable oyster) thickened with the
yolks of the eggs. Sprinkle with granola and bake until browned.


GREEN CORN CHOWDER (NEW ENGLAND STYLE)

    Corn pulp, fresh cut from the cob, 2-1/2 cups.
    Diced protose, 1 cup.
    Vegetable stock, 1 cup.
    Parsley, chopped, 1 tablespoonful.
    Bread crumbs.
    Minced onion, medium size, 1.
    Sliced potatoes, 2 cups.
    Oil, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Salt.

Brown the onion in the oil, and add the protose and vegetable stock.
When thoroughly heated, add corn pulp, mix all together, heat up well,
and salt. Put the sliced potatoes in cold water, drain, and put into a
pan of flour; shake the pan so as to cover the potatoes with flour.
Put half of the potatoes in a layer in the bottom of a baking-pan,
cover with half the corn and protose mixture, sprinkle with bread
crumbs and part of the parsley. In the same manner add the remainder
of the potatoes and mixture. Moisten with stock and bake until the
potatoes are done.


SQUASH FRITTERS

    Mashed summer squash, 2 cups.
    Butter, 1 heaping tablespoonful.
    Sugar, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt, 1/2 teaspoonful.
    Rich milk, 1/2 cup.
    Flour, 1 cup.
    Eggs, 2.

Mix thoroughly the squash, butter, milk, flour, sugar, salt, and beaten
yolks. Then fold in the stiffly-beaten whites. Brown on a griddle.


BEAN CROQUETTES

    Navy beans, 1 cup.
    Olive oil, 1 tablespoonful.
    Bread crumbs.
    Salt, 1 level teaspoonful.
    Beaten egg, 1.

Cover beans with water, soak overnight, drain, and cook in fresh
boiling water until tender, or about an hour. Drain, press through
a colander, add salt and olive oil. Mix thoroughly and roll into
cylinder-shaped croquettes; dip into beaten egg, roll in bread crumbs
and bake in moderate oven. Serve with tomato sauce.


SCOTCH PEA LOAF

    Scotch pea pulp, 1-1/2 cups.
    Egg, 1.
    Poultry dressing or sage.
    Nut food, 1 pound.
    Butter, 2 teaspoonfuls.

Stir all together, or thicken with toasted bread crumbs or granola;
bake. Serve with gravy.


BEAN AND NUT LOAF

    White beans, 1 cup.
    Onion, 1/4 cup.
    Sage.
    Toasted bread crumbs or granola.
    Chopped walnuts, 1 cup.
    Egg, 1.
    Salt.

Thoroughly wash the beans and soak overnight. Boil thoroughly, and
when done rub through a colander. Add the chopped walnuts, egg, onion
braized in oil, sage, and salt to taste. Thicken with granola or
toasted bread crumbs. Put into an oiled pan and bake. Serve with gravy.


CARROT SOUFFLE

    Mashed carrots, 1-1/2 cups.
    Rich milk, 1 cup.
    Toasted bread crumbs, or granola, 1-1/2 cups.
    Braized onion, 1 tablespoonful.
    Nutmeg, 1 level teaspoonful.
    Yolks of eggs, 3.

Beat the whites of the eggs very stiff and fold into the above mixture.
Put into oiled pan, and bake in moderate oven.


OKRA GUMBO (VEGETARIAN STYLE)

    Ripe tomatoes, 2 cups.
    Water, 1-1/2 quarts.
    Diced nuttolene, 1/4 pound.
    Onion, medium size, 1.
    Sliced okra, 2 cups.
    Diced protose, 1/2 pound.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Rice, boiled, 1 cup.
    Salt, celery salt, mace.
    Watercress, parsley.

Cook the tomatoes and okra in the water. Brown the onion in the butter,
add the protose and nuttolene with the seasoning; brown all together
a few minutes; then add the tomato and okra; let all simmer for two
hours. Serve on platters on tablespoonful of boiled rice. Garnish with
the parsley or cress.


BAKED POT PIE

    Protose, 1 pound.
    Carrots, 1-1/2 cups.
    Strained tomato, 1 cup.
    Thyme.
    Potatoes, 2 cups.
    Minced onion, 1/2 cup.
    Chopped parsley.

Cook the carrots about one hour, then add potatoes, onions, protose,
and a little chopped parsley. Simmer in just enough water to keep from
burning until potatoes are done. Season with thyme and salt to taste.
Put in an oiled pan and cover with a rich pie paste. Bake thirty to
forty minutes in a moderate oven.


BAKED EGGPLANT A LA CREME

    Eggplant, 6 slices.
    Milk, 3 cups
    Butter.
    Toasted bread crumbs, 1/2 cup.
    Salt, 2 teaspoonfuls.

Peel the eggplant and cut in slices about three-fourths of an inch
thick. Place slices in a pan and cover with sifted toasted bread crumbs
or sifted granola. Pour over this the milk; add salt and small piece of
butter, and bake. If it becomes too dry, add a little more milk.


MOCK CHICKEN PIE

    Boiled potatoes, 4 cups.
    Nuttolene, 1/2 pound.
    Eggs, 2.
    Pie crust.
    Protose, 1/2 pound.
    Milk, 1 cup.
    Chopped onion and parsley.
    Nut gravy.

Put into an oiled baking-pan a layer of the thinly-sliced boiled
potato, and over this a layer of nuttolene cut into thin slices.
Sprinkle on a little chopped onion and parsley, then a layer of sliced
protose. Pour over the nut gravy and let set five minutes. Cover this
with the pie crust and bake till done.


GREEN CORN NUT PIE

    Corn mixture.
      Corn ground, 2 cans.
      Rich milk, 1 cup.
      Flour, 3/4 cup.
      Beaten eggs, 2.
      Salt to taste.

    Nut mixture.
      Minced onion, 1.
      Chopped celery, 1/4 cup.

Braize in a little butter or oil. Add

    Water, 1 cup.
    Strained tomatoes, 1/2 cup.
    Minced nuttolene or protose, 3/4 cup.

Add to this sufficient bread crumbs to make a batter that will spread
easily. Oil a baking-pan, and cover the bottom with one-half of the
corn mixture, then put in the nut food mixture and the remainder of the
corn to top. Bake till nicely browned.


VEGETABLE OYSTER PIE

    Vegetable oysters, 1 quart.
    Potatoes, 1 cup.
    Cream sauce, 2-1/2 cups.
    Pie paste sufficient to cover.
    Chopped parsley, 1 teaspoonful.
    Parsnips, 1 cup.
    Salt.

Boil the vegetables separately until tender; then mix with the other
ingredients and put in a shallow baking-pan. Cover with the pie paste
and bake a light brown. Serve hot.


VERMICELLI NUT PIE

    Nuttolene, 1/2 pound.
    Vermicelli, 2 cups.
    Salt.
    Rich milk, 4 cups.
    Eggs, 2.

Cook the nuttolene ten minutes in two cups of rich milk, then rub
through a strainer. Flavor with celery salt. Cook the vermicelli
fifteen minutes, strain, and pour over it while in the strainer two
quarts of cold water. When it is well drained, line the bottom of a pie
dish with one-half of it. Pour over it the puree of nuttolene and cover
with the other half of the vermicelli. Make a custard of two eggs, two
cups of milk, and a teaspoonful of salt. Turn this custard over the
pie, and with a fork make an impression all over, to permit the custard
to run through. Sprinkle a few bread crumbs over it, and bake in a
quick oven thirty minutes. Serve with or without sauce.


NUT AND VEGETABLE PIE

    Minced onion, 1 cup.
    Minced parsley, 1/2 cup.

Brown and add

    Mashed carrots, 2 cups.
    Mashed potatoes, 2 cups.
    Nut food, 1 pound.
    Eggs, 2.

Salt to taste and put in oiled pan. Pour over this a mixture made by
beating one egg in one cup milk, and bake in a moderate oven till it is
nicely browned.


TOMATO PIE

    Tomatoes, 6.
    Chopped parsley.
    Salt.
    Cooking oil, 1/3 cup.
    Pie paste.

Peel and slice the tomatoes and place in a small baking-pan. On top of
this put some chopped parsley, a pinch of salt, and cooking oil. Cover
with thin pie paste and bake.


BOILED MACARONI (PLAIN)

Put two cups of macaroni, broken into inch lengths, into a saucepan,
cover with plenty of boiling water, salted, and boil till tender, or
about thirty minutes. Stir gently once or twice, to prevent sticking to
the bottom. Add enough cold water to stop boiling and let it come to a
boil again. Drain in a colander. Boiled macaroni may be served with a
gravy or fruit sauce.


MACARONI A L'ITALIENNE

    Macaroni, raw, 1 cup.
    Corn meal, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Grated onion, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Salt to taste.
    Milk or cream, 2 cups.
    Tomatoes, cooked and strained, 1 cup.

Break the macaroni into one-inch lengths; boil in salted water till
done; drain. While the macaroni is cooking, boil the milk and thicken
with the corn meal. When thoroughly cooked, add the tomatoes, onions,
and salt. Pour this dressing over the macaroni, and serve hot.


MACARONI AND KORNLET

    Macaroni, raw, 1 cup.
    Cream or rich milk, 3/4 cup.
    Kornlet, 3/4 cup.
    Salt to taste.

Break the macaroni in one-inch lengths and boil in salted water till
tender. Drain, add the kornlet, cream, and salt. Mix thoroughly, spread
in a baking-pan, and bake a light brown. There should be enough kornlet
and cream to cover the macaroni smoothly, and it should not be too
moist when done.


MACARONI WITH TOMATO SAUCE

    Macaroni, raw, 1 cup.
    Flour,1 tablespoonful.
    Cream, 1/2 cup.
    Tomatoes, stewed and strained, 2 cups.
    Salt to taste.

Break the macaroni into one-inch lengths and boil in salted water till
thoroughly done. Boil tomatoes and thicken with flour, rubbed smooth in
a little water. Add the cream, which should be hot, and salt to taste.
Drain the macaroni, pour the sauce over, mix well, and serve. The cream
may be omitted if preferred.


MACARONI CUTLETS

    Macaroni, raw, 1 cup.
    Flour, 2 heaping tablespoonfuls.
    Minced protose, 1 cup.
    Salt to taste.
    Milk, 1 cup.
    Egg, 1.
    Bread crumbs.

Boil the macaroni in salted water till done, drain, and chop fine.
Boil the milk and thicken with the flour; stir in the well-beaten egg;
beat thoroughly. Add the macaroni, protose, and salt, and make stiff
with the bread crumbs, so that it can be made into cutlets. Make into
any shape desired. Put into an oiled pan and bake till nicely browned.
Serve with tomato or cream sauce.


CREAMED MACARONI

    Rich milk, 2 cups.
    Flour, 2 large tablespoonfuls.
    Salt.
    Macaroni, 1 cup.
    Butter.

Boil the macaroni and put it into a gravy made of the milk, flour,
butter, and salt. Mix well, and serve.


MACARONI IN CREAM

    Macaroni, 2-1/2 cups.
    Milk, 4 cups.
    Egg yolk, 1.
    Cream, 1 cup.

Cook the macaroni in plenty of boiling water thirty minutes. Turn off
the water and wash the macaroni by pouring two or three quarts of cold
water over it. Return the macaroni to the saucepan and add the boiling
milk. Remove to a cool part of the stove and cook for thirty minutes.
Before serving, add the beaten yolk and the boiling cream. Shake the
pot to mix the egg with the macaroni. Stir as little as possible. Salt
to taste.


EGG MACARONI

    Macaroni, 1-1/2 cups.
    Eggs, hard-boiled, 3.
    Cream gravy, 2 cups.
    Bread crumbs.

Break macaroni into one-inch lengths and boil in salted water till
tender. Drain and wash with cold water. Put into a baking dish and
sprinkle over it the hard-boiled eggs chopped fine. Stir into cream
gravy, made from rich milk, sprinkle top with bread crumbs. Bake until
nicely browned.


BAKED MACARONI WITH EGG SAUCE

    Macaroni, 2 cups.
    Milk, 3 cups.
    Granola.
    Eggs, 4.
    Salt, 1 tablespoonful.

Break the macaroni into inch lengths and boil in salted water thirty
to thirty-five minutes. Drain, turn it into a deep pan. Pour over this
a custard made with the milk, beaten eggs, and salt. Sprinkle with
granola on top, and bake in a moderate oven thirty minutes.


MACARONI WITH APPLE

Butter a deep baking-dish and put in a layer of mashed and sweetened
apple sauce. Grate a little nutmeg over and add a layer of cooked
macaroni. Repeat till the dish is full, finishing with the apple sauce.
Bake till the apples are slightly browned. Serve with sweetened cream,
seasoned with nutmeg. May be served as a dessert.


MACARONI AND CHEESE (VEGETARIAN STYLE NO. 1)

    Macaroni, 2-1/2 cups.
    Egg sauce, 1 cup.
    Sour cream, 1/2 cup.
    Granola.

Break the macaroni into inch lengths and boil in salted water until
tender. Drain and mix in a little granola. Add the sour cream or thick
sour milk and about one cup of egg sauce. (See egg sauce recipe, page
156.) Season to taste and bake.


MACARONI AND CHEESE (VEGETARIAN STYLE NO. 2)

    Macaroni, 2-1/2 cups.
    Cottage cheese, 1-1/4 cups.
    Milk.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Bread crumbs.

Break the macaroni and cook in salted water until about half done.
Drain and pour over it enough milk to cover, and simmer until done. Add
the cottage cheese and butter and mix thoroughly. Pour into baking-pan,
sprinkle with bread crumbs, and bake.


MACARONI WITH GRANOLA

    Macaroni, raw, 2 cups.
    Granola, 1/2 cup.
    Salt to taste.
    Cream sauce, 2-1/2 cups.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.

Cook the macaroni till tender; drain, put one-half in a baking-pan,
sprinkle on one-half of the granola, and cover with one-half of the
gravy. Repeat with the remainder, making two layers. Bake until nicely
browned.


MACARONI CROQUETTES

    Macaroni, raw, 2 cups.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Egg yolks, 2.
    Milk, 1 cup.
    Flour, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Salt to taste.

Boil the macaroni in salted water until tender, drain, and chop fine.
Heat the milk; when boiling, add the butter and flour, that have been
rubbed together until smooth; stir until thick, remove from the range,
and stir in quickly the beaten yolks of the eggs. Mix this sauce with
the macaroni, season with salt, turn out into a flat pan, and let
cool. When cold, form into croquettes, egg, crumb, and bake.


MACARONI NEAPOLITAINE

    Vegetable stock, 3 cups.
    Diced protose, 1/2 pound.
    Macaroni, raw, 1 cup.
    Salt to taste.

Cook the macaroni, drain, and add the rest of the ingredients. Let
simmer thirty minutes. Serve.


MACARONI (SPANISH STYLE)

    Macaroni, 2 cups.
    Onion, 1.
    Cream sauce, 2 cups.
    Salt to taste.
    Eggs, 3.
    Parsley, chopped fine, 1 teaspoonful.
    Dash of nutmeg.

Cook the macaroni in salted water, drain, and chop fine; have the eggs
boiled hard and chopped fine, and the onions grated. Mix all together,
sprinkle with toasted bread crumbs, and brown in the oven. Serve with
tomato or Chili sauce.


MACARONI WITH TOMATO

    Stewed tomatoes, 2 cups.
    Butter, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Hard-boiled eggs, grated or rubbed through a colander, 1 cup.
    Salt.
    Vegetable stock, 2 cups.
    Macaroni, 2 cups.

Boil the macaroni till tender, drain, and add the stock and tomatoes
not strained (they should be put on a sieve and allowed to drain, as
the stock will afford sufficient liquid), but chopped, and there should
not be enough of them to allow the tomato taste to predominate. Now add
to this the hard-boiled eggs, grated or rubbed through a colander. Mix
all together, and add a little salt. Pour into a baking-pan about four
inches deep, and bake until the mixture is thick. A few lumps of butter
sprinkled over the top as it goes to the oven is an improvement.


SCALLOPED MACARONI WITH VEGETABLE OYSTERS

    Vegetable oysters, peeled and sliced, 2 cups.
    Macaroni, 1 cup.
    Rich milk, 2 cups.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt.
    Eggs, 2.
    Flour, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Bread crumbs.

Boil the macaroni and vegetable oysters separately, and drain. Then
place same in alternate layers in a pan. Pour over this a gravy made of
the milk, flour, eggs, butter, and salt. Stir carefully so as to get
the gravy mixed through thoroughly. Sprinkle a few bread crumbs on top
and bake in a quick oven till nicely browned.


SPAGHETTI IN TOMATO SAUCE

    Broken spaghetti, 2 cups.
    Flour, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Bay leaves, 2.
    Onion, minced, 1.
    Tomatoes, 4 cups.

Break the spaghetti into small pieces and boil until well done. Pour
over this tomato sauce, made as follows: Brown the minced onion in a
little oil, stir in the flour, and add tomatoes, bay leaves, and salt
to taste. Let boil, and strain.


PROTOSE HASH

    Protose, 1-1/2 cups.
    Cold boiled or baked potatoes, 2 cups.
    Oil.
    Chopped onions, large, 2.
    Salt.
    Sage.

Put all together in a pan, pour over a little cooking oil, and set
on the stove. When it begins to brown, stir up with a thin knife
occasionally until well browned.


VEGETARIAN HAMBURGER STEAK

    Protose, 1 pound.
    Sage, 1/2 teaspoonful.
    Eggs, 2.
    Nuttolene, 1/2 pound.
    Grated onion, 1 tablespoonful.
    Granose biscuits, powdered fine, 2.

Mix thoroughly, form into patties, and fry. Serve with tomato sauce.


VEGETARIAN HAMBURGER STEAK WITH MACARONI

Serve vegetarian hamburger steak with macaroni and a little brown sauce.


VEGETARIAN SAUSAGE

    Boiled rice, 3 cups.
    Grated onion, 6 teaspoonfuls.
    Protose, 1 pound.
    Salt, 1-1/2 teaspoonfuls.
    Oil, 3 tablespoonfuls.
    Sage, 6 teaspoonfuls.
    Egg, 1.

Form into patties, and roll in gluten or browned flour, and bake in a
frying-pan. If browned in the oven, put a small piece of butter on top
of each.


BAKED STUFFED TOMATOES

    Tomatoes, medium sized, 6.
    Chopped protose, 1/2 pound.
    Sage, 1/2 teaspoonful.
    Chopped parsley.
    Toasted bread crumbs, 8 to 12 tablespoonfuls.
    Chopped onion, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.

Take out the inside of the tomatoes and mix with this the bread crumbs.
Then add the other ingredients, and fill the tomatoes, piling mixture
up on top. Place small piece of butter on each, and bake in a hot oven,
until the tomatoes are cooked. When nearly done, sprinkle chopped
parsley over the top.




_VEGETABLES_


VEGETABLES

The term "vegetable," as here used, is applied to such plants (grains,
nuts, and fruits excepted) as are cultivated and used for food. The use
of a large variety of vegetables in our food assists in promoting good
health. To get the best results, they should be judiciously combined
with nuts, fruits, and grains. Green vegetables are rich in potash
salts and other minerals necessary to the system, and in such a form as
to be easily assimilated.

Starchy vegetables, as potatoes, supply energy and heat, and give
necessary bulk to the food. Peas, beans, and lentils contain a large
amount of proteid, used in building and repairing tissue, and are
therefore used in place of meat. For weak stomachs they are more easily
digested in the form of purees and soups, with the outer indigestible
covering removed. All vegetables should be fresh; for in spite of
all that may be said to the contrary, all vegetables, whether roots,
leaves, or any other kind, begin to lose bulk and flavor as soon, as
removed from the ground. The kind that suffer least in this respect are
beets, potatoes, carrots, etc. Those which are most easily affected are
cabbage, lettuce, celery, asparagus, etc.

Vegetables that have been touched with the frost should be kept in
a perfectly dark place for some days. The frost is then drawn out
slowly, and the vegetables are not so liable to rot.


GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR VEGETABLES

Fresh green vegetables should be cooked as soon after being gathered as
possible. Those containing sugar, as corn and peas, lose some of their
sweetness by standing. Wash thoroughly in cold water, but unless wilted
do not soak. It is better not to prepare fresh green vegetables until
they are needed; but if they must be prepared some time before cooking,
cover with cold water.

Most vegetables should be put into fresh, rapidly-boiling water, and if
cooked in uncovered vessels, they will retain a better color, as high
heat destroys their color. In no instance permit them to steep in the
warm water, as this toughens them, and in some instances destroys both
color and flavor.

The salt hardens the water, and also sets the color in the vegetable.
For peas and beans do not add salt to the water until they are nearly
done, as they do not boil tender so readily in hard water.

Corn should not be boiled in salt water, as the salt hardens the outer
covering of skin and makes it tough. Cook the vegetables rapidly till
perfectly tender, but no longer. If vegetables are cooked too long,
flavor, color, and appearance are all impaired. To judge when done,
watch carefully, and test by piercing with a fork. The time required
to cook a vegetable varies with its age and freshness; therefore, the
time tables given for cooking serve only as approximate guides.

Delicate vegetables, as green peas, shelled beans, celery, etc., should
be cooked in as little water as possible, toward the last the water
being allowed to boil away till there is just enough left to moisten.
In this manner all the desirable soluble matter that may have been
drawn out in cooking is saved.

Strongly flavored vegetables, as cabbage, onions, etc., should be
cooked in a generous quantity of water, and the water in which onions
are cooked may be changed one or more times.

The general rule for seasoning vegetables is as follows:--

To two cups small whole vegetables, or two cups of vegetables
mashed or sliced, add a rounding teaspoonful of butter, and half a
level teaspoonful of salt. To beans, peas, and squash, add one-half
teaspoonful of sugar to improve them. Add milk or the vegetable liquid
when additional moisture is required.


POTATOES

Pre-eminent among vegetables stands the potato.

The solid matter of potatoes consists largely of starch, with a small
quantity of albumen and mineral salts. Potatoes also contain an acid
juice, the greater portion of which lies near the skin. This bitter
principle is set free by heat. While potatoes are being boiled, it
passes into the water; in baking it escapes with the steam.

New potatoes may be compared to unripe fruit, as the starch grains are
not fully matured. Potatoes are at their best in the fall, and they
keep well during the winter. In the spring, when germination commences,
the starch changes to dextrin or gum, rendering the potato more waxy
when cooked, and the sugar then formed makes them sweeter. When the
potatoes are frozen, the same change takes place.

In the spring, when potatoes are shriveled and gummy, soaking improves
them, as the water thus absorbed dissolves the gum, and makes them less
sticky. At other times, long soaking is undesirable.

Soak about half an hour in the fall, one to three hours in winter and
spring. Never serve potatoes, whether boiled or baked, in a closely
covered dish, as they thus become sodden and clammy; but cover with a
folded napkin, and allow the moisture to escape. They require about
forty-five minutes to one hour to bake, if of a good size, and should
be served promptly when done.


BAKED POTATOES

Potatoes are either baked in their jackets or peeled; in either case
they should not be exposed to a fierce heat, inasmuch as thereby a
great deal of the vegetable is scorched and rendered uneatable. They
should be frequently turned while being baked, and kept from touching
one another in the oven or dish. When they are pared, they should be
baked in a dish, and oil of some kind added, to prevent their outsides
from becoming burned.


MASHED POTATOES

Pare and boil or steam six or eight large potatoes. If boiled, drain
when tender, and let set in the kettle for a few minutes, keeping them
covered, shaking the kettle occasionally to prevent scorching. Mash
with a wire potato masher, or, if convenient, press through a colander;
add salt, a lump of butter, and sufficient hot milk to moisten
thoroughly. Whip with the batter whip, or wooden spoon, until light and
fluffy. Heap up on a plate, press a lump of butter into the top, and
send to the table hot.


POTATO PUFFS

    Potatoes, prepared as for mashed potatoes, 2 cups.
    Cream or milk, 3/4 cup.
    Melted butter, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Eggs, yolks and whites beaten separately, 2.
    Salt.

Mix and beat up thoroughly, folding in the beaten whites last. Make
into balls, put into greased pans, brush with beaten egg, and bake a
light brown.


MINCED POTATOES

Mince six large, cold potatoes. Put them in a baking-pan, cover with
milk; add a little cream, and bake fifteen minutes.


SCALLOPED POTATOES NO. 1

    Potatoes, medium size, 6.
    Milk sufficient to cover, mixed with tablespoonful of flour.
    Crumbs.
    Butter.
    Salt.

Cut potatoes into even slices, put in a baking-pan, sprinkle with a
little salt, and a few small pieces of butter. Pour over the milk and
flour mixture, and sprinkle the top with a layer of crumbs. Cover and
bake till potatoes are tender. Remove the cover and brown lightly.


SCALLOPED POTATOES NO. 2

    Cold, boiled potatoes, sliced.
    Thin cream sauce.

Place in alternate layers in a pan and sprinkle the top with ground
bread crumbs. Bake until brown.


HASHED BROWNED POTATOES

Use cold, boiled potatoes or good left-over baked potatoes. Pare and
cut into three-quarter-inch dice or irregular pieces. Put in a shallow
baking-pan, sprinkle with salt, pour over sufficient cooking oil,
season well, and prevent scorching. Put into the oven, and when they
begin to brown, stir continually till all are nicely browned.


NEW POTATOES AND CREAM

    New potatoes.
    Cream.
    Salt.
    Butter.
    Parsley.

Wash and rub new potatoes with a coarse cloth or scrubbing brush; drop
into boiling water and boil briskly till done, but no more. Press the
potato against the side of the kettle with a fork; if done, it will
yield to gentle pressure. In a saucepan have ready some butter and
cream, hot but not boiling, a little green parsley, and salt. Drain
the potatoes, add the mixture, put over hot water a minute or two, and
serve.


POTATOES A LA CREME

    Cold, boiled potatoes, 2 cups.
    Parsley, finely chopped.
    Flour.
    Milk.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt.

Heat the milk and stir in the butter cut up in the flour. Stir until
smooth and thick. Salt and add the potatoes, sliced, and a very little
finely-chopped parsley. Shake over the fire until the potatoes are
heated through. Pour into a deep dish and serve.


POTATOES A LA DELMONICO

Cut the potatoes with a vegetable cutter into small balls about
the size of marbles. Put them into stew-pan with plenty of butter
and a good sprinkling of salt. Keep the saucepan covered and shake
occasionally until they are quite done, which will be in about an hour.


POTATO CROQUETTES (DELMONICO'S)

    Cold, mashed potatoes, 2 cups.
    Flour or cracker crumbs.
    Salt.
    Eggs, 2.
    Butter.
    Cooking oil.

Season the potatoes with salt and butter. Beat the whites of the eggs
and work all together thoroughly. Make into small balls slightly
flattened. Dip them into beaten yolks of eggs, roll in flour or cracker
crumbs, and fry in hot oil.


STEWED SALSIFY OR VEGETABLE OYSTERS

    Salsify, cut in 1/4-inch slices, 1 quart.
    Milk, 2 cups.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt to taste.

Wash and scrape the salsify, slice, and put into cold water to prevent
discoloring. Cook in sufficient boiling water to cover. When tender,
drain, add the milk and butter, let simmer a few minutes, and serve.


ESCALLOPED VEGETABLE OYSTER

    Sliced vegetable oyster, 3 cups.
    Rich cream sauce.
    Sifted bread crumbs.
    Salt.

Wash, scrape, cut in thin slices, and put into plenty of cold water
till ready to use, to prevent discoloration. When ready to cook, boil
in enough water to prevent scorching. Salt when they begin to get
tender. Boil a few minutes longer, but do not let them get too salty.
Drain, or remove with a skimmer, putting a layer in a baking-pan, then
a little rich cream sauce, then another layer of each. Sprinkle the top
with sifted bread crumbs, and bake a light brown.


MOCK OYSTERS

    Corn, young and tender, 6 ears.
    Flour, 3 tablespoonfuls.
    Butter, 3 tablespoonfuls.
    Eggs, 3.
    Oil.
    Salt, 3 teaspoonfuls.

Grate the corn with a coarse grater into a deep dish; beat the whites
and yolks separately, and add the corn, flour, butter, and salt. Drop
spoonfuls of this batter into a frying-pan with hot oil, and fry a
light brown on both sides. The corn must be young.


CELERY

Cut off all the roots and remove all the decayed and outside leaves.
Wash thoroughly, being careful to remove all specks and blemishes. If
the stalks are large, divide them lengthwise into two or three pieces
and place root downward in a celery glass, which should be nearly
filled with cold water.


STEWED CELERY

    Celery hearts, 6.
    White sauce, 2 cups.

Cut the celery into half-inch lengths and cook in boiling, salted
water. When tender, drain and pour over this the sauce. Heat well, and
serve. The liquid drained from the celery may be thickened, seasoned
with a little butter, and used instead of the white sauce if preferred.


LENTILS (ORIENTAL STYLE)

    Lentils, 1 cup.
    Olive oil, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Salt, 1 level teaspoonful.
    Boiled rice, 1 cup.
    Onion, finely shredded, 1.

Wash the lentils well, soak overnight, and drain. Cook in boiling water
till tender; drain again. Put the olive oil in a saucepan, add the
onion, and cook till the onion is soft, not brown. Add the lentils and
boiled rice, mix, stir over the fire till hot, add the salt, and serve
hot.


LENTILS WITH ONIONS

    Lentils, 1 cup.
    Onions, 2.
    Butter.

Wash the lentils, put to cook in saucepan with plenty of cold water,
and boil till tender; when soft, turn them into a fine colander, and
drain thoroughly, saving the water they were cooked in. Peel the
onions, cut into thin slices, put in a flat stew-pan with a lump of
butter, or a little olive oil, and fry. Put the lentils in the onions
and add salt to taste. Moisten with a little of the broth drained from
the lentils and allow them to simmer at the side of the fire. Serve.


CREAMED CHESTNUTS

Boil or steam the chestnuts till tender. Make a cream sauce of milk or
cream, seasoned with butter, and slightly thickened with flour. Pour
this over the chestnuts; serve as a vegetable.


ASPARAGUS NO. 1

Asparagus, like potatoes, contains a bitter alkaloid, which is drawn
into the water in cooking, and often imparts to it a very unpleasant
flavor. This may be remedied by blanching the asparagus in boiling
water for four or five minutes. Then drain, and add more hot water, and
finish cooking.


ASPARAGUS NO. 2

Scrape the stalk ends of the asparagus or break off the tough lower
stalks as far as they will snap. Wash well, tie in bundles, and put
into enough rapidly-boiling salted water to cover. Allow a teaspoonful
of salt to each quart of water; cook uncovered from twenty to thirty
minutes, or till perfectly tender. Drain, remove the string, spread
with salt and butter, and serve immediately on toast. The asparagus may
be neatly arranged on hot toast and covered with white cream sauce, if
preferred.


ASPARAGUS POMPADOUR

Wash the asparagus carefully, place in a saucepan of boiling salted
water, and boil till done. Take them out and cut into lengths of about
two inches, and place on a cloth near the fire to dry. Prepare a little
sauce made of lemon juice, butter, yolk of an egg, and salt. Place the
asparagus on a dish, over which pour the sauce, and serve.


PEAS

The flavor of peas and the time required for cooking depend largely
upon their freshness. Very young peas will cook tender in twenty
minutes, older peas sometimes requiring an hour or more. A teaspoonful
of finely minced parsley cooked with peas imparts to them a very
delicious flavor.


STEWED ASPARAGUS

Break the tender parts of the asparagus into one-inch lengths and put
into enough boiling water to cover. Boil till tender; add sufficient
rich milk or cream to make a gravy. Thicken with flour, season with
salt, let come to a boil, and serve.


ASPARAGUS WITH EGGS

    Asparagus.
    Cream, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Salt.
    Eggs, 4.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.

Cut the tender tops from a bunch of asparagus, and boil about twenty
minutes. Then put into a baking-tin with butter and salt. Beat the
whites and yolks of the eggs separately, add the cream and pour this
over the asparagus. Bake until the eggs are set.


ASPARAGUS WITH GREEN PEAS

    Asparagus, 2 cups.
    Peas, 2 cups.
    Salt.
    Rich milk or cream.
    Flour.

Break the tender parts of the asparagus into one-inch lengths and put
with the peas into boiling water enough to cover. Boil till tender;
add sufficient rich milk or cream to make a gravy. Thicken with flour,
season with salt, let come to a boil, and serve.


BAKED BEANS

Wash one and three-fourths cups of navy beans and put them into an
earthen jar, covering immediately with one and three-fourths quarts
of boiling water. Add salt, cover, and put into the oven. When they
boil well, draw the jar to the edge of the oven, where they will just
simmer. Cook for twenty-four hours. If they get too dry, add a little
boiling water. The beans will be nicely colored and have a rich flavor.


BAKED BEANS

    Small white beans, 2 cups.
    Protose, if desired.
    Molasses, 1 teaspoonful.
    Salt.

Clean the beans, soak in cold water one hour, season with salt and
molasses. Put into a covered jar with plenty of water; bake overnight
in a slow oven. When done, the beans should be whole, dry, and mealy,
and of a rich brown color. This can only be obtained by baking the
beans several hours in a slow oven. If desired, a little chopped
protose may be added. Serve the beans plain, or with brown bread.


PUREE OF BEANS

Follow the directions given for puree of peas.


BEANS STEWED

Wash the required quantity of navy, lima, kidney, or other beans, and
put to cook in plenty of boiling water; boil till they are swollen,
then put them where they will stew till cooked; season just before they
finish cooking. Never parboil beans.


BAKED BEANS WITH TOMATO SAUCE

Prepare the beans as for plain baked beans; put into the jars to bake;
cover with a mixture of strained stewed tomatoes and water in equal
proportions; a little butter or olive oil may be added.


SUCCOTASH

    Fresh shelled lima beans, 2 cups.
    Sweet corn, 2 ears.
    Cream, 1/2 cup.
    Butter, size of an egg.
    Salt.

Put beans in pot with cold water, rather more than will cover them.
Scrape the kernels from twelve ears of young sweet corn. Put the cobs
in with the peas, boiling from thirty to forty-five minutes. Take out
the cobs and put in the scraped corn. Boil again for fifteen minutes;
then season with salt, butter and cream. Serve hot.


ONIONS

Contrary to the opinion of many, the onion is not objectionable as an
article of food. Judiciously used it fills as important a place in
cooking as salt or any other seasoning.


BAKED ONIONS

    Onions, large, 6.
    Salt.
    Crumbs.
    Milk.
    Butter.

Put onions into a saucepan of water, or water and milk mixed in equal
proportions; add salt and boil till tender. When done so that they can
be easily mashed, work them up with a little butter into a paste. Cover
with bread crumbs and bake in a moderate oven.


STUFFED ONIONS

Peel the desired number of onions, being careful not to cut off the
root end. Take out the inside of the onion and fill the hole with a
mixture of bread crumbs, beaten egg, and a little milk. Season with
salt and sage. Bake in oven until brown.


SCRAMBLED TOMATOES

    Tomatoes, 6.
    Eggs, 3.
    Butter.
    Salt.

Remove the skins from six tomatoes and cut them up in a saucepan. Add
a little butter and salt. When sufficiently boiled beat up eggs, and
just before you serve turn them into the saucepan with the tomatoes,
and stir one way for two minutes, allowing them time to get thoroughly
done.


SPINACH

Trim the spinach and wash in three or four waters to remove the grit.
Cook in boiling water about twenty minutes, removing the scum. Do not
cover the vessel while cooking. When tender, turn into a colander,
drain, and press well. Chop fine, put into a saucepan with butter and
salt. Set on the fire and cook till quite dry, stirring it all the
time. Turn into a vegetable dish, shape, and garnish with slices of
hard-boiled eggs.


SUMMER SQUASH

Wash and cut in pieces. Cook in the steamer, that it may be as dry as
possible. When done, let it stand and drain a few minutes, shaking it
occasionally. Mash and season with salt, butter, and a little cream.


WINTER SQUASH (HUBBARD)

_Mashed_:

Cut the squash, pare, remove seeds, wash, and put into the steamer.
Cook until soft, remove and mash or press through a colander. Season
with salt, butter, sugar, and a little sweet cream. Beat well, and
serve.

_Baked_:

Cut into pieces of desired size, remove seeds, sprinkle with a little
sugar and salt; bake until done. Serve in the shell, or it may be
peeled before baking.


PUREE OF PEAS

    Peas, fresh, 2 cups (or dry, 1 cup).
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Cream or milk, 1-1/2 cups.
    Flour, 1 level tablespoonful.
    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.

Put the peas to cook in boiling water; boil until tender, then simmer
slowly, cooking as dry as possible without scorching. When soft and
dry, rub through a colander to remove the hulls. Put the butter in a
saucepan; when melted stir in the flour, being careful not to scorch;
pour in the milk gradually, stirring all the time; and when thoroughly
cooked, add the salt and the pulp of the peas. Turn all into a double
boiler, heat thoroughly, and serve.


GREEN CORN (STEWED)

    Green corn, 3 cups.
    Butter.
    Salt.
    Milk, more or less, 1 cup.
    Sugar.

Husk and clean as for boiling corn; with a sharp knife cut off the top
of the grain, being careful not to cut too close to the cob and with
the back of the knife press out the remaining pulp. When cut in this
way, the corn is much more juicy than when the grains are cut close to
the cob. Place the milk in a granite saucepan, and when boiling, add
the butter and corn; cook from ten to fifteen minutes, or until it
loses its raw taste. Stir frequently, and season to taste with salt and
sugar.


GREEN CORN (BOILED)

Strip off the husk, remove the silk, put into fresh boiling water, and
cook ten to twenty minutes. Cook only till done, for if boiled too
long, the corn hardens, and its flavor is impaired. If the corn is not
very sweet, add one-fourth cup of sugar to the water in which it is
boiled.


GREEN PEAS (VERY YOUNG AND TENDER)

Shell the peas and cover with cold water; skim off undeveloped peas
which rise to the top of the water and drain. Barely cover with boiling
water; cook till tender, then add salt. When done, very little water
should remain. Season to taste with butter and add more salt if needed.
A little sugar is sometimes an improvement.

When the peas are older, half a cup of milk or cream, with sufficient
flour to thicken, is considered an improvement.


PLAIN BOILED STRING BEANS

Break off the ends of beans and string; wash thoroughly; if large cut
them in two; drop into boiling water and boil till tender. Salt and
season with olive oil or butter; if preferred, drain off the juice,
salt to taste, and add some hot, rich milk.


CAULIFLOWER WITH CREAM SAUCE

Divide the cauliflower into portions of convenient size before cooking.
Boil slowly, or steam till tender, drain, and when dished up, pour one
or two tablespoonfuls of strained white sauce over each portion.


BAKED CAULIFLOWER

    Cauliflower.
    Milk, 1 cup.
    Flour, 1 rounded teaspoonful.
    Butter, 1 rounded teaspoonful.
    Salt.

Soak a medium head of cauliflower in cold water with head down for
thirty minutes; steam or boil gently till tender; separate into small
sprays and pour over them a sauce made of the milk thickened with flour
and butter beaten together. Add a little salt. Cover lightly with bread
crumbs, which have been moistened with melted butter, and bake until a
nice brown. Serve at once.


CAULIFLOWER WITH TOMATO SAUCE

Prepare as for stewed cauliflower, and when done serve with tomato
sauce.

Sauce:

Strain a pint of stewed tomatoes, let come to a boil, and thicken with
a tablespoonful of flour rubbed smooth in a little water; add a little
olive oil or hot cream; salt to taste. Pour this over the cauliflower,
and serve.


STEWED CAULIFLOWER

Prepare as for plain boiled cauliflower; cook or steam till tender;
drain and put in a stew-pan; pour over some rich milk or cream; stew
together for a few minutes, and serve.


BOILED CAULIFLOWER (PLAIN)

Pick off the outside leaves, cut the stalk one inch from the head,
split, wash thoroughly in cold water. Put in salted water for one or
two hours before cooking. Cook in salted, boiling water (milk added to
the water will keep it white). Boil till tender; remove from the fire;
let stand in same water till ready to serve. Drain, serve with cream,
butter, or egg sauce poured over.


BROWNED CAULIFLOWER

Prepare as for plain boiled cauliflower; boil until tender; place in a
baking-dish and sprinkle with fine bread crumbs; pour over some thin
cream sauce, and brown in the oven. Serve with egg or butter sauce.


CABBAGE AND CREAM

    Cabbage, 1 head.
    Grated nutmeg.
    Cream, 1-1/2 cups.
    Butter, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Flour, 1 teaspoonful.
    Salt.

Take a well-blanched cabbage, drain, cool, and chop fine; place it in a
stew-pan with butter, a little salt, and grated nutmeg; add the flour,
stirring well, and then pour in the cream. Stir till the cabbage and
cream are thoroughly mixed. Cook about thirty or forty minutes, and
serve hot.


BAKED CABBAGE NO. 1

Wash and chop rather fine the required quantity of cabbage. Put into
a stew-pan with boiling water; add a little salt and blanch twenty
minutes. Drain, put in a baking-pan, and cover with cream or milk to
which has been added the beaten yolk of one egg to each cup of cream.
Bake until the custard is nicely set.


BAKED CABBAGE NO. 2

    Cabbage, cold, boiled.
    Browned crumbs.
    Butter.
    Salt.
    Egg, well beaten, 1.
    Brown sauce.
    Nutmeg.

Rub sufficient cold, boiled cabbage through a sieve or colander. Mix
with it a piece of butter, salt, nutmeg, and the well-beaten egg. Stir
thoroughly; butter a pudding dish of suitable size, line with browned
crumbs, press in the cabbage, and bake in a moderate oven. Turn out on
a hot dish, pour brown sauce around the base, and serve.


CABBAGE STEWED WITH TOMATO

Slice and wash a good sound cabbage and put into a stew-pan with enough
chopped tomato to give it a decidedly tart taste. Add enough salt to
season. Add sufficient water to cook and stew slowly till tender.
Strained tomatoes may be used if desired.


SCALLOPED CABBAGE

Wash and chop the cabbage in rather fine pieces. Put a layer of the
cabbage into a baking-pan and sprinkle with a little salt. Cover this
with finely-broken, fresh bread crumbs, repeat and pour over sufficient
milk or cream to thoroughly moisten and cover the crumbs. Cover and
bake in a moderate oven till the cabbage is thoroughly cooked. More
milk may be added if necessary.


HOLLAND CREAM CABBAGE

    Cabbage.
    Eggs, 2.
    Water, 2 cups.
    Lemon juice, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Salt.
    Butter.

Cut the cabbage fine, sprinkle with salt, and let stand a few minutes
before using. Beat the eggs well, add lemon juice, water, and melted
butter. Mix this with the cabbage and cook till tender in a vessel that
does not easily burn.


HOT SLAW

Clean a nice young head of cabbage, quarter, cut out the heart, and
shred fine. Put in cold, salted water for half an hour; drain, boil
till tender; drain partly, leaving enough juice to make the cabbage
moist; add lemon juice and a little butter or olive oil; season with
salt; serve hot.


LADIES' CABBAGE

    Firm, white cabbage, 1.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt.
    Eggs, 2.
    Cream, rich, 1 tablespoonful.

Boil a firm, white cabbage fifteen minutes, changing the water; add
more from the boiling teakettle; when tender, drain, and set aside till
perfectly cold; chop fine and add the beaten eggs, butter, salt, and
cream; stir all well together and bake in a buttered dish till brown.


BRUSSELS SPROUTS PLAIN

Select nice, fresh sprouts, cut off the stem end and outside leaves,
and wash in cold water. Cook in salted water till tender. Pour off the
water; serve with butter or cream sauce.


BRUSSELS SPROUTS SAUTE

Prepare as for plain boiled; when done, drain and press dry; put in a
stew-pan, season with salt, and moisten with oil and rich milk. Toss
frequently and cook till well heated through. Serve hot with mashed
potato.


BRUSSELS SPROUTS BAKED WITH CRUMBS

Prepare as for plain boiled; when done, drain, and press dry; arrange
in a baking-dish and sprinkle with bread crumbs; pour over a thin cream
or egg sauce. Bake in the oven till nicely browned.


BEETS

Select young red beets; cut off the tops half an inch from the root.
If cut too close, the roots will bleed and the color will be impaired.
Wash and clean carefully with the brush to remove all particles of
dirt. They may be boiled or steamed. If boiled, use as little water as
possible. Young beets will cook in an hour; old beets require three or
four hours, according to age and size. When done, put in cold water,
rub off the skins, and they are ready for use.


BEET GREENS

Wash young, tender beet tops, cleaning thoroughly; drain and boil in
salted water till tender; drain, chop fine, season with butter or oil,
and serve with lemon juice or cream.


BEET STALKS WITH BUTTER SAUCE

Take some beet stalks, cut off the leaves, wash thoroughly, tie in
bunches, and let steep in cold water two or three hours to make them
fresh and crisp. Boil in salted water until tender; cut the band; serve
as asparagus on a platter with butter sauce.


BEETS AND POTATOES

Boil young beets and new potatoes separately until tender; peel and
slice in alternate layers in a baking dish; season with salt and
moisten with rich milk. Bake until nicely browned.


BAKED BEETS

Select young, smooth, red beets of uniform size; wash and clean
thoroughly; bake in a slow oven from two to six hours; when done,
remove the skins and dress with lemon juice or cream sauce.


BOILED BEETS

Cut off the tops half an inch from the roots; wash and clean carefully
to remove all dirt. Boil in as little water as possible. When done,
pour a little cold water over them, rub off the skins, and slice into a
granite or earthen dish; pour over them equal parts of lemon juice and
water. Let stand one or two hours before serving.


YOUNG BEETS

    Cream or milk, 1 cup.
    Flour, 1 tablespoonful.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Beets.

Cook the beets till tender in salted water, then cut into dice. Serve
with cream sauce, made by thickening the milk or cream with the flour
rubbed in the butter. Heat well, and serve at once.


BEET AND POTATO HASH

    Cold, boiled beets, 2 cups.
    Cold, boiled potatoes, 2 cups.
    Salt.
    Butter.
    Cream.

Chop beets and potatoes fine and season with salt and butter. Pour
over a little cream. Put on the stove in a covered saucepan, and stir
occasionally. When thoroughly heated through, serve.


BAKED PARSNIPS

Scrape and cut in half lengthwise; boil till tender; put in a shallow
baking-pan; put a few pieces of chopped butter or a little cooking oil
on top; sprinkle lightly with sugar; pour over sufficient cream to
about half cover. Salt to taste and bake a rich brown.


PARSNIPS IN EGG SAUCE

Clean and cut into small dice and boil in a little salted water until
tender, drain and pour over sufficient egg sauce to cover.


STEWED PARSNIPS

After washing the parsnips, slice them about half an inch thick; put
them in a saucepan containing enough boiling water to barely cook
them; add a tablespoonful of butter, season with salt, then cover
closely and stew them until the water has cooked away, stirring often
to prevent burning, until they are soft. When they are done, they will
be of a creamy, light straw color, and deliciously sweet, retaining all
the nutrition of the vegetable.


YOUNG TURNIPS

Cut into half-inch dice and boil till tender; drain and add a small
lump of butter and a little salt; heat well and add a dash of lemon
juice at the last.


MASHED TURNIPS

Turnips may be cooked and mashed the same as potatoes, keeping them
as dry as possible. The addition of a little sugar is considered an
improvement by some.


HOLLAND BOILED TURNIP

    Turnips, cut in 3/4-inch dice, 1 quart.
    Egg, 1.
    Butter, 1/2 cup.
    Lemon, large, 1.

Boil the turnips till tender in just enough salted water to prevent
burning; drain and set in a covered dish on the side of the range,
where they will keep hot but not burn. Melt the butter, add the beaten
yolk with the eggs, juice of the lemon, and a little salt. Serve a
spoonful of this sauce over each order of turnip.


FRENCH CARROTS

Scrape enough small round carrots to make three cups; boil in salted
water till tender; drain, and cover with a rich parsley sauce.


CARROTS A LA CREME

Clean carrots, cut in slices about half an inch thick, and parboil in
salted water. Drain, pour over some hot rich milk, and let simmer till
done. Add a little butter; season with salt.


CARROTS WITH EGG SAUCE

Clean carrots, cut in slices about half an inch thick, and boil until
tender; drain, pour egg sauce over, and serve.


PUREE OF CARROTS

Clean young carrots, cut into slices, and boil in salted water until
tender. Drain, mash through a colander, and season with a little salt
and cream. Serve as mashed potatoes, or with broiled or braized protose
as an entree.


TO DRESS CUCUMBERS

Pare and lay in cold water--ice water if possible--for an hour. Slice
very thin. Sprinkle a very little fine salt over each piece. Let stand
for an hour. Shake the dish briskly, drain closely, sprinkle with lemon
juice, and serve.




_SAUCES_

_For Vegetables, Entrees, Puddings, Etc._


VEGETABLE SOUP STOCK NO. 1

    Cooking oil, 1/2 cup.
    Butter, 1/4 cup.

Put into a saucepan and add

    Carrot, medium, 1.
    Turnip, 1.
    Celery stalks, with root, 2.
    Parsley sprigs, 2 or 3.
    Onions, large, 2.
    Bay leaves, 2.

All to be chopped fine; place on range and cook slowly, stirring
occasionally to prevent burning, until vegetables are nicely browned,
then add

    Flour, 1/2 cup.

Stir and mix thoroughly, until a rich brown, being careful not to burn.
Now add

    Strained tomato, 1 cup.
    Boiling water to required consistency.

Strain through a fine sieve, and the stock is ready for use.


VEGETABLE STOCK NO. 2

Boil some turnips, carrots, celery, and onions in enough water to make
half the amount of stock required. When the vegetables are done, drain
and add an equal amount of rich bean broth with a little brown flour,
nut butter, celery salt, and just enough strained tomato to remove the
sweet vegetable taste. This should be of the consistency of broth when
done. Use with roast braized protose, etc. Protose may be cooked with
the vegetables if it can be afforded. The vegetables should be put to
cook in cold water that the substance and flavor may be well drawn out.


OLIVE SAUCE

Take one-fourth cup of ripe olives, and after extracting the stones,
chop fine. Put on the stove and stew for two or three hours in water
enough to cover well. Brown together a little olive oil and flour, the
same as for gravy. Strain through a colander and add the stewed olives.
Season with salt.


BROWN REGENCY SAUCE

(For Vegetables and Roasts)

    Nut butter, 1 cup.
    Sage, 1 tablespoonful.
    Browned flour, 3 heaping tablespoonfuls.
    Salt.
    Minced onion, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Water, 1-1/2 quarts.

Mix all together, salt lightly, put in an enameled baking-pan, cover,
and bake till of the desired consistency.


HOLLANDAISE SAUCE

    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Olive oil, 1 tablespoonful.
    Flour, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt.
    Lemon juice, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Eggs, 2.
    Nutmeg.

Rub the butter, flour, nutmeg, and salt together until smooth, and add
slowly one and one-half cups hot water, stirring constantly. Boil,
remove from the fire, and add the lemon juice, olive oil, and the
yolks of the eggs, one at a time. Beat slowly and thoroughly together.
Strain, and serve.


SAUCE IMPERIAL

    Stewed tomatoes, 1 quart.
    Bay leaves, 2.
    Onion, medium, 1.
    Lemon, 1/4.
    Chopped parsley, 1 tablespoonful.
    Thyme, 1 teaspoonful.
    Cooking oil, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Flour, 2 tablespoonfuls.

Put the oil, parsley, bay leaves, thyme, and onions into a stew-pan,
set on the range and cook until the onion is a golden brown, being
careful not to burn; then add the flour, let cook a few minutes,
add the lemon and tomato, and let stew half an hour. Strain, salt,
and serve. The chopped parsley may be added just before serving, if
desired.


MINT SAUCE

    Mint, 1/4 cup.
    Sugar, 1/3 cup.
    Lemon juice, 1/2 cup.

Mix all together, set on the side of the range where the sugar will
melt, and the sauce be hot, but it must not get too hot. Serve with
protose or meat substitutes.


WHITE CREAM SAUCE FOR VEGETABLES

    Butter, 2 rounding tablespoonfuls.
    Flour, 2 rounding tablespoonfuls.
    Milk, 2 cups.
    Salt, 1/2 teaspoonful.

Melt the butter in a saucepan, add the flour, and cook until well
blended, but not browned; add the milk gradually, and stir until
boiling well; then add the salt.

Half milk and half broth of the vegetables may be used if desired,
unless the broth has a bitter or otherwise objectionable taste, as is
sometimes the case with asparagus.


GERMAN SAUCE

    Egg yolks, 12.
    Fruit juice, bright colored, 1 cup.
    Sugar, 1/2 cup.
    Juice of 1/2 lemon.

Beat the yolks of the eggs about two minutes; put the sugar into a
saucepan with the fruit juice (preferably cherry or strawberry); stir
it over the fire till hot, then remove it to the side, as it must
not be permitted to boil. Stir in the beaten yolks and add the lemon
juice. Whisk the sauce at the side of the fire until well frothed and
thickened.


TOMATO SAUCE

    Tomatoes, stewed, 1 quart.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt.
    Minced onion, 1 tablespoonful.
    Flour, 1 tablespoonful.

Put the tomatoes into a saucepan over the fire; add the onion and
salt; boil about twenty minutes; remove from range and strain through
a sieve. In another pan melt the butter, and as it melts sprinkle in
the flour; stir till it browns and froths a little. Mix the tomato pulp
with it, and it is ready for use.


IDEAL CHILI SAUCE

    Stewed tomatoes, 1 quart.
    Celery salt, 1 teaspoonful.
    Sugar, 1 tablespoonful.
    Sliced onion, large, 1.
    Salt, 1-1/2 teaspoonfuls.

Mix all together and let simmer two or three hours. Strain through a
sieve. Serve with croquettes, broiled protose, or nuttolene.


NUT GRAVY NO. 1

    Nut butter, 4 tablespoonfuls.
    Strained tomatoes, 1 cup.
    Hot water, 2 cups.

Thoroughly mix the butter with the water and tomato. Let it boil, and
salt to taste. If too thin, thicken with a little flour rubbed smooth
in a little water.


NUT GRAVY NO. 2

    Water, 1 quart.
    Strained tomatoes, 1-1/2 cups.
    Salt to taste.
    Nut butter, 1 heaped tablespoonful.
    Flour.

Emulsify the butter in the tomato, add to the water, and put in a
saucepan over the fire, being careful not to scorch. When it boils,
thicken with a little flour rubbed smooth in water, using plenty of
salt to season, as it brings out the nice flavor of the sauce.


CREAM TOMATO SAUCE

Make a tomato sauce and add one-fourth part rich cream, beating well.


TOMATO CREAM SAUCE

Make a rich cream sauce and add one-fourth part of strained tomatoes,
or an equal amount of tomato sauce. Beat up well.


BROWN SAUCE FOR VEGETABLES AND ROASTS

    Water, 2 cups.
    Minced onion, small, 1.
    Browned flour, 2 rounded tablespoonfuls.
    Strained tomato enough to mix the flour smooth.
    Salt.
    Minced protose, 1/4 cup.
    Butter, 1 rounded tablespoonful.
    White flour, 1 tablespoonful.
    Celery salt.

Put the water, butter, and onion in a saucepan and set on the stove;
when it begins to boil, add the protose and let simmer ten or fifteen
minutes, then place where it will boil, and thicken with the browned
and white flour rubbed smooth in the tomato; the thickening should be
thin enough to pour readily. Let cook a few minutes and add salt and
celery salt, and serve with vegetables or roasts.


WALNUT GRAVY

    Ground walnuts, 1 cup.
    Milk, 1 cup.
    Flour.
    Water, 2 cups.
    Salt to taste.

Put the water and milk in a saucepan, and when boiling add the walnuts.
Thicken with a little flour thickening, and salt to taste.


PARSLEY SAUCE

Add two tablespoonfuls of finely chopped parsley to two cups of cream
sauce.


BROWN SAUCE

    Vegetable stock, 2 cups.
    Browned flour, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Strained tomatoes, 1/4 cup.

Heat the stock to boiling, add the hot tomato, and thicken with browned
flour.


CREAM SAUCE

    Cream, 1/2 cup.
    Flour, 1 heaped tablespoonful.
    Milk, 2-1/2 cups.

Mix the flour to a smooth cream in a little milk, boil the cream and
remainder of the milk, and thicken with the flour. Salt to taste. If
a richer sauce is desired the beaten yolks of one or two eggs may be
added.


EGG SAUCE

    Cream sauce, 1 pint.
    Egg, 1.

Beat the egg and add to the cream sauce, mixing thoroughly.


BREAD SAUCE

    Stale bread crumbs, 1 cup.
    Chopped onion, 1.
    Butter, 1 large teaspoonful.
    Vegetable stock, 1 cup.
    Mace, 1/4 teaspoonful.

Rub the bread crumbs through a sieve and add the onion and mace. Boil
for a few minutes in the vegetable stock, add the butter, and serve.


HARD SAUCE

    Butter, 3/4 pound.
    Powdered sugar, 1 pound.
    Nutmeg to suit.

Beat the butter and sugar together until white and creamy, then add the
nutmeg.


GOLDEN SAUCE

    Nutmeg, 1/2.
    Sugar, 1 cup.
    Butter, 1 rounding tablespoonful.
    Egg yolks, 2.
    Corn starch, 1 tablespoonful.
    Water, 2 cups.

Break the nutmeg into pieces and put in a saucepan with the water,
boil, and add the corn starch mixed (sifted) with the sugar. Stir over
the fire until the corn starch is cooked, then add the butter. Beat
the yolks with one tablespoonful of the sauce, then stir quickly into
the remainder, which should be immediately removed, as the yolks will
curdle if boiled. Strain, and serve.


VANILLA SAUCE

    Cream, 2 cups.
    Eggs, 3.
    Flour, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Sugar and vanilla to taste.

Thicken the cream with the flour and stir in the beaten yolks. Cook a
few minutes, stirring all the time. Add sugar to taste. When cool, add
the beaten whites, and flavor with vanilla.


ORANGE SAUCE

    Oranges, 2.
    Eggs, 2.
    Butter to suit.
    Sugar, 1 cup.
    Lemon juice, 1/4 cup.

Put the juice of the oranges and the grated rind of one with the sugar
into a saucepan. Set on the range and stir till the sugar is melted or
dissolved, then strain through a fine sieve to remove the rind. Add the
beaten eggs, lemon juice, and butter. Before serving, set in double
boiler and stir for a few minutes to melt the butter and thoroughly mix
the eggs. Serve hot or cold.


LEMON SAUCE FOR PUDDING NO. 1

    Sugar, 2 cups.
    Eggs, 2.
    Lemons, 2.
    Boiling water, 1-1/2 cups.

Add the grated rind and juice of the lemons to the sugar, beat the eggs
until light, and add to the sugar, and stir well. Just before serving,
add the boiling water and set on the stove, but do not boil. For a
richer sauce add one-third of a cup of butter.


LEMON SAUCE NO. 2

    Water, 2 cups.
    Corn starch, 3 tablespoonfuls.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Sugar, 1 cup.
    Lemon, grated rind and juice, 1.

Boil the sugar in the water for five minutes, then stir in the corn
starch previously mixed with a little cold water. Stir over the fire
ten minutes, then add the grated rind and juice of the lemon and the
butter. When the butter is melted, the sauce is ready for use.


SAUCE FOR PLUM PUDDING

    Butter, 1 large tablespoonful.
    Hot water, 1-1/2 cups.
    Lemon juice, 1 tablespoonful.
    Flour, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Brown sugar, 1 cup.
    Grated nutmeg.

Put the butter into a saucepan; when it has melted stir in the flour
and mix well; then pour in gradually the hot water and stir over the
fire till well cooked; then add the sugar, lemon juice and a small
quantity of grated nutmeg.




_EGGS_


OMELETS

Omelets may be made with asparagus, cauliflower, lima beans, onions,
peas, lentils, granose, gluten, rice, nuts, etc.

Boil the vegetables till tender, chop fine, then beat with the eggs and
proceed as with plain omelets.


OMELET SOUFFLE NO. 1

Take two eggs, separate whites from yolks, beat whites very stiff,
salt, and add yolks, beating just enough to mix yolks with whites. Turn
into a hot oiled omelet pan, put in medium hot oven, and bake till
done, or to a rich brown. Serve in great haste on being removed from
the oven, to prevent falling.


OMELET SOUFFLE NO. 2

    Eggs, 4.
    Powdered sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Flavoring.

Beat the yolks of the eggs as light as possible, and add the sugar,
a few drops of flavoring, and beat to a cream. Beat the whites until
you can turn the plate bottom side up, without their falling. Pour the
beaten whites and yolks together and mix thoroughly. Put into an oiled
baking dish, and dust with powdered sugar. Bake in a moderate oven till
a golden brown. Serve at once.

A very delicate souffle is made of whites of eggs beaten stiff, adding
a tablespoonful of sugar to two whites, and chopped apricots or
peaches. Any kind of marmalade may be used in place of fruit.


PLAIN OMELET (FRENCH)

Break eggs into a dish, whip lightly with egg whip or fork, turn into
hot oiled skillet, and place on range. As soon as they begin to set,
lift edges of omelet, so that the uncoagulated part can run under, next
to bottom of the skillet. When light brown, turn, and cook till light
brown on the other side. Fold with knife about one-third over; then
toss out on hot platter, so that the one-third fold will be underneath.
Garnish with parsley and watercress. Serve at once.


PROTOSE OMELET

    Protose, 1/2 a thin slice.
    Eggs, 2.
    Minced parsley.
    Cooking oil.

Mince the protose fine, break two eggs, separating the whites, beat the
yolks a little, and stir the minced protose into them. Beat the whites
into a froth, not stiff, and stir into the protose; add a little minced
parsley; put a little oil into the omelet pan, and when hot pour in
the mixture. Cook a few minutes. Insert a knife between the omelet and
pan, and with a sudden turn of the hand fold the omelet in two. Finish
cooking in hot oven two or three seconds. Serve hot.


GLUTEN OMELET

Same as plain omelet, adding one tablespoonful of gluten to eggs and
cream before whipping. Serve at once on a hot platter.


RICE OMELET

Same as plain omelet, only adding one tablespoonful of cooked rice to
eggs and milk before beating. Serve on a hot platter at once.


APPLE OMELET

Same as plain omelet. Serve with a tablespoonful of well seasoned
apple sauce, mixed with equal amount of beaten white of egg on side of
platter.


GRANOSE OMELET

Same as plain omelet, adding two tablespoonfuls of cream instead of
milk, and one or two tablespoonfuls of granose, before whipping.


OMELET WITH TOMATO

Prepare a plain omelet, and when ready to fold, put a layer of baked
ripe tomatoes on one half, and fold the other half over it. Serve with
or without a tomato gravy as preferred.


ONION OMELET

Make as for plain omelet, placing one dessertspoonful of lightly
braized onion on the omelet just before you fold, folding the one-third
over the onion. Serve on hot platter at once.


GREEN PEA OMELET

Make as for plain omelet, folding one tablespoonful French peas with a
little thick cream sauce over them. Serve at once on hot platter.


ASPARAGUS OMELET

Make as for plain omelet, folding in one tablespoonful of asparagus
tips, which have been nicely seasoned. Serve on hot platter at once.


EGG A LA MODE

    Bread crumbs, 2 cups.
    Milk, 2 cups.
    Eggs, 8.
    Salt.
    Buttered toast or zwieback.

Soak bread crumbs in milk, beat eggs very light, add the soaked bread
crumbs, and bake for five minutes. Have ready a hot oiled or buttered
saucepan; pour in the mixture, salt, and stir briskly for three
minutes. Serve hot on squares of buttered toast or zwieback.


CURDLED EGGS

Bring a kettle of water to a boil, set at back of range for two
minutes, then drop in two eggs for each person, and leave for eight
minutes. Serve in cups.


JELLIED EGGS

Cook the same as curdled eggs, leaving eggs in fifteen minutes instead
of eight.


SHIRRED EGGS

Oil a small platter or granite egg dish, break in fresh eggs, being
careful not to break the yolks. Sprinkle with minced parsley, salt, and
add a bit of butter. Set in oven and bake till cooked as desired. Serve
at once.


CREAM SHIRRED EGGS

Prepare eggs as for shirred eggs, omitting parsley. Pour about one
tablespoonful of rich cream over them, salt, set in oven, and bake as
desired. Serve at once.


FLOATED EGGS

Take two fresh eggs, separate whites from yolks, put yolks into a
soup bowl of hot water, being careful not to break them. Let set two
minutes, then place them, bowl and all, into a larger dish of boiling
water, and cook till set as desired,--two minutes for medium, four
minutes for hard. Meantime beat whites very stiff, mold them in a soup
bowl, then float mold on boiling water two or three minutes till nicely
set. Then place them on large platter, place yolk in center, garnish
with parsley, and serve. In removing whites from bowl, take bowl in
left hand, knife in right, dip bowl about one-third in water, then slip
knife under edge of mold in the water. The water will get under eggs
and float them out easily. This makes a nice dish for the sick, if
yolks be boiled hard and whites are cooked rare.


BAKED EGGS IN TOMATO CASES

Take nice, ripe, medium-sized tomatoes, remove the stem and center with
sharp paring knife or spoon sufficient to encase an egg nicely. Place
them in an oiled granite baking-pan, break an egg into each tomato,
salt and sprinkle with chopped parsley, and add a small piece of
butter. Set in moderate oven and bake till eggs are medium done. Serve
at once.


MUMBLED EGGS

    Milk, 1 cup.
    Eggs, 6.
    Granose biscuit, 3.
    Salt.

Put milk on to heat in agate pan; when it begins to boil, break in the
eggs, and with a fork stir rapidly till it thickens. It must not be as
hard as scrambled eggs. Split granose biscuit in half and heat them in
the oven a few minutes. Serve a spoonful of the mumbled eggs on each
half of the biscuits. Do not forget to add salt.


SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH SUGAR CORN

Prepare as for scrambled eggs with protose, using nice, tender corn in
place of protose. Salt and serve at once on hot platters.


SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH ONIONS

Prepare as for scrambled eggs with protose, using one teaspoonful of
lightly braized onion in place of protose. Salt, and serve on hot
platters at once.


SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH PROTOSE

    Cream or milk, 1 tablespoonful (for one person).
    Fresh eggs, 2.
    Minced protose, 1 tablespoonful.

Into an oiled skillet containing one tablespoonful of cream or milk
break the eggs, slightly whipping them with egg whip or spoon, then add
protose. Stir to prevent sticking to bottom, also to thoroughly mix egg
with protose. Salt, scramble (soft medium, or hard), as desired. Serve
at once on hot platters.


SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH PARSLEY

Prepare as for scrambled eggs with protose, omitting protose and
substituting minced parsley.


POACHED EGGS ON TOAST

Serve poached eggs on nice light brown slices of zwieback, or fresh
toast if preferred, that has been slightly moistened, not soaked, with
hot cream, milk, or water.


POACHED EGGS

Take nice, fresh eggs, as only fresh eggs poach nicely; break them
into a pan of hot water, almost boiling. Let pan set on range so that
it will not boil; poach as desired,--soft, two minutes; medium, three
minutes; hard, five minutes. Serve on platter, garnish with watercress
or parsley. Serve while very hot.


POACHED EGGS ON GRANOSE

Heat some granose in the oven a few minutes; put a few spoonfuls on a
plate and place poached eggs on top. A small piece of butter may be
added to each egg.




_BEVERAGES_


CARAMEL-CEREAL

(A Substitute for Coffee)

For each cup of the beverage required use two tablespoonfuls of the
cereal and boil for ten to twenty minutes. Then remove to the side of
the range and let steep a few minutes. The strength and aroma of cereal
coffee are developed by long steeping.


CHOCOLATE

(Sanitas)

Grate some Sanitas chocolate, place in a saucepan, and to each two
ounces allow one cup of cold water. Let it stand until the chocolate
is soft, place over the fire, and when it boils, cook one minute. Work
it briskly with an egg beater, then serve at once, adding at the last
moment a tablespoonful of whipped cream to each cup.

It is considered an improvement by some to use two-thirds chocolate and
one-third malted nuts.

Other chocolate is not recommended, as it contains an injurious
alkaloid, which in the Sanitas brand is removed by a special process.


FRUIT NECTAR

For every eight parts of fruit juice used add one part of lemon juice
and sweeten to taste. A combination of fruit juices, as grape, cherry,
and raspberry, makes a very nice nectar, always using the lemon juice.
The nectar should be served ice cold.


STRAWBERRY SHERBET

    Ripe strawberries, crushed, 4 cups.
    Water, 4 cups.
    Lemon, sliced very thin, 1.
    Powdered sugar, 2 cups.

Mix the strawberries, water, and lemon together, and let stand in glass
or earthen jar for two hours; strain through coarse cloth and add the
powdered sugar. When sugar is dissolved strain and keep on the ice
until served.


MINT JULEP

    Sugar, 1 cup.
    Mint sprigs, 6.
    Strawberry juice, 1/2 cup.
    Juice of 4 lemons.
    Water, 1 pint.
    Boiling water, 1 cup.
    Raspberry juice, 1/2 cup.
    Ice.

Boil sugar and water twenty minutes; crush mint and pour over it one
cup boiling water. Let stand five or ten minutes, strain, and pour into
the syrup. To this add strawberry, raspberry, and lemon juices. Serve
ice cold.


FRUIT CUPS

    Lemons, juice and rind, 12.
    Powdered sugar, 2-1/2 pounds.
    Ice.
    Ripe pineapple, 1.
    Water, 2 quarts.

Put into a dish the juice of the lemons and the rind sliced very thin.
Slice the pineapple into another dish and pour over it half a pound
of the powdered sugar. Let stand overnight. In the morning strain off
the juices and add the rest of the sugar and the water. Stir till the
sugar is dissolved, then strain through a coarse cloth, and serve with
crushed ice.


LEMONADE NO. 1

The best lemonade is made from lemon syrup. Into the juice of twelve
lemons grate the rind of six. Be careful to exclude all seeds and the
inner white skin, as they impart a bitter taste. Let stand overnight.
Make thick syrup of white sugar, and when cold strain the lemon juice
into it. A tablespoonful added to a glass of water makes a perfect
lemonade.


LEMONADE NO. 2

Three lemons to a pint of water makes a strong lemonade. Sweeten to
taste.


ORANGEADE

    Sugar, 1 cup.
    Water, 2 cups.
    Orange juice, 2 cups.
    Cracked ice.

Boil sugar and water together ten minutes to make a syrup; then add the
orange juice and let it cool. When cold, pour into goblets half filled
with cracked ice.


APOLLINARIS LEMONADE

    Juice of 6 lemons.
    Rind of 4 lemons, sliced very thin.
    Sugar, 2 cups.
    Apollinaris water, ice cold, 1/4 bottle.
    Cracked ice.

Mix the lemon juice, rind of the lemons, and sugar together and add
Apollinaris water. Serve in goblets of cracked ice.


PINEAPPLE LEMONADE

    Sugar, 1 cup.
    Water, 2 cups.
    Ice water, about 4 cups.
    Juice of 4 lemons.
    Pineapple, freshly grated, 1.

Boil the sugar and water together ten minutes, and then add lemon juice
and freshly-grated pineapple. Let this cool, then strain carefully, and
add ice-water, about four cups.




_CEREALS_


CEREALS

Grains may be considered perfect food in themselves, as they contain
all the food elements in nearly right proportions. Rice is an exception
to this, the starch being in excess.

In cooking grains in the form of porridges, they should be introduced
into rapidly salted water, beating with a batter whisk so that the
grains may be thoroughly mixed with the water and be free from lumps.
In cooking coarse grains, as cracked wheat, pearl barley, hominy, etc.,
keep them boiling, stirring occasionally until the grain does not sink
to the bottom, but hangs suspended in the water. If the inner part of a
double boiler has been used, it may now be set into the outer boiler,
which should be placed on the range where the water will boil rapidly.
Replenish the water in the outside boiler from time to time with
boiling water.

By setting the grain in boiling water, the indigestible outer portion
or cellulose is more completely broken up, and the starch granules
are more thoroughly acted upon by the water, the object being to cook
the starch and the gluten as thoroughly as possible. If the grains
are cooked in a double boiler, they will not need to be stirred after
they are set, except when cooked in a very large quantity. The cooking
should be continuous and the length of time varies according to the
varying proportion of gluten in the grain. The larger percentage of
starch, the shorter the time required in cooking. Grains combine nicely
with fruits, and may be cooked or served with either fruit or fruit
juices.


OATMEAL

    Oatmeal, 1 cup.
    Water, 1 quart.

Put water into a double boiler, place on the range, and when boiling
add oatmeal. Boil until it thickens and finish in double boiler. Cook
five hours.


ROLLED OATS

    Rolled oats, 1-1/2 cups.
    Water, 1 quart.

Put water into a double boiler, place on the range, and when boiling
add rolled oats. Boil until it thickens and finish in double boiler.
Cook four hours.


CRACKED WHEAT

    Water, 4 cups.
    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.
    Cracked wheat, 1 cup.

Put water into the inner double boiler, place on the range, and when
boiling add salt and cracked wheat. Boil rapidly until grains do not
sink when the dish is lifted from the range. Place in the outer boiler
and cook constantly for four or five hours.


PEARL WHEAT

    Water, 4 cups.
    Pearl wheat, washed, 1 cup.
    Salt.

Boil water in the inner double boiler, add pearl wheat, and salt. Place
in the outer boiler and cook five or six hours.


PEARL BARLEY

    Pearl barley, well washed, 1 cup.
    Water, 4 cups.

Put cold water into double boiler and add pearl barley. Heat slowly and
cook about six hours.


FARINA

    Milk, or water, 6 cups.
    Farina, 1 cup.
    Salt.

Put the milk or water in the inner part of a double boiler, place on
the range, and when boiling add salt and farina. Let it boil for two or
three minutes, stirring all the time. Then place in a double boiler and
cook one hour. If milk is used, it should first be simmered or scalded
in a double boiler, and then placed on the range and the milk will
boil almost immediately. In this way the milk will not be so liable to
scorch as if it was put on the range at first. This rule will apply to
all grains cooked with milk.


RICE (SOUTHERN STYLE)

    Rice, 1 cup.
    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.
    Water, 6 Cups.
    Butter or gravy.

Wash rice in two waters, then put into vessel with water and salt.
After boiling about ten minutes, strain off all the water except a
scant cupful. Cover the vessel and let steam fifteen minutes or more,
stirring once or twice. Serve with butter or gravy, the latter being
stirred in quickly while the rice is hot.


RICE (WESTERN STYLE)

    Rice, 1 cup.
    Water, 6 cups.
    Salt, 1 tablespoonful.

Wash rice, put in kettle of water, salt, and boil till tender, stirring
once or twice to prevent sticking. Drain off all water through a
colander and pour over hot water sufficient to wash off the starchy
water and separate the grains. Leave in the colander and set into
another pan, so that the bottom of colander will not touch. Cover and
place in the oven a few minutes.


RICE WITH RAISINS

    Washed rice, 1 cup.
    Raisins, washed, seeded, 1/2 cup.
    Salt, 1/2 teaspoonful.
    Water, 2 cups.

Put in an enameled pan, cover, and steam one hour.


BROWNED RICE

Rice may be browned in the oven until of a yellow straw color, then
cooked as any rice, but preferably steamed. Care must be taken in
browning that it does not scorch or get too brown.


CORN MEAL MUSH

    Salted water, 4 cups.
    Corn meal, 1 cup.

Into the salted water stir corn meal till it begins to thicken, and
finish cooking in a double boiler. Cook three or four hours.


GRAHAM PORRIDGE

    Graham flour, 1 cup.
    Boiling water, salted, 3 cups.

Stir the flour into boiling water and beat till perfectly smooth; set
in a double boiler, or in another vessel containing boiling water, and
cook one hour.


GRAHAM PORRIDGE WITH DATES

Set as for plain graham porridge; after it has cooked one-half hour,
beat in the desired quantity of washed, seeded, and chopped dates; let
it cook half an hour longer, and serve.


GLUTEN-GRANOLA MUSH

    Boiling milk or water, 1 quart.
    Mixed gluten and granola, 1-1/2 pints.

Cook fifteen minutes, and serve with cream.




_TOASTS_


TOASTS

Toasts are uniformly and properly regarded as a breakfast dish, and
when properly prepared are wholesome, nutritious, and appetizing, and
far more conducive to health than the fried mushes and griddle cakes
with which so many are prone to appease their appetites.

Zwieback should be used as the foundation of all toasts, although
ordinary toasted bread can be used. In toasting bread, do not expose
it to such fierce heat that the bread will be burned or singed. Singed
bread is not toasted bread. Again, the fire should be hot enough to
more than simply dry the bread. It should be toasted as far through as
possible, and should be crisp and brittle, not hard. In using zwieback
for toast it may be moistened by hot milk, if for cream, gravy, or egg
toast; or with hot salted water, if for fruit. In either case the toast
should be dipped quickly in and out again so as not to absorb too much
liquid and become mushy. Under this head a few kinds of toasts will be
given, inexpensive and otherwise. While it is not an exhaustive list,
it will include sufficient to suggest others equally good.


MILK TOAST

    Milk, 6 cups.
    Flour, 1 heaped teaspoonful.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Toasted bread or zwieback.

Heat milk and butter in a saucepan over the fire; when boiling, add
salt and flour, moistened with a little milk. Let it boil, remove from
the fire, and dip into this slices of toasted bread or zwieback. Pour
what remains over the toast, cover, and send to the table hot.


CREAM TOAST

    Cream, 6 cups.
    Zwieback.
    Milk.

Heat cream to boiling, dip slices of zwieback into hot milk for an
instant, place on saucer, pour hot cream over, and serve.


AMERICAN OR FRENCH TOAST

    Eggs, thoroughly beaten, 3.
    Salt.
    Butter.
    Milk, 3 cups.
    Sliced bread.

Beat the eggs thoroughly and add the milk and a little salt. Slice
light bread and dip into the mixture, allowing each slice to absorb
some of the milk. Then brown on a hot, buttered griddle or thick
bottomed frying-pan. Spread with butter, and serve hot.


BOSTON CREAM TOAST

Toast two slices of bread, trim and cut in two lengthwise, making
four pieces. Place these evenly on top of one another and cut again
cornerwise, into long triangular pieces. Arrange artistically on a
platter, and serve with cream sauce.


NUN'S TOAST

    Hard-boiled eggs, 6.
    Flour, 1 teaspoonful.
    Butter.
    Hot buttered toast.
    Finely-chopped onion, 1.
    Milk, 2 cups.

Put the butter into a saucepan, and when it begins to bubble add the
chopped onion. Let the onion cook a little without color, then stir in
the flour. Add the milk and stir till it becomes smooth. Then put in
the eggs which have been sliced and let them get hot. Pour this mixture
over neatly trimmed slices of hot, buttered toast. Season with salt.


NUT GRAVY TOAST

Dress moistened toast with nut gravy as given under sauces.


PRUNE WHIPPED TOAST

    Prune pulp, 2 cups.
    Sugar, 1 tablespoonful.
    Eggs, whites, 4.

Beat the whites very stiff and stir in the hot prune pulp and sugar.
Serve on slices of zwieback which have been dipped in hot water.


PRUNE TOAST

Prepare as for apricot toast, using prune marmalade.


DATE TOAST

Prepare as for prune toast, except that the dates should be steamed,
not boiled.


PROTOSE TOAST

    Minced protose, 2 cups.
    Eggs, 2.
    Sweet cream, 1/2 cup.
    Salt to taste.

Mix and heat thoroughly; when boiling hot spread over slices of

    Toasted bread.

Dipped in hot salt water, and well buttered. Take

    Hard-boiled egg, 1,

Cut in halves, remove yolk, and fill hole with

    Currant jelly,

And place on top of the protose.


NUTTOLENE ON TOAST

Mince half a pound of nuttolene very fine, put in a well-oiled
saucepan, and fry over the fire till a delicate brown. Great care must
be taken to prevent scorching; shake the pan often. Make two cups
of rich cream sauce well seasoned with butter sauce, and desiccated
cocoanut. Strain this over the nuttolene, and serve a spoonful on warm
toast. This makes six large portions.


BERRY TOAST

Any canned fruit, as strawberries, blackberries, blueberries, etc., may
be used for toasts. Strain off the juice, boil, and thicken with corn
starch to the consistency of cream. Stir in the strawberries and reheat
till the berries are well heated through. Serve as other fruit toasts.


BANANA TOAST NO. 1

Peel and rub some nice bananas through a fine colander; sweeten and
beat up with a little cream, and serve on moistened toast. Serve cold.


BANANA TOAST NO. 2

Take the desired quantity of bright fruit juice, as strawberry or
cherry. Boil and thicken with corn starch. Into this slice some ripe
bananas. The juice should not be too thick, but just so that the banana
will appear suspended in the juice. Serve on moistened toast.


DATE TOAST WITH WALNUTS

Prepare same as date toast, then serve with walnut meat on each corner
and one in the center.


TOMATO TOAST

Dress moistened toast with tomato sauce, as given under sauces; or use
strained tomatoes thickened with flour or corn starch.


ASPARAGUS TOAST

Prepare as for stewed asparagus. Moisten and butter a piece of toast,
lay four or five pieces of asparagus on it, pour a spoonful of white
sauce on the bottom end of the stalks, and serve.


APPLE TOAST

Fresh stewed apples, rubbed through a colander and sweetened, make a
nice dressing. The apples may be flavored with lemon, or mixed with
grape or cranberry sauce. When the apples are put in the colander, the
liquid may be poured into a saucepan and boiled into a syrup, and the
toast moistened with this. Serve a spoonful or two of the apple sauce
over all.


APRICOT TOAST

In making apricot marmalade, save the juice by itself and boil it down
into a syrup. Moisten the toast, pour over some of the syrup, and some
of the marmalade over all.




_BAKERY AND BREAKFAST DISHES_


BAKERY AND BREAKFAST DISHES

Thin batters are about the consistency of thin cream. Thick batters are
like cream. Still thicker batters, which may be poured in a continuous
stream, are called pour batters. Any batter is a pour batter until it
is made so stiff that it breaks or drops in the pouring, when it is
called a drop batter. It will remain a batter until too stiff to be
beaten, when it becomes a dough.

Doughs, like batters, are of varying degrees of thickness, ranging from
those just stiff enough to be handled to those which may be rolled thin
as paper. Generally speaking, one full measure of flour to one scant
measure of liquid makes a pour batter. Two full measures of flour make
a drop batter; and three full measures make a dough; although, for
various reasons, these proportions are subject to many modifications.

If the ingredients in batters were simply mixed and cooked slowly,
the resulting substances would be hard and compact, unfit for human
digestion. Hence, to obviate this, and to make them light and porous,
we must resort to other processes. This is accomplished by means of
the expansion of incorporated air, by the generation of gas within the
mixture, or by a combination of both methods, supplemented by quick
cooking before the gas has a chance to escape.

Air at seventy degrees expands to about three times its volume when
exposed to the temperature of a hot oven. Consequently, as a mixture
heats in cooking, incorporated air expands, giving the desired
lightness. Air is incorporated or enclosed in batters by beating the
mixture thoroughly, as in making whole-wheat gems; by adding eggs to
the beaten mixture, as in popovers; and by the gas obtained by the
union of an acid with an alkaline carbonate, as in the use of baking
powders. In batters made light by the admixture of air, one must
exercise care in beating to actually incorporate and retain the air.
When eggs are added to the mixture, the glutinous consistency of the
albumin they contain assists in retaining the entangled air.


GEMS OR PUFFS (PLAIN)

    Milk, 1 cup.
    Salt.
    Cooking oil, 1 tablespoonful, if desired.
    Egg, 1.
    Sifted flour, about 2 cups.

Break the egg into the milk, add salt, and beat thoroughly. Beat into
this enough sifted flour to make a batter that will pile slightly when
poured in a thick stream. Bake in hot greased gem irons in a brisk
oven. A tablespoonful of cooking oil may be added to the milk if a
richer batter is desired.


CORN GEMS

Make same as plain gems, but use one-fourth corn meal and a little
sugar.


WHOLE-WHEAT AND GRAHAM GEMS

Use one-fourth to one-third whole wheat or graham flour.


GRANOSE PUFFS

    Eggs, 4.
    Ground cinnamon, 1 teaspoonful.
    Salt.
    Sugar, 1/4 cup.
    Granose flakes, 4 cups.

Beat the yolks of the eggs with the sugar until light, then add the
cinnamon and salt. Beat again, then add two cups granose flakes. Mix
thoroughly and add half of the stiffly-beaten whitest of the eggs, then
two more cups granose flakes, and lastly the rest of the whites. Drop
in round gem irons, filling them heaping full, and bake a light brown.
They may be iced and a little shredded cocoanut sprinkled on top.


VEGETARIAN HOT CAKES

    Bread crumbs, 4 cups.
    Flour, 1 cup.
    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.
    Sugar as desired.

Mix all together thoroughly, and add sufficient

    Milk heated at 140 deg. or 150 deg.,

To make a thick pour batter. To this add the

    Yolks of 5 eggs.

Beat up thoroughly and add the

    Stiffly-beaten whites.

Bake on soapstone griddle. Be careful not to have the milk scalding
hot, as it renders cakes soft and sticky.


GREEN CORN GRIDDLE CAKES

    Corn, 1 quart, cut from the ear.
    Butter, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    White corn meal, 3 tablespoonfuls.
    Salt, 1/4 teaspoonful.
    Milk, 1 cup.
    Eggs, 4.
    Flour, 1/2 cup.

Mix thoroughly and bake on soapstone griddle.


BAKED CORN PIE

    Sweet corn, 1 can.
    Milk, 2 cups.
    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.
    Butter, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Eggs, 2.

Warm the butter and stir through the corn; beat the eggs with the milk,
add the salt, and mix with the butter and the corn. Turn into a pan and
bake until set. Should be light brown.


POPOVERS

    Flour, 2 cups.
    Milk, 1-3/4 cups.
    Butter.
    Salt, 1/2 level teaspoonful.
    Eggs, 3.

Mix the salt and flour, pour on slowly half the milk to make a smooth
batter; add the eggs, one at a time, beating well, and gradually the
remaining milk. Beat vigorously for a few minutes, then turn at once
into hot well-buttered gem-pans, filling them about half full. Bake in
rather hot oven from twenty to thirty minutes.


CORN BREAD WITHOUT BAKING POWDER NO. 1

    Corn meal, 2 cups.
    Eggs, 4.
    Salt.
    Boiling milk, 3 cups.
    Butter, size of egg.

Put the meal into the mixing bowl, make hollow in the center, put in
butter and salt, and pour the hot milk over all, and stir well. Let
cool, and if too stiff, add a little more cold milk. Break the eggs and
separate them; add the yolks to the meal and beat five minutes. Beat
the whites and add them to the batter. Oil a baking-pan, make it hot,
and turn in the batter. Bake in a quick oven thirty minutes.


HOE CAKE

    Corn meal, 4 cups.
    Water, or milk.
    Melted butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt and sugar as desired.

Sift corn meal with a little salt, and sugar if desired; scald with
sufficient water or milk to make a stiff batter, but soft enough to
spread easily with a knife. A tablespoonful of melted butter may be
added if desired. Spread on a baking-sheet or pan about one-half inch
thick or less and bake slowly till crisp clear through.

If the cake bakes fast on the bottom, it may be turned over so that
both sides may be evenly baked.


CORN BREAD WITHOUT BAKING POWDER NO. 2

    Corn meal, 2 cups.
    Flour, 1 cup.
    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.
    Sugar, 1/4 cup.

Mix and add

    Boiling water.

sufficient to make stiff dough; let cool, then stir in

    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Beaten yolks, 6.

and lastly the

    Stiffly-beaten whites, 6.


CORN BREAD NO. 3

    Sponge, 3 cups.
    Butter, 1 rounded tablespoonful.
    Mixture, 2 parts corn meal to 1 part flour.
    Eggs, 2.
    Sugar, 3 heaped tablespoonfuls.

Take three cups of the sponge as set for making wheat bread, measured
when light, ready to mix up stiff. Add sugar, eggs, and butter. To this
add a mixture of two-thirds corn meal and one-third flour until it is
as stiff as will stir conveniently (if made too stiff, the bread will
be dry; if not stiff enough, it will be sticky). Put about half an inch
deep in greased pans, and let rise till nearly an inch deep and bake in
a moderate oven. It may be in deeper loaves, but they are not likely to
be so satisfactory.


GEORGIA PONES

    Southern corn meal, 2 cups.
    Sugar, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt, 1/2 teaspoonful.
    Boiling milk or cream.

Sift meal with sugar and salt. Pour over this enough boiling milk or
cream to make a stiff drop batter. Stir constantly, that the meal may
not lump. When perfectly smooth, drop in large spoonfuls on a cold
buttered baking-sheet and bake in a brisk oven. The pones should be
browned on top.


BOSTON BROWN BREAD

    Yellow corn meal, 1 cup.
    White flour, 3/4 cup.
    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.
    Eggs, 4.
    Graham flour, 1 cup.
    New Orleans molasses (good), 3/4 cup.
    Milk, about 3 cups.

Mix meal, flour, molasses, and milk; separate eggs and mix yolks with
other ingredients. Beat whites very stiff and fold into mixture, which
should not be thick. Put this in the tin dish immediately and steam for
three or four hours.




_PUDDINGS_


LEMON-APPLE

    Tart apples, 6.
    Sugar, 1 cup.
    Lemon, 1.

Pare the apples and remove the core, being careful not to break the
apple. Put into a granite or enameled baking-pan of suitable size. Fill
the hole made by removing the cores, with the sugar; moisten the sugar
with the lemon juice and sprinkle a little of the grated rind on each
apple. Pour sufficient water into the pan to half cover the apples.
Cover and bake until clear.


FARINA MOLD

    Milk, 1 quart.
    Sugar, 1/3 cup.
    Farina, 1/2 cup.
    Salt.

Put the milk into double boiler; when scalding hot, set the inner
boiler on range until the milk boils; then stir in the farina, sugar,
and salt. Let boil till the farina is set, then set back in outer
boiler and cook one hour. Turn into molds previously oiled or dipped
into cold water. May be served with cream sweetened and flavored, or
with fruit juice.


BROWN BETTY

    Chopped apples, 2 cups.
    Bread crumbs, 1 cup.
    Butter, 1/2 cup.
    Chopped raisins, 1 cup.
    Raisin or prune juice, 1 cup.

Fill a pudding dish with alternate layers of the fruit, crumbs, and
butter,--fruit first, finishing bread crumbs on top. Pour over the
fruit juice. Set the dish in a pan of hot water; cover and bake in
a moderate oven for nearly an hour; then remove the cover and brown
lightly. Serve with sweetened cream or lemon sauce.


STRAWBERRY SHORT CAKE

    Cream, 1 cup.
    Flour to make a medium soft dough.
    Salt.
    Yeast, 1 tablespoonful.

Warm the cream to about seventy degrees, add the salt, yeast, and
about two cups of the flour. Mix thoroughly, cover, and set in a warm
place to rise. When well risen and lively, add the rest of the flour,
and leave until perfectly smooth. Roll out about half an inch thick.
Put in greased pans, brush the top with melted butter, let rise until
about double its original size, and bake. Split, and fill with whole or
crushed berries, sprinkled with sugar.


STRAWBERRY GRANOSE

Put a layer of granose in a deep pan of sufficient size; cover with a
layer of crushed berries and sugar; repeat till the pan is full. Press
lightly. Serve with cream.


FLOATING ISLAND

    Milk, 1 quart.
    Sugar, 1/2 cup.
    Eggs, 5.
    Jelly, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Flavor to suit.

Make a custard with the milk, the yolks of the eggs, the whites of two,
and the sugar. Whip the remaining three whites to a stiff froth with
a little sugar and flavoring, same as custard. Pour the custard into
individual glass dishes, drop spoonfuls of the whites on the custard
so as to form islands, or it may be put on with a pastry tube or paper
funnel. Drop a little bright jelly in the center of each island.


CORN STARCH BLANC MANGE

    Milk, 1 quart.
    Corn starch, 4 heaped tablespoonfuls.
    Eggs, whites, 3.
    Sugar, 1/2 cup.
    Lemon flavoring.

Put half the milk in a double boiler and set over the fire. When
scalding hot, add the remaining milk in which has been dissolved the
sugar and corn starch. Stir till it is thick and there are no lumps.
Flavor with lemon, take from the range, and add the stiffly beaten
whites. Pour into molds and set in a cool place to get firm.

A pleasing effect may be obtained by dividing the mixture after it is
cooked, and coloring one-half pink, then filling the mold one-third of
one, and filling up with the other. When turned from the mold they will
look like small, white pyramids capped with pink, or pink with white. A
custard to be served with this blanc mange is made of two cups of milk,
the yolks of three eggs, and half a cup of sugar. Flavor same as blanc
mange.


GRANOSE MOLD

    Boiling milk, 2 cups.
    Granose flakes, 3 cups.
    Sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Beaten eggs, 6.

Stir the granose flakes into the boiling milk; then add the beaten
eggs and sugar. Let boil two minutes, and pour into molds. Serve with
vanilla sauce.


PINEAPPLE TAPIOCA

    Pearl tapioca, 1 cup.
    Pineapple, ripe, 1.
    Water, 1 quart.
    Sugar, 1 cup.

Wash the tapioca, and put to cook with the water and sugar in a double
boiler; cook until cleared. Pare the pineapple, remove the core, and
slice very thin. Put a layer of the pineapple in a deep pan; pour over
some of the tapioca, then another layer of pineapple, and so on till
all the pineapple and tapioca are used. Serve cold.


BANANA TAPIOCA

Same as pineapple tapioca, but use bananas instead of pineapples. Milk
may be substituted for water, and two eggs used if desired.

The tapioca may be flavored and colored if desired.


DATES STUFFED WITH MALTED NUTS

Wash, dry, and pit the desired quantity of dates, being careful not to
break more than are necessary. Fill the cavity made by removing the pit
with malted nuts, and press together. Make an icing of the white of an
egg, eight or nine tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar, a few drops of
lemon juice, and one teaspoonful of corn starch. Dip the dates in this,
using a sharp toothpick with which to handle them, and place on an
oiled paper or plate to dry. Or the icing may be made with less sugar,
and after they are dipped, roll them in powdered or Victor sugar.


SAGO FRUIT

    Sago, 1 cup.
    Sugar, 1/2 cup.
    Oranges, 2.

Wash the sago through three waters, and simmer in a quart of water
with the sugar until transparent and thoroughly done. Peel and slice
the oranges, remove the pips, and add to the sago. Cook a few minutes
longer, then turn into six or eight individual glass sauce dishes, and
put away to cool. Garnish with a little bright colored jelly or jam.


RICE PATTIES

    Rice, cooked, 2 cups.
    Butter, 1-1/2 tablespoonfuls.
    Egg whites, well-beaten, 2.
    Sugar, 1 tablespoonful.
    Nutmeg.

Mix, and stir over the fire till well blended; when cold, form into
patties, roll in beaten white of egg, and then in bread crumbs
moistened with melted butter. Bake. Serve hot with sweetened cream,
flavored with nutmeg.


LEMON OMELET

    Corn starch, 1 dessertspoonful.
    Cream, 1/2 cup.
    Eggs, 4.
    Butter.
    Powdered sugar.
    Flour, 1 teaspoonful.
    Salt.
    Boiling milk, 1 cup.
    Lemon honey.

Mix the corn starch, flour, cream and salt. Beat till smooth; add the
beaten yolks of the eggs and the boiling milk. Stir in the whites of
the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth. Butter four pudding plates, pour in
the mixture, and bake in a quick oven ten minutes. Spread lemon honey
on half, fold over, and sprinkle powdered sugar on top. Serve hot.


LEMON HONEY

    White sugar, 1 cup.
    Egg yolks, 3.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Lemon, grated rind and juice of 1.
    Egg white, 1.

Put the juice, sugar, and butter in a double boiler over the fire;
while it is melting, beat the eggs and add to them the grated rind of
the lemon. Add this to the sugar and butter, cooking and stirring till
it is thick and clear like honey.


STRAWBERRY SOUFFLE

    Fruit.
      Fresh strawberries, 3 quarts.
      Powdered sugar, 1-1/2 cups.

    Custard.
      Egg yolks, 4.
      Cream or milk, 3/4 pint.
      Sugar.

    Meringue.
      Egg whites, 4.

Put two and a half quarts of the strawberries and the powdered sugar
into a saucepan. Put in oven and let it simmer till sugar is melted.
Beat the yolks of the eggs in the cream or milk, and sweeten to taste.
Set in double boiler over the fire, and stir till thick. Arrange the
berries without the juice in glass dishes, so that they will form a
sort of wall. Fill the center with custard and meringue the top with
the whites. Use the remaining two cups of berries to decorate the
meringue with half or whole berries. Serve hot or cold.


PLAIN CUSTARD

    Sugar, 3/4 cup.
    Eggs, 6.
    Milk, 1 quart.
    Salt.

Beat the eggs till light, and stir in the milk, sugar, and salt. Bake
in a pudding-pan; set in a pan of hot water. Bake until the center of
custard is set.


CARAMEL CUSTARD

    Milk, 3 cups.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Water, 1/2 cup.
    Sugar, 1 cup.
    Eggs, 6.
    Vanilla, 1/2 teaspoonful.

Put the butter into a saucepan and set on the range. When melted,
stir in the sugar, and let cook until of a dark brown color, stirring
frequently to prevent burning. Now add the water, which should be hot,
and stir until the caramel (the browned sugar) is dissolved. Beat up
the eggs and mix with the milk; add this to the caramel and flavor
with the vanilla. Pour into custard cups, set into a shallow pan of
water, and bake till the custard is set in the middle.


TAPIOCA CUSTARD (RICH)

    Tapioca, 1/2 cup.
    Sugar, 3/4 cup.
    Salt, 1/4 teaspoonful.
    Milk, 1 quart.
    Eggs, 4.
    Flavor to suit.

Wash the tapioca and put to cook with the milk in a double boiler; stir
occasionally, and cook till clear. Beat the eggs till light; beat in
the sugar, and add to the tapioca. Let cook a minute and remove from
the range. Stir in the flavoring, and turn into a pan of suitable size.
Serve cold. If desired, the whites of two of the eggs may be used as a
meringue, which should be flavored the same as the custard.


RICE PUDDING

    Rice, 4 tablespoonfuls.
    Sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Seedless raisins, 1/2 cup.
    Milk, 4 cups.
    Grated nutmeg, 1/4 teaspoonful.
    Salt, 1/2 teaspoonful.

Put all together and bake about two hours. Stir with a fork three or
four times during first hour to prevent sticking. Should it get too
dry, add a little more milk.


CREAM RICE PUDDING

    Washed rice, 1/2 cup.
    Cream, or milk, 3 cups.
    Eggs, 4.

Cook the rice in the cream or milk; when nearly done, remove from the
range, and stir in the yolks of the eggs. Pour into a pan, and set in
another containing water, and bake fifteen or twenty minutes, or till
the eggs are cooked. Make a meringue of the whites.


SANITAS CHOCOLATE PUDDING

    Bread crumbs, 2 cups.
    Eggs, 3.
    Sanitas chocolate, 1/4 pound.
    Hot milk, 2 cups.
    Sugar, 1/3 cup.

Soak bread crumbs in hot milk, add eggs, sugar, and chocolate. Beat the
eggs and mix all the ingredients thoroughly. Put into a buttered can,
and steam two hours.

See note under "Beverages, Sanitas Chocolate."


APPLE NUT PUDDING

    Apple pulp, 2 cups.
    Nuttolene, 1/2 pound.
    Eggs, 4.
    Sugar, 3/4 cup.
    Bread crumbs, 1-3/4 pounds.
    Cinnamon or nutmeg, 1 teaspoonful.

Grate sufficient tart apples to make two cups; then add the sugar,
cinnamon or nutmeg, bread crumbs, nuttolene, which has been put through
a vegetable grinder, and the beaten yolks of the eggs. Beat well and
add the stiffly-beaten whites, put into an oiled pudding-pan set in a
pan of boiling water, and bake. Serve with sweetened cream or flavored
sauce.


PRUNE TAPIOCA PUDDING

    Tapioca, 1/2 cup.
    Cold water, 2-1/2 cups.
    Lemon juice, 1 tablespoonful.
    Prunes, 1 cup.
    Salt, 1/2 teaspoonful.
    Sugar, 1/2 cup.

Put the prunes into enough water to cover them, and let simmer gently
till they absorb all the water. Turn onto a plate to cool and remove
stones. When tapioca has cooked until clear, put all the seasoning into
it, and put a layer into a pudding dish, then a layer of prunes, and so
on, having the top layer tapioca. Bake in moderate oven one hour; then
allow to partially cool, and serve with cream.


PRUNE PUDDING

    Prune pulp, 1 cup.
    Prune meats, chopped fine, 1/4 cup.
    Egg whites, well beaten, 4.
    Sugar, 1/2 cup.

Stir the beaten whites of the eggs with the prune pulp, and add the
chopped prune meats and sugar. Bake till lightly browned, and serve
with cream.


BREAD PUDDING

    Milk, 1 quart.
    Sugar, 1/2 cup.
    Stale bread, 1-1/2 cups.
    Eggs, 3.
    Flavor to suit.

Soak the bread in the milk; beat the yolks and one of the whites of the
eggs with the sugar, and flavor. Mix and put into a pudding dish. Set
into a pan of hot water and bake until the custard is set. Meringue
with the whites.

If desired, the top of the pudding may first be marked with jelly,
marmalade, or fresh fruit of some kind, and the meringue put over all.


PRESSED FRUIT PUDDING

    Bread, 8 slices.
    Stewed huckleberries, 1 quart.
    Sugar, 1/2 cup.

Trim the bread, cutting off all crusts, put four slices in the bottom
of a pudding-pan, cover with half the berries, which should have the
juice strained off, sprinkle over part of the sugar, then the rest of
the bread and the remainder of the berries and sugar. Pour over all
the juice that has been drained; there should be enough to moisten
the bread thoroughly. If served the same day, put another pan on top
of the pudding, with a weight in it, to press the pudding. It is not
necessary to press the pudding if not used the same day it is made.
Serve with sweetened cream or sweet sauce.


SNOW PUDDING

    Milk, 1 quart.
    Salt, 1/3 teaspoonful.
    Eggs, whites, 5.
    Sugar, 1/3 cup.
    Corn starch, 1/3 cup.
    Vanilla to suit.

Set milk, sugar, and salt in double boiler over the fire; when scalding
hot, add the corn starch mixed smooth in a little cold milk. When the
starch is cooked, remove from the fire, and beat well. When cold, stir
in carefully the stiffly-beaten whites and flavor with vanilla. Serve
with vanilla sauce.


APPLE PUDDING (BAKED)

    Butter, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Eggs, 4.
    Green tart apples, grated, 6.
    Sugar, 1/2 cup.
    Lemon, 1.

Stir the butter and sugar to a cream; stir into this the well-beaten
yolks of the eggs, the juice and grated rind of the lemon, and the
grated apples. Stir in the beaten whites of the eggs, flavor with
cinnamon or nutmeg, and bake. Serve cold with cream.


PLUM PUDDING

    Eggs, 4.
    Cream, 1 cup.
    Flour, 1-3/4 cups.
    Raisins, seeded, chopped, 1/2 pound.
    Dried cherries, 1/2 pound.
    Candied orange peel, 2 ounces.
    Sugar, 1 cup.
    Bread crumbs 1 cup.
    Butter, 1/3 pound.
    Currants, 1/2 pound.
    Candied citron, 2 ounces.

Beat the eggs, add the cream, bread crumbs, flour, and butter. Beat
well together, and mix in the sugar and fruit. Mix well, pour into a
buttered pan, cover, and steam about two hours.


CABINET PUDDING

    Candied citron, 1/2 cup.
    Seedless raisins, 1/2 cup.
    Currants, 1/2 cup.
    Cinnamon.
    Nutmeg.
    Stale sponge cake, 1 quart.
    Milk, 2 cups.
    Eggs, 2.
    Butter, melted, 1 tablespoonful.
    Salt.

Butter a pudding mold that will hold at least two quarts. Have the
citron and raisins chopped fine, the currants well washed, and the cake
cut into strips about an inch and a half wide and half an inch thick;
sprinkle some of the fruit on the bottom of the mold, then slices of
the cake; sprinkle on a little cinnamon and nutmeg, then more fruit,
then cake, and so on till the ingredients are all used. Pour over this
a custard made of the milk, eggs, and melted butter. Pour this over the
cake without cooking, and let soak one-half hour, then set into a pan
of water, cover, and bake until the custard is set. Serve with a tart
sauce.


CREAM SAGO PUDDING

    Sago, 1/2 cup.
    Sugar, 1 cup.
    Milk or cream, 1 quart.
    Eggs, 2.
    Lemon flavoring.

Wash the sago, and with the milk put into a double boiler, and cook
until clear. Beat the eggs very light, and add the sugar and flavor.
Remove the sago from the range, and allow to cool a little, then pour
in the eggs and sugar, beating all the time. Put in a pudding-pan, set
in a pan of water, cover, and bake until the custard is set.


STEAMED FRUIT PUDDING

    Tart apple pulp, 2 cups.
    Sugar, 1 cup.
    Eggs, 6.
    Grape juice, 2-1/2 cups.
    Salt, 1/2 teaspoonful.
    Toasted bread crumbs, 4 cups.
    Seedless raisins, 1 cup.
    Lemon rind, grated, 1.
    Vanilla, 1 tablespoonful.

Mix all well together except the whites of the eggs, which should be
beaten stiff and added last. Turn into a buttered mold, and steam or
boil for three hours. Serve with sweetened cream, flavored with nutmeg.


SPONGE PUDDING

    Milk, 2 cups.
    Flour, 1/2 cup.
    Sugar, 1/3 cup.
    Eggs, 4.

Put milk into a double boiler. Mix the sugar and flour with a little
cold milk; pour this into the scalding milk, and stir till it thickens;
then stir it into the well-beaten yolks of the eggs; then add the
whites beaten stiff. Pour the mixture into buttered cups or into a
pudding dish. Put the cup or dish into a pan of boiling water, place
in the oven, and bake twenty minutes. About five minutes before it is
done, remove from the pan of water, and finish baking on the grate.
Serve in the cups in which it is baked or on hot plates if baked in
a pudding dish. This should not be allowed to stand, but be served
immediately.


FIG PUDDING

    Butter, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Corn starch, 1/2 cup.
    Flour, 1/2 cup.
    Fig marmalade, 1-1/4 cups.
    Cream, 1-1/2 cups.
    Sugar, 1 cup.
    Eggs, 4.

Mix the butter with the corn starch and flour; mix the fig marmalade
and the cream; stir in the butter, corn starch, and flour mixture,
together with the sugar and the yolks of eggs. Mix well and fold in
quickly the well-beaten whites. Pour into a buttered pudding-pan and
steam one and one-half hours.


DATE PUDDING

Make same as fig pudding, using date marmalade.


ADELAIDE PUDDING

    Eggs, 6.
    Water, 2 cups.
    Lemon extract, 1 teaspoonful.
    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.
    Corn starch, 1 cup.
    Sugar, 1-1/4 cups.
    Lemon, grated rind and juice, 1.
    Flour, 1-1/2 cups.

Over the beaten yolks pour a syrup made by boiling the sugar in the
water. Add lemon rind and juice, lemon extract, and salt. Beat up
well, and mix in slowly the flour and corn starch. Fold in the beaten
whites of the eggs, pour into a greased pudding dish, and steam one and
one-half hours.


CEREAL PUDDING

    Milk, 4 cups.
    Eggs, 4.
    Sugar, 1/2 cup.
    Cream of maize, or cerealine, 2 cups.
    Lemon, grated rind and juice, 1.

Heat milk to boiling and stir in cream of maize or cerealine. Set in
double boiler and cook half an hour. Remove from range and stir in the
yolks and sugar. Flavor with grated rind and juice of lemon. Pour in a
shallow pan, and set within another containing water, and bake till the
custard sets. Meringue with the whites.




_PIES_


PASTRY DOUGH FOR PIES

    Flour, 1 pint.
    Butter, 3 tablespoonfuls, rounding full,
      or, Olive oil, 1/2 cup.
    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.
    Cold water, 6 tablespoonfuls.

Chop the butter in the flour, add the water and salt, and without
mixing turn upon the board. Roll out and double over three times. Then
roll out again and double. Continue this till the crust is smooth; then
roll out very thin and roll as for jelly cake. Cut into two pieces,
stand each piece on end, and roll out one for the top and the other for
the bottom crust.


PUMPKIN FOR PIES

Wash the pumpkin, but do not peel; remove the seeds, cut up, cook and
put through a colander. The pumpkin is much sweeter cooked this way
than when the peel is removed before cooking.


PUMPKIN PIES

    Mashed pumpkin, 1 cup.
    Molasses, 1/3 cup.
    Sugar, 1/3 cup.
    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.
    Flour, 1 tablespoonful.
    Eggs, 2.
    Cinnamon, 1 teaspoonful.
    Milk, 1 cup.

Mix all together thoroughly, adding the milk last.


PUMPKIN PIES WITHOUT EGGS

    Mashed pumpkin, 1 cup.
    Flour, 1 tablespoonful.
    Sugar, 1/2 cup.
    Nutmeg, a dash.

Mix together, and when smooth, add

    Sweet cream, 1 cup.


SANITAS CHOCOLATE CUSTARD PIE NO. 1

    Milk, 1 quart.
    Sugar, 1 cup.
    Eggs, 6.
    Chocolate, 1/4 pound.
    Water, 2 cups.
    Vanilla, 2 teaspoonfuls.

Save the whites of three of the eggs for meringue; beat together the
remainder of the eggs, sugar, and vanilla; dissolve the chocolate in
the water and boil for three minutes. When nearly cold, add to the eggs
and sugar. Put in pan lined with good pastry and bake; makes two large
or three small pies.


SANITAS CHOCOLATE CUSTARD PIE NO. 2

Make an ordinary custard pie, flavor with vanilla; put the grated
chocolate into a basin on the side of the range, where it will melt,
but not burn. When melted, beat into it one egg and sugar to suit the
taste. Spread on top of the pie.


HYGIENIC MINCE MEAT

(For Six Pies)

    Chopped apples, medium size, 14.
    Chopped walnuts, 1 cup.
    Chopped blanched almonds, 1/2 cup.
    Chopped figs, 1/2 cup.
    Chopped citron, 1/4 cup.
    Seeded raisins, 1 cup.
    Seedless raisins or currants, 1 cup.
    Caramel-cereal coffee, 1 cup.
    Fruit juice or jelly, 1 cup.
    Lemons, juice of, 4.
    Salt, 1 tablespoonful.
    Sugar and spice to taste.


MINCE PIE

    Minced apples, 4 cups.
    Prune juice, 1 cup.
    Sugar, 1 cup.
    Molasses, 1 cup.
    Butter, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Minced protose, 3 cups.
    Seedless raisins, 2 cups.
    Lemon, grated rind and juice, 1.

Stew all together until thick enough for filling.

Flavor with

    Salt, 1 teaspoonful.
    Cinnamon.
    Nutmeg.


BAKER'S CUSTARD PIE

    Sugar, 3 tablespoonfuls.
    Eggs, 3.
    Vanilla, 1 teaspoonful.
    Salt to taste.
    Flour, 1 tablespoonful.
    Milk, 2 cups.
    Grated nutmeg.

Beat the yolks of the eggs to a cream, stir the flour thoroughly into
the sugar, and add to the eggs. Then put in the vanilla, nutmeg, and
salt; then add well-beaten whites. Mix well and add by degrees the milk
that has been scalded and cooled (but not boiled), and turn all into a
deep pie-pan, lined with rich paste. Bake from twenty-five to thirty
minutes.


LEMON PIE (SUPERIOR)

    Lemons, 3.
    Water, 3 cups.
    Corn starch, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Butter, 1 tablespoonful.
    Sugar, 2-1/2 cups.
    Eggs, 3.
    Flour, 4 tablespoonfuls.

Put the water and butter into a double boiler and set on the range.
Mix the sugar, flour, and corn starch together; grate in the lemon
rind, add the juice and beaten yolks of the eggs. When the water in
the boiler is scalding hot, stir in the mixture, and cook till of
the consistency of cold honey, stirring now and then to ensure even
cooking. Remove from the fire; when cool, pour into deep pie tins,
lined with good pastry. When done, meringue with the whites of the eggs.


COCOANUT PIE

    Desiccated Cocoanut, 1/2 cup.
    Eggs, 2.
    Butter, size of an egg.
    Milk, 1 cup.
    Sugar, 1 small cup.

Soak the cocoanut in the milk, add the beaten egg, sugar, and butter
melted. Line a pie-pan with rich pastry, put in the filling, and bake.
The white of one of the eggs may be used as a meringue, if desired.


WASHINGTON CREAM PIE

    Crust:
      Eggs, 6.
      Vanilla, 1 teaspoonful.
      Flour, 1 rounded cup.
      Sugar, 1 cup.
      Lemon juice, 2 teaspoonfuls.

Beat the yolks of the eggs till very thick; add the sugar, vanilla,
and lemon juice. Beat the whites of the eggs very stiff, fold half
the whites into the yolk and sugar, then half the flour, then the
remainder of the whites and the rest of the flour. Divide this batter
into two pie-pans and bake. When cold, split each cake and put in the
filling.

    Filling:
      Milk, 2 cups.
      Eggs, 2.
      Flour, 1/2 cup.
      Butter, 2 tablespoonfuls.
      Sugar, 1 cup.
      Vanilla, 1-1/2 teaspoonfuls.

Put three-fourths of the milk into a double boiler, together with the
milk, and set on the range. Beat the eggs very light; add the sugar,
flour, and the remainder of the milk. Beat till perfectly smooth, and
when the milk in the boiler is scalding hot, stir in the mixture. Beat
till smooth, and cook thoroughly; when cool, add the vanilla. If made a
day or two before serving, and kept on ice, the quality of these pies
is greatly improved.


PRUNE PIE

    Prune, marmalade, 1 pint.
    Egg, 1.
    Lemon, 1.
    Sugar, 1/2 cup.

To the marmalade add the grated rind and juice of the lemon, sugar, and
beaten yolk of egg; put into a pie-pan lined with good paste and bake
till the crust is done; remove from oven and meringue with the white
of the egg.


APPLE PIE

Line a pie-pan with rich paste, sprinkle over the bottom a little flour
and sugar. Fill with apples cut in thin slices. The pan should be
slightly rounding full. Sprinkle a little flour and sugar, according
to the tartness of the fruit. Add two tablespoonfuls of water, and a
few small pieces of butter. Moisten the edge of the paste and put on
the upper crust, press down the edges, trim, make several perforations
in the top to allow the steam to escape, brush the crust with a little
milk, and bake about forty-five minutes.


RHUBARB PIE

    Pie paste.
    Rhubarb, 4 cups.
    Sugar, 1 large cup.
    Nutmeg.
    Salt.
    Flour.

Line a pie plate with paste rolled a little thicker than a dollar.
Strip the skin off the rhubarb and cut the stalk into half-inch
lengths. Fill the plate an inch deep, and to a quart of rhubarb add a
large cup of sugar. Sprinkle a pinch of salt, and a grating of nutmeg
on top, with a little flour. Cover with a rich crust and bake in a
quick oven until the pie loosens from the dish.


BLUEBERRY PIE

Line a pie-pan with pie paste. Put in the berries half an inch deep,
and to one quart of berries put a teacup of brown sugar; sift a
teaspoonful of flour over, a pinch of salt, and a little grated nutmeg.
Cover with the top crust, pressing down the edges tightly. Trim and
bake in a good oven forty-five minutes. This pie is the typical berry
pie.




_CAKE_


FROSTING

    Egg white, beaten stiff, 1.
    Corn starch, 1 teaspoonful.
    Powdered sugar, 9 tablespoonfuls.
    Lemon or orange juice, 1 teaspoonful.

Mix and beat together.


SUNSHINE CAKE

    Egg whites, 6.
    Egg yolks, 3.
    Sugar, granulated, 1 cup.
    Flour, 1 scant cup.
    Lemon juice, 2 teaspoonfuls.

Mix and bake as for Favorite Sponge Cake, flavor with

    Grated rind of lemon.
    Juice of 1/2 orange.


ORANGE CAKE

If boiled icing flavored with orange is used, the result will be orange
cake.


ANGEL CAKE

    Flour, 1 cup sifted 5 times.
    Lemon juice, 2 teaspoonfuls.
    Powdered sugar, sifted, 1 cup.
    Egg whites, 11 beaten to stiff froth.
    Vanilla, 2 teaspoonfuls.

Stir the sugar into the whites very lightly and carefully, adding the
vanilla, after which add the flour, stirring quickly and lightly. Pour
into a bright, clean cake dish, which should not be buttered or lined.
Bake at once in a moderate oven about forty minutes. Test it with a
broom splint. When done, let it remain in the cake tin, turning it
upside down, with the sides resting on two saucers, so that a current
of air will pass over and under it.


SPONGE SHEET

Use and make the ingredients the same as for Simple Sponge Cake, but
bake in a sheet. Before baking, sprinkle a generous quantity of the
following mixture on top:--

Mix an equal quantity of granulated sugar and chopped almonds and add a
small pinch of ground cinnamon. This produces a delicious crust. Bake
in a buttered and floured pan, and remove from the pan as soon as done.


SIMPLE SPONGE CAKE

    Eggs, 6.
    Sifted granulated sugar, 1 cup.
    Flour, 1 scant cup.

To the eggs add sugar, and beat with a wire egg beater till the mixture
is thick and light colored. Then add the flour, folding it in gently.
Drop by the spoonful in an unbuttered pan, and bake in a moderate oven.
When done, invert the pan, letting it rest on cups till the cake is
cool, when it can easily be taken out. Thus suspended from the bottom
of the pan, the cake is stretched by its own weight, which makes
it lighter and more elastic than if left to fall by its weight in
cooling. The quantity given will make a small loaf cake, or two layers.


FAVORITE SPONGE CAKE

    Eggs, 6.
    Granulated sugar, 1 cup.
    Flour, 1 scant cup.
    Lemon juice, 2 teaspoonfuls.

Sift the flour and sugar four or five times. Beat the whites of the egg
to a stiff froth, adding the lemon juice. When half beaten, fold in
carefully in regular order the sugar, well-beaten yolks of eggs, and
the flour. Bake in a moderate oven.


NUT SPONGE CAKE

    Eggs, 7.
    Water, 1/4 cup.
    Lemon extract, 1/4 teaspoonful.
    Ground English walnut, 3/4 cup.
    Sugar, 1-1/4 cups.
    Vanilla, 1 teaspoonful.
    Flour, 1 rounded cup.

Beat the yolks of the eggs till thick; boil sugar in water till it
spins a thread. Pour this into the yolks, beating all the time till
cool. Add the vanilla and lemon extract; mix flour with walnuts; mix
all together, and lastly stir in the stiffly-beaten whites. Bake in
tins lined with greased paper.


MARGUERITES

    Egg white, 1, partly beaten.
    Sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls.
    Chopped walnuts, 1/2 cup.

Stir together and spread on crackers, one inch wide by three or four
inches long. Bake a light brown.


SPONGE JELLY CAKE

    Eggs, 5.
    Lemons, 1.
    Sugar, 1 cup.
    Flour, 1 cup.

Beat the yolks till very thick, add sugar gradually, then the grated
rind and two tablespoonfuls of lemon juice. Fold in one-half of the
whites of the eggs, beaten very stiff, then one-half of the flour, the
other half of the whites, lastly the remainder of the flour. Bake in a
large dripping-pan fifteen minutes. Turn onto a cloth, trim the edges,
spread the jelly, and roll up. Wrap in the cloth and set aside to cool.


ALMOND MACAROONS

    Egg whites, 5.
    Rind of 1 lemon.
    Almond meal, 1 scant cup.
    Sugar, 2 cups.
    Flour, 1 cup.

Beat eggs stiff, add sugar, and beat very stiff; add lemon rind grated;
mix and add flour and almond meal. Drop on oiled pans in pieces the
size of a walnut, allowing plenty of room between each. Smooth with a
knife dipped in water. Bake a light brown.




_NUT BUTTER_


NUT BUTTER

Nut butter can be easily made in the home, but nearly all the prepared
nut foods on sale require expensive machinery and a steam plant to
produce, hence can not be made in the home.

Peanuts and almonds are the nuts most suitable for making nut butter.
The other varieties are difficult to blanch and do not make good
butter. The best variety of peanuts for making nut butter is the
Spanish shelled. They are the most easily blanched. Removing the skins
from the nuts after they are shelled is called blanching. Peanuts can
not be blanched unless they have been thoroughly heated.

To properly cook peanuts is the essential thing to produce a healthful,
palatable nut butter. This can be accomplished if care is exercised.
There are three ways of cooking them: namely, baking or roasting,
boiling, and steaming. The baking process is the easiest way, but care
should be used not to scorch them. Scorched or burnt peanuts are unfit
to use in any form.


PROCESS NO. 1

Put a layer of peanuts about one-half inch deep in a dripping-pan and
place on perforated shelf in a moderate oven. Allow them to bake slowly
for about one hour. Cook them until they are a light brown or straw
color. Shake the pan or stir the peanuts every few minutes. When the
kernels begin to crack and pop they brown very quickly and should be
watched closely.

A splendid way to cook them is to fill a tight-covered dish about
two-thirds full, place in the oven, and shake occasionally. When cooked
this way, they are not so liable to burn, and they retain their flavor
better. When they have cooked sufficiently, spread out at once. When
they have become quite cool, blanch as follows: This can be done by
rubbing them in the hands, or what is better, a coarse bag, or take
a piece of cloth and fold the ends together, forming a bag. Another
good device is a screen made of coarse wire. Rub them until the skins
are loose. The chaff can be removed by using a fan or by pouring them
from one dish to another where the wind is blowing. Look them over
carefully, removing defective nuts and foreign substances.

The next step is to grind them. The most practical family mill we
know of for grinding nuts, etc., is the Quaker City Mill (see cut and
description of same in this book).

Always grind freshly cooked nuts, as they do not make good butter when
left a day or two after being cooked.


PROCESS NO. 2

Thoroughly heat the nuts in an oven, but do not let them brown. Allow
them to cool, then blanch as described in process No. 1. Boil them from
three to four hours, until they are tender. Drain, spread out on tins,
and thoroughly dry them; then grind them through the mill.


PROCESS NO. 3

Heat and blanch the same as for No. 2. Grind them through a meat
chopper or the nut butter mill loosely adjusted. Then cook them in a
steam cooker about four hours. When tender, drain, spread on tins, and
thoroughly dry them. Then run them through the mill tightly adjusted.


SALTED NUT BUTTER

Prepare nuts as described in process No. 1. Sprinkle salt on the
kernels when grinding. It is much more preferable to grind the salt in
with the nuts than to mix it in the butter.


ALMOND BUTTER

Almond butter is more difficult to make than peanut butter, on account
of the difficulty in removing the skins. Dry heat does not loosen the
skins as it does the peanut. To blanch almonds, soak them in boiling
water from two to five minutes; then the skins become loose and can
be pinched off by pressing on the nut with the thumb and finger; the
skins will crack and the kernel pop out. Dry them in a slow oven until
they become thoroughly dry and crisp, taking care not to burn them.
Then grind them through a loosely adjusted mill. Place on tins or on a
cloth stretched over the stove until perfectly dry. Then grind then in
the nut butter mill tightly adjusted.

This makes excellent butter if the almonds are first-class and sweet.


BRAZIL NUT BUTTER

Remove the brown, woody skins with a sharp knife and put the nuts
through the mill. They may have to be broken up before they can be
ground. This butter is very good, but somewhat expensive. It is cheaper
to buy the nuts already shelled.


PEANUT MEAL

Heat the peanuts sufficiently to remove the skins, but do not brown
them. Blanch and look over. Boil or steam them until tender, taking
care to have them quite dry when done. Drain off all the water possible
and put them through a colander. Put on tins suspended over the stove,
or in a slow oven, with the door open, taking care not to brown them.
When perfectly dry and hard, grind through the mill loosely adjusted.
If it is not fine enough, spread out to dry some more, pass through the
mill again more tightly adjusted, but if the mill is too tight, it will
grind it into butter. A good plan is to rub it through a flour sieve.


NUT BUTTER FOR THE TABLE

Put one-half the amount of butter required for the meal into a bowl and
dilute with an equal quantity of water, adding a little of the water at
a time, beating it thoroughly with a fork until it is smooth and light.
Enough water should be used to make it the proper consistency to spread
nicely. An egg beater or wire potato masher is an excellent utensil for
mixing. A little salt can be added if desired. Nut butter when mixed
with water does not keep but a few hours.


PEANUT CREAM

Cook the peanuts until they just begin to turn brown. Then make into
butter, ground as fine as possible. Emulsify with water until it is
the consistency of milk. Then put in double boiler and cook until it
has become as thick as ordinary cream. A little salt can be added if
desired. Serve it hot or cold as preferred. It can be made into milk by
adding a little water.




_VEGETARIAN DIRECTORY_


VEGETARIAN RESTAURANTS AND CAFES

VEGETARIAN CAFE, 755 Market Street, San Francisco, Cal.

VEGETARIAN RESTAURANT, 44 San Pablo Avenue, Oakland, Cal.

VEGETARIAN RESTAURANT, 317 West Third Street, Los Angeles, Cal.

GOOD HEALTH RESTAURANT, 616 Third Street, Seattle, Wash.

VEGETARIAN RESTAURANT, 283 Pitt Street, Sydney, N. S. W.

VEGETARIAN RESTAURANT, 54 Farrar Street, Detroit, Mich.

VEGETARIAN RESTAURANT, 607 Locust Street, Des Moines, Ia.

HYGEIA DINING ROOMS, Fifty-eighth Street and Drexel Avenue, Chicago,
Ill.

VEGETARIAN RESTAURANT, 145 South Thirteenth Street, Lincoln, Neb.

VEGETARIAN RESTAURANT, Lovstrode 8, Copenhagen, K., Denmark.

VEGETARIAN CAFE, 1543 Glenarm Street, Denver, Colo.

VEGETARIAN CAFE, 322-1/2 North Tejon Street, Colorado Springs, Colo.

THE HYGEIA, Washington Avenue, Battle Creek, Mich.

HYGIENIC CAFE, 1017 Walnut Street, Philadelphia, Pa.

VEGETARIAN RESTAURANT, 170 South Howard Street, Spokane, Wash.

HYGIENIC RESTAURANT, Sheridan, Wyo.

HYGIENIC CAFE, 164 Wisconsin Street, Milwaukee, Wis.

HYGIENIC CAFE, 426 State Street, Madison, Wis.

PURE FOOD CAFE, 410 East Twelfth Street, Kansas City, Mo.

NORTH MICHIGAN TRACT SOCIETY, Petoskey, Mich.

VEGETARIAN RESTAURANT, Corner Church and Vine Street, Nashville, Tenn.

VEGETARIAN RESTAURANT, 105 East Third Street, Jamestown, N. Y.

THE LAUREL, 11 West Eighteenth Street, New York City.

HEALTH RESTAURANT, 391 Sixth Avenue, New York City.

HYGIENIC DINING ROOMS, 1209 G Street, N. W. Washington, D. C.

RESTAURANT, 307 Madison Street, Fairmont, W. Va.

THE PURE FOOD CAFE, 13 South Main Street, Salt Lake City, Utah.


DIRECTORY OF SANITARIUMS

BATTLE CREEK SANITARIUM, Battle Creek, Mich.

CHICAGO SANITARIUM, 28 Thirty-third Place, Chicago, Ill.

PACIFIC UNION MEDICAL MISSIONARY AND BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION,
Room 203, Parrott Building, 825 Market Street, San Francisco, Cal.

ST. HELENA SANITARIUM, Sanitarium, Napa County, Cal.

SAN FRANCISCO BRANCH SANITARIUM, 1436 Market Street, San Francisco, Cal.

SACRAMENTO TREATMENT ROOMS, 719-1/2 K Street, Sacramento, Cal.

EUREKA BRANCH SANITARIUM, Corner Third and J Streets, Eureka, Cal.

SAN FRANCISCO HYDRIATIC DISPENSARY, 916 Laguna Street, San Francisco,
Cal.

PORTLAND SANITARIUM, West Avenue, Mt. Tabor, Ore.

VANCOUVER TREATMENT ROOMS, 338 Columbia Street, Vancouver, B. C.

VICTORIA TREATMENT ROOMS, Victoria, B. C.

PASADENA SANITARIUM, 317 West Third Street, Los Angeles, Cal.

ARIZONA SANITARIUM, Phoenix, Ariz.

SPOKANE SANITARIUM, Spokane, Wash.

COLLEGE PLACE TREATMENT ROOMS, College Place, Wash.

SAN DIEGO TREATMENT ROOMS, Sefton Block, San Diego, Cal.

TACOMA SANITARIUM, 1016 Tacoma Avenue, Tacoma, Wash.

SEATTLE SANITARIUM, 612 Third Avenue, Seattle, Wash.

WHATCOM SANITARIUM, 1016 Elk Street, Whatcom, Wash.

COLORADO SANITARIUM, Boulder, Colo.

IOWA SANITARIUM, 603 East Twelfth Street, Des Moines, Ia.

NEBRASKA SANITARIUM, College View, Neb.

NEW ENGLAND SANITARIUM, Melrose, Mass.

SOUTHERN SANITARIUM, Graysville, Tenn.

KEENE SANITARIUM, Keene, Tex.

PHILADELPHIA SANITARIUM, 1809 Wallace Street, Philadelphia, Pa.

MADISON SANITARIUM, R. F. D. No. 4, Madison, Wis.

DETROIT SANITARIUM, 54 Farrar Street, Detroit, Mich.

JACKSON SANITARIUM, 106 First Street, Jackson, Mich.

BUFFALO SANITARIUM, 922 Niagara Street, Buffalo, N. Y.

THE TRI-CITY SANITARIUM, 1213 Fifteenth Street, Moline, Ill.

PEORIA SANITARIUM, 203 Third Avenue, Peoria, Ill.

LITTLE ROCK SANITARIUM, 1623 Broadway, Little Rock, Ark.

NASHVILLE SANITARIUM ASSOCIATION, Nashville, Tenn.

PIEDMONT VALLEY SANITARIUM, Hildebran, N. C.

ST. LOUIS SANITARIUM, Fifty-fifth Street and Cabanne Avenue, St. Louis,
Mo.

KNOWLTON SANITARIUM, Knowlton, Quebec.

NEWFOUNDLAND SANITARIUM, 282 Duckworth Street, St. Johns, Newfoundland.

CATERHAM SANITARIUM, Caterham, Surrey, England.

LEICESTER SANITARIUM, 80 Regent Street, Leicester, England.

BELFAST SANITARIUM, 39 Antrim Road, Belfast, Ireland.

FRIEDENSAU SANITARIUM, Friedensau, Post Grabow, Bez. Magdeburg, Germany.

INSTITUT SANITAIRE, Weiherweg 48, Basle, Switzerland.

NORWEGIAN PHILANTHROPIC SOCIETY, Akersgaden 74, Christiania, Norway.

SKODSBORG SANATORIUM, Skodsborg, Denmark.

FRYDENSTRANDS SANITARIUM, Frederikshavn, Denmark.

OREBRO HEALTH HOME, Klostergaten 33, Orebro, Sweden.

CAPE SANITARIUM, Plumstead, Cape Colony, South Africa.

SYDNEY SANITARIUM, Wahroonga, N. S. W., Australia.

AVONDALE HEALTH RETREAT, Cooranbong, N. S. W., Australia.

CHRISTCHURCH SANITARIUM, Papanui, Christchurch, New Zealand.

SAMOA SANITARIUM, Apia, Samoa.

GUADALAJARA SANITARIUM, Guadalajara, Mexico.

CALCUTTA SANITARIUM, 51 Park Street, Calcutta, India.

JAPANESE SANITARIUM, 42 Yamamoto-dori, Nichome, Kobe, Japan.

WASHINGTON SANITARIUM, 222 North Capitol Street, Washington, D. C.


DIRECTORY OF SANITARIUM FOOD FACTORIES

BATTLE CREEK SANITARIUM FOOD COMPANY, Battle Creek, Mich.

SANITARIUM FOOD COMPANY, Sanitarium, Cal.

PORTLAND SANITARIUM FOOD COMPANY, West Avenue, Mt. Tabor, Ore.

COLORADO SANITARIUM FOOD COMPANY, Boulder, Colo.

SANITARIUM FOOD COMPANY, 228 Clarence Street, Sydney, N. S. W.,
Australia.

UNION COLLEGE BAKERY, College View, Neb.




INDEX


BAKERY AND BREAKFAST DISHES

Baked Corn Pie, 198

Boston Brown Bread, 201

Corn Gems, 196

Corn Bread, 199, 200

Gems, 196, 197

Granose Puffs, 197

Griddle Cakes, 198

Georgia Pones, 201

Hoe Cake, 199

Popovers, 198

Vegetarian Hot Cakes, 197


BEVERAGES

Apollinaris Lemonade, 176

Caramel-Cereal, 173

Chocolate, 173

Fruit Nectar, 173

Fruit Cups, 175

Lemonade, 175

Mint Julep, 174

Orangeade, 176

Pineapple Lemonade, 176

Strawberry Sherbet, 174


CAKE

Angel, 235

Almond Macaroons, 238

Frosting, 235

Marguerites, 237

Orange, 235

Sunshine, 235

Sponge Sheet, 236

Sponge, Simple, 236

Sponge, Favorite, 237

Sponge, Nut, 237

Sponge, Jelly, 238


CEREALS

Cracked Wheat, 180

Corn Meal Mush, 183

Farina, 181

Graham Porridge, 183

Graham Porridge with Dates, 184

Gluten-Granola Mush, 184

Oatmeal, 180

Pearl Wheat, 181

Pearl Barley, 181

Rolled Oats, 180

Rice, 182

Rice, with Raisins, 183

Rice, Browned, 183


EGGS

A la Mode, 166

Baked in Tomato Cases, 168

Curdled, 166

Cream Shirred, 167

Floated, 167

Jellied, 167

Mumbled, 168

Omelet Souffle, 163

Omelet, Plain, 164

Omelet, Protose, 164

Omelet, Gluten, 165

Omelet, Rice, 165

Omelet, Apple, 165

Omelet, Granose, 165

Omelet with Tomato, 165

Omelet, Onion, 166

Omelet, Green Pea, 166

Omelet, Asparagus, 166

Poached on Toast, 169

Poached on Granose, 170

Scrambled with Sugar Corn, 169

Scrambled with Onions, 169

Scrambled with Protose, 169

Scrambled with Parsley, 169

Shirred, 167


ENTREES

Braized Protose and Cabbage, 83

Braized Protose, 85

Baked Protose with Macaroni, 86

Bean Croquettes, 99

Bean and Nut Loaf, 100

Baked Potpie, 101

Baked Eggplant a la Creme, 102

Boiled Macaroni (plain), 105

Baked Macaroni, with Egg Sauce, 108

Baked Stuffed Tomatoes, 114

Cream Nut Loaf, 74

Cereal Roast, 75

Chicken Croquettes, 77

Corn Fritters, 96

Carrot Souffle, 100

Creamed Macaroni, 107

Dressing, 69, 70

Dried Pea Croquettes, 76

Egg Mixture for Croquettes, etc., 78

Escalloped Protose, 87

Eggplant with Protose, 88

Egg Macaroni, 108

Fillets of Vegetable Salmon, 67

Frijoles with Protose Mexicano, 79

Fricassee of Protose with Potato, 79

Frizzled Protose in Eggs, 87

Green Corn and Tomato, 79

Golden Nut Chartreuse, 91

Green Corn Chowder, 98

Green Corn Nut Pie, 103

Hamburger Loaf, 73

Hashed Protose Croquettes, 77

Imperial Nut Roast, 74

Lentil Hash, 92

Lentil Fritters, 92

Lentil Patties, 93

Lentil Roast, 94

Lentil Nut Roast, 94

Mock White Fish, 67

Mock Turkey with Dressing, 69

Mock Veal Loaf, 71

Mock Chicken Rissoles, 80

Mock Chicken Pie, 102

Macaroni a l'Italienne, 105

Macaroni and Kornlet, 106

Macaroni with Tomato Sauce, 106

Macaroni Cutlets, 107

Macaroni in Cream, 107

Macaroni with Apple, 109

Macaroni and Cheese, 109

Macaroni with Granola, 110

Macaroni Croquettes, 110

Macaroni Neapolitaine, 111

Macaroni (Spanish), 111

Macaroni with Tomato, 111

Nuttolene Roast, 71

Nut and Granola Roast, 73

Nut and Tomato Roast, 76

Nut Fricassee, 78

Nut and Vegetable Stew, 81

Nut Lisbon Steak, 85

Noodles, 97

Nut and Vegetable Pie, 104

New England Boiled Dinner, 80

Okra Gumbo, 101

Pea Croquettes, 96

Protose Roast, Olive Sauce, 68

Protose with Browned Potato, 78

Protose Fricassee, 82

Protose Steak Smothered in Onions, 82

Protose Smothered with Tomatoes, 83

Protose Pot Roast, 83

Protose Steak with Potatoes, 84

Protose Pilau, 84

Protose Patties, 84

Protose Cutlets, 89, 85

Protose Hash, 113

Protose and Tomato, 86

Protose Jambalaya, 88

Protose Chartreuse, 90

Protose Steak, 90

Protose Steak a la Tartare, 90

Protose or Nuttolene Cutlets, 91

Protose and Rice Chowder, 97

Protose, Stewed (Spanish), 81

Rice, Spanish, 96

Roast Duck, 70

Roast of Protose, 72

Ragout of Protose, 89

Rice Mold, 95

Rice and Banana Compote, 95

Rice and Egg Scramble, 96

Squash Fritters, 99

Scotch Pea Loaf, 100

Scalloped Macaroni, 112

Spaghetti in Tomato Sauce, 113

Tomato Pie, 105

Vegetarian Roast, 72

Vegetable Oyster, 98

Vegetable Oyster Pie, 103

Vermicelli Nut Pie, 104

Vegetarian Hamburger Steak, 113, 114

Vegetarian Sausage, 114

Walnut Lentil Patties, 93

Walnut Lentils, 93

Walnut Loaf, 75

Walnut Roast, 75


HYGIENE OF COOKING

Boiling, 9

Baking, 12

Braizing, 12

Broiling, 12

Milk, 11

Steaming, 11

Stewing, 11


NUT BUTTER

Almond, 243

Brazil, 244

For Table, 245

Process of Making, 241

Peanut Meal, 244

Peanut Cream, 245

Salted, 243


PIES

Apple, 231

Blueberry, 232

Chocolate Custard, 226

Cocoanut, 229

Custard, Baker's, 228

Lemon, 228

Mince, 227

Pastry Dough for, 225

Pumpkin, 226, 225

Prune, 230

Rhubarb, 231

Washington Cream, 229


PUDDINGS

Apple Nut, 214

Apple (Baked), 217

Adelaide, 221

Brown Betty, 206

Banana Tapioca, 209

Bread, 216

Corn Starch Blanc Mange, 207

Caramel Custard, 212

Custard, Plain, 212

Cream Rice, 214

Cabinet, 218

Cream Sago, 219

Cereal, 221

Date, 221, 209

Farina Mold, 205

Floating Island, 207

Fig, 220

Granose Mold, 208

Lemon Apple, 205

Lemon Omelet, 210

Lemon Honey, 211

Pineapple Tapioca, 208

Prune Tapioca, 215

Prune, 215

Pressed Fruit, 216

Plum, 218

Rice, 213, 210

Strawberry Short Cake, 206

Strawberry Granose, 207

Sago Fruit, 209

Strawberry Souffle, 211

Sanitas Chocolate, 214

Snow, 217

Steamed Fruit, 219

Sponge, 220

Tapioca Custard, 213


SALADS

Almond, 17

Asparagus and Protose, 26

Asparagus and Cauliflower, 27

Asparagus, 28

Brazilian, 18

Beet, 25

Beet and Potato, 27

Brussels Sprout, 28

Cabbage, 24

Carrot and Beet, 25

Date and Celery, 28

English, 21

Fruit, 19

Lima Bean, 23

Lettuce, 24

Macedoine, 28

Normandy, 18

Nesslerode, 19

Nut and Fruit, 22

Nut, 22

Protose, 20

Protose and Celery, 20

Pea and Onion, 21

Pea and Tomato, 23

Salad la Blanche, 24

Stuffed Beet, 25

Tomato Mayonnaise, 22

Turnip and Beet, 26

Vegetarian Chicken, 17

Waldorf, 19

Water Lily, 21


SALAD DRESSINGS

Boiled, 32

Cream (Plain), 33

Cream, 33

French, 34

Golden, 35

Green Mayonnaise, 36

Lettuce, 34

La Blanche, 36

Mayonnaise, 31

Nut or Olive Oil, 35

Oil (Sour), 35

White, 32

White Cream, 34


SOUPS

Artichoke, 59

Barley and Nut, 51

Bean and Tomato, 46

Brown Bean, 53

Bean Tapioca, 54

Bread Bisque, 56

Croutons for, 40

Corn and Tomato, 48

Cereal Consomme, 48

Celery and Tomato, 59

Creole, 61

Chocolate, 62

Egg Balls for, 40

Egg Dumplings, 41

Foundation of Cream, 40

Family Favorite, 57

Fruit, 61, 64

German Lentil, 50

Green Pea, 55

Impromptu, 60

Julienne, 45

Kinds of, 39

Lentil and Tomato, 51

Lentil and Nut, 52

Lima Bean, 56

Mock Chicken, 43

Noodles for, 41

Nut Chowder, 42

Nut, French, 42

Nut and Olive, 52

Nut Noodle, 52

Nut and Pea, 53

Nut and Bean, 53

Nut and Asparagus, 53

Nut Meat Broth, 58

Nut and Cream of Corn, 59

Pea, with Vegetable Stock, 58

Palestine, 61

Rice and Nut, 51

Rice, 55

Rolled Oats, 57

Sago, 54

Savory Potato, 58

Swiss Lentil, 48

Spring Vegetable, 49

Tomato, 46

Tomato-Vermicelli, 46

Tomato and Okra, 47

Turnip and Rice, 50

Tomato Bisque, 56, 57

Vegetable, Plain, 44

Vegetable Bouillon, 41

White Soubise, 45

White Swiss, 47

White Bean, 54


SAUCES

Brown Regency, 150

Brown, 155, 156

Bread, 157

Cream Tomato, 154

Cream, 156

Egg, 156

German, 152

Golden, 157

Hollandaise, 151

Hard, 157

Imperial, 151

Ideal Chili, 153

Lemon, 159

Mint, 152

Nut Gravy, 154

Olive, 150

Orange, 158

Parsley, 156

Plum Pudding, 159

Tomato, 153

Tomato Cream, 154

Vegetable Soup Stock, 149

Vanilla, 158

White Cream, 152

Walnut Gravy, 155


TOASTS

American or French, 188

Asparagus, 192

Apple, 192

Apricot, 192

Boston Cream, 189

Berry, 191

Banana, 191

Cream, 188

Date, 190

Date with Walnuts, 192

Milk, 188

Nun's, 189

Nut Gravy, 189

Nuttolene on, 191

Prune Whipped, 190

Prune, 190

Protose, 190

Tomato, 192


VEGETABLES

Asparagus, 127

Asparagus Pompadour, 128

Asparagus with Eggs, 129

Asparagus with Green Peas, 129

Asparagus, Stewed, 128

Beans, Baked, 129, 130

Beans, Puree of, 130

Beans, Stewed, 130

Beans, Baked with Tomato, 131

Beans, String, 135

Brussels Sprouts, Plain, 140

Brussels Sprouts, Saute, 140

Brussels Sprouts, Baked, 141

Beets, 141

Beet Greens, 141

Beet Stalks, 141

Beets and Potatoes, 142

Beets, Baked, 142

Beets, Boiled, 142

Beets, Young, 142

Beet and Potato Hash, 143

Celery, Plain, 125

Celery, Stewed, 126

Chestnuts, Creamed, 127

Corn, Green, Stewed, 134

Corn, Green, Boiled, 135

Cauliflower, Cream Sauce, 136

Cauliflower, Baked, 136

Cauliflower, Tomato Sauce, 136

Cauliflower, Stewed, 137

Cauliflower, Boiled, 137

Cauliflower, Browned, 137

Cabbage and Cream, 137

Cabbage, Baked, 138

Cabbage with Tomato, 139

Cabbage, Scalloped, 139

Cabbage, Holland Cream, 139

Cabbage, Ladies', 140

Carrots, French, 145

Carrots, a la Creme, 145

Carrots with Egg Sauce, 145

Carrots, Puree of, 145

Cucumbers, 146

General Directions, 118

Lentils, Oriental Style, 126

Lentils, with Onions, 127

Onions, 131

Onions, Baked, 132

Onions, Stuffed, 132

Oysters, Mock, 125

Oysters, Vegetable, 125

Potatoes, 119

Potatoes, Mashed, 121

Potato Puffs, 121

Potatoes, Minced, 121

Potatoes, Scalloped, 122

Potatoes, Hashed, 122

Potatoes, New, and Cream, 123

Potatoes, a la Creme, 123

Potatoes, a la Delmonico, 123

Potato Croquettes, 124

Peas, 128

Peas, Puree of, 134

Peas, Green, 135

Parsnips, Baked, 143

Parsnips, in Egg Sauce, 143

Parsnips, Stewed, 143

Salsify, Stewed, 124

Succotash, 131

Spinach, 133

Squash, Summer, 133

Squash, Hubbard, 133

Turnips, Young, 144

Turnips, Mashed, 144

Turnips, Boiled, 144

Tomatoes, Scrambled, 132


       *       *       *       *       *


  Quaker City Peanut Butter Mill

  [Illustration]

  Price of Mill $4.00

  This mill is tinned and has a ball bearing. Grinds dry, wet or
  oily substances. Weight ten pounds, capacity five pounds peanut
  butter per hour. This is not a cheap meat mill which will not
  grind fine, but a thoroughly practical grinding mill constructed
  on the same principles as our large mills, which have been used so
  successfully throughout the world for nearly a generation. It is a
  general grinding mill for family use, and is sold at a price within
  the reach of every family. The importance of pure food can not be
  overestimated. The surest way to get it is to do your own grinding,
  thus having the article freshly ground as you use it, and avoiding
  the danger of injurious adulterations. This mill is adapted to
  grinding or pulverizing any of the following articles:--

  Coffee, peanuts or nuts of any kind, all wet or oily substances,
  corn meal, cracker dust, bread crumbs, cracked wheat and oats,
  horseradish, and cooked meats, spices, herbs, and roots, vanilla
  beans and pods when mixed with sugar and ground together for
  flavoring; raisins, with or without seeds for marmalade, cocoanuts,
  etc. Peanut butter is said to be superior to codliver oil for
  consumptives. Send for circular containing directions for making
  peanut butter.

  MANUFACTURED BY

  The A. W. STRAUB CO., 3737-41 Filbert St. Philadelphia, Pa.

  Canal and Randolph Sts., Chicago, Ill.

  VEGETARIAN CAFE, 755 MARKET ST., SAN FRANCISCO, CAL.


  Vegetarian Cooking Oil

  [Illustration]

  A pure vegetable shortening, made by a combination of the best food
  oils so blended as to give the delicate flavor of pure olive oil.
  A superior salad oil, a cheap, successful oil for all kinds of
  shortening.

  1/2 gal. can, $0.75      10 gal. case, 11.50


  Grape Juice and Cider

  [Illustration]

  Our Grape Juice is made from the best California grapes carefully
  selected, filtered, and put up by a process that keeps the juice
  from fermenting.

  Apple Cider is made from sound ripe apples cored, washed and free
  from worms.

  Quarts $0.40 Pints $0.25 Apple Cider, quarts $0.35


  SANITARIUM FOOD COMPANY
  Sanitarium, California

  BRANCH STORES: San Francisco, Oakland, San Jose, Fresno,
  California; And Salt Lake City and Provo, Utah.


  _Among the recipes in this cook-book are a large number in which
  Sanitas Nut Foods are used, particularly Protose and Nuttolene. A
  trial of these dishes will convince the most scientific cook and
  the greatest lover of good things, of the important place in the
  "meatless menu" occupied by these preparations._

  _NUT FOODS_ were developed by the Sanitas Nut Food Co., Ltd.,
      Battle Creek, Mich. Their manufacture is protected by patents
      issued by the patent bureaus of the United States and foreign
      countries only after the most rigid scrutiny of the claims
      presented by the manufacturers.

  _SANITAS_ Protose and Nuttolene are the only successful and
      scientific meat substitutes on the market.

  _SANITAS FOODS_ are sold by reliable dealers in all parts of the
      country. In case your dealer does not carry them, write us
      for information about our "easy way of supplying you direct
      from factory." The Sanitarium Food Co., St. Helena and San
      Francisco, Cal., carry a full line of our products.


                  Wheeling, W. Va.

      I have been a vegetarian for several years, and as long as I
  can procure your Protose, Malted Nuts and Nut Butter, I have no
  desire to go back to the flesh pots.
      You shall hear from me again.

          Yours very respectfully
              F. H. H.


  SANITAS NUT FOOD CO., Ltd.
    Battle Creek, Michigan


     *       *       *       *       *


  Transcriber's Notes:

  Obvious errors in punctuation and capitalization have been corrected.
  The spelling of the original has been preserved and the hyphenation
  has not been standardized.

  Page 32, "tablepoonfuls" changed to "tablespoonfuls"
           (froth, 6 tablespoonfuls)
  Page 55, "and" changed to "an" (simmer half an hour)
  Page 56, "prefectly" changed to "perfectly" (until perfectly soft)
  Page 62, "Chopped ice" changed to "Chipped ice"
  Page 125, "salt" changed to "salty" (get too salty.)
  Page 243, "diffcult" changed to "difficult" (more difficult to make)
  Page 244, "prefectly" changed to "perfectly" (When perfectly dry)





End of Project Gutenberg's The Vegetarian Cook Book, by E. G. Fulton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VEGETARIAN COOK BOOK ***

***** This file should be named 43879.txt or 43879.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/8/7/43879/

Produced by Feorag NicBhride, Petra A and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
