The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Trail of The Badger, by Sidford F. Hamp

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Trail of The Badger
       A Story of the Colorado Border Thirty Years Ago

Author: Sidford F. Hamp

Illustrator: Chase Emerson

Release Date: October 21, 2013 [EBook #43989]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TRAIL OF THE BADGER ***




Produced by sp1nd, Martin Pettit and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)






THE TRAIL OF THE BADGER

[Illustration: "DICK PUSHED HIS RIFLE-BARREL THROUGH A CREVICE IN THE
ROCKS."]




The Trail of The Badger

_A STORY OF THE COLORADO BORDER THIRTY YEARS AGO_

BY
SIDFORD F. HAMP

_Author of "Dale and Fraser, Sheepmen,"
"The Boys of Crawford's Basin," etc._


ILLUSTRATED BY
CHASE EMERSON

[Illustration: logo]

W. A. WILDE COMPANY
BOSTON      CHICAGO


_Copyrighted, 1908_ BY W. A. WILDE COMPANY _All rights reserved_




THE TRAIL OF THE BADGER




PREFACE


In writing the adventures of the boys who followed "The Trail of the
Badger" down into that part of Colorado where the fringes of two
discordant civilizations overlapped each other--the strenuous
Anglo-Saxon and the easygoing Mexican--the author has endeavored to show
how two healthy, enterprising young fellows were able to do their little
part in that great work of Desert Reclamation whose importance is now as
well understood by the general public as it always has been by those
whose lot has been cast to the west of meridian one hundred and five.

To some it may appear that the boys are ahead of their time, but to the
author, whose introduction to "the arid region" dates back thirty years
and more, remembering the conditions then prevailing, it seems no more
than natural that they should recognize the unusual opportunity
presented to them of making a career for themselves, and even that they
should be dimly conscious of the fact that if they "could make two ears
of corn, or two blades of grass, to grow upon a spot of ground where
only one grew before" they would be deserving well of the infant
community of which they formed a part.

That in making this attempt they would meet with adventures--in fact,
that they could hardly avoid them--the author, recalling his own
experiences in that country at that time, feels well assured.




CONTENTS


    I. DICK STANLEY                     11

   II. SHEEP AND CINNAMON               32

  III. THE MESCALERO VALLEY             51

   IV. RACING THE STORM                 68

    V. HOW DICK BROUGHT THE NEWS        87

   VI. THE PROFESSOR'S STORY           102

  VII. DICK'S DIPLOMACY                116

 VIII. THE START                       129

   IX. ANTONIO MARTINEZ                147

    X. THE PADRON                      165

   XI. THE SPANISH TRAIL               179

  XII. THE BADGER                      191

 XIII. THE KING PHILIP MINE            203

  XIV. A CHANGE OF PLAN                221

   XV. DICK'S SNAP SHOT                241

  XVI. THE OLD PUEBLO HEAD-GATE        259

 XVII. THE BRIDGE                      276

XVIII. THE BIG FLUME                   294

  XIX. PEDRO'S BOLD STROKE             313

   XX. THE MEMORABLE TWENTY-NINTH      333




ILLUSTRATIONS


"Dick pushed his rifle-barrel through a crevice in
the rocks"                     (_Frontispiece_)          42

"It was a splendid chance; nobody could ask for a
better target"                                           57

"Passing on our way through the town of Mosby"          137

"Behind him, stood the squat figure of Pedro Sanchez"   213

"I could not think what he was doing it for"            286




The Trail of the Badger




CHAPTER I

DICK STANLEY


"Look out! Look out! Behind you, man! Behind you! Jump quick, or he'll
get you!"

It was a boy, a tall, spare, wiry young fellow of sixteen, who shouted
this warning, his voice, in its frantic urgency, rising almost to a
shriek at the end; and it was another boy, also tall, spare and wiry, to
whom the warning was shouted. The latter turned to look behind him, and
for one brief instant his whole body stiffened with fear--his very hair
stood on end. Nor is this a mere figure of speech: the boy's hair did
actually stand on end: he could feel it "creep" against the crown of his
hat. _I know_--for I was the boy!

That I had good reason to be "scared stiff" I think any other boy will
admit, for, not thirty feet below me, coming quickly and silently up
the rocks, his little gleaming eyes fixed intently upon me, was a grim
old cinnamon bear, an animal which, though less dangerous than his big
cousin, the grizzly, is quite dangerous enough when he is thoroughly in
earnest.

But for my companion's warning shout the bear would surely have caught
me, and my story would have come to an end at the very beginning of the
first chapter.

It was certainly an awkward situation, about as awkward, I should think,
as any boy ever got himself into; and how I, Frank Preston, lately a
schoolboy in St. Louis, happened to find myself on a spur of Mescalero
Mountain, in Colorado, with a cinnamon bear charging up the rocks within
a few feet of me, needs a word of explanation.

I will therefore go back a few steps in order to give myself space for a
preliminary run before jumping head-first into my story, and will tell
not only how I came to be there, but will relate also the curious
incident which first brought me into contact with my future friend, Dick
Stanley; an incident which, while it served as an introduction, at the
same time gave me some idea of the resourcefulness and promptness of
action with which his very peculiar training had endowed him.

It was in the last week of October, 1877, that I was seated one evening
in my room in St. Louis, very busy preparing my studies for next day,
when the door opened suddenly and in walked my Uncle Tom.

When, at the age of seven, I had been left an orphan, Uncle Tom, my
mother's brother, though himself a bachelor, had taken charge of me, and
with him I had lived ever since. He and I, I am glad to say, were the
best of friends--regular chums--for, though twenty years my senior, he
seemed in some respects to be as young as myself, and our relations were
more like those of elder and younger brother than of uncle and nephew.

Uncle Tom was rather short and rather fat, and he was moreover one of
the jolliest of men, being blessed with a disposition which prompted him
always to see the bright side of things, no matter how dark and
threatening they might look. Having at a very early age been pitched out
into the world to "fend for himself," and having by square dealing and
hard work done remarkably well, he had imbibed the idea that
book-learning as a means of getting on in the world was somewhat
overrated; an idea which, right or wrong--and I think myself that Uncle
Tom carried it rather too far--was to have a decided effect in shaping
my own career.

As it was against the rule, laid down by Uncle Tom himself, for any one
to disturb me at my studies, I naturally looked up from my books to
ascertain the cause of the intrusion, when, with a cigar in his mouth
and his hands in his pockets, he came bulging in, half filling the
little room.

That there was something unusual in the wind I felt sure, and my
guardian's first act went far to confirm my suspicion, for, removing one
hand from his pocket, he quietly reached forward and with his finger
tilted my book shut.

"Put 'em away," said he. "You won't need them for a month or more."

As the fall term of school was then in full swing, this declaration was
a good deal of a surprise to me, as any one will suppose, and doubtless
I showed as much in my face.

"I have a scheme in my head, Frank," said he, with a knowing wag of that
member, in reply to my look of inquiry.

"I know _that_," I replied, laughing; for there never was a moment when
Uncle Tom had not a scheme in his head of one sort or another.

"You spider-legged young reptile!" cried he, with perfect good humor,
but at the same time shaking a threatening finger at me. "Don't you dare
to laugh at my schemes; especially this one. For this is a brand-new
idea, and a very important one--to you. I'm leaving to-morrow night for
Colorado."

"Are you?" I cried, a good deal surprised by this sudden announcement.
"When did you decide upon that?"

"To-day. I got a letter this afternoon from my friend, Sam Warren, the
assayer, written from Mosby--if you know where that is."

I shook my head.

"I didn't suppose you did," remarked Uncle Tom. "It is a new mining camp
on one of the spurs of Mescalero Mountain in Colorado, and in the
opinion of Sam Warren--my old schoolmate, you know--it has a great
future before it. So he has written me that if I have the time to spare
I had better come out and take a look at it."

Uncle Tom's business was that of a mining promoter, the middle man
between the prospector and the capitalist, a business in which his
ability and his honorable methods had gained for him an enviable
reputation.

"So you have decided to go out, have you?" said I.

"Yes," he replied. "I leave to-morrow evening--and you are coming with
me."

As may be imagined, I opened my eyes pretty widely at this unfolding of
the "brand-new idea."

"What do you mean?" I asked.

"Look here, Frank, old chap," said he, seating himself on the edge of
the table and becoming confidential. "You've stuck to your books very
well--if anything, too well. Now, I've had my eye on you ever since the
hot weather last summer, and it strikes me you need a change--you are
too pale and altogether too thin."

Being fat and "comfortable" himself, Uncle Tom was disposed to regard
with pity any one, like myself, whose framework showed through its
covering.

"But----" I began; when Uncle Tom headed me off.

"Now you be quiet," said he, "and let me finish. I've had some such idea
brewing in my head for some time; it isn't a sudden freak, as you
imagine. I've considered the matter carefully, and I've come to the
conclusion that you'll lose nothing by the move. In fact, what you will
lose by missing a month or so of schooling will be more than made up to
you by the eye-opener you will get in making this expedition."

"How so?" I asked.

"You will make the acquaintance of a young State just learning to walk
alone--for, as you know, it was only last year that Colorado came into
the Union; you will see a new mining camp, and rub up against the men,
good, bad and indifferent, who go to make up the community of a frontier
town; and more than that, you will get at first hand, what you never
could get by sitting here and reading about it, a correct idea of the
country traversed by the explorers--Pike, Fremont and the rest of them.

"I am honestly of opinion, Frank," he went on, seriously, "that this is
an opportunity not to be neglected. At the same time, old fellow, as it
is your education and not mine that is under discussion, I consider that
you have a right to a voice in the matter; so I'll leave you to think it
over, and to-morrow at breakfast you can tell me whether you are coming
or not."

With that, Uncle Tom slipped down from the table, walked out and shut
the door behind him. That was his way: he was always as sudden as a clap
of thunder.

Anybody will guess that my books did not receive much more attention
that evening. For an hour I paced up and down the room, considering
Uncle Tom's proposition. It was true that I did feel pulled down by the
effects of the hot weather, combined with a pretty close application to
my books, and I had no doubt that the expedition proposed would do me a
world of good; though whether my education would be benefited in like
manner I was not so sure as Uncle Tom seemed to be.

But though I did my best honestly to consider the question in all its
aspects, there can be little doubt that my inclinations--whether I was
aware of it or not--colored my judgment, so that my final decision was
just what might have been expected in any active boy of sixteen. As the
clock struck ten I ran down-stairs and informed Uncle Tom that I was
going with him.

It is not necessary to go into all the details of our journey, though to
me, who had never before been a hundred miles from home, everything was
new and everything was interesting. It is enough to say that, leaving
the train at the foot of the mountains--for the railroad then went no
further--we engaged places in the mail-carrier's open buckboard, and
after a very rough and very tiring drive of a day and a half we at last
reached our destination and were set down at the door of a house outside
which hung a "shingle" bearing the legend, "Samuel Warren, Assayer and
U. S. Dep. Min. Surveyor."

It will be remembered that one of Uncle Tom's reasons for breaking into
my school term was that I should rub up against the citizens comprising
a frontier settlement. He could hardly have contemplated, however, that
I should come in contact with quite so many of them quite so early in
the day as I did.

We had hardly sat down to the refreshments spread before us by our
host--a big, bearded man, clad in a suit of brown canvas--when we, in
common with the rest of the community, were startled by the sudden
shriek of a woman in distress. To rush to the door was the work of a
moment, when, the first thing we caught sight of was a man, clad only in
his nightshirt, running like a madman up the street, while far behind
him, and losing ground at every step, ran a woman, calling out with all
the breath she had to spare--which was not much--"Stop him! Stop him!"

"It's Tim Donovan!" shouted the assayer. "He's sick with the
mountain-fever! He's crazy! Head him off! Head him off! The poor chap
will die of exposure!"

Warren's house was near the upper end of the street, and just as we
three jumped down the porch steps, the demented fugitive passed the
door, going like the wind. At once we set off in pursuit, while behind
us came all the rest of the population and most of the dogs, by this
time roused to action by the cries of the sick man's wife.

Nobody knows until he has tried it how hard it is to run up-hill at an
elevation of nine thousand feet, especially to one unaccustomed to such
altitudes. Uncle Tom, who was not built for such exercise, fell out in
the first fifty yards, while, of the others, the short-winded barroom
loafers--of whom, as is always the case in a new camp, there were more
than enough--gave out even more quickly, their habits of life being a
fatal handicap in a foot-race. One by one, nearly all the rest came down
to a walk, until presently the only ones left with any run in them were
Jake Peters and Oscar Swansen, both timber-cutters from the hills,
Aleck Smith, a wiry little teamster, and myself.

As for me, having the advantage of a good start over everybody else,
being only sixteen years old, and having a reputation at school as a
long-distance runner, it seemed as though I ought to be able to catch
the unfortunate fugitive, who, having run a quarter of a mile already,
should by this time be out of breath.

Indeed, I believe I should have caught him at the first dash had he not
resorted to tactics which made me chary of coming near him. Not more
than thirty yards separated us and I was gaining steadily, when he,
barefooted himself and making no noise, hearing the clatter of my shoes
behind him, suddenly stopped, picked up a stone and hurled it at me. It
would have taken me square in the chest had I not jumped aside; when,
finding that the man was really dangerous, and knowing very well that I
should have no chance whatever in a personal struggle with him--for he
was a stout young Irish miner with a fore-arm like a leg of mutton--I
contented myself with trotting behind and keeping him in sight; trusting
to the able-bodied men following me to do the tackling when the
opportunity should arise.

The town of Mosby consisted of one steep street about half a mile long
and two houses thick; for it was situated in a valley, or, rather, in a
gorge, so narrow that there was no room for it to spread except at the
two ends. In truth, there was no room for it to grow except southward,
for at the upper, or northern, end the mountains came together, forming
an inaccessible canon through which rushed the little stream of ice-cold
water coming down from Mescalero.

From the lower end of this canon the stream fell perpendicularly into a
great hole in the rocks--a sort of natural chimney, or well, about sixty
feet deep. The down-stream side of this "chimney" was split from top to
bottom, and through the narrow crack, only four or five feet wide, the
water leaped foaming down in a series of miniature cascades. The only
way of getting into this deep pit was by taking to the water, scrambling
up the steep, step-like bed of the stream and passing through the crack,
when, once inside, a man might defy the world to come and get him out.

This was exactly what Tim Donovan did. Seeing that he could follow the
stream no further, I was wondering whether he would take to the
mountain on the right or the one on the left, when he suddenly jumped
into the water, ran up the smooth, wet "steps," and disappeared from
sight through the crevice. In ten seconds, however, he showed himself
again. He had found in the driftwood a ragged branch of a pine tree
about three feet long, and with this in one hand and a ten-pound stone
in the other he stood at bay, regardless of the icy water which poured
over his feet, or of the spray from the fall behind him, which in half a
minute had wet his thin single garment through and through.

It was an impregnable stronghold. No one could get in from the rear, and
the place could not be rushed from the front--the ascent was too steep
and slippery and the entrance too narrow. If Tim were determined to stay
there and perish with cold, it appeared to me that nobody could do
anything to prevent him.

One by one the pursuers joined me before the entrance, when Mrs.
Donovan, who was among the last to arrive, advanced as near as she could
without getting into the water, and besought her errant husband to come
down.

But Tim was deaf to entreaty; all the blandishments of his anxious wife
were without effect, and if she could not get him to come down it
appeared as though nobody could.

Tim, though, was a popular young fellow, and it was not in the nature of
a Colorado miner, or of an Irishman either--for they hold together like
burrs in a horse's tail--to desert a comrade in distress. So, Mrs.
Donovan having failed, there stepped to the front a short, thick-set,
red-haired man, Mike O'Brien by name, Tim's partner and particular
crony, who, talking pleasantly and naturally to him, as though his
friend were quite sane and rational, stepped into the water and waded
carefully up the steep slope.

"How are ye, Tim, me boy?" said he, with off-hand cordiality. "It's glad
I am to see ye out again. It's me birthday to-day, Tim; I'm having a bit
of a supper at home an' I come up to ask ye----"

Whack! came the stone from Tim's hand, breaking to pieces against the
rocky wall within an inch of Mike's head. The invitation was declined.

Mike himself, in his effort to dodge the missile, missed his footing,
fell on his back, and in a series of dislocating bumps was swept down
the "steps" to the starting place, wet, as he declared, right through to
his bones.

Up to this time the demented man had kept silence, but on seeing Mike
go tumbling down-stream, he shook his fist after him and cried out:

"Come back and try again, ye devouring baste! Come on, the whole pack of
yez! Don't stand there howling, ye cowardly curs; come up and get me
out--if ye dare!"

"I believe he thinks we are a pack of wolves," said Mr. Warren.

"That's it, Mr. Warren, sir," exclaimed Mrs. Donovan, turning to the
assayer. "That's it, entirely. He heard a wolf howl last night, and it
was hard wor-rk I had to kape him from jumping out of his bed and
running off right thin. He thinks it's a pack of them that's hunting
him."

"Poor fellow! No wonder he refuses to come down. What are we going to
do? We _must_ get him out."

Then ensued an eager debate, in which everybody took a share except
Uncle Tom and myself, who, standing a little apart from the rest on the
sloping bank of the stream, were listening and looking on, when some one
touched me on my arm, and a boyish voice said:

"What's the matter? What's it all about?"

Turning round, I saw before me a tall young fellow about my own age,
with reddish hair, very keen gray eyes and a much-freckled face,
carrying in one hand an old-fashioned, muzzle-loading rifle, nearly as
long as himself, and in the other three grouse which he appeared to have
shot.

Wondering who the boy might be, I explained the situation, when he
cried:

"What! Tim Donovan! Why he'll die if he's left in there. Poor chap! We
must get him out."

"Yes," said Uncle Tom. "That's just it. But how? The man won't be
persuaded to come out, and no one can get in to drag him out--so what's
to be done?"

The young fellow stood for a minute thinking, and then, suddenly lifting
his head, he exclaimed, with a half laugh:

"I know! I know what we can do! He can't be persuaded out or dragged
out, but he can be driven out."

"How?" asked Uncle Tom.

"If you'll come with me," replied the boy, "I'll show you in two
minutes."

So saying, he jumped across the creek and set off straight up the almost
perpendicular side of the mountain, we two following. Uncle Tom,
however, finding the climb too steep for him, very soon turned back
again, so we two boys went on alone.

About three hundred feet up my companion stopped, and it was well for me
he did, for I could hardly have gone another step, so desperately out of
breath was I.

"Not used to it, are you?" said the boy, who himself seemed to be quite
unaffected. "Well, we don't have to go any higher, fortunately. Look
over there. Do you see that stubby pine tree growing out of the rocks
and overhanging the waterfall?"

"Yes, I see it," I replied. "And what's that big round thing hanging to
it?"

"A wasps' nest."

"A wasps' nest?"

"A wasps' nest," repeated my new acquaintance with peculiar emphasis and
with a twinkle in his eye.

"Ah!" I exclaimed, suddenly enlightened. "I see your little game. Good!
You propose to knock down the wasps' nest into the 'well,' and then poor
Tim will just have to vacate."

"That's my idea."

"Great idea, too. But, look here! Are the wasps alive at this time of
year?"

"They are this year. We've had such a wonderfully warm season that they
are just as brisk as ever."

"Well, but there's another thing: how are you going to do it? You can't
get at it: the rocks are too straight-up-and-down; and you can't come
near enough to knock it off with a stone. How are you going to do it?"

The young fellow smiled and patted the stock of his gun.

"Shoot it down!" I exclaimed. "Do you think you can? It won't be any use
plugging it full of holes, you know; you'll have to nip off the little
twig it hangs on. Can you do that?"

"I think I can."

"All right, then, fire away and let's see."

I must confess I felt doubtful. The boy did not look nor talk like a
braggart, but nevertheless, to cut with a bullet the slim little branch,
no bigger than a lead-pencil, upon which the nest hung suspended looked
to me like a pretty ticklish shot.

My companion, however, seemed confident. Cocking his gun, he kneeled
down, and using a big rock as a rest he took careful aim and fired.

It was a perfect shot. The big ball of gray "paper" dropped like a
plumb, struck the rim of the "well," burst open, and emptied upon the
head of the unfortunate Tim about a bucketful of venomous little
yellow-jackets, each and every one of them quivering with rage, and each
and every one bent on taking vengeance on somebody.

The people below were still debating how to get the sick man out of his
fortress, when the sound of the rifle-shot caused them all to look up;
but only for an instant, for the echoes had not yet died away, when,
with a startling yell, out came Tim, frantically waving his club above
his head, seemingly more crazy than ever. Supposing that he was making a
dash for liberty, half a dozen of his particular friends flung
themselves upon him, and down they all went in a heap together.

But this arrangement was of the briefest. In another moment, with
shrieks and yells and whirling arms, the whole population went charging
down the street, Uncle Tom in the lead, running--breath or no breath--as
he had never run before.

Never was there a more complete victory: besiegers and besieged flying
in one general rout before the assaults of the new enemy. And never did
I laugh so extravagantly as I did then, to see the enraged
yellow-jackets "take it out" on an unoffending community, while the real
culprits were all the time sitting safely perched on the mountainside
looking down on the rumpus.

"Well, we got him out all right," remarked my companion, as he calmly
reloaded his rifle. "I thought we could. You're a newcomer, aren't you?
My name's Dick Stanley; I live up-stream, just at the head of the canon.
Are you expecting to make a long stay?"

"Two or three weeks, I think," I replied. "My uncle, Mr. Tom Allen, is
here to inspect the mines, and he brought me with him. We come from St.
Louis. My name's Frank Preston. We're staying at Mr. Warren's house."

"Well, come up to our house some day. It is in a little clearing just at
the head of the canon--you can't miss it--and we'll go off for a day's
grouse-shooting up into the mountains if you like."

"All right, I will. That would just suit me. To-morrow?"

"Yes, come up to-morrow, if you like. I'll be on the lookout for you. I
suppose you are going home now," he continued, as we rose to our feet.
"If I were you, I'd keep up here on the side of the mountain--the street
will be full of yellow-jackets--and then, when you come opposite the
assayer's house, make a bolt for his back door, or some of them may get
you yet."

"That's a good idea. I'll do it. Well, good-bye. I'll come up to-morrow
then, if I can."




CHAPTER II

SHEEP AND CINNAMON


"That was the funniest thing I ever saw," exclaimed Uncle Tom, laughing
in spite of himself, while at the same time, with a comically rueful
twist of his countenance, he rubbed the back of his neck where one of
the wasps had "got" him. "The way poor Tim bolted out of his stronghold
after defying the whole population to come and get him out, was the very
funniest thing I ever did see. That was a smart trick of that young
rascal; though I wish he had given me notice beforehand of what he
intended to do. I'd have started to run a good five minutes earlier if
I'd known what was coming. Who is the boy, Warren?"

"Well, that is not easy to say," replied our host, "for, as a matter of
fact, he does not know himself. His history, what there is of it, is a
peculiar one. He lives up here at the head of the canon with an old
German named Bergen--commonly known as the Professor--and his Mexican
servant, a man of forty whom the professor brought up with him from
Albuquerque, I believe. If Frank's object in coming here was to rub up
against all sorts and conditions of men, he could hardly have chosen a
better place. Certainly he cannot expect to find a more remarkable
character than the professor.

"The old fellow is regarded by the people here as a harmless
lunatic--which, in a community like this, where muscle is at a premium
and scientific attainments at a discount, is not to be wondered at--for
it is incomprehensible to them that any man in his right mind should
spend his life as the professor spends his.

"The old gentleman is an enthusiastic naturalist. He is making a
collection of the butterflies, beetles and such things, of the Rocky
Mountain region, and with true German thoroughness he has spent years in
the pursuit. Choosing some promising spot, he builds a log cabin, and
there he stays one year--or two if necessary--until that district is
'fished out,' as you may say, when he packs up and moves somewhere else,
to do the same thing over again."

"Well, that is certainly a queer character to come across," was Uncle
Tom's comment. "But how about the boy, Sam? How does he happen to be in
such company?"

"Why, about twelve or thirteen years ago, old Bergen was 'doing' the
country somewhere northwest of Santa Fe, when he made a very strange
discovery. It was a bad piece of country for snowslides, which were
frequent and dangerous in the spring, and one day, being anxious to get
to a particular point quickly, the professor was crossing the tail of a
new slide--a risky thing to do--as being the shortest cut, when his
attention was attracted by some strange object lodged half way up the
great bank of snow. Climbing up to it, he found to his astonishment that
the strange object was a wagon-bed, while, to his infinitely greater
astonishment, inside it on a mattress, fast asleep, was a three-year-old
boy--young Dick!"

"That was an astonisher, sure enough!" exclaimed I, who had been an
eager listener. "And was that all the professor found?"

"That was all. The running-gear of the wagon had vanished; the horses
had vanished; and the boy's parents or guardians had vanished--all
buried, undoubtedly, under the snow."

"And what did the professor do?"

"The only thing he could do: took the boy with him--and a fortunate
thing it was for young Dick that the old gentleman happened to find
him. But though he inquired of everybody he came across--they were not
many, for white folks were scarce in those parts then--the professor
could learn nothing of the party; so, not knowing what else to do, he
just carried off the youngster with him, and with him Dick has been ever
since."

"That's a queer history, sure enough," remarked Uncle Tom. "And was
there nothing at all by which to identify the boy?"

"Just one thing. I forgot to say that in the wagon-bed was a single
volume of Shakespeare--one of a set: volume two--on the fly-leaf of
which was written the name, 'Richard Livingstone Stanley, from Anna,'
and as the boy was old enough to tell his own name--Dick Stanley--the
professor concluded that the owner of the book was his father. Moreover,
as the boy made no mention of his mother, though he now and then spoke
of his 'Daddy' and his 'Uncle David,' the old gentleman formed the
theory that the mother was dead and that the father and uncle, bringing
the boy with them, had come west to seek their fortunes, and being very
likely tenderfeet, unacquainted with the dangerous nature of those great
snow-masses in spring time, they had been caught in a slide and
killed."

"Poor little chap," said Uncle Tom. "And he has been wandering about
with the old gentleman ever since, has he? He must be a sort of Wild Man
of the West in miniature."

"Not a bit of it. The professor is a man of learning, and he has not
neglected his duty. Dick has a highly respectable education, including
some items rather out of the common for a boy: he speaks German and
Spanish; he has a pretty intimate knowledge of the wild animals of the
Rocky Mountains; and he is one of the best woodsmen and quite the best
shot of anybody in these immediate parts."

"Well, they are an odd pair, certainly. I should like to go up and see
the professor--that is, if he ever receives visitors."

"Oh, yes. He's a sociable old fellow. He and I are very good friends.
I'll take you up there and introduce you some day. He is well worth
knowing. If there is any information you desire concerning the Rocky
Mountain country from here southward to the border, Herr Bergen can give
it you. You are to be congratulated, Frank, on making Dick's
acquaintance so early: he will be a fine companion for you while you
stay here. You propose to go grouse-shooting to-morrow, do you? Well,
you can take my shotgun--it hangs up there on the wall--and make a day
of it; for your uncle and I are proposing to ride up to inspect a mine
on Cape Horn, which will take us pretty well all afternoon."

I thanked our host for his offer, and next morning, gun in hand, I set
off immediately after breakfast for Dick's dwelling.

Passing the "well" where Tim Donovan had taken refuge the day before, I
ascended by a clearly-marked trail to the edge of the canon, and
following along it through the woods for about a mile, I presently came
in sight of a little clearing, in which stood a neat log cabin of two or
three rooms. Outside was a Mexican, chopping wood, while in the doorway
stood Dick, evidently looking out for me, for, the moment I appeared, he
ran forward to meet me.

"How are you?" he cried. "Glad you came early: I have a new plan for the
day, if it suits you. I've been spying around with a field-glass and
I've just seen a band of sheep up on that big middle spur of Mescalero;
they are working their way up from their feeding-ground, and I propose
that we go after them instead of hunting grouse. What do you say?"

"All right; that will suit me."

"Come on, then. Just come into the house for a minute first and see the
professor, and then we'll dig out at once."

From the fact that Mr. Warren had so frequently spoken of the professor
as "the old gentleman," I was prepared to see a bent old man, with a
white beard and big round spectacles--the typical "German professor," of
my imagination. I was a good deal surprised, then, to find a small,
active man of sixty, perhaps, a little gray, certainly, but with a clear
blue eye and a wide-awake manner I was far from anticipating. He was in
the inner room when I entered--evidently the sanctum where he prepared
and stored his specimens--but the moment he heard our steps he came
briskly out, and, on Dick's introducing me, shook hands with me very
heartily.

"And how's poor Tim this morning?" he asked, as soon as the formalities,
if they can be called so, were over.

"He is all right, sir," I replied. "I went down there before breakfast
this morning at Mr. Warren's request to inquire. In fact, Tim was so
much better apparently that Mrs. Donovan declares that if he ever gets
the fever again she intends to apply iced water to his feet and
wasp-stings to the rest of his anatomy, as being a sure cure. She is
immensely grateful to Dick for having discovered and applied a remedy
that has worked so well."

"Then if Tim is wise," remarked the professor, laughing, "he won't get
the fever again, for I should think the cure would be worse than the
disease. But you want to be off, don't you? Do you understand the
working of a Winchester repeater? Well," as I shook my head, "then you
had better take the Sharp's and Dick the Winchester. And, Dick, you'd
better have an eye on the weather. Romero says there is a change coming,
and he is generally pretty reliable. So, now, off you go; and good luck
to you."

Leaving the cabin, we went straight on up the narrow valley for about
three miles--the pine-clad mountains rising half a mile high on either
side of us--going as quickly as we could, or, to be more exact, going as
quickly as I could. For the elevation, beginning at nine thousand feet,
increased, of course, at every step, and I, being unused to such
altitudes, found myself much distressed for breath--a fact which was
rather a surprise to me, considering that in our track-meets at school
the mile run was my strong point. I did not understand then that to get
enough oxygen out of that thin mountain air it was necessary to take two
breaths where one would suffice at sea-level.

We had ascended about a thousand feet, I think, when, at the base of the
bare ridge for which we had been making, we slackened our pace, and my
companion, who knew the country, taking the lead, we went scrambling up
over the rocks and snow for an hour or more.

The quantity of snow we found up there was a surprise to me, for, from
below the amount seemed trifling. There had been a heavy fall up in the
range a month before, and this snow, drifting into the gullies, had
settled into compact masses, the surface of which, on this, the southern
face of the mountain, being every day slightly softened by the heat of
the sun, and every night frozen solid again, made the footing
exceedingly treacherous. Whenever, therefore, we found it necessary to
cross one of these steep-tilted snow-beds we did so with the greatest
caution.

We had been climbing, as I have said, for more than an hour, and were
nearing the top of the ridge, when Dick stopped and silently beckoned to
me to come up to where he lay, crouching under shelter of a little
ledge.

"Smell anything?" he whispered.

I gave a sniff and raised my eyebrows inquiringly.

"Sheep?" said I, softly.

My companion nodded.

"They must be somewhere close by," said he, in a voice hardly audible.
"Go very carefully and keep your eyes wide open. If you see anything,
stop instantly."

We were lying side by side upon the rocks, Dick considerately waiting a
moment while I got my breath again, and were just about to crawl
forward, when there came the sound of a sudden rush of hoofs and a
clatter of stones from some invisible point ahead of us, and then dead
silence again.

"They've winded us and gone off," whispered Dick. But the next moment he
added eagerly, "There they are! Look! There they are! Up there! See? My!
What a chance!"

Immediately on our left was a deep gorge, so narrow and precipitous that
we could not see the bottom of it from where we lay. The sheep, having
seemingly got wind of us, with that agility which is always so
astonishing in such heavy animals, had rushed down one side of the
precipitous gorge and up the other, and now, there they were, all
standing in a row--eleven of them--on the opposite summit, looking down,
not at us, but at something immediately below them.

"What do you suppose it is, Dick?" I whispered.

"Don't know," my companion replied. "Mountain-lion, perhaps: they are
very partial to mutton. Anyhow," he continued, "if we want to get a shot
we must shoot from here: we can't move without the sheep seeing us, and
they'd be off like a flash if they did. You take a shot, Frank. Take the
nearest one. Sight for two hundred yards."

"No," I replied. "You shoot. I shall miss: I'm too unsteady for want of
breath."

"All right."

Raising himself a fraction of an inch at a time until he had come to a
kneeling position, Dick pushed his rifle-barrel through a crevice in the
rocks, took aim and fired. The nearest sheep, a fine fellow with a
handsome pair of horns, pitched forward, fell headlong from the ledge
upon which he had been standing and vanished from our sight among the
broken rocks below; while the others turned tail and fled up the
mountain, disappearing also in a minute or less.

"Come on!" cried Dick, springing to his feet. "Let's go across and get
him. Round this way. Don't trust to that slope of ice: you may slip and
break your neck."

"But the mountain-lion, Dick," I protested. "Suppose there's a
mountain-lion down there."

"Oh, never mind him!" Dick exclaimed. "If there was one, he's gone by
this time. And even if he should be there yet, he'd skip the moment he
saw us. We needn't mind him. Come on!"

Away we went, therefore, Dick in the lead, and scrambling quickly though
carefully down the rocky wall, we made our way up the bed of the ravine
until we found ourselves opposite the ledge upon which the sheep had
been standing. Here we discovered that the wall of the gorge was split
from top to bottom by a narrow cleft--previously invisible to us--filled
with hard snow, and whether the sheep had been standing on the right
side or the left of this crevice, and therefore on which side the big
ram had fallen, we could not tell; for the wall of the gorge, besides
being exceedingly rough, was littered with great masses of rock against
any of which the body of the sheep might have lodged.

"I'll tell you what, Frank," said my companion. "It might take us an
hour or two to search all the cracks and crannies here. The best plan
will be to climb straight up to the ledge where the sheep stood and look
down. Then, if he is lodged against the upper side of any of these
rocks, we shall be able to see him. But as we can't tell whether he was
standing on the right or the left of this crevice, suppose you climb up
one side while I go up the other."

"All right," said I. "You take the one on the left and I'll go up on
this side."

It was a laborious climb for both of us--and how those sheep got up
there so quickly is a wonder to me still--but as my side of the crevice
happened to be easier of ascent than Dick's I got so far ahead of him
that I presently found myself about fifty yards in the lead.

At this point, however, I met with an obstruction which at first seemed
likely to stop me altogether. The fallen rocks were so big, and piled so
high, that I could not get over them, and for a moment I thought I
should be forced to go back and try another passage. Before resorting
to this measure, though, I thought I would attempt to get round the
barrier by taking to the snow-bank, supporting myself by holding on to
the rocks. To do this I should need the use of both my hands, so, as my
rifle had no strap by which to hang it over my shoulder, I took out my
handkerchief, tied one end to the trigger-guard, took the other end in
my teeth, and slinging the weapon behind me, I seized the rock with both
hands and set one foot on the snow.

It was at this moment that Dick, down below me on the other side of the
crevice, while in the act of crawling up over a big rock, caught a
glimpse of something moving over on my side, and the next instant, out
from between two great fragments of granite rushed a cinnamon bear and
went charging up the slope after me.

The bear--as we discovered afterward--had found our sheep, and was
agreeably engaged in tearing it to pieces, when he caught a whiff of me.
He was an old bear, and had very likely been chased and shot at more
than once in the past few years--since the white men had begun to invade
his domain--and having conceived a strong antipathy for those
interfering bipeds which walked on their hind legs and carried
"thunder-sticks" in their fore paws, he decided instantly that, before
finishing his dinner, he would just dash out and finish me.

And very near he came to doing it. It was only Dick's quick sight and
his equally quick shout that saved me.

My companion's warning cry to jump could have but one meaning: there was
nowhere to jump except out upon the snow-bank; and recovering from my
first momentary panic, I let go my rifle and sprang out from the rocks.

My hope was that I should be able to keep my footing long enough to
scramble across to the rocks on the other side; but in this I was
disappointed. The snow-bed lay at an angle as steep as a church roof,
and while its surface was slightly softened by the sun, just beneath it
was as hard and as slippery as glass. Consequently, the moment my feet
struck it they slipped from under me, down I went on my face, and in
spite of all my frantic clawing and scratching I began to slide briskly
and steadily down-hill.

The bear--most fortunately for me--seemed to be less cunning than most
of his fellows. Had he paused for a moment to reason it out, he would
have seen that by waiting five seconds he might leap upon my back as I
went by. Luckily, however, he did not reason it out, but the instant he
saw me jump he jumped too, and he, too, began sliding down the icy slope
ahead of me; for being, as I said, an old bear, his blunted claws could
get no hold.

It was an odd situation, and "to a man up a tree," as the saying is, it
might have been entertaining. Here was the pursuer retreating backward
from the pursued, while the pursued, albeit with extreme reluctance, was
pursuing the pursuer--also backward.

It was like a nightmare--and a real, live, untamed broncho of a
nightmare at that--but luckily it did not last long. Finding that no
efforts of mine would arrest my downward progress, and knowing that the
bear, reaching the bottom first, need only stand there with his mouth
wide open and wait for me to fall into it, I whirled myself over and
over sideways, until presently my hand struck the rocks, my finger-tips
caught upon a little projection, and there I hung on for dear life, not
daring to move a muscle for fear my hold should slip.

But from this uncomfortable predicament I was promptly relieved. I had
not hung there five seconds ere the sharp report of a rifle rang out,
and then another, and next came Dick's voice hailing me:

"All right, Frank! I've got him! Hold on: I'm coming up!"

Half a minute later, as I lay there face downward on the ice, I heard
footsteps just above me, a firm hand grasped my wrist, and a cheerful
voice said:

"Come on up, old chap. I can steady you."

"But the bear, Dick! The bear!" I cried, as I rose to my knees.

"Dead as a door-nail," he replied, calmly. "Look."

I glanced over my shoulder down the slope. There, on his back among the
rocks, lay the cinnamon, his great arms spread out and his head hanging
over, motionless. As the snarling beast had slid past him, not ten feet
away, Dick, with his Winchester repeater, had shot him once through the
heart and once in the base of the skull, so that the bear was stone dead
ere he fell from the little two-foot ice-cliff at the bottom of the
slope.

As for myself, I had had such a scare and was so completely exhausted by
my vehement struggles during the past couple of minutes, that for a
quarter of an hour I lay on the rocks panting and gasping ere I could
get my lungs and my muscles back into working order again.

As soon as I could do so, however, I sat up, and holding out my hand to
my companion, I said:

"Thanks, old chap. I'm mighty glad you were on hand, or, I'm afraid, it
would have been all up with me."

"It was a pretty close shave," replied Dick; "rather too close for
comfort. He meant mischief, sure enough. Well, he's out of mischief now,
all right. Let's go down and look at him."

"I suppose," said I, "it was the bear that the sheep were looking down
at when they stood up there on the ledge all in a row."

"Yes, that was it. If I'd known it was a bear they were staring at I'd
have left them alone. A mountain-lion I'm not afraid of: he'll run
ninety-nine times out of a hundred. But a cinnamon bear is quite another
thing: the less you have to do with them, the better."

"Well, as far as I'm concerned," said I, "the less I have to do with
them, the better it will suit me. If this fellow is a sample of his
tribe I'm very willing to forego their further acquaintance: my first
interview came too unpleasantly near to being my last. Come on; let's go
down."




CHAPTER III

THE MESCALERO VALLEY


It had been our intention to take off the bear's hide and carry it home
with us, but we found that he was such a shabby old specimen that the
skin was not worth the carriage, so, after cutting out his claws as
trophies, we went on to inspect our sheep. Here again we found that "the
game was not worth the candle," as the saying is, for the bear had torn
the carcass so badly as to render it useless, while the horns, which at
a distance and seen against the sky-line, had looked so imposing, proved
to be too much chipped and broken to be any good.

My rifle we found lying beside the bear, it also having slid down the
ice-slope when I dropped it.

"Well, Frank," remarked my companion, "our hunt so far doesn't seem to
have had much result--unless you count the experience as something."

"Which I most decidedly do," I interjected.

"You are right enough there," replied Dick; "there's no gainsaying that.
Well, what I was going to say was that the day is early yet, and if you
like there is still time for us to go off and have a try for a deer. I
should like to take home something to show for our day's work."

"Very well," said I. "Which way should we take? There are no deer up
here among the rocks, I suppose."

"Why, I propose that we go up over this ridge here and try the country
to the southwest. I've never been down there myself, having always up to
the present hunted to the north and east of camp; but I've often thought
of trying it: it is a likely-looking country, quite different from that
on the Mosby side of the divide: high mesa land cut up by deep canons.
What do you say?"

"Anything you like," I answered. "It is all new to me, and one direction
is as good as another."

"Very well, then, let us get up over the ridge at once and make a
start."

Having discovered a place easier of ascent than those by which we had
first tried to climb up, we soon found ourselves on top of the ridge,
whence we could look out over the country we were intending to explore.

It was plain at a glance that the two sides of the divide were very
different. Behind us, to the north, rose Mescalero Mountain, bare,
rugged and seamed with strips of snow. From this mountain, as from a
center, there radiated in all directions great spurs, like fingers
spread out, on one of which we were then standing. Looking southward, we
could see that our spur continued for many miles in the form of a chain
of round-topped mountains, well covered with timber, the elevation of
which diminished pretty regularly the further they receded from the
parent stem. On the left hand side of this chain--the eastern, or Mosby
side--the country was very rough and broken: from where we stood we
could see nothing but the tops of mountains, some sharp and rugged, some
round and tree-covered, seemingly massed together without order or
regularity. But to the south and southwest it was very different. Here
the land lying embraced between two of the spurs was spread out like a
great fan-shaped park, which, though it sloped away pretty sharply, was
fairly smooth, except where several dark lines indicated the presence of
canons of unknown depth. The whole stretch, as far as we could
distinguish, was pretty well covered with timber, though occasional open
spaces showed here and there, some of two or three acres and some of
two or three square miles in extent.

"Just the country for black-tail," said Dick, "especially at this time
of year--the beginning of winter. For, you see, it lies very much lower
on the average than the Mosby side, and the snow consequently will not
come so early nor stay so late. It ought to be a great hunting-ground."

"It is a curious thing to find an open stretch like that in the midst of
the mountains," said I. "What is it called?"

"The Mescalero valley. The professor says it was once an arm of the
sea--and it looks like it, doesn't it? Over on the Mosby side the rocks
are all granite and porphyry, tilted up at all sorts of angles; but down
there it is sandstone and limestone, lying flat--a sure sign that it was
once the bottom of a sea."

"Is the valley inhabited?" I asked.

"Down at the southern end, about fifty miles away, there is a Mexican
settlement, at the foot of those twin peaks you see down there standing
all alone in the midst of the valley--the Dos Hermanos: Two Brothers,
they are called--but up at this end there are no inhabitants, I
believe."

"Well, there will be some day, I expect," said I. "It ought to be a
fine situation for a saw-mill, for instance."

"I don't know about that. There would be no way of getting your product
to market. Old Jeff Andrews, the founder of Mosby, told me about it
once--he's been across it two or three times--and he says that the
country is so slashed with canons that a wheeled vehicle couldn't travel
across it, and consequently the expense of road-making would amount to
about as much as the value of the timber."

"I see. And, of course, the streams are much too shallow to float out
the logs. Well, let us get along down."

"All right. By the way, before we start, there was one thing I wanted to
say:--If we should happen to get separated, all you have to do is to
turn your face eastward, climb up over the Mosby Ridge, and you'll find
yourself on our own creek, either above or below the town. It's very
plain; you can hardly lose yourself--by daylight at any rate. So, now,
let's be off."

The climb down on this side we found to be very much steeper than the
climb up on the other had been. We dropped, by Dick's guess, about
three thousand feet in the three miles we traversed ere we found
ourselves in the midst of the thick timber, walking on comparatively
level ground. Keeping along the eastern side of the valley, in the
neighborhood of the Mosby Ridge, we made our way forward, steering by
the sun--for the trees were so thick we could see but a short distance
ahead--when we came upon one of the little open spaces I have mentioned.
We were just about to walk out from among the trees, when my companion,
with a sudden, "Pst!" stepped behind a tree-trunk and went down on one
knee. Without knowing the reason for this move, I did the same, and on
my making a motion with my eyebrows, as much as to say, "What's up?"
Dick whispered:

"Do you see that white patch on the other side of the clearing? An
antelope with its back to us. I'll try to draw him over here, so that
you may get a shot."

So saying, Dick took out a red cotton handkerchief, poked the corner of
it into the muzzle of his rifle, and standing erect behind his tree,
held out his flag at right angles.

At first the antelope took no notice, but presently, catching a glimpse
of the strange object out of the corner of his eye, he whirled round
and stood for a moment facing us with his head held high. A slight puff
of wind fluttered the handkerchief; the antelope started as though to
run; but finding himself unhurt, his curiosity got the better of his
fears, and he came trotting straight across the clearing in order to get
a closer view. At about a hundred yards distance he stopped, his body
turned broadside to us, all ready to bolt at the shortest notice, when
Dick whispered to me to shoot.

[Illustration: "IT WAS A SPLENDID CHANCE; NOBODY COULD ASK FOR A BETTER
TARGET."]

It was a splendid chance; nobody could ask for a better target; but do
you think I could hold that rifle steady? Not a bit of it! Instead of
one sight, I could see half a dozen; and finding that the longer I aimed
the more I trembled, I at length pulled the trigger and chanced it.
Where the bullet went I know not: somewhere southward; and so did the
antelope, and at much the same pace, if I am any judge of speed.

"Never mind, old chap," said Dick, laughing. "That is liable to happen
to anybody. Most people get a touch of the buck-fever the first time
they try to shoot a wild animal. You'll probably find yourself all right
the next chance you get."

"I'm afraid there's not likely to be a 'next chance,' is there?" I
asked. "Won't that shot scare all the deer out of the country?"

"I hardly think so: the deer are almost never disturbed down here; it
isn't like the Mosby side, where the prospectors are tramping over the
hills all the time."

"Don't they ever come down here, then?"

"No, never. There is a common saying, as you know, perhaps, that 'gold
is where you find it'; meaning that it may be anywhere--one place is as
likely as another. But, all the same, the prospectors seem to think the
chances are better among the granite and porphyry rocks on the other
side, where the formation has been cracked and broken and heaved up on
end by volcanic force. They never trouble to come down here, where any
one can see at a glance that the deposits have never been disturbed
since they were first laid down at the bottom of a great inlet of the
ocean."

"I see what you mean: and as nobody ever comes down here the deer are
not fidgety and suspicious as they would be if they were always being
disturbed."

"That's it, exactly. They are so unused to the presence of human beings
that I doubt if they would take any notice of your shot except to cock
their ears and sniff at the breeze for a minute or two. Anyhow, we'll go
ahead and find out. Let us go across this clearing and see if there
isn't a spring on the other side. That antelope was drinking when we
first saw him, if I'm not mistaken."

Sure enough, just before we entered the trees again, we came upon a pool
of water around the softened rim of which were many tracks of animals.

"Hallo!" cried Dick. "Just look here! See the wolf tracks--any number of
them. It must be a great wolf country as well as a great deer
country--in fact, because it is a great deer country. I shouldn't like
to be caught here in the winter with so many wolves about; they are
unpleasant neighbors when food is scarce."

"Are they dangerous to a man with a gun?" I asked.

"Yes, they are. One wolf--or even two--doesn't matter much to a man with
a breach-loading rifle; but when a dozen or twenty get after you, you'll
do well to go up a tree and stay there. A pack of hungry wolves is no
trifle, I can tell you."

"Have you ever had any experience with them yourself?"

"I did once, and a mighty distressing one it was, though it didn't hurt
me, personally. I was out hunting with my dog, Blucher, a little
short-legged, long-bodied fellow of no particular breed, and was up
among the tall timber east of the house, going along suspecting nothing,
when Blucher, all of a sudden, began to whine and crowd against my legs.
I looked back, and there I saw six big timber-wolves slipping down a
hill about a quarter of a mile behind me. They stopped when I stopped,
but as soon as I moved, on they came again--it was very uncomfortable,
especially when two of them vanished among the trees, and I couldn't
tell whether they might not be running to get round the other side of
me. I went on up the next rise, the wolves keeping about the same
distance behind me, and as soon as we were out of their sight, Blucher
and I ran for it. But it was no use: the wolves had taken the same
opportunity, and when I looked back again, there they were, all six of
them, not a hundred yards behind this time.

"It began to look serious; for though it was possible that they were
after Blucher, and not after me at all, I couldn't be sure of that. So,
first picking out a tree to go up in case of necessity, I knelt down
and fired into the bunch, getting one. I had hoped that the others would
turn and run, but the shot seemed to have a directly opposite effect:
the remaining five wolves came charging straight at me.

"I gave the dog one kick and yelled at him to 'Go home!'--it was all I
could do--dropped my rifle, jumped for a branch, and was out of reach
when the wolves rushed past in pursuit of Blucher.

"Poor little beast! Though he was a mongrel with no pretence at a
pedigree, he was a good hunting dog and a faithful friend. But what
chance had he in a race with five long-legged, half-starved
timber-wolves? It happened out of my sight, I am glad to say; all I
heard was one yelp, followed by an angry snarling, and then all was
silent again."

Dick paused for a moment, his face looking very grim for a boy, and then
continued: "I've hated the sight and the sound of wolves ever since. Of
course, I know they were only following their nature, but--I can't help
it--I hate a wolf, and that's all there is to it."

"I don't wonder," said I. "Any one----"

"Hark!" cried Dick, clapping his hand on my arm. "Did you hear that?
Listen!"

We stood silent for a moment, and then, far off in the direction from
which we had come, I heard a curious whimpering sound, the nature of
which I could not understand.

"What is it?" I whispered, involuntarily sinking my voice.

"Wolves--hunting."

"Hunting what?"

"I don't know; but we'll move away from here, anyhow. Come on."

Dick's manner, more than his words, made me feel a little uneasy and I
followed him very willingly as he set off at a smart walk through the
timber.

"You don't suppose they are hunting us, Dick, do you?" I asked, as we
strode along side by side.

"I can't tell yet. It seems hardly likely--in daylight, and at this time
of year. I could understand it if it were winter. If they are hunting
us, it is probably because they, like the deer, are unacquainted with
men, and never having been shot at, they don't know what danger they are
running into. Still, I feel a little suspicious that it is our trail
they are following. They are coming down right on the line we took, at
any rate. We shall be able to decide, though, in a minute or two. Look
ahead. Do you see how the trees are thinning out? We are coming to
another open space, a big one, I think; I noticed it when we were up on
the ridge just now."

"What good will that do us?" I asked.

"We shall be able to get a sight of them. Come on. I'll show you."

True enough, we presently stepped out from among the trees again and
found ourselves on the edge of another open, grassy space, very much
larger than the last one. It was about three hundred yards across to the
other side, and a mile in length from east to west. We had struck it
about midway of its east-and-west length. Out into the open Dick walked
some twenty yards, and there stopped once more to listen.

We had not long to wait. The eager whimper came again, much nearer, and
now and then a quavering howl. I did not like the sound at all. I looked
at Dick, who was standing "facing the music" and frowning thoughtfully.

"Well, Dick!" I exclaimed, getting impatient.

"I think they are after us," said he.

"And what do you mean to do? Not stay out here in the open, I suppose."

"Not we; at least, not for more than five minutes. Look here, Frank,"
he went on, speaking quickly. "I'll tell you what I propose to do. We'll
keep out here in the open, about this distance from the trees, and make
straight eastward for the Mosby Ridge; it is only half a mile or so to
the woods at that end of the clearing and we can make it in five
minutes. Then, if the wolves are truly hunting us, they will follow our
trail out into the open, when we shall get a sight of them and be able
to count them. If they are only three or four we can handle them all
right, but if there is a big pack of them we shall have to take to a
tree. Give me your rifle to carry--my breathing machinery is better used
to it than yours--and we'll make a run for it."

It was only a short half-mile we had to run--quite enough for me,
though--and under the first tree we came to, Dick stopped.

"This will do," said he, handing back my rifle. "We'll wait here now and
watch. Hark! They're getting pretty close. Hallo! Hallo! Why, look
there, Frank!"

That Dick should thus exclaim was not to be wondered at, for out from
the trees, scarce a hundred paces from us, there came, not the wolves,
but a man! And such an odd-looking man, riding on such an odd-looking
steed!

"What is he riding on, Dick?" I asked. "A mule?"

"No; a burro--a jack--a donkey; a big one, too; and it need be, for he
is a tremendous fellow. Did you ever see such a chest?"

"Is he an Indian?"

"No; a Mexican. An Indian wouldn't deign to ride a burro. I understand
it all now. The wolves are not hunting us at all: they are after the
donkey. And the man is aware of it, too: see how he keeps looking
behind. What is that thing he is carrying in his left hand? A bow?"

"Yes; a bow. And a quiver of arrows over his shoulder."

"So he has! He doesn't seem to be in much of a hurry, does he? Evidently
he is not much afraid of the wolves. Why, he's stopping to wait for
them! He's a plucky fellow. Why, Frank, just look! Did you ever see such
a queer-looking specimen?"

This exclamation was drawn from my companion involuntarily when the
Mexican, checking his donkey, sprang to the ground. He certainly was a
queer-looking specimen. If he had looked like a giant on donkey-back, he
looked like a dwarf on foot; for, though his head was big and his body
huge, his legs were so short that he appeared to be scarce five feet
high; while his muscular arms were of such length that he could touch
his knees without stooping.

To add to his strange appearance, the man was clad in a long, sleeveless
coat made of deer-skin, with the hairy side out.

We had hardly had time to take in all these peculiarities when Dick once
more exclaimed:

"Ah! Here they come! One, two, three--only five of them after all."

As he spoke, the wolves came loping out from among the trees; but the
moment they struck our cross-trail the suspicious, wary creatures all
stopped with one accord, puzzled by coming upon a scent they had not
expected.

This was the Mexican's opportunity. Raising his long left arm, he drew
an arrow to its head and let fly.

I thought he had missed, for I saw the arrow strike the ground and knock
up a little puff of dust. But I was mistaken. One of the wolves gave a
yelp, ran back a few steps, fell down, got up again and ran another few
steps, fell again, and this time lay motionless. The arrow had gone
right through him!

Almost at the same instant Dick raised his rifle and fired. The shot
was electrical. One of the wolves fell, when the remaining three
instantly turned tail and ran.

But not only did the wolves run: the Mexican, casting one glance in our
direction, sprang upon his donkey and away he went, at a pace that was
surprising considering the respective sizes of man and beast.

It was in vain that Dick ran out from under our tree and shouted after
him something in Spanish. I could distinguish the word, _amigos_, two or
three times repeated, but the man took no notice. Perhaps he did not
believe in friendships so suddenly declared. At any rate, he neither
looked back nor slackened his pace, and in a minute or less he and his
faithful steed vanished into the timber on the south side of the
clearing.

The whole incident had not occupied five minutes; but for the presence
of the two dead wolves one would have been tempted to believe it had
never happened at all--solitude and silence reigned once more.

"Well, wasn't that a queer thing!" cried Dick.

"It certainly was," I replied. "I wonder who the man is. Anyhow, he's
not coming back, so let's go and pick up his arrow."




CHAPTER IV

RACING THE STORM


Walking over to where the two wolves lay, we soon found the arrow, its
head buried out of sight in the hard ground, showing with what force it
had come from the bow. It was carefully made of a bit of some hard wood,
scraped down to the proper diameter, and fitted with three
feathers--eagle feathers, Dick said--one-third as long as the shaft,
very neatly bound on with some kind of fine sinew.

"Looks like a Ute arrow," remarked my companion, as he stooped to pick
it up; "yet the man was a Mexican, I am sure. I suppose he must have got
it from the Indians."

"Do the Utes use copper arrow-heads?" I asked.

"No, they don't. They use iron or steel nowadays. Why do you ask?"

"Because this arrow-head is copper," I replied.

"Why, so it is!" cried Dick, rubbing the soil from the point on his
trouser-leg. "That's very odd. I never saw one before. I feel pretty
sure the Indians never use copper: it is too soft. This bit seems to
take an edge pretty well, though. See, the point doesn't seem to have
been damaged by sticking into the ground; and it has been filed pretty
sharp, too; or, what is more likely, rubbed sharp on a stone. It has
evidently been made by hand from a piece of native copper."

"I wonder why the man should choose to use copper," said I. "Though when
you come to think of it, Dick," I added, "I don't see why it shouldn't
make a pretty good arrow-head. It is soft metal, of course, but it is
only soft by comparison with other metals. This wedge of copper weighs
two or three ounces, and it is quite hard enough to go through the hide
of an animal at twenty or thirty yards' distance when 'fired' with the
force that this one was."

"That's true. And I expect the explanation is simple enough why the man
uses copper. It is probably from necessity and not from choice. Like
nearly all Mexicans of the peon class, he probably never has a cent of
money in his possession. Consequently, as he can't buy a gun, he uses a
bow; and for the same reason, being unable to procure iron for
arrow-heads, he uses copper. I expect he comes from the settlement at
the foot of the valley, for copper is a very common metal down there."

"Why should it be more common there than elsewhere?" I asked.

"Well, that's the question--and a very interesting question, too. The
professor and I were down in that neighborhood about a year ago, and on
going into the village we were a good deal surprised to find that every
household seemed to possess a bowl or a pot or a cup or a dipper or all
four, perhaps, hammered out of native copper--all of them having the
appearance of great age. There were dozens of them altogether."

"How do they get them?" I asked.

"That's the question again--and the Mexicans themselves don't seem to
know. They say, if you ask them, that they've always had them. And the
professor did ask them. He went into one house after another and
questioned the people, especially the old people, as to where the copper
came from; but none of them could give him any information. I wondered
why he should be so persevering in the matter--though when there is
anything he desires to learn, no trouble is too much for him--but after
we had left the place he explained it all to me, and then I ceased to
wonder."

"What was his explanation, then?"

"He told me that when he was in Santa Fe about fifteen years before, he
made the acquaintance of a Spanish gentleman of the remarkable name of
Blake----"

"Blake!" I interrupted. "That's a queer name for a Spaniard."

"Yes," replied Dick. "The professor says he was a descendant of one of
those Irishmen who fled to the continent in the time of William III, of
England, most of them going into the service of the king of France and
others to other countries--Austria and Spain in particular."

"Well, go ahead. Excuse me for interrupting."

"Well, this gentleman was engaged in hunting through the old Spanish
records kept there in Santa Fe, looking up something about the title to
a land-grant, I believe, and he told the professor that in the course of
his search he had frequently come across copies of reports to the
Spanish government of shipments of copper from a mine called the King
Philip mine. That it was a mine of importance was evident from the
frequency and regularity of the 'returns,' which were kept up for a
number of years, until somewhere about the year 1720, if I remember
rightly, they began to become irregular and then suddenly ceased
altogether."

"Why?"

"There was no definite statement as to why; but from the reports it
appeared that the miners were much harried by the Indians, sometimes the
Navajos and sometimes the Utes, while the loss, partial or total, of two
or three trains with their escorts, seemed to bring matters to a climax.
Shipments ceased and the mine was abandoned."

"That's interesting," said I. "And where was this King Philip mine?"

"The gentleman could not say. There seemed to be no map or description
of any kind among the records; but from casual statements, such as notes
of the trains being delayed by floods in this or that creek, or by snow
blockades on certain passes, he concluded that the mine was somewhere up
in this direction."

"Well, that is certainly very interesting. And the professor, I suppose,
concludes that the Mexicans down there at---- What's the name of the
place?"

"Hermanos--called so after the two peaks, at the foot of which it
stands."

"The professor concludes, I suppose, that the Mexicans' unusual supply
of copper pots and pans came originally from the King Philip mine."

"Yes; and I've no doubt they did; though the Mexicans themselves had
never heard of such a mine. Yet--and it shows how names will stick long
after people have forgotten their origin--yet, just outside the village
there stands a big, square adobe building, showing four blank walls to
the outside, with a single gateway cut through one of them, flat-roofed
and battlemented--a regular fortress--and it is called to this day the
_Casa del Rey_:--the King's House. Now, why should it be called the
King's House? The Mexicans have no idea; but to me it seems plain
enough. The King Philip mine was probably a royal mine, and the
residence of the king's representative, the storage-place for the
product of the mine, the headquarters of the soldier escort, would
naturally be called the King's House."

"It seems likely, doesn't it? Is that the professor's opinion?"

"Yes. He feels sure that the King Philip mine is not far from the
village; possibly--in fact, probably--in the Dos Hermanos mountains."

"And did he ever make any attempt to find it?"

"Not he. Prospecting is altogether out of his line. It was only the
historical side of the matter that interested him. All he did was to
write to the Senor Blake at Cadiz, in Spain, telling him about it;
though whether the letter ever reached its destination he has never
heard."

"And who lives in the King's House now?" I asked. "Anybody?"

"Yes. It is occupied by a man named Galvez, the 'padron' of the village,
who owns, or claims, all the country down there for five miles
square--the Hermanos Grant. We did not see him when we were there, but
from what we heard of him, he seems to regard himself as lord of
creation in those parts, owning not only the land, but the village and
the villagers, too."

"How so? How can he own the villagers?"

"Why, it is not an uncommon state of affairs in these remote Mexican
settlements. The padron provides the people with the clothes or the
tools or the seed they require on credit, taking security on next year's
crop, and so manages matters as to get them into debt and keep them
there; for they are an improvident lot. In this way they fall into a
state of chronic indebtedness, working their land practically for the
benefit of the padron and becoming in effect little better than slaves."

"I see. A pretty miserable condition for the poor people, isn't it? And
doesn't this man, Galvez, with his superior
intelligence--presumably--know anything of the King Philip mine?"

"Apparently not."

"My word, Dick!" I exclaimed. "What fun it would be to go and hunt for
it ourselves, wouldn't it?"

"Wouldn't it! I've often thought of it before, but I know the professor
would never consent. He would consider it a waste of time. It's an idea
worth keeping in mind, though, at any rate. There's never any telling
what may turn up. We might get the chance somehow; though I confess I
don't see how. But we must be moving, Frank," said he, suddenly changing
the subject. "It's getting latish. Hallo!"

"What's the matter?" I asked, looking wonderingly at my companion, who,
with his hand held up to protect his eyes from the glare, was standing,
staring at the sun.

"Why, the matter is, Frank, that the professor will say that I've
neglected my duty, I'm afraid. You remember he told me to look out for a
change of weather? I'd forgotten all about it."

"Well," said I, "I don't see that that matters. There's no sign of a
change, is there?"

"Yes, there is. Look up there. Do you see a number of tiny specks all
hurrying across the face of the sun from north to south?"

"Yes. What is it?"

"Snow."

"Snow!" I cried, incredulously. "How can it be snow, when there isn't a
scrap of cloud visible anywhere?"

"It is snow, all the same," said Dick; "old snow blown from the other
side of Mescalero."

"But how can that be, Dick? All the snow we found up there was packed
like ice."

"Ah, but we were on the south side. On the north side, where the sun has
no effect, it is still as loose and as powdery as it was when it fell."

"Of course. I hadn't thought of that. There must be a pretty stiff
breeze blowing overhead to keep it hung up in the sky like that and not
allow a speck of it to fall down here."

"Yes, it's blowing great guns up there, all right, and I am afraid we
shall be getting it ourselves before long. We must dig out of here hot
foot, Frank. I hope we haven't stayed too long as it is."

It was hard to believe that there was anything to fear from the weather,
with the unclouded sun shining down upon us with such power as to be
almost uncomfortably hot; but Dick, I could see, felt uneasy, and as I
could not presume to set up my judgment against his larger experience, I
did not wait to ask any more questions, but set off side by side with
him when he started eastward at a pace which required the saving of all
my breath to keep up with him.

We had been walking through the woods for about half an hour and were
expecting to begin the ascent of the Mosby Ridge in a few minutes, when
we were brought to a standstill by coming suddenly upon the edge of a
deep cleft in the earth, cutting across our course at right angles. It
was one of the many canons for which the Mescalero valley was notorious.

Looking across the canon, we could see that the opposite wall was
composed of a thick bed of limestone overlying another of sandstone, the
latter, being the softer, so scooped out that the limestone cap
projected several feet beyond it. It appeared to be quite unscalable,
and on our side it was doubtless the same, for, on cautiously
approaching the edge as near as we dared, we could see that the cliff
fell sheer for three hundred feet or more.

"No getting down here!" cried Dick. "Up stream, Frank! The canon will
shallow in that direction."

Away we went again along the edge of the gorge, and presently were
rejoiced to find a place where the cliff had broken away, enabling us,
with care, to climb down to the bottom. The other side, however,
presented no possible chance of getting out, so on we went, following up
the dry bed of the arroyo, looking out sharply for some break by which
we might climb up, when, on rounding a slight bend, Dick stopped so
suddenly that I, who was close on his heels, bumped up against him.

"What's the matter, Dick?" I asked. "What are you stopping for?"

"Look up there at Mescalero," said he.

It was the first glimpse of the mountain we had had since entering the
woods at the head of the valley, and the change in its appearance was
alarming. The only part of it we could see was the summit, standing out
clear and sharp against the sky; all the rest of it, and of the whole
range as well, was shrouded by a heavy gray cloud, which, creeping round
either side of the peak, was rolling down our side of the range, slowly
and steadily filling up and blotting out each gully and ravine as it
came to it. There was a stealthy, vindictive look about it I did not at
all like.

"Snow, Dick?" I asked.

"Yes, and lots of it, I'm afraid. See how the cloud comes creeping
down--like cold molasses. I expect it is so heavy with snow that it
can't float in the thin air up there, and the north wind is just
shouldering it up over the range from behind. We've got to get out of
here, Frank, as fast as we can and make the top of the Mosby Ridge, if
possible, before that cloud catches us. Once on the other side, we're
pretty safe: I know the country; but on this side I don't. So, let us
waste no more time--we have none to waste, I can tell you."

Nor did we waste any, for neither of us had any inclination to linger,
but pushing forward once more along the bottom of the canon, we
presently espied a place where we thought we might climb out. Scrambling
up the steep slope of shaly detritus, we had come almost to the top,
when to our disappointment we found our further progress barred by a
little cliff, not more than eight feet high, but slightly overhanging,
and so smooth that there was no hold for either feet or fingers.

"Up on my shoulders, Frank!" cried my companion, laying down his rifle
and leaning his arms against the rock and his head against his arms.

In two seconds I was standing on his shoulders, but even then I could
not get any hold for my hands on the smooth, curved, shaly bank which
capped the limestone. Only a foot out of my reach, however, there grew a
little pine tree, about three inches thick, and whipping off my belt I
lashed at the tree trunk with it. The end of the belt flew round; I
caught it; and having now both ends in my hands I quickly relieved my
companion of his burden and crawled up out of the ravine.

Then, buckling the belt to the tree, I took the loose end in one hand,
and lying down flat I received and laid aside the two rifles which Dick
handed up to me, one at a time. Dick himself, though, was out of reach,
perceiving which, I pulled off my coat, firmly grasped the collar and
let down the other end to him, lying, myself, face downward upon the
stones, with the end of the belt held tight in the other hand.

"All set?" cried Dick; and, "All set!" I shouted in reply. There was a
violent jerk upon the coat, and the next thing, there was Dick himself
kneeling beside me.

"Well done, old chap!" cried he. "That was a great idea. Now, then,
let's be off. I'll carry the two rifles. It's plain sailing now.
Straight up the Ridge for those two great rocks that stand up there like
a gateway to the pass. I know the place. Only a couple of thousand feet
to climb and then we begin to go down-hill. We shall make it now. Come
on!"

The trees were thin just here, and as we started to ascend the pass we
obtained one more glimpse of Mescalero--the last one we were to get that
day. The bank of cloud had advanced about half a mile since we first
caught sight of it, while it had become so much thicker as the wind
rolled it up from the other side of the range, that now only the very
tip of the mountain showed above it. Even as we watched it, a great fold
of the cloud passed over the summit, hiding it altogether.

"See that, Dick?" said I.

"Yes," he replied. "A very big snow, I expect. Hark! Do you hear that
faint humming? The wind in the pines. We shall be getting it soon. Come
on, now; stick close to my heels; if I go too fast, call out."

Away we went up the pass, pressing forward at the utmost speed I could
stand, desperately anxious to get as far ahead as possible before the
storm should overtake us. The ascent, though very steep on this side,
presented no other special difficulty, and at the end of an hour we had
come close to the two great rocks for which we had been making.

All this time the sun continued to shine down upon us, though with
diminishing power as the hurrying snowflakes passing above our heads
became thicker and thicker; while, as to the storm-cloud itself, we
could not see how near it had come, for the pine-clad mountain, rising
high on our left hand, obstructed our view in that direction. That it
was not far off, though, we were pretty sure, for the humming of the
wind in the woods--the only thing by which we could judge--though faint
at first, had by this time increased to a roar.

The storm was, in fact, much nearer than we imagined, and just as we
passed between the "gateway" rocks it burst upon us with a fury and a
suddenness that, to me at least, were appalling.

Almost as though a door had been slammed in our faces, the light of the
sun was cut off, leaving us in twilight gloom, and with a roar like a
stampede of cattle across a wooden bridge, a swirling, blinding smother
of snow, driven by a furious wind, rushed through the "gateway," taking
us full in the face, with such violence that Dick was thrown back
against me, nearly knocking us both from our feet. Instinctively, we
crouched for shelter behind the rock, and there we waited a minute or
two to recover breath and collect our senses.

"Pretty bad," said Dick. "But it might have been worse: it isn't very
cold--not yet; we have only about two miles to go, and I know the lay of
the land. We'll start again as soon as you are ready. I'll go first and
you follow close behind. Whatever you do, don't lose sight of me for an
instant: it won't do to get lost. Hark! Did you hear that?"

There was a rending crash, as some big tree gave way before the storm.
It was a new danger, one I had not thought of before. I looked
apprehensively at my companion.

"Suppose one of them should fall on us, Dick," said I.

"Suppose it shouldn't," replied Dick. "That is just as easy to suppose,
and a good deal healthier."

I confess I had been feeling somewhat scared. The sudden gloom, the
astonishing fury of the wind, the confusing whirl and rush of the snow,
and then from some point unknown the sharp breaking of a tree, sounding
in the midst of the universal roar like the crack of a whip--all this,
coming all together and so suddenly, was quite enough, I think, to
"rattle" a town-bred boy.

But if panic is catching, so is courage. Dick's prompt and sensible
remark acted like a tonic. Springing to my feet, I cried:

"You are right, old chap! Come on. Let's step right out at once. I'm
ready."

It was most fortunate that Dick knew where he was, for the light was so
dim and the snow so thick that we could see but a few paces ahead; while
the wind, though beating in general against our left cheeks, was itself
useless as a guide, for, being deflected by the ridges and ravines of
the mountain, it would every now and then strike us square in the face,
stopping us dead, and the next moment leap upon us from behind, sending
me stumbling forward against my leader.

In spite of its vindictive and ceaseless assaults, though, Dick kept
straight on, his head bent and his cap pulled down over his ears; while
I, following three feet behind, kept him steadily in view. Presently he
stopped with a joyful shout.

"Hurrah, Frank!" he cried. "Look here! Now we are all right. Here's a
thread to hold on by: as good as a rope to a drowning man."

The "thread" was a little stream of water, appearing suddenly from I
know not where, and running off in the direction we were going.

"This will take us home, Frank!" my companion shouted in my ear. "It
runs down and joins our own creek about a quarter of a mile above the
house. With this for a guide we are all safe; we mustn't lose it, that's
all. And we won't do that: we'll get into it and walk in the water if we
have to. Best foot foremost, now! All down-hill! Hurrah, for us!"

Dick's cheerful view of the situation was very encouraging, though, as a
matter of fact, it was a pretty desperate struggle we had to get down
the mountain, with the darkness increasing and the snow becoming deeper
every minute. Indeed it was becoming a serious question with me whether
I could keep going much longer, when at the end of the most perilous
hour I ever went through, we at last came down to the junction of the
creeks, and turning to our right presently caught sight of a lighted
window.

Five minutes later we were safe inside the professor's house--and high
time too, for I could not have stood much more of it: I had just about
reached the end of my tether. But the warmth and rest and above all the
assurance of safety quickly had their effect, and very soon I found
myself seated before the fire consuming with infinite gusto a great bowl
of strong, hot soup which Romero had made all ready for us; thus
comfortably winding up the most eventful day of my existence--up to that
moment.




CHAPTER V

HOW DICK BROUGHT THE NEWS


"You ran it rather too close, Dick," said the professor, with a shake of
his head, when we had told him the story of our race with the storm. "I
was beginning to be afraid; not so much for you as for your companion:
it was too big an undertaking for him, considering that it was his first
day in the mountains; even leaving out the risk of the snow-storm."

"I'm afraid I was thoughtless," replied Dick, penitently; "especially in
not looking out for a change of weather. It did run us too close, as you
say--a great deal too close. But there is one thing I can do, anyhow, to
repair that error to some extent, and I'll be off at once and do it."

So saying, Dick, who by this time had finished his supper, jumped out of
his chair and began putting on his overcoat.

"Where are you off to, Dick?" I exclaimed. "Not going out again
to-night?"

"Only a little way," replied Dick. "Down to the town to let your uncle
know that you are all safe. He'll be pretty anxious, I expect."

I had thought of that, but I could see no way of getting over it. I
could not go myself, for even if I had dared to venture I had not the
strength for it, and of course I could not expect any one else to do it
for me. My first thought, therefore, when Dick announced that he was
going, was one of satisfaction; though my next thought, following very
quickly upon the first one, was to protest against his doing any such
thing.

"No, no, Dick," I cried, "it's too risky--you mustn't! Uncle Tom will be
worried, I know, but he will conclude that I am staying the night with
you. And though I should be glad to have his mind relieved, I don't
consider--and he would say the same, I'm pretty sure--that that is a
good enough reason for you to take such a risk."

"Thanks, old chap," replied Dick; "but it isn't so much of a risk as you
think. Going down wind to the town is a very different matter from
coming down that rough mountain with the storm beating on us from every
side. I've been over the trail a thousand times, and I believe I could
follow it with my eyes shut; and, anyhow, to lose your way is pretty
near impossible, you know, with the canon on your right hand and the
mountain on your left. So, don't you worry yourself, Frank: I'll be
under cover again in an hour or less."

Seeing that the professor nodded approval, I protested no more, though I
still had my doubts about letting him go.

"Well, Dick," said I, "it's mighty good of you. I wish I could go, too,
but that is out of the question, I'm afraid: I should only hamper you if
I tried. I can tell you one thing, anyhow: Uncle Tom will appreciate
it--you may be sure of that."

In this I was right, though I little suspected at the moment in what
form his appreciation was to show itself. As a matter of fact, Dick's
action in braving the storm a second time that evening was to be a
turning-point in his fortune and mine.

"Good-night, Frank," said he. "I'll be back again in the morning, I
expect. Hope you'll sleep as well in my bed as I intend to do in yours.
Good-night."

So saying, Dick, this time overcoated, gloved and ear-capped, opened the
door and stepped out. Watching him from the window, I saw him striding
off down wind, to be lost to sight in ten seconds in the maze of driving
snow.

"Are you sure it's all right, Professor?" said I, anxiously. "There's
time yet to call him back."

"It is all right," replied my host, reassuringly. "You need not fear.
Dick has been out in many a storm before, and he knows very well how to
take care of himself. You may be sure I would not let him go if I
thought it were not all right. And now, I think, it would be well if you
took possession of Dick's bed. You have had a very hard day and need a
good long rest."

To this I made no objection, and early though it was, I was asleep in
five minutes, too tired to be disturbed even by the insistent banging
and howling of the storm outside.

Meanwhile, Uncle Tom, down in the town, was, as I had suspected,
fretting and fuming and worrying himself in his uncertainty as to
whether I was safe under cover or not.

The storm had taken the town by surprise, for the morning had opened
gloriously, clear and sharp and still, as it had done every day for a
month past, and most people naturally supposed there was to be another
day as fine as those which had gone before; little suspecting that the
north wind, up there among the icebound peaks and gorges of the mother
range, was at that moment marshaling its forces for a mad rush down into
the valley.

And how should they suspect? Of the three hundred people comprising the
population, not one, not even old Jeff Andrews himself, the patriarch of
the district, had spent more than two winters in the camp. In the year
of its founding there were about a dozen men and no women who had braved
the hardships of the first winter, but as the fame of the new camp
extended to the outer world, other people began to come in, slowly at
first and then in larger numbers, so that by this time the population
numbered, as I said, about three hundred souls, including twenty-one
women and two babies; while at a rough guess I should say there was
about two-thirds of a dog to each citizen, counting in the twelve
children of school age and the two babies as well.

These dogs, by the way, were the chief source of entertainment in the
town, for during the hours of daylight there was always a fight going on
somewhere, while at night most of them, especially the younger ones,
used to sit out in the middle of the street barking defiance at the
coyotes, which, from the hills all round, howled back at them in
unceasing chorus. This part of the programme was changed, however, later
in the winter, for one half-cloudy night the blacksmith's long-legged
shepherd pup, seated in front of the forge door, was barking himself
hoarse at the moon when a big timber-wolf came slipping down out of the
woods and finished the puppy's song and his existence with one snap.
After this the other dogs were more careful about the hours they kept.

But to return to the human part of the population. Considering how few
of them had spent a winter in this high valley; remembering that every
one of the grown-up citizens had been born in some other State, and that
the very great majority were newcomers in Colorado, it is not to be
wondered at that the storm should have caught them unawares. For, in
Colorado, if there is one thing almost impossible to forecast it is the
weather, especially in the mountains where it is made, where the
snow-storms and the thunder-storms, brewing in secret behind the peaks,
bounce out on you before you know it.

So, on this sunshiny morning, most people went about their usual
occupations unsuspicious of evil; it was only the few old-timers who
divined what was coming, and their little precautions, such as shutting
their doors and windows before leaving the house, merely excited a smile
or a word of chaff from the "plum-sure" newcomers. For it is always the
new arrival who thinks he can predict the weather; the old-stager,
having had experience enough to be aware that he knows nothing about it
for certain, can seldom be persuaded to venture a decided opinion.

Tied to a hitching-post outside the assayer's door that afternoon were
two ponies, and about two o'clock Mr. Warren, himself, and Uncle Tom,
issued from the house, prepared for their ride up on Cape Horn--a big,
bare mountain lying southeast of town. As they stepped down from the
porch, however, Warren happened to notice old Jeff Andrews walking up
the street, carrying over his shoulder a great buffalo-skin overcoat,
which, considering the warmth of the day, seemed rather out of place.

"Hallo, Jeff!" the assayer called out. "What are you carrying that thing
for? Are we going to have a change?"

Jeff, a gray-bearded, round-shouldered man of sixty, with a face burnt
all of one color by years of life in the open, paused for a moment
before replying, and then, knowing that the assayer was not one of those
"guying tenderfeet," for whom, as he expressed it, "he had no manner of
use," he answered genially:

"Well, gents, I ain't no weather prophet--I'll leave that business to
the latest arrival--but I have my suspicions. Just look up overhead."

The old man had detected the hurrying snowflakes passing across the face
of the sun, and though to Uncle Tom there was nothing unusual to be
seen, the assayer understood the signs.

"Wind, Jeff?" said he.

"And snow," replied the old prospector. "Was you going to ride up on
Cape Horn this evening, Mr. Warren? Well, if I was you, I wouldn't. Cape
Horn lies south o' here, and if a storm from the north catches you up
there on that bare mountain you may not be able to work your way back
again. If I was you, I'd put the ponies back in the stable and lay low
for a spell."

"Thank you, Jeff," responded the assayer. "I believe that's a good idea.
I think we shall do well, Tom, to postpone our trip. No use running the
risk of being caught out in a blizzard: it's a bit too dangerous to suit
me."

The ponies, therefore, were taken back to the stable and the two men,
returning to the house, sat down on the sunny porch to await
developments.

The snow-cloud was already half way down the range and it was not long
ere the murmur of the wind among the distant trees began to make itself
heard, giving warning of what was coming to a few of the more observant
people.

"It looks pretty threatening, Sam," said Uncle Tom. "I don't like the
way that cloud comes creeping down. I hope those boys will notice it in
time."

"I don't think you need worry about them," replied the assayer. "Young
Dick is well able to take care of himself. He knows the signs as well as
anybody."

"Well, I hope he'll notice them in time. Going indoors, are you?"

"Yes; if you don't mind, I'll leave you for the present. I have some
work I want to finish up. Let me know when it comes pretty close so that
I may get my windows shut. It will come with a 'whoop' when it does
come."

As the assayer rose to his feet, he observed across the street the
proprietor of the corner grocery standing in his doorway with his hands
in his pockets.

"Hallo, Jackson!" he called out. "You'd better take in those loose boxes
from the sidewalk if you want to save them: there's a big blow coming
pretty soon."

"Oh, I guess not," replied the grocer, a fat-faced, self-satisfied man,
one of those "dead-sure weather prophets" for whom old Jeff felt such
supreme contempt. "I reckon I'll chance it."

He cast a glance skyward, and deceived by the sparkling brilliancy of
the sun, he added under his breath, "Big blow! As if any one couldn't
see with half an eye that there isn't a sign of wind in the sky."

"All right, Jackson, suit yourself," replied Warren; adding on his part,
as an aside to Uncle Tom, "He'll change his mind in about half an hour,
if I'm not mistaken."

For about that length of time Uncle Tom continued to sit on the porch
watching the approaching cloud and listening to the increasing murmur of
the wind, when, on the crown of a high ridge about a mile above town he
saw all the pine trees with one accord suddenly bend their heads toward
him, as though making him a stately obeisance.

Springing out of his chair, Uncle Tom bolted into the house, slamming
the door behind him and calling out: "Here it comes, Sam! Here it
comes!"

It did. The roar of its approach was now plainly audible; there was a
hurrying and scurrying of men and women, a banging of doors and a
slamming down of windows; even the incredulous grocer, convinced at
last, made a dive for his loose boxes--but just too late.

With a shriek, as of triumph at catching them all unprepared, the wind
came raging down the street, making a clean sweep of everything. A young
mining camp is not as a rule over-particular about the amount of rubbish
that encumbers its streets, and Mosby was no exception to the rule, but
in five minutes it was swept as clean as though the twenty-one
housewives had been at work on it for a week with broom and
scrubbing-brush.

Heralded by a cloud of mingled dust and snow, a whole covey of paper
scraps, loose straw and a few hats, went whirling down the street,
followed by a dozen or two of empty tin cans, while behind them, with
infinite clatter, came three lengths of stove-pipe from the bakery
chimney, closely pursued by an immense barrel which had once contained
crockery.

As though enjoying the fun, this barrel came bounding down the roadway,
making astonishing leaps, until, at the grocery corner, it encountered
the only one of the empty boxes which had not already gone south, and
glancing off at an angle, went bang through the show window!

It was as though My Lord, the North Wind, aware of Mr. Jackson's
incredulity, had sent an emissary to convince him that he _did_ intend
to blow that day.

From that moment the wind and the snow had it all their own way; not a
citizen dared to show his nose outside.

It was an uneasy day for Uncle Tom. Knowing full well the extreme danger
of being caught on the mountain in such a storm, he could not help
feeling anxious for our safety, and though his host tried to reassure
him by repeating his confidence in Dick Stanley's good sense and
experience, he grew more and more fidgety as the day wore on and
darkness began to settle down upon the town.

In fact, by sunset, Uncle Tom had worked himself up to a high state of
nervousness. He kept pacing up and down the room like a caged beast,
unconsciously puffing at a cigar which had gone out half an hour before;
then striding to the window to look out--a disheartening prospect, for
not even the corner grocery was visible now. Then back he would come,
plump himself into his chair before the fire, only to jump up again in
fifteen seconds to go through the same performance once more.

At length he flung his cigar-stump into the fire, and turning to his
friend, exclaimed:

"Sam, I can't stand this uncertainty any longer. I'm going out to see if
I can't find somebody who will undertake to go up to the professor's
house and back for twenty dollars, just to make sure those boys have got
safe home. I'd go myself, only I know I should never get there."

The assayer shook his head.

"No use, Tom," said he. "You couldn't get one to go; at least, not for
money. If it were to dig a friend out of the snow you could raise a
hundred men in a minute; but for money--no. I don't believe you could
get any of them to face this storm for twenty dollars--or fifty, either.
They would say, 'What's the use? If the boys are in, they're in; if
they're not----'"

"Well, if they're not---- What? I know what you mean. You chill me all
through, Sam, with your 'ifs.' Look here, old man, isn't there _anybody_
who would go? Think, man, think!"

"We might try little Aleck Smith, the teamster," said the assayer,
thoughtfully. "He's as tough as a bit of bailing-wire and plum full of
grit. We'll try him anyhow. Come on. I'll go with you. It's only six
houses down. Jump into your overcoat, old man!"

The two men turned to get their coats, when, at that moment, there came
a thump upon the porch outside, as though somebody had jumped up the two
steps at a bound, the door burst open and in the midst of a whirl of
snow there was blown into the room the muffled, snow-coated figure of a
boy, who, slamming the door behind him, leaned back against it, gasping
for breath.

The men stared in astonishment, until the boy, pulling off his cap,
revealed the face, scarlet from exposure, of Dick Stanley.

"Why, Dick!" cried the assayer. "What's the matter? Where's young
Frank?"

"All safe, sir! Safe in our house, and in bed and asleep by this time."

"And did you come down through this howling storm to tell me?" cried
Uncle Tom.

"Yes, sir. But that wasn't anything so very much, you know: it was
down-hill and downwind, too."

"Well, you may think what you like about it--but so may I, too; and my
opinion is that there isn't another boy in the country would have done
it. I shan't forget your service, Dick. You may count on that. I shan't
forget it!"

Nor did he--as you will see.




CHAPTER VI

THE PROFESSOR'S STORY


What a change had come over the landscape when, at sunrise next morning,
I jumped out of bed and went to the door to look out. Though the sky was
as clear and as blue as ever, though Mescalero, swept bare by the wind,
looked much as usual, all the lower parts of the range, except the
crowns of the ridges, were buried under the snow. The woods were full of
it; every hollow was leveled off so that one could hardly tell where it
used to be; while the narrow valley itself was ridged and furrowed by
great drifts piled up by freaks of the wind. It was cold, too, for with
the falling of the wind and the clearing of the sky the temperature had
dropped to zero. As so often happens in these parts, winter had arrived
with a bang.

Closing the door, I hopped back to the jolly, roaring fire of logs which
Romero had started an hour before, and there finished my dressing. While
I was thus engaged, the professor came out of the back room, where it
was his custom to sleep--a queer choice--with a couple of thousand dead
insects for company.

"Well, Frank," said he, cheerily. "Here's King Winter in all his glory.
Rather a rough-and-tumble monarch, isn't he? When his majesty makes his
royal progress, we, his humble subjects, do well to get out of his way
and leave the course clear for him."

"That's true, sir," said I, laughing; and falling into the professor's
humor, I added: "I never met a king before, and if King Winter is an
example of the race I think we Americans were wise to get rid of them
when we did."

"Oh," replied the professor, "you must not judge a whole order by one
specimen: there are kings and kings, and some of them are very fine
fellows. King Winter, though, is rather too boisterous and
inconsiderate; and to tell you the truth, Frank, you had rather a narrow
escape from him yesterday. I did not like to make too much of it before
Dick; I did not want him to think I blamed him for what was, after all,
merely an oversight; but as a matter of fact you ran a pretty big risk,
as you may easily understand when you see the amount of snow that fell
in about twelve hours; for the storm ceased and the sky cleared again
about three o'clock this morning."

"It was nip and tuck for us, sure enough," said I; "but if our getting
caught in the storm was any fault of Dick's, there is one thing certain,
sir: he got us out of it in great style. I wouldn't ask for a better
guide. I was pretty badly scared myself, I don't mind owning"--the
professor nodded, as much as to say, "I don't wonder,"--"but Dick," I
continued, "did not seem to be flustered for a moment; he knew just what
to do and pitched right in and did it. It seems to me, sir--though of
course I don't set up to be a judge--that the most experienced
mountaineer couldn't have done any better."

"Dick is a good boy," said the professor, evidently pleased at my
standing up for his young friend; "and he seems to have a faculty for
keeping his wits about him in an emergency. It has always been so, ever
since he was a little boy. I suppose he has never told you, has he, how
he once saved his donkey from a mountain-lion?"

"No, sir," I replied. "How was it?"

"He was about nine years old at the time, and as his little legs were
too short to enable him to keep up with me, I had given him a young
burro to ride. We were camped one night on the Trinchera, not far from
Fort Garland, when we were awakened by a great squealing on the part of
the donkey, which was tethered a few feet away, and sitting up in our
beds, which were on the ground under the open sky, we were just in time
to see some big, cat-like animal spring upon the poor little beast and
knock it over. Instead of crying and crawling under the blankets, as he
might well have been excused for doing, little Dick sprang out of his
bed--as did I also. But the youngster was twice as quick as I was, and
without an instant's hesitation he seized a burning stick from the fire,
ran right up to the mountain-lion--for that was what it was--and as the
snarling creature raised its head, the plucky little chap thrust the hot
end of his stick into its mouth, when, with a yell of pain and
astonishment, the beast let go its hold and fled like a yellow streak
into the woods again."

"Bully for Dick!" I cried. "That was pretty good, wasn't it? And was the
donkey killed?"

"No; rather badly scratched; but Dick's promptness and courage saved it
from anything more serious."

"Well, that was certainly pretty good for such a youngster," said I.
"By the way, sir," I continued, "there is one thing I should like to ask
you, if you don't mind, about your life in the mountains, especially
back in the 'sixties' and earlier, and that is, how you managed to
escape being killed and scalped by the Indians."

My host laughed, and I could see by his face that he was thinking
backward, as he slowly stirred his coffee round and round; for we were
seated at our breakfast, Romero serving us.

"That _was_ a serious question at first," he replied presently, "but I
solved it very early in my wanderings; and now I--and Dick, too--may go
among any of the tribes with impunity."

"Will you tell me about it, sir?" I asked, full of curiosity to know how
he had worked such a seeming miracle.

The professor leaned back in his chair, stretched out his feet and
folded his hands on the edge of the table.

"I will, with pleasure," he replied; "for it is rather a curious
incident, I have always thought.

"Before I took up the profession of 'bug-hunting,' as the pursuit of
entomology is irreverently termed by the people here, I had graduated as
a physician--very fortunately for me, as it turned out, for my
knowledge of medicine was the basis of my reputation among the Indians.
I was down in Arizona at one time, when, on coming to a little Mexican
village, I found the poor people suffering from an epidemic of smallpox.
Several had died, and the survivors, scared out of their wits, had given
themselves up for lost. After my arrival, however, there were no more
deaths, I am glad to say, and by the end of about a month I had
succeeded in putting all my patients on the highroad to recovery.

"There was a little adobe ranch-house about a quarter of a mile
up-stream from the village, the owner of which had died before my
arrival, and this building I had utilized as a pest-house. I was on my
way out to it one morning, with my little case of medicines in my hand,
when I heard behind me a great crying out among the villagers, and
looking back I saw them all scuttling for shelter, at the same time
shouting and screaming, according to their age and sex, 'Apache!
Apache!'

"The next moment, right through the middle of the village, riding like a
whirlwind, came ten horsemen, who, paying no attention to the frightened
Mexicans, made straight for me. Doubtless they had been hiding in the
creek-bed among the willows since daylight, awaiting their opportunity
to dash out and capture me--for, as I found later, it was I whom they
were after.

"To run was useless, to fight impossible, as I was unarmed, so, there
being nothing else to do, I just stood still and waited for them. In a
moment I was surrounded, when one of the Indians sprang from his horse
and advanced upon me. He had, as I very well remember, his nose painted
a bright green--a fearsome object. This apparition came striding toward
me, and I supposed I was to be killed and scalped forthwith; but
instead, my friend of the green nose, in halting Spanish, and with a
deference which was as welcome as it was unexpected, explained to me
that the fame of the great white medicine-man had extended far and wide;
that the smallpox was ravaging their village; and that they had come to
beg me to return with them and drive out the enemy.

"Greatly relieved to find that their mission was peaceful, I replied at
once that I would come with pleasure, provided I were treated with the
respect due to my quality, but that I must first visit the pest-house
and leave directions for the care of my two remaining patients. To
this--rather to my surprise--they readily consented, relying implicitly
upon my promise to accompany them; an instance of trustfulness from
which I could only infer, I regret to say, that they had had but little
intercourse with white men.

"The Indians had brought a horse for me, and after a long two-days' ride
into the mountains, we reached the camp, consisting of about twenty
lodges, where I found matters in pretty bad condition. I went to work
vigorously, however, and again had the good fortune to rout the enemy
without the loss of a patient; thereby, as you may suppose, gaining the
lasting good will of every member of the tribe--with one exception.

"This exception--rather an important one--was the local medicine-man,
who, having vainly endeavored to drive out the plague by the application
of bad smells and worse noises, was not unnaturally consumed with
jealousy of my superior success, and with the desire to discover what
charms and spells I used to that end.

"On our way up from the Mexican settlement I had several times stopped
to note the direction with a little pocket-compass I always carried
about with me, on each of which occasions I had observed that the
medicine-man, who was one of the party, had eyed the little instrument
with a sort of fearful curiosity. Later, when my patients were all
getting well, I had several times gone out to a distance from the camp
and with the compass taken the bearings of the many mountain peaks
visible in all directions, making a little map of the country. Every
time I did this, the medicine-man was sure to come stalking by, watching
my motions out of the corner of his eye. On one such occasion I called
him to me, anxious to be on friendly terms, and showing him the
instrument, tried to explain its use. But the Indian, seeing through the
glass the unaccountable motion of the needle, was afraid to touch it,
and my explanation, I fear, had rather the effect of misleading him, for
his knowledge of Spanish was very small, while my knowledge of Apache
was smaller, and eventually he went off with the idea that the compass,
which I had tried to make him understand was my 'guide,' 'director' and
so forth, was in fact nothing more nor less than the familiar spirit
through whose aid I had ousted the evil spirit of the smallpox.

"With this conviction in his mind, and supposing that the possession of
the compass would confer upon him similar powers, he screwed up his
courage to steal it--and a very courageous act it was, too, I consider,
remembering how greatly he stood in fear of it.

"It was on the eve of my departure that I discovered my loss, and going
straight to my friend with the green nose I informed him of the fact, at
the same time stating my conviction that the medicine-man was the thief.
He was very wroth that his guest should have been so treated after
having rendered such good service to the community, but feeling some
diffidence about seizing and searching his medicine-man, of whom he was
rather afraid, he suggested that I concoct a spell which should induce
the thief to disgorge his plunder of his own accord; a course which
would doubtless be a simple matter to a high-class magician like myself.

"This was rather embarrassing. I did not at all like to trust to the
tricks of the charlatan, but being unable to devise any other plan by
which to recover my compass, an instrument indispensable to me, and
impossible to replace, in that wild country, I determined to employ a
device I had once read of as having been adopted by an officer in the
East India Company's service to detect a thieving Sepoy soldier. Even
then I should not have resorted to such a measure had I not felt
convinced that the medicine-man was the thief, and that his
superstitious dread of my powers would cause him to fall into my trap.

"I therefore desired Green Nose to summon all the men of the village,
which being done, I addressed them through him as interpreter. I told
them that one of their number was a thief, and that I was about to find
out which one it was--a statement which I could see had an impressive
effect.

"Taking two straws of wild rye, I cut them to exactly equal lengths, and
then, holding them up so that all might see, I announced that the men
were to come forward, one at a time, take one of the straws, step inside
my lodge for a few seconds, and then bring back the straw to me. To
those who were innocent nothing would happen, 'but,' said I, with
menacing fore-finger, 'when the _thief_ brings back the straw it will be
found to have _grown one inch_!'

"I waited a minute to allow this announcement to have its full effect,
and then requested that, in deference to his exalted position, my
honored brother, the medicine-man, should be the first to test the
potency of my magic.

"I could see that he was very reluctant to do any such thing, but to
decline would be to draw suspicion on himself, so, stepping from the
line, he received the straw and retired with it to my lodge.

"There was a minute of breathless suspense, when back he came and handed
over his straw to me. My own straw, together with the hand which held
it, I had covered with a large, spotted silk handkerchief, in such a
manner that it was concealed from view, and slipping the medicine-man's
straw into the same hand, I perceived at once that the thief had
betrayed himself, just as I had hoped and expected he would.

"Casting a glance along the line of silent Indians, and noting that they
were all attention, I withdrew the handkerchief and held up the two
straws. One of them was an inch longer than the other!

"In spite of their habitual stoicism, there was a murmur and a stir
along the line; but the greatest effect was naturally upon the poor
medicine-man. Thrusting his hand into his bosom, he drew out the compass
from under his shirt, handed it to me, and then, pulling his blanket
over his head, he crept away without a word and shut himself up in his
lodge."

"But how did you do it?" I interrupted. "How did his straw come out
longer than the other? Did you break off a piece from your own?"

"No," replied the professor, smiling; "it was the medicine-man who broke
off a piece from his. Knowing himself to be the thief, and fully
believing that the straw would grow in his hand, he no sooner got into
the shelter of my lodge than he bit off an inch from his straw, thus
making sure, as he supposed, that its supernatural growth would bring it
back to its original length. It was just what I had expected him to do.
Nobody but myself, of course, could tell which straw was which, and when
I held them up to view, one longer than the other, the whole assembly
never doubted for an instant that the shorter one was mine and that it
was the thief's straw that had grown--least of all the medicine-man,
himself.

"He, poor fellow, conscious of guilt, and being himself a dealer in
charms and incantations, was more than anybody in a proper frame of mind
to put faith in my magic, and when he saw, as he supposed, that his
straw, in spite of his precautions, had grown the promised inch, he
collapsed at once; and thinking, very likely, that it was the compass
itself that had betrayed him, he handed it back to me very willingly,
glad to be rid of so pernicious a little imp."

"And was that the end of the matter?" I asked.

"Yes, that was the end of it. Being all ready to go, I went, leaving
behind me a reputation which was to be of great service to me on many a
subsequent occasion; a reputation due, I am sorry to say, very much more
to the clap-trap trick played upon the poor medicine-man than upon my
really meritorious service in dealing with the smallpox epidemic. My
fame gradually extended among all the mountain tribes, and since then I
have been free to go anywhere with the assurance not only of safety but
of welcome from any of the Indians, Apache, Ute or Navajo--a condition
of affairs which, as you will readily understand has been of infinite
service to me during my twenty years of wandering.

"Ah!" casting a glance out of the window as he rose from the table.
"Here comes Dick, and somebody with him; a stranger to me--your uncle, I
presume."




CHAPTER VII

DICK'S DIPLOMACY


Running to the door, I saw Dick striding down toward the cabin, while
behind him on a stout pony rode Uncle Tom. Just as I stepped out, the
pair approached one of the drifts of snow which ridged the valley, and
into this Dick plunged at once. Though it was up to his waist, he pretty
soon forced his way through, when it was Uncle Tom's turn.

Evidently it was not the first time the pony had tackled a snow-drift,
for he showed no disposition to shirk the task, but wading in up to his
knees, he did the rest of the passage in a series of short leaps, very
like buck-jumping; a mode of progression extremely discomforting to his
plump, short-legged rider.

"Oh! Ah!" gasped Uncle Tom at each jump. "Heavens! What a country! Dick,
you imp of darkness, I thought you said it was an easy trail."

At this I could not help laughing, when Uncle Tom, who had not
perceived me before, transferred his attention to me.

"You young scamp, Frank!" cried he, shaking his fist at me as I ran
forward to meet him. "This is a nice way to treat your respected
uncle--first scare him half to death and then laugh at him. Lucky for me
there's only one of you: if you had been born twins I should have been
worn to a rag long ago. How are you, old fellow?" he went on, reaching
down to shake hands with me. "Any the worse for your adventure?"

"Not a bit," I replied. "Sound as a bell, thank you."

"Thank Dick, you mean. I'll tell you what, Frank," he continued, leaning
down and whispering; Dick having walked on toward the house: "that's an
uncommonly fine young fellow, in my opinion. His coming down in the
storm last night to tell me that you were all safe was a thing that few
boys of his age would have done and fewer still would have thought of
doing. Ah! This is the professor, I suppose. Why, I've seen him before!"

So saying, Uncle Tom jumped to the ground, and hastening forward, held
out his hand, exclaiming:

"How are you, Herr Bergen? I'm glad to meet you again. We are old
acquaintances, though I had forgotten your name, if I ever heard it."

"I believe you are right, Mr. Allen," responded the professor. "Your
face seems familiar, though I am ashamed to say I cannot recall when or
where we met."

"I can remind you," said Uncle Tom. "It was at Fort Garland, six or
seven years ago. I was on my way to investigate an alleged gold
discovery in the Taos mountains, when you rode into the fort to ask the
cavalry vet to give you something to dress the wounds of a burro which
had been clawed by a mountain-lion. I got into conversation with you,
and learning that you also wanted some cartridges for a little Ballard
rifle, I gave you a box of fifty. Do you remember?"

"I remember very well," replied the professor. "The cartridges were for
Dick: he learned to shoot with a Ballard. Well, this is a great pleasure
to meet an old acquaintance like this. Come in out of the cold. Romero
will take your pony."

Soon we were all seated before the fire, Uncle Tom puffing away his
aches and pains with the smoke of the inevitable cigar, when the
professor, turning to him, asked:

"And how long do you intend to stay in camp, Mr. Allen? Will this snow
drive you out?"

"Not at all," replied Uncle Tom. "I expect to be here a couple of weeks,
in spite of the snow. The drifts will settle in a day or two, and the
miners will break trails to their claims, and then I shall be able to
get about--there won't be any difficulty. Though if it were going to be
as hard work as it was coming up here this morning I might as well go
home again at once--it took us an hour to make the one mile from town."

"You came to inspect the mines, I understand. Do you confine yourself to
silver mines, or do you deal in mines of all sorts?"

"Silver and gold," replied Uncle Tom. "Though, as it happens, I am on
the lookout this time for a copper mine as well. Before I left St. Louis
I notified a Boston firm, with whom I have frequent dealings, of my
intention to come here, and received from them in reply a telegram,
saying, 'Find us a good copper mine. Price no object.' There was no
explanation, and I am rather puzzled to understand why they should
suddenly branch out into 'coppers' in this way."

"I expect the explanation is simple enough," remarked the professor.

"What is it, then?" asked Uncle Tom.

"To any one watching the progress of science," replied the professor,
puffing away at his big porcelain pipe, "even to me, here on the ragged
edge of civilization, it is obvious that a new era is close at hand; a
new force rapidly coming to the front."

"Electricity?" asked Uncle Tom.

"Yes, electricity. The science is still in the egg, as you may say, but
to those who have ears to hear, the shell is beginning to crack. I am
convinced that before long we shall be lighting our streets with
electricity and using it in a thousand ways as a mechanical power. The
consequence will be an immense increase in the demand for copper; and
that, I have no doubt, is why you have been asked to look out for a
copper mine: they want to be ready when the time comes. What is this,
Dick?"

At the first mention of the words, "copper mine," the thoughts of Dick
and myself had, of course, instantly reverted to the King Philip mine,
and I was on the point of introducing the subject, when Dick, catching
my eye, signed to me to keep quiet. Rising from his chair, he stepped
softly to the rack where the rifles hung and took down the Mexican's
arrow, which he had put there the evening before. It happened that we
had not mentioned the episode of the wolves and the Mexican when
describing to the professor our struggle homeward through the
snow-storm, and consequently, when my companion laid the arrow on the
table close to his elbow, it was only natural that the old gentleman
should exclaim, "What is this, Dick?"

Very briefly, Dick related how he had come by it, merely stating that we
had seen a Mexican shoot a wolf; that the Mexican had run away when we
hailed him; and that we had gone and picked up his arrow. I wondered
rather why he did not call attention to the copper arrow-head; but Dick
knew what he was about, as I very soon saw: he intended to let the
professor discover it for himself, which a man of his habits of close
observation was certain to do. In fact, the old gentleman had no sooner
taken the arrow into his hands than he exclaimed:

"Why, this arrow-head is made of copper! A Mexican, you say? Then he
probably came from Hermanos. You remember, Dick, how all the people
down there---- Why, Mr. Allen, here's the very thing! You want a copper
mine? Well, here is a copper mine all ready to your hand! All you have
to do is----"

"To find it," interjected Dick, laughing.

"That is true," the professor assented, laughing himself. "I had
forgotten that little particular for the moment, Dick. I'm afraid it is
not quite so ready to your hand as I was leading you to suppose, Mr.
Allen; but that it is there, somewhere in the Dos Hermanos mountains, I
feel sure."

Thereupon the professor proceeded to tell the story that Dick had
already told me, giving some further details of the information he had
derived from the Spanish gentleman, Don Blake.

"It appears to have been a mine of some consequence," said the
professor. "The records covered a period of fifteen years, and during
the last five years of the time the shipments were constant and large.
It is fairly sure, I think, that the product was native copper----"

"Sure to be," interrupted Uncle Tom. "It would never have paid to ship
any waste product so far. In fact, I am surprised that they should ship
even native copper such a long distance."

"Yes; but as they did so, I think the inference is that the metal was
plentiful and easy to mine."

"That is a reasonable assumption," said Uncle Tom, thoughtfully nodding
his head. "What beats me, though," he went on, "is that the memory of
the spot should have been so totally lost. Considering that the mine was
producing for fifteen years, there must be many traces of the work done,
such as the waste dump, the old road or trail, and so forth: you can't
run a mine for that length of time and leave no marks. It is a wonder to
me that the place has never been rediscovered."

"I don't think there is anything surprising in that," replied the
professor. "The villagers of Hermanos, agricultural people, seldom go
five miles from home; it is only old Galvez' _vaqueros_, his cow-men,
who would be likely to come across the traces of mining, and if they
did, those peons are such incurious, unenterprising people they would
pay no attention. Besides which, I gathered that even the cow-men never
went up into the Dos Hermanos mountains: it is not a good cattle
country--rough granite and limestone, little water and scant pasturage.
Consequently, the cattle range southward toward the Santa Claras,
instead of westward to the Dos Hermanos, and the Twin Peaks, therefore,
remain in their solitary glory, untouched by the foot of man; and
probably they have so remained ever since the King Philip mine was
abandoned, a hundred and fifty years ago."

For a full minute Uncle Tom remained silent, thoughtfully blowing out
long spirals of cigar smoke, but presently he roused up again and said:

"There is one thing more I should like to ask you, Professor, and that
is, why you conclude that the King Philip mine is in the Dos Hermanos
mountains?"

"For this reason," replied our friend: "In the first place, many of the
reports were dated from the _Casa del Rey_. Of course, it is likely
enough that there are other _Casas del Rey_ in other parts of the
country, but besides the frequent mention of the King's House, there was
also mention of Indian fights at different places: 'at the crossing of
the Perdita,' for instance, and 'near the spring by Picture Buttes';
then there was the record of a snow-blockade on the Mosca Pass, in the
Santa Claras; another of a terrible dust-storm on the Little Cactus
Desert, 'with the loss of one man and three mules'; and so forth. Now, a
line running through these and other places mentioned would bring you
into the Mescalero valley at its southern end, and there is no doubt in
my mind that the _Casa del Rey_ named in the reports is the King's House
down there at Hermanos."

"It does seem so, doesn't it?" responded Uncle Tom. "Look here,
professor," he went on, suddenly jumping out of his chair and casting
his cigar stump into the fire, "I must make an attempt to find that
copper mine. It does, as you say, seem all ready to my hand. But how to
do it, is the question. I can't go myself--can't spare the time--so the
only way, I suppose, is to hire some prospector, if I can."

"I don't think you can get one," said the professor, shaking his head;
"at least, not here in Mosby. They are all too intent on hunting for
silver, and I doubt if you could persuade one of them to waste a season
in searching for a metal so commonplace as copper, the value of which is
rather prospective than immediate. I doubt very much if you could get
one to go."

"I suppose not," replied Uncle Tom. "And you can hardly blame them,
either, when you consider that by the expenditure of the same amount of
labor a man may come across a rich vein of silver, every ounce of which
he knows to be worth a dollar and twenty cents."

"Just so," the professor assented.

"What am I to do, then?" asked Uncle Tom. "Give it up? Seems a pity,
doesn't it, when, more than likely, the old workings are lying there
plain to view, only waiting for some one with his eyes open to pass that
way. Still, if I can't get a man----"

"Take a boy," suggested Dick, cutting in unexpectedly.

Uncle Tom whirled round on his heels and stared at him; the professor
removed his long pipe from his mouth and stared at him too; while Dick
himself sat bolt upright in his chair, a broad and genial grin
overspreading his countenance.

For some seconds they all maintained these attitudes in silence, when
Uncle Tom suddenly broke into a hearty laugh.

"You young scamp!" cried he, shaking his forefinger at Dick. "I believe
that's what you've been aiming at all the time."

"That's just what we have, Mr. Allen," replied my companion. "Frank and
I were talking about it yesterday, saying what fun it would be to go and
hunt for the old mine; though we never expected to get the chance. But
when you began to talk about copper mines, we cocked our ears, of
course, thinking that here, perhaps, _was_ a chance after all--and--and
if you _can't_ get a man, Mr. Allen, why not send a boy? Would you let
me go, Professor?"

Our two elders looked at each other, and very anxiously we looked at our
two elders. Not a word did either of them say, until the professor,
rising from his chair and knocking out the ashes of his pipe upon the
hearthstone, remarked quietly:

"Go out and chop some wood, boys. I want to talk to Mr. Allen."

Regarding this order as a hopeful sign, out we went, and for a long
half-hour we feverishly hacked at the heap of poles outside, making a
rather indifferent job of it, I suspect, until a tapping at the window
attracted our attention and we saw Uncle Tom beckoning us to come in.

How anxiously we scanned their countenances this time, any one will
guess. Both men were standing with their backs to the fire, Uncle Tom
smoking a fresh cigar and the professor puffing away again at his pipe,
both of them looking so solemn that I thought to myself, "It's no go,"
and my spirits fell accordingly; but looking again at Uncle Tom I
detected a twitching at the corner of his mouth which sent them up again
with a bound.

"Well, Uncle Tom!" I cried. "What's it to be?"

"It is a serious matter," replied my guardian, with all the solemnity of
a judge passing sentence. "The professor and I have discussed it very
earnestly, and we have decided--that you shall go!"




CHAPTER VIII

THE START


The delight with which this announcement was received by us two boys may
be imagined, for though we had hoped for such a decision we had not
dared to expect it. I, for my part, had feared that the matter of my
interrupted education alone would form an insurmountable barrier; and
indeed it was that subject which had proved the chief obstacle, as Uncle
Tom presently informed me. All the other objections were minor ones and
we discreetly refrained from asking for their recapitulation lest, in
going over them again, something not thought of before should crop up to
interfere. We were quite content to accept the decision without knowing
how it had been arrived at.

As to my interrupted schooling, though, that was a serious matter, as
Uncle Tom, in spite of his original ideas about education, clearly
understood.

"The main question with me, you see, Frank," said he, "was whether you
would benefit or otherwise by missing so much schooling, and though I
believe pretty strongly in the value of learning by practice and
experience, I should have felt obliged to decide against this expedition
if the professor had not come to the rescue. It is to him you owe our
decision to let you boys go."

I looked gratefully at Herr Bergen, who serenely waved the stem of his
pipe in our direction, though whether to intimate that the obligation
was nothing to speak of, or as a sign to Uncle Tom to go on, I could not
decide.

"I find," continued the latter, "that the winter is Dick's school-time;
and the professor has offered to take you in, Frank, and let you share
in Dick's work, undertaking to bring you on in your mathematics in
particular--which is your weak spot, you know. In the spring, when the
snow clears off, you are to start for the Dos Hermanos and make a
thorough search for this old copper mine; and as you will be doing it on
my account, I shall bear all expenses. There, that is all, except--well,
it is not necessary to mention that--but I was going to say that I rely
on you, old fellow, to make the most of your opportunity and in your own
person to prove the correctness of my theory that a boy may sometimes
learn more out of school than in it."

"I believe you may count on me, Uncle Tom," said I. "I'll do my level
best. And I'm tremendously obliged to you, Herr Bergen----"

"Not at all," interrupted the professor, "not at all. The fact is, I am
very glad to have a companion for Dick; and as to the schooling, the
obligation is not all on one side by any means, for to me it is one of
the greatest pleasures possible to teach a boy who really desires to
learn. I anticipate a most pleasant winter."

Thus was this odd arrangement made by which I, who by right should have
been attending a public school in St. Louis, became the private pupil of
an eminent German professor, pursuing my studies in a little log cabin
tucked away in a snow-encumbered valley of the Rocky Mountains--about as
queer a piece of topsyturviness, to my notion, as ever happened to a
boy, and one very unlikely to happen to any other boy, unless he chanced
to be endowed with an Uncle Tom cut out on the same pattern as mine.

"There's one thing, Frank," said my guardian, as we made our way down to
camp later in the day, "there's one thing I didn't mention in Dick's
presence, and that is that the professor laid great stress on the
pleasure and advantage it would be to Dick to have a companion of his
own age for once, and it was that which turned the balance with
me--after the educational question had been got out of the way. For I
owe Dick a good turn if I can do him one without hurting anybody else; I
told him I wouldn't forget his service in coming down through the storm
yesterday, and I haven't forgotten. I'm uncommonly glad to think that in
consenting to your taking part in this expedition--which I believe will
be a great thing for you, mentally as well as bodily--we shall be doing
a service to Dick and to the old professor at the same time."

"Well, Uncle Tom," said I, "you may be sure I am glad enough to stay,
and I hope it will not only prove a good thing for Dick and me, but for
you as well."

"I hope so, too. And it will, if you can locate that old copper mine,
and if it should prove to be anywhere near as good as it sounds."

As things turned out, I was destined to begin my winter's schooling
somewhat earlier than we had expected, for, five days after the storm,
Uncle Tom received from his Boston employers a telegram, forwarded by
mail from the end of the line, saying, "Come here at once. Important,"
when, without demur, he forthwith packed up his things and away he went;
while I, taking leave of our kind host, the assayer, moved up to Herr
Bergen's house.

I need not go into the details of our daily life on Mosby Creek; it is
enough to say that the winter was one of the pleasantest I had ever
spent. Time flew by, as was only natural, for there was not an idle
moment for either of us. Herr Bergen proved to be a most able
instructor, not only in the matter of scholarship but in general
training as well. He had served in the German army in his younger days,
and the habits of orderliness, precision and promptness remained with
him. We boys were made to toe the mark, and no mistake; there was a time
for work and a time for play, and whether for duty or pleasure, we had
to be on hand to the minute.

I do not wish to imply that the professor was harsh, or anything of the
sort; very far from it: he was most considerate of our shortcomings,
which were doubtless plentiful enough, and with infinite patience would
go over the ground again and again whenever Dick or I got ourselves
tangled up; a condition of things which happened on the average about
once a day to each of us. Then, every marked advance we made in any of
our studies was so obviously gratifying to the kindly old gentleman that
that fact alone was enough to spur a fellow on to doing his extra-best.
As a consequence, I, for my part, made very notable progress, and it was
with great pleasure, as you may suppose, that I was able later on to
write to Uncle Tom my conviction that I had gained rather than lost by
my winter's work.

One thing, at least, which I should not have acquired in school, I
gained by my association with the professor's household: I learned to
speak Spanish. Herr Bergen made a great point of it that I should do so,
as it would be pretty sure to come in useful during the ensuing summer.
He and Dick--and Romero, of course--all spoke it very well, so that my
opportunity for picking it up was excellent, and I made rapid progress;
my knowledge of Latin, which, though very far from profound, was up to
the average of a schoolboy of my age, being an immense help.

All this time we did not lack exercise--the professor was just as
particular about that as he was about our work--and Dick and I had many
a jolly outing on our snow-shoes, the management of which was another
thing I learned. I should not omit to mention also that I spent a good
deal of time and a liberal number of cartridges practising with a rifle,
thereby becoming a very fair shot; though, of course, I could not
compete with Dick, who, having learned as a mere child, seemed, almost,
to shoot straight by nature.

The weather on the average was splendid that winter, and there were but
few days when we could not get out. Four or five times, perhaps, during
the months I spent in the valley a snow-storm came raging down on us,
shutting us up for a day or two, after which the jovial sun would turn
up smiling again just as though nothing had happened.

It was toward the end of April that Dick and I began to get ready to
leave. The increasing power of the sun had cleared off all the snow
below eleven thousand feet, the green grass was beginning to show in
many places, and it was fair to suppose that by the time we reached the
Dos Hermanos we should find pasturage enough for our animals--two ponies
and a mule.

Dick already had his own pony, while the mule, a tough little beast by
name Uncle Fritz, was provided by the professor, both animals having
passed the winter on a ranch about a couple of thousand feet lower down.
Before he left, Uncle Tom had suggested hiring them for the season, but
the professor would not consent to his paying anything, saying that the
animals might just as well be put to some use as to waste their time
doing nothing all summer. Consequently, about the only expense to which
my guardian was put, besides furnishing provisions and tools for the
expedition, was the purchase of a pony and a rifle for me. This was a
very moderate outlay, and I was glad to think that Uncle Tom would get
off so cheaply, if our search should turn out a failure; and no one was
more ready to recognize that possibility--probability, I should rather
say, perhaps--than Uncle Tom himself, to whom the many stories in
general circulation of lost Spanish mines of fabulous richness were
familiar, and who knew very well how little foundation there was for
most of them. The present case, though, was different from the
generality, in that there existed documentary evidence that there had
been such a mine; a fact which altered the conditions entirely. For it
is safe to say that without such documentary evidence Uncle Tom would
never have consented to our undertaking such an enterprise, and Dick and
I, in consequence, would never have run into the series of adventures
which were destined to befall us before we were many weeks older.

It was on the first day of May that we at last took leave of our good
friend, Herr Bergen, and rode off down the valley, passing on our way
through the town of Mosby, where our appearance on horseback, driving
our pack-mule before us, excited among the citizens much speculation as
to our destination; a matter concerning which we had said not a word to
anybody. That it was a prospecting expedition any one could see, for the
pick and shovel could not very well be concealed, but where we were
bound for nobody knew, Uncle Tom having cautioned us that if we let a
word escape about an old Spanish mine we should have a hundred men at
our heels in no time; the very idea of such a thing having an
irresistible fascination for some people, especially for the
inexperienced newcomer.

[Illustration: "PASSING ON OUR WAY THROUGH THE TOWN OF MOSBY."]

Our reason for taking our way through town rather than crossing the
Mosby Ridge, back of the professor's house, and going down the
Mescalero valley, was that the latter course, cut up by many deep
canons, would be much the more difficult of the two; for by following
down the eastern side of the ridge, as we proposed to do, we should
presently come to a point where that barrier, which up near Mescalero
began as a mountain range, became first a line of round-topped hills,
and then, about forty miles below town, came to an end altogether in a
little conical eminence known as The Foolscap. We could therefore pass
round its southern end without difficulty, when we should find ourselves
in the Mescalero valley at its wide part, and by heading southwestward
should arrive in about another twenty miles in the neighborhood of the
village of Hermanos--a route somewhat longer, but very much easier for
the animals, than the other one.

About five miles below town we abandoned the road, which there turned
off to the left to join the main stage-road, and continuing our
southward course up and down hill over the spurs of the Mosby Ridge we
made camp early in the afternoon; for our animals being as yet in rather
poor condition, we thought it advisable to give them an easy day for the
first one.

Selecting a sheltered nook among the pine trees, we unpacked the mule
and unsaddled the ponies, and then, while Dick cooked our supper, I
busied myself cutting pine boughs for our beds and chopping fire-wood.
Soon after sunset we rolled ourselves in our blankets, and in spite of
the novelty of the situation--for I had never before gone to bed with no
roof overhead nearer than the sky--I slept soundly until Dick's voice
aroused me, crying, "Roll out, old chap! Roll out! The sun will catch
you in bed in a minute," when I sprang up, fresh as a daisy and hungry
as a shark, as one always seems to do after sleeping out under the stars
in the keen, pine-scented air of the mountains.

Continuing our journey, we presently rounded the end of the Mosby Ridge,
and turning to the right saw before us the twin peaks of the Dos
Hermanos, standing there, as it seemed to me, like two faithful
sentinels guarding the secret of the King Philip mine.

"Now, Frank," said my companion, as we sat at supper on the little hill
with which the Ridge terminated, "we have a tough day of it before us
to-morrow. The valley down at this end, you see, is just a sage-brush
plain; there are no canons down here like there are at the upper end;
and there is no water either, unfortunately--this side of the
mountains, I mean. The streams which come down from Mescalero and the
Ridge take a westerly turn and go off through a deep gorge to the north
of the peaks--you can see the black shadow of it from here."

"What do the people at Hermanos do for water, then?" I asked.

"There is a little stream which comes down from the saddle between the
Dos Hermanos peaks and runs eastward through the village. But it sinks
into the soil soon afterward, for the country down that way becomes very
sandy; it is the beginning of the Little Cactus Desert, across which the
pack-trains and the soldier escort used to travel, you remember, headed
for the Mosca Pass--that low place in the Santa Claras that you see down
there, due south from here."

"I see. So the nearest water is the stream running through the village.
Do you propose, then, to make for Hermanos?"

"No, I don't," replied Dick. "We want to avoid the village, if possible:
it is no use exciting the curiosity of old Galvez, if he happens to be
there. What I propose is that we make straight from here to the north
side of the peaks, leaving the village three or four miles on our left;
find a good camping-place, and make it a base for our preliminary
operations."

"That's all right," I assented. "But how much of a day's ride will it be
to the north side of the peaks? Further than to Hermanos, I suppose, and
that is over twenty miles."

"Yes," replied Dick, "twenty-five miles certainly and perhaps thirty--a
long stretch without water. But we can do it all right. I propose that
we get off by four in the morning, which ought to bring us to the
foothills of the Dos Hermanos by two or three o'clock in the afternoon."

"That's a good idea," I responded. "And if, by bad luck, we should find
that we can't make it, we can always turn off and head for the village
if we have to."

"Yes. So let us get to bed early. It will be a hard day at best, and we
may as well get all the sleep we can."

As my companion had predicted, the morrow did turn out to be a tough
day, and it began early, too. It was about half-past three in the
morning that I was awakened by the crackling of the fire, and sitting up
in my blankets, I saw Dick squatted on his heels, frying bacon over some
of the hot embers.

"Time to turn out, Frank," said he. "Breakfast will be ready in two
minutes; feeling pretty hungry this morning?"

By way of reply, I opened my mouth with a yawn so prodigious that Dick
laughingly continued:

"Hungry as all that, eh? Well, old man, if the size of your mouth is an
indication of the size of your appetite, I'll slice up another
half-pound of bacon!"

At this I laughed too, and jumping up, I ran to the creek, where I
soused my head and face in the cold water, which wakened me up
effectually.

By four o'clock we were under way, steering by compass; for, though the
stars were shining and the waning moon, then near its setting, furnished
some light, there was not enough to enable us to distinguish objects at
any distance. Our progress at first was pretty slow, for horses and
mules do not like traveling by night, but presently there came a change,
the sky behind us took on a rosy hue, and pretty soon there appeared on
the western horizon two glowing points, like a pair of triangular red
lamps hung up in the sky for our guidance--the summits of the Dos
Hermanos caught by the rising sun.

It was an inspiring sight! The very animals, seeming to feel its
influence, brisked up at once and stepped out gaily, while Dick and I,
who had been "mouching" along in silence, straightened up in our saddles
and fell to talking.

"I've been thinking, Dick," said I, "about what our first move should be
after we have found a good camping-place. My idea is that we should ride
down to the neighborhood of Hermanos and see if there is any sign of an
old trail leading from the village to the mountains."

"That's a good idea," Dick responded. "It is pretty certain that the
copper was brought down from the mine on the backs of burros, and the
supplies carried up in the same way, and if that was kept up for several
years there must have been a well-defined trail worn in this soft soil,
which may be visible yet."

"On the other hand," was my comment, "as the travel ceased so long ago,
isn't it probable that the trail will have been blown full of sand and
covered up?"

"That is likely enough--in many places, at least," replied my companion,
"though it is very possible, I think, that there may be some traces
left, for it is surprising how long such marks on the ground continue to
show. At any rate, we'll try it. Here's the sun; it's going to be
pretty hot, I expect."

Slowly we plodded along, hour after hour, until presently we had come
opposite the village, the mud-colored buildings of which, though not
more than three miles away, were barely distinguishable against the
gray-tinted plain upon which they stood. The green fields and gardens
surrounding the houses we could not see, they being below the general
level, but that they were there, and that the Mexicans were at that
moment engaged in irrigating them, we felt very sure. A light wind was
blowing from the south, and Dick declared that he could "smell the wet";
but though I sniffed and sniffed, I could not conscientiously say that I
could detect it myself.

Our animals, however, very evidently smelt it, for they evinced a
decided inclination to bear to the left, and we had a good deal of
difficulty in keeping their heads straight--the slightest inattention on
our part, and they were off the line in a moment. As is so often the
case, they had not cared to drink in the cool of the morning before we
started, and consequently, what with the heat of the sun and the alkali
dust they kicked up, they had become eager for water and would have
made a straight shoot for Hermanos if we had let them.

But we were nearing the mountains, an hour or two more and we should
reach water, probably, so, though it was painful to deny the poor
beasts, we kept right on, until about four in the afternoon--for it had
taken us longer than we had anticipated--when all three of them suddenly
lifted their heads, pricked their ears and wanted to run forward. They
smelt water ahead of them.

Pressing on at an increased pace, we were presently brought to a halt by
coming upon the brink of a cliff, at the base of which was a large pool
of clear water. The pool lay in a little grass-covered valley about half
a mile long, encompassed on all sides by the precipitous wall of rock.
We could not see that there was any way of getting down.

In order to get a better view, Dick and I dismounted and walked to the
edge, when the first thing we saw was a little bunch of half-a-dozen
scrawny Mexican cattle down near the pool.

"Then there is a way down," cried Dick. "Whoop!" he yelled, clapping his
mouth with his hand.

The cattle looked up, and seeing two horseless human beings on the
sky-line above them, away they went up the valley, vanished for an
instant among the fallen rocks at the foot of the cliff, and in another
moment appeared again on our level, going off southward with their tails
in the air, wild as deer.

"Come on!" cried Dick, jumping upon his horse. "Where they came up we
can get down."

Riding forward, we presently found the cow-trail, when, dismounting once
more, for it was too steep to ride without risk of breaking one's neck,
we led our horses down. Within another half-hour Dick and I, comfortably
seated in the shade of the rock, were enjoying a much-needed dinner,
while the three animals, their waist-lines enormously distended with the
gallons of water they had swallowed, were eagerly snapping up the young
green grass with which the valley was covered--all the troubles of the
day completely forgotten.




CHAPTER IX

ANTONIO MARTINEZ


As we wished to give the animals a good rest, we decided to stay where
we were for the remainder of that day and on the morrow move to the foot
of the mountain and look out for a good camping-place from which to make
our preliminary explorations.

The spot where we were then encamped would not serve, for we were yet at
least three miles from the lowest spurs of the twin mountains. The
stream beside which we were seated issued from the northernmost of the
two peaks, and after running out into the plain for some distance made a
great bend and went back almost to the point of departure, when, turning
to the northward, it poured its waters into the deep canon cut by the
streams which came down from Mescalero and the Ridge. It was just at the
bend that we had struck it.

"What we want, Frank," said my companion, "is a good place in the
foothills, and when we have found one, I propose that we take our
ponies, skirt along the base of the mountains from north to south, and
see if we can't cut across that old trail we were talking about this
morning. It is extremely important that we should do so; it might save
us weeks of useless searching."

"Yes," I assented, "it would be a great help, of course; though all we
can hope to find is some mark in the soil which will point us generally
in one direction or another."

"Yes; and that's just it. If we can find any indication of the direction
the trains used to take when they started from the King's House, it will
lighten our task tremendously. Look here," taking a pointed stick and
drawing a rough plat of the country in the sand. "Here are the two
peaks, lying north and south of each other; here, between them, the
creek comes down which runs two or three miles out on to the plain to
the village here. Now, when the trains used to start out from the _Casa
del Rey_ they took to the right of that stream or they took to the left
of it, one or the other, and if we can do no more than find out which it
was it will be a great help."

"Of course," I responded. "I see that. It would show us whether it was
the north mountain or the south mountain that we had to explore."

"That's it, exactly. And if you stop for a moment to consider, you will
see that that would be a pretty big item all by itself. The two
mountains cover a space about fifteen miles long by, perhaps, ten miles
wide--a hundred and fifty square miles--a pretty big piece of country,
old man, for you and me to scramble over; but if we can find a trail
which will show us which of the two mountains is the right one, that
hundred and fifty miles will be chopped in half at one blow--and if that
isn't a pretty big item all by itself, I should like to know what is."

With that, Dick, who was sitting cross-legged on the ground, stuck his
stick point downward into the middle of his map, planted his hands on
either knee, and with a defiant jerk of his head, challenged me to deny
his conclusion.

I could not help laughing at his emphatic manner, but I could not help,
either, admitting that his point was a good one.

"It certainly would make an immense difference," said I, "and it will
pay us to find that old trail if it takes us a week to do it. So, let us
dig out first thing to-morrow, Dick, and find a good camping-place as a
base."

Accordingly we broke camp again early next morning, and following along
the rim of the canon we presently drew near the foothills. As we
approached the mountain we were able to distinguish with more clearness
the details of its form, and the more clearly we could distinguish them
the more were we impressed with the difficulty and the magnitude of the
task we had undertaken. It was not going to be the simple,
straightforward matter I had at first imagined.

Seen from a distance the north peak looked smooth and symmetrical, but
when you came close to it you found that it was broken up into cliffs
and canons, some of them of great height and depth. On its northern
face, a thousand feet or so below the summit, our attention was drawn to
a great semicircular precipice which looked very like the upper half of
an old volcanic crater, the lower half, presumably, having broken away
and fallen down the mountain.

"A pretty tough piece of country, Frank," said my companion, "and a
pretty large stretch of it, too, for us to tramp over; for, by the look
of it from here, our horses won't be much use to us--at least, when we
get up above the lower spurs. Let us try this gully to the left:
there's probably water up there; I see the tops of two or three
cottonwoods."

Turning in that direction, therefore, we presently came upon a
diminutive stream which ran down and fell into the canon, and passing
between two high rocks, which looked as though they had been split apart
with a wedge to let the water out, we found ourselves in a little
park-like valley, flanked on either side by high ridges.

"This ought to do, Dick," said I, "at any rate for the present; plenty
of grass, plenty of wood and plenty of water. Just the place."

"Yes, this is all right; couldn't be better. Let's unsaddle at once,
make our camp, and after dinner we'll ride down in the direction of
Hermanos and do a little prospecting."

Having chosen a good spot, we arranged a comfortable camp, and after a
hasty dinner we started out; first picketing Uncle Fritz to keep him
from coming trailing after us.

Immediately to the south of our camping-place, forming one of the
boundaries of the little ravine, in fact, there stretched down from the
mountain a great, bare rib of granite, almost devoid of vegetation,
which projected a long way out into the valley, and as it lay square
across our course we decided, instead of going round the end of it, to
ride up to the top in order to get a good lookout over the country we
proposed to examine. From the summit of this ridge, at a point about
four hundred feet above the plain, we were able to get a very good view
of all the wide stretch of comparatively level ground below us,
including the village of Hermanos and the green irrigated fields around
it, which from this elevation were distinctly visible. Except for this
tiny oasis, the whole plain, bounded on the east by the Mosby Ridge, and
on the south by the Santa Clara mountains, appeared to be one uniform,
level stretch of sage-brush desert--dull, gray and uninviting.

"What a pity," remarked Dick, "that there is no water here. If only one
could get water upon it, this sage-brush plain could be turned into a
wheat-field big enough to supply the whole State with bread, besides
furnishing labor and subsistence for a good-sized population of
farmers."

"It would be fine, wouldn't it?" I assented. "And I don't see why it has
never been done: there must be many streams coming down from these
mountains."

"Yes, no doubt; but the difficulty is that all the streams of any
consequence have cut canons for themselves and are too far below the
general level to be of any use. To get water out upon the surface of
this valley one would have to go high up on the mountain, find some
good-sized stream, head it off--building a dam for the purpose,
perhaps--and then conduct the water down here by a ditch several miles
long possibly. Far too big an undertaking, you see, for these penniless,
unenterprising Mexicans."

"I see. It would take a great deal of work and a great deal of money,
probably, but it would be a fine thing to do, all the same."

"Yes, it would; and some day it will be done. It won't be so very many
years before all the 'easy water' in the State will have been
appropriated, and then people will begin to look out for a supply in the
more out-of-the-way places, building reservoirs to catch the rainfall
which now runs to waste after every thunder-storm, and carrying the
water long distances to sell it to the ranchman. The professor says that
some day the business of catching and distributing irrigation water will
be the most important industry in the State, and that a good
ever-flowing stream will be more valuable than any silver mine."

"I can understand that," I replied. "The best mine will some day come
to an end, for when the silver is once dug out it is gone--you can't
plant more; whereas, a good stream of water applied on the soil will go
on producing forever and ever."

"That's it, exactly. And some day that is what will happen here. This
fine stretch of level land, which now grows only grass enough to support
about three cows and a burro, won't always lie idle. Some enterprising
fellow will come along, climb up into this mountain, catch one of those
streams which now go running off through the canons, turn it down here,
and a couple of years later this worthless desert will be converted into
farms and orchards."

"A fine undertaking, too!" I exclaimed. "I should like to have a try at
it myself."

"So should I. But our object in life just now is 'copper,' so come on,
old chap, and let us ride down to the point of this ridge. What is that
black speck down there toward the village? Man on horseback? Ah! He has
disappeared again. Well, come on now, Frank. Let's get started."

Getting down upon the plain again, we turned southward, skirting the
base of the mountain, winding our way through the sage-brush, which was
large and very thick, when, after riding barely a quarter of a mile in
that direction, Dick suddenly pulled up.

"Frank!" he exclaimed. "Look here! Doesn't it seem to you that there is
a depression in the soil going off to the right and the left? Look away
a hundred yards and you will see what I mean. It seems to lead straight
up into the mountain one way, and straight out upon the plain the other
way."

At first I could not detect anything of the sort, but on Dick's pointing
it out more particularly it did appear to me that there was a depression
going off in both directions.

"Let us turn to the left, Dick," said I, "and follow it--if we can--out
into the valley and see what becomes of it."

"All right," responded my companion. "Let's do so."

The mark on the ground was by no means easy to follow, it was so
overgrown with sage-brush, and in many places altogether obliterated by
drifting sand, but, though we frequently lost it, by looking far ahead
we always caught the line again. Presently we found that it went
curving off to the right in the direction of Hermanos, and our hopes
rose.

"Dick!" I cried. "This is no accidental mark in the soil! It is a trail,
as sure as you live!"

"It does begin to look like it," replied my more cautious friend. "I
believe it---- Hallo! Who's this coming?"

As he spoke, I saw about half a mile away a horseman coming toward us at
an easy lope from the direction of the village. He was riding a handsome
gray horse, very superior to the little bronchos we ourselves bestrode.

"He rides well," said I. "I wonder how he got so close to us on this
flat country without our seeing him."

"The country is probably not quite so flat as it looks," replied my
companion. "I expect the man has been keeping in the hollows so that he
might slip up on us unobserved. It is probably old Galvez coming to find
out what we are doing prowling around his domain. He must be the
horseman I saw just now, and I've no doubt he saw us, too, cocked up on
that bare ridge--for all these Mexicans have eyes like hawks."

Meanwhile the rider continued to approach, and as he came nearer we
observed, rather to our relief, that it could not be the padron, for the
stranger was a well-dressed young Mexican, only three or four years
older than ourselves, a handsome, intelligent-looking young fellow, too,
with a trim little black moustache and bright black eyes--evidently one
of a class superior to the ordinary cow-man or farm-hand.

Watching him closely as he came up, wondering what sort of a reception
we should get from him, it appeared to me that he, too, looked both
surprised and relieved when he perceived that instead of the two rough
and sturdy prospectors he had probably expected to meet, it was only a
couple of boys, younger than himself, with whom he had to deal.

And it is likely that he did feel relieved, for at that time the white
men--or, at least, very many of them--dwelling on what was then the
outer edge of civilization, were apt to look down upon all Mexicans as
people of an inferior race, frequently treating them in consequence in a
rough, overbearing manner by no means calculated to promote friendly
feeling.

The young Mexican doubtless "sized us up" favorably; at any rate, no
sooner had he come near enough to see what we were like than he rode
straight up to us, and addressing us politely in Spanish, said:

"Good-day, sirs. Are you going down to Hermanos? I shall be glad to ride
with you if you are."

It happened that I was the one to whom he addressed this salutation,
Dick being a little further back. Now, though I had acquired enough of
the language to understand and speak it fairly well, the Spanish I had
learned was good Castilian, whereas the young Mexican spoke a kind of
_patois_, such as is commonly used among all the natives of these
outlying settlements. The unexpected difference of pronunciation, though
slight, caused me to hesitate an instant in making reply--I have no
doubt, too, my face looked rather blank--whereupon the young fellow
instantly jumped to the conclusion that we did not speak Spanish at all,
and he therefore repeated his remark in English.

It was without any thought of misleading him that I replied, very
naturally, in the tongue which came easiest to me, and as the stranger
spoke English quite as well as I did, it was very natural again that the
conversation should be continued in that tongue. Thus it happened that
we accidentally deceived him--or, rather, he deceived himself--into the
belief that we did not understand any language but our own, and as no
opportunity cropped up during our talk for setting him right, he
continued in this mistaken idea; a fact which, a little later, caused us
considerable satisfaction--not on our own account, but on his.

Replying to his question therefore in English, I said:

"No, we were not bound for Hermanos in particular. We have come down
here to do a little prospecting, and were just riding around a bit to
take a look at the country. Do you live here?"

"No," he replied, "I live in Santa Fe. My name is Antonio Martinez. I am
on a visit here to my uncle, Senor Galvez, the padron of Hermanos. He is
my mother's brother, and as she had not seen him for many years, and as
he has always declined to come to us, she sent me here to make his
acquaintance. For myself, I had never even seen him until I arrived here
two weeks ago, and----"

He checked himself suddenly, looking a little confused; I had an idea
that what he was going to say was that he did not much care if he never
saw him again.

"And are you expecting to stay here?" asked Dick.

"No, I go back in a day or two. Where do you, yourselves hail from, if I
may ask? From Mosby?"

"Yes, from Mosby," replied Dick. "We came down, as my friend said, to do
some prospecting up in one or other of these two peaks--we don't know
which one yet. How is the country up there? Pretty accessible? You've
been up, I suppose."

"No, I haven't," replied the young Mexican. "You think that rather
strange, don't you? And naturally enough. Here have I been for two weeks
hanging around this village with absolutely nothing to do; I should have
been glad enough to make an expedition up into the mountains--in fact, I
had a very particular reason for wishing to do so--but when I suggested
the idea to the padron, explaining to him why I was so anxious to go, he
not only refused emphatically for himself, but declined to let me go
either."

"Why, that seems queer!" cried Dick.

"It does, doesn't it? And his reason for refusing will appear to you
queerer still--he's afraid!"

"Afraid!" we both exclaimed. "Afraid of what?"

"Afraid of The Badger," replied the young fellow, breaking into a laugh
as he noted the mystified look which came over both our faces.

"What do you mean?" I asked. "Why should he--or anybody--be afraid of a
badger?"

"I said _The_ Badger," replied our friend. "You have never heard of him,
evidently--El Tejon, The Badger."

We both shook our heads.

"What is he?" I asked. "A man?"

"Yes--or a wild beast. It is hard to say which. He is a Mexican who once
lived in the village here, I believe. For some reason which I cannot
understand--for my uncle won't talk about it, though I have asked him
several times--for some reason The Badger conceived a violent hatred for
the padron; whether he went crazy or not, I don't know, but anyhow he
committed a murderous assault upon him, hurting him badly--knocked out
all his front teeth with a stone, for one thing--and then escaped into
the mountains. That was twelve years ago, and as far as any one knows he
is there yet, if he is still alive."

"And wasn't any attempt ever made to capture him?" asked Dick.

"Once," replied Antonio. "According to the padron's story, he went out
with six of his cow-men to try to run The Badger to earth; but the
attempt was a failure, as was only to be expected, for the cow-men were
very unwilling to go. They trembled at the very name of El Tejon, who
was a man of immense strength and a great hunter, and they feared that
instead of catching him, he would catch one of them. And the event
showed that they had reason. They had been out several days, had ridden
all over the lower part of the north mountain without seeing a sign of
their man, and were coming back, single file, down a narrow gully, when
the padron's horse suddenly, and seemingly without cause, fell down,
stone dead. The rider, of course, fell too, and striking his head
against a stone he lay for a moment stunned. No one could think what had
happened to the horse, until presently one of the men noticed blood upon
the rocks, and turning the animal over they were all scared out of their
wits by seeing the head of an arrow sticking out between his ribs."

"An arrow!" we both cried.

"Yes, an arrow," continued the narrator, not noticing the glance Dick
and I exchanged. "They knew well enough where it came from, for The
Badger had always hunted with a bow and arrow, with which he was
extraordinarily expert. The instant the cow-men saw what had happened
they stuck spurs into their horses and away they all went,
helter-skelter, leaving their leader lying on the ground."

"That was a pretty shabby desertion," said I. "How did the padron
escape?"

"That is one of the things I can't understand," replied Antonio. "Why
the man, having him so entirely in his power, didn't kill him at once is
a puzzle to me. As it was, when the padron recovered his senses, he
found El Tejon calmly seated on the carcase of the horse, waiting for
him to wake up. He quite expected, he says, to be murdered forthwith,
but instead, the man merely held up the arrow, which he had drawn out of
the horse's body, and said: 'For you--next time'; and with that he arose
and walked off. The padron is no coward, but he knows when to let well
enough alone: he has never been up on the mountain since."

"That's a curious story," said Dick. "What sort of a looking man is this
El Tejon?"

"I've never seen him myself, of course," replied our friend, "but the
padron describes him as a very remarkable man to look at: less than five
feet high, with an immense body, very short legs and very long arms."

Dick and I exchanged glances again.

"Whether the man is yet alive," continued the young fellow, "nobody
knows. It is nearly twelve years ago that this happened, and since then
he has never been seen nor heard of. The chances are, I expect, that he
has been long dead."

"On that point," remarked Dick, "we can give _you_ a little information.
He is not dead--at least he wasn't last fall."




CHAPTER X

THE PADRON


"What do you mean?" cried Antonio. "How do you know? I thought you said
you had never heard of him."

"We hadn't," replied Dick, "until you mentioned his name, but from your
description we have no doubt we saw him some months ago up here at the
head of the valley."

With this by way of preface, my companion related to our new
acquaintance the particulars of our "interview" with the "little giant,"
as he called him.

"It must be the same man," said Antonio. "I wonder what he was doing so
far away from his own mountain. You say he shot the wolf with a
copper-headed arrow? That's something I should like to investigate, if
only the padron were not so dead set against my going up into the
mountain. Where does he get his copper? In fact----" He paused to
consider, and then went on: "Yes; I don't see why I shouldn't tell
you--my uncle won't go himself, and he won't let me go, so I may as
well tell _you_. The truth is that the reason why I was so anxious to
make an excursion up there was just that--to find out where El Tejon
gets his copper. And not only he, but the villagers down here. Every
house in Hermanos has its copper bowl and dipper. They are hammered out
of lumps of native copper; some of them must weigh five or six pounds.
Where did they come from? Lumps of copper of that size were not washed
down the streams--they were dug up. But by whom, and where?"

I felt a great inclination to tell him. He had been so friendly and
communicative that I began to feel rather uncomfortable at the thought
that we were drawing all this information from him under what might be
regarded as false pretences.

I was pretty sure that Dick would be feeling much the same--for among
boys, as I have many a time noticed, there is nothing more catching than
open-heartedness--and I was right; for, glancing at him to see what he
thought, I caught his eye, when he immediately raised his eyebrows a
trifle, as much as to say, "Shall I tell him?"

"Yes," said I, aloud. "I think so. Though we must remember, Dick, that
it isn't altogether our secret."

Dick nodded, and turning to the young Mexican, who was gazing at us
open-eyed, wondering what we were talking about, he said:

"Senor Antonio, my friend and I agree that it isn't quite fair to you to
let you go on telling us these things without our telling you something
in return. As Frank says, it is not altogether our own secret, but at
the same time we don't think it is quite a square deal to get all these
particulars from you and to keep you in the dark about ourselves. I can
tell you this much, anyhow: that our object in coming down here was to
find out where those same lumps of copper did come from."

"Why, how did _you_ know anything about them?" cried Antonio, opening
his eyes wider still.

"I passed through Hermanos about eighteen months ago," replied Dick, "in
company with a German naturalist, Herr Bergen, when we noticed the great
number of copper bowls and things, and the sight of them reminded the
professor of a story he had heard of an old copper mine, abandoned more
than a hundred years ago, supposed to be somewhere down in this
country. The story the professor told us is the story which we think we
have no business to repeat, but I can tell you this much, at least, that
it seemed to indicate the Dos Hermanos as the site of the old mine; and
so we got leave to come down here to see if we couldn't trail it up."

"Is that so? What fun you will have. I wish I could go with you. But
that, I know, is out of the question: the padron would not consent, and
I could not go against his will. But if I can help you I shall be very
glad. Does the story you refer to indicate which of the two peaks is the
right one?"

"No, it doesn't," replied Dick. "We suppose that the copper used to be
brought down to the _Casa_ on pack-burros, and we thought there might be
the remains of a trail down here in the valley. That is what we were
doing when you rode up:--looking for the trail; and we thought perhaps
we had found it when we discovered this indentation in the soil that we
have been following."

"And I believe you have!" cried Antonio. "That's just what you have! It
goes on straight southward from here, very plain, to within half a mile
of the _Casa_ and then seems to die out for some reason. But, that it is
the old trail I feel certain. Your copper mine is up there on the north
peak as sure as----"

He stopped short, his enthusiasm suddenly died out, and pulling a long
face, he gazed at us rather blankly.

"Well?" asked Dick.

"I was forgetting. There's something else up there on the north peak."

"What's that?"

"The Badger!"

"That's so!" cried Dick. "I'd forgotten him, too. Do you suppose he
would interfere with us?"

"That's more than I can say. From what the padron has told me, I imagine
it is only to him that El Tejon objects, and perhaps also to me as one
of the family; but I'm not sure about that. Look here! I'll tell you
what I'll do. I'll just ride home and ask him what he thinks. You stay
here. I'll be back in half an hour."

"You are very kind," said my partner. "But why should we trouble you to
come back here? We'll ride down with you."

To our surprise the young fellow flushed and looked embarrassed, but
recovering in a moment, he said:

"Come on, then. But before we go, let me tell you something. The reason
I hesitated was that I feared you might not receive a very hearty
welcome from the padron. The truth of the matter is--to put it plainly,
once for all--he hates strangers, and above all he hates the Americans.
I am sorry it should be so, but so it is. The feeling is not uncommon
among the older Mexicans: those who went through the war of '46; and if
you stop to think of it, it isn't altogether unreasonable. According to
the padron's view of the matter, his native country was invaded without
cause or justice; he, himself, fought against the invader; his own
brother and many of his friends were killed; and finally, he saw the
land where he was born torn away from its old moorings and attached to
the country of the enemy."

This defence of his fellow-countryman, which the young Mexican delivered
with much earnestness and feeling, was a revelation to me. Hitherto I
had only considered the war with Mexico from our side, glorying in our
success and admiring--very rightly--the bravery of our soldiers. That
the Mexicans, themselves, might have a point of view of their own had
never occurred to me, until this young fellow thus held up their side of
the picture for me to see.

"That's a matter I never thought of before," said I; "but when you do
stop to think of it, it is _not_ surprising that the older generation of
Mexicans should have no liking for us."

"No," Dick chimed in; "and I don't think you can blame them, either."

"I'm glad you see it that way," said Antonio. "It makes things all
comfortable for me. So, now, let us get along. And if the padron doesn't
seem best pleased to see you, you will know why."

Following along the line of the supposed trail, which continued in
general to be pretty plain, we presently passed alongside of a high bank
of earth to which our guide called our attention.

"Just ride up here a minute," said he. "Now, do you see how this
earth-bank forms a perfect square, measuring about two hundred yards
each way? What do you make of that?"

"It was evidently built up," said I; "it can't be a natural formation.
But what the earth was piled up for, I can't see."

"I think I can," remarked Dick. "If I'm not mistaken, this is the site
of an old pueblo."

"Just what I think," responded Antonio. "An old pueblo which probably
stood here before ever the Spaniards came to the country, and has been
melted down to this shapeless bank by the rains of centuries. This
valley must have supported a good-sized population once--very much
larger than at present."

"It looks like it," Dick assented. "I wonder where they got their water
from--for I suppose they lived mostly by agriculture, as the Pueblos do
still. Hasn't the padron ever tried to find the old source of supply?"

The young Mexican shook his head. "No," said he. "The source of supply,
wherever it was, was up in the mountains somewhere, and in spite of the
fact that if he could find it, it would increase the value of the grant
a thousand times, he daren't go to look for it."

"My! What a chance there is here"--Dick began, when he suddenly checked
himself. "Here's some one coming," said he. "Is this the padron?"

"Yes; he must be coming to see who you are. I hope he won't make himself
unpleasant."

As Antonio spoke, there came riding toward us a square-set, gray-haired
Mexican, at whom, as he approached, we gazed with much interest. He was
a man of fifty, or thereabouts, harsh-featured and forbidding, who
scowled at us in a manner which made me, at least, rather wish I had not
come. To put it shortly and plainly, the Senor Galvez had, in fact, the
most truculent countenance I had ever seen; and his first remark to his
nephew, as the latter advanced to meet him, was on a par with his
appearance.

"What are you bringing these American pigs here for, Antonio?" he
growled, in Spanish. "You know I will have nothing to do with them."

Poor Antonio flushed painfully under his brown skin. He half raised his
hand with a deprecatory gesture, as though to beg the speaker to be more
moderate, while he glanced uneasily at us out of the corner of his eye
to see if we had understood.

It was then that Dick and I congratulated ourselves on having
accidentally deceived our friend into the belief that we did not speak
Spanish. Suppressing our natural desire to bandy a few compliments with
the churlish padron, we put on an expression of countenance as stolid
and vacant as if we had been indeed the American pigs
aforesaid--immensely to the comfort of the younger man, as it was easy
to see.

"Do not be harsh, senor," said he. "They are only boys, and they are
doing no harm here. Moreover," he went on, "they have brought you a
piece of information which you will be glad to have:--El Tejon is still
alive."

The elder man started; his weather-beaten face paled a little.

"How do they know that?" he asked, suspiciously.

Antonio briefly told him our story.

"Hm!" grunted the padron, glowering at us from under his bushy eyebrows.
"But what are these boys skulking around here for? They don't pretend, I
suppose, that they have come all the way down from Mosby just to tell me
they have seen El Tejon."

"Not at all," replied Antonio, with considerable spirit. "They are
gentlemen, and they don't pretend anything. That bigger one of the two,
the freckled one with the hook-nose and red hair"--it was Dick he meant,
and intense was my desire to wink at him and laugh--"that one passed
through here before; he noticed how every house contained its copper
bowl and dipper--just as I did--and he has come down here with his
friend--just as I wanted to do--to try to find out where the copper
came from. We have had a long talk about it, and we have concluded that
it probably came from somewhere up on the north peak. What I brought
them down here for was to ask you whether you thought The Badger would
let them alone if they went up there--that's all."

"That's all, is it? Well, perhaps it is. But I'm suspicious of
strangers, Antonio, especially since----"

He paused, seemingly considering whether he should or should not mention
the subject he had in mind, but at length--evidently supposing that we
could not understand what he was saying--he went on:

"I had not intended to say anything to you about it, but three days
ago--the day you rode over to Zapatero to spend the night--something
occurred here which makes me rather uneasy. I had been away all day
myself that day and on my return I found a young man in the village who
had come, he said, from Santa Fe. For a young man to come to this
out-of-the-way place, all alone, from Santa Fe, or from anywhere else,
for that matter, was a strange thing: it made me suspicious that he was
after no good. And I became more than suspicious when I found that he
had spent the day going from one house to another inquiring after El
Tejon!"

"Inquiring after El Tejon!" repeated Antonio. "That was strange;
especially considering that El Tejon has been practically dead for a
dozen years. Did he offer any explanation?"

"No. To tell the truth, I did not give him the opportunity. When I found
out what he was doing, how he had slipped into the village during my
absence and had gone prying about among these ignorant peons, asking
questions concerning my enemy, I was so enraged that I threatened to
shoot him if he did not depart at once. I made a mistake there, I admit;
if I had curbed my anger, I might have found out what his object was.
But I did not, so there is no more to be said."

"That was unfortunate," said Antonio; "but, as you say, it can't be
helped now. So the stranger went off, did he? Did he return to----"

"No, he didn't," Galvez interrupted, "or, at any rate, not immediately.
I'll tell you how I know. I was so distrustful of him that I followed
his trail next morning--it was dark when he left, and I couldn't do it
then. It was an easy trail to follow, for his horse was shod, and ours,
of course, are not. It led eastward for a mile and then turned back,
circled round the village and went up into the north mountain. I have
not seen him, nor a trace of him since."

"It is a strange thing," said Antonio, thoughtfully. "What was the young
man like? How old? Was he a Mexican or an American?"

"I don't know. He looked like an American, though he spoke Spanish
perfectly. He might be twenty years old. It is an odd thing,
Antonio--and it is that, perhaps, which made me speak so sharply when I
first saw these new friends of yours--but the young man was something
like the bigger one of these two boys: the same hook-nose and light-gray
eyes, though his hair was black instead of red."

"A strange thing altogether," said Antonio, reflectively. "I don't
wonder you feel a little uneasy."

"As to these boys here," the padron went on, jerking his head in our
direction, "you may tell them that they need not fear The Badger. It is
only I who have cause to fear him, and perhaps you, as my nephew. These
boys may go where they like without danger. The chances are they won't
see El Tejon--they certainly won't if he doesn't want to be seen. And,
Antonio, just thank them for bringing me their information, and then
send them off."

So saying, old Galvez turned his unmannerly back on us and rode away.

The interview, if it can be called such--for the padron had not
addressed a single word to us--being plainly at an end, we shook hands
with our friend, Antonio, and having thanked him very heartily for his
service, we set off for camp, riding fast, in our hurry to get back
before darkness should overtake us.




CHAPTER XI

THE SPANISH TRAIL


"Dick," said I, as we sat together that evening beside our camp-fire,
"what do you make of it? That was a queer thing, that young fellow
coming inquiring for El Tejon. I confess, for my part, I can't make head
or tail of it."

"I can't either," replied Dick; "at least, as far as this stranger is
concerned. I'm quite in the dark on that point. As to the padron and The
Badger, though, that seems to me simple enough. It is some old feud
between the two which concerns nobody but themselves."

"That is how it strikes me. You don't think, then, that there is any
danger to us?"

"No, I don't. In fact, I feel sure of it. It is just a personal quarrel
of long standing between those two--that's all. I have no more fear of
El Tejon than I have of any other Mexican. All the same, old chap, if
you have any doubt about it, I'm ready to quit and go home again."

"No," I replied, emphatically. "I vote we go on. And I'll tell you why,
Dick. For one thing, I always did hate to give up."

My partner nodded appreciation.

"For another thing, I have gathered the notion that this Badger is not a
bad fellow; not at all the kind that would murder a man in his sleep or
shoot him from behind a rock. The fact that he let old Galvez go that
time when he had him helpless, seems to me pretty good evidence that he
is a man of some generosity and above-boardness."

"That's a fact," Dick assented; "it was rather a fine action, as it
seems to me. And unless I'm vastly mistaken, Frank," he went on, "if the
cases had been reversed, and the padron had caught The Badger as The
Badger caught the padron, it would have been all up with El Tejon. I
never saw a harder-looking specimen in my life than old Galvez. I know,
if he were my enemy, I should be mighty sorry to fall into his hands."

"So should I; and the less we have to do with him the better, to my
notion. I think we shall do well to steer clear of him."

"Yes; and there won't be any temptation to go near him, anyhow,
especially as Antonio won't be there to act as a buffer. So, we decide
to go on, do we?" Dick concluded, as he arose to put two big logs on the
fire for the night. "All right. Then we'll get out to-morrow morning.
We'll take the line of the old trail and follow it up into the mountain
as far as it goes--or as far as we can, perhaps I should say."

"Very well," I agreed. "And we may as well abandon this camp, take old
Fritz and all our belongings with us, and find another place more
suitable higher up the mountain."

"Yes; so now to bed."

We were up betimes next morning, and having packed our traps away we
went, Dick in the lead, Fritz following, and I bringing up the rear.
Climbing over the big ridge from whose crest we had surveyed the valley
the day before, we rode down its other side to the line of the old
trail, and there, turning to the right, we followed it as it gradually
ascended, until presently at the head of the ravine the trail, greatly
to our perplexity, came to an end altogether.

The ravine itself had become so narrow and its sides so precipitous that
there appeared to be no way of climbing out of it, and we began to have
our doubts as to whether it could really be an old trail that we had
been following after all, when Dick, spying about, discovered a
much-washed-out crevice on the right-hand side, so grown up with trees
and brush as to be hardly distinguishable.

"Frank," said he, "they must have come down here--there's no other way
that I can see. Wait a moment till I get up there and see if the trail
isn't visible again up on top."

It was a pretty stiff scramble to get up, but as soon as he had reached
the top my partner shouted down to me to come up--he had found the trail
once more.

If it had been a stiff climb for Dick's horse, it was stiffer still for
old Fritz with his bulky pack. But Fritz was a first-rate animal for
mountain work, having had lots of practice, and being allowed to choose
his own course and take his own time he made the ascent without damaging
himself or his burden.

As soon as I had rejoined him, Dick pointed out to me the line of the
trail, which, bearing away northward now, was much more distinct than it
had been down below. For one thing, the ground here was a great deal
harder; and for another, being well sheltered by the pine woods, the
trail had not drifted full of sand as it had out on the unprotected
valley. There were, it is true, frequent places where the rains of many
years had washed the soil down the hillsides and covered it up, but in
general it was easily distinguishable as it went winding along the base
of the mountain proper, at the point where the steeper slopes merged
into the great spurs which projected out into the valley.

The distinctness of the old trail was, indeed, a surprise to me, its
line was so much easier to follow than I had expected. If it continued
to be as plain as this, we should have no trouble in keeping it; and so
I remarked to my companion.

"That's true," Dick assented, adding: "I'll tell you what, Frank: this
must surely have been a government enterprise. Just see how much work
has been expended on this trail--and needlessly, I should say--no
private individual or corporation would have taken the trouble to make a
carefully graded road like this--for that is what it really was
apparently. It must have been some manager handling government funds and
not worrying himself much about the amount he spent."

"I shouldn't wonder," said I.

"Just notice," Dick continued, pointing out the places with his finger.
"See what useless expenditure they made. Whenever they came to a dip,
big or little, instead of going down one side and up the other, as any
ordinary human being would do, they carried their road round the end of
the gully--just as though a loaded burro would object to coming up a
little hill like this one, for instance, here in front of us."

"It does seem rather ridiculous," I assented. "And they must have laid
out their line with care, too, for, if you notice, Dick, it goes on
climbing up the mountain with a grade which seems to be perfectly
uniform as far as we can see it. It is more like a railroad grade than a
trail. It isn't possible, is it, Dick," I asked, as the thought suddenly
occurred to me, "it isn't possible that they can have used wheeled
vehicles?"

"Hm!" replied my companion, rubbing his chin thoughtfully. "No, I think
not. It would be extremely improbable, to say the least. No, I think it
is more likely to be as I said: some lordly government official,
spending government funds, and not troubling himself whether the income
would warrant the expenditure or not."

"I suppose that was probably it," said I. "There's one thing sure,
Dick," I added: "if the income did warrant the expenditure, that old
copper mine must have been a staver and no mistake."

"That's a fact. Well, come on; let us go ahead and see where the trail
takes us."

This following of the trail was a perfectly simple matter; the animals
themselves, in fact, took to it and kept to it as naturally as though
even they recognized it as a road. So, on we went, climbing gradually
higher at every step, when, on rounding the shoulder of a big spur, we
were brought to a sudden and most unexpected halt by coming plump upon
the edge of a deep and very narrow canon. Right up to the very brink of
this great chasm the trail led us, and there, of necessity, it abruptly
ended.

This gorge, which was perhaps a thousand feet deep, and, as I have said,
extremely narrow--not more than thirty feet wide at the point where we
had struck it--came down from the north face of the mountain, and, as we
could see from where we stood, ran out eastward into the plain. It was
undoubtedly the stream upon which we had camped when we had come across
the valley two days before.

Looking the other way--to the left, that is: up stream--our view was
limited, but from what we could see of it, the country in that
direction bade fair to be inaccessible, for horses, at least; while as
to the canon itself, it curved first to the left and then to the right
in such a manner that we could not see to the bottom. Moreover a large
rock, rising from the edge of the gorge, and in fact overhanging it a
little, cut off our view up stream.

On the opposite side of the chasm the ground rose high and rocky, an
exceedingly rough piece of country; for though it was in general well
clothed with trees, we could see in a score of places great bare-topped
ridges and pinnacles of rock projecting high above the somber woods.

"Dick," said I, "this looks rather like the end of things. What are we
to do now?"

"The end of things!" cried Dick. "Not a bit of it! Don't you see, on the
other side of the canon, exactly opposite, that little ravine which goes
winding up the mountain until it loses itself among the trees? Well,
that is the continuation of the trail. Come down here to the edge and
I'll show you."

Dismounting from our horses, we advanced as near the rim of the chasm as
we dared, when Dick, pointing across to the other side, said:

"Look there, Frank, about a foot below the top. Do you see those two
square niches cut in the face of the rock? This place was spanned by a
bridge once, and those two niches are where the ends of the big
stringers rested."

"It does look like it!" I exclaimed. "If there are other similar niches
on this side, that would settle it. Take hold of my feet, will you,
while I stick my head over the edge and see?"

With Dick firmly clasping my ankle by way of precaution, I crept to the
rim and craned my neck out over the precipice as far as I dared venture.
As we had expected, there were the two corresponding niches, while about
ten feet below them were two others, the existence of which puzzled me.
Squirming carefully back again, I rose to my feet and told Dick what I
had seen.

"Two others, eh?" said he. "That's easily explained. Look across again
and you will see that there are two in the face of the opposite cliff to
match them. Those people not only laid two big stringers across the
canon, but they supported them from below with four stays set in those
lower holes."

"That must be it!" I exclaimed. "They did things well, didn't they--it
is on a par with the work they expended on the trail. The trail itself,
of course, went on up that little ravine and has since been washed out
by the rains."

"Yes; and the bridge has rotted and fallen into the stream; unless they
destroyed it purposely when they abandoned the mine."

"Well, Dick," said I. "It seems fairly sure that the mine was over
there, somewhere in the rough country on the other side of the canon.
The question is, how are _we_ to get over there?"

"Yes, that's the question all right. We can't get down here. That is
plain enough. We shall have to find some other way. And that there is
another way is pretty certain. See here! This canon comes down from the
north side of the mountain, runs out into the valley to the point where
we struck it day before yesterday, doubles back, and joins the streams
coming down from Mescalero, as well as those others which flow down from
the north side of the peak."

"Well?"

"Well, this piece of country before us is therefore a sort of island,
surrounded, or nearly surrounded, by canons."

I nodded. "Yes," said I. "Or more like a fortress with a thousand-foot
moat all round it."

"Well," continued my partner, "the original discoverers of the mine,
whether Indians or Spaniards, did not cross here by a bridge, of course;
they climbed up from the bottom of one of these canons somewhere, and at
first, probably, brought out the copper the same way, until, finding how
much easier it would be to come across here, they built a bridge and
made this road for the purpose."

"That sounds reasonable," I assented. "So if we want to find the place
where they used to get up, we must climb down into the bottom of the
canon ourselves and hunt for it."

"Yes," replied Dick. "And from the look of it, I shouldn't wonder if we
don't have to go all the way back to our old camping-place in order to
get down!"

"Hm!" said I, puckering up my lips and rubbing my chin. "I hope we don't
have to go that far; but if we must, we must. Anyhow, Dick, before we go
all the way down to the bottom of the mountain again, let us climb up
above this big rock here and take a look up stream. It is just possible
there may be a way down in that direction."

"Very well," replied my partner. "I don't suppose there is, but we'll
try it anyhow."

Leaving our horses standing, we went back a little way along the trail,
and climbing upward, presently reached a point level with the top of the
big rock which rose above the edge of the gorge. There we found several
little gullies leading down to the ravine, and Dick taking one of them
and I another, we thus became separated for a few minutes. Only for a
few minutes, however, for very soon I heard my partner hailing me to
come back. From the tone of his voice I felt sure he had discovered
something.

"What is it, Dick?" I asked. "Found a way down?"

"That's what I have, Frank, I'm pretty sure. Come here and look!"




CHAPTER XII

THE BADGER


A short distance down Dick's gully was a great slab of stone standing on
edge, which, leaning over until its upper end touched the opposite wall,
formed a natural arch about as high as a church door. Through this
vaulted passage Dick led the way. In about twenty steps we came out
again upon the brink of the chasm, and then it was that my partner, with
some natural exultation, pointed out to me the remarkable discovery he
had made.

In the face of the cliff was a sort of ledge, varying in width from ten
feet to about double as much, which, with a pretty steep, though pretty
regular pitch, continued downward until it disappeared around the bend
in the gorge. Unless the ledge should narrow very considerably we should
have no trouble in getting down, for there was room in plenty not only
for ourselves but for our animals also--even for old Fritz, pack and
all.

"Why, Dick!" I cried. "We can easily get down here! I wonder if this
wasn't the original road taken by the pack-trains."

"It was," replied Dick; "at least, I feel pretty sure it was--and it was
used for a long time, too."

"Why do you think so?" I asked. "You speak as though you felt pretty
certain, Dick, but for my part I don't see why."

"Don't you? Why, it's very plain. Look here! Do you see, close to the
outer edge of the shelf, a sort of trough worn in the rock? Do you know
what that is? If I'm not very much mistaken, it is the trail of the
pack-burros. There must have been a good many of them, and they must
have gone up and down for a good many years to wear such a trail;
though, of course, it has been enlarged since by the rain-water running
down it."

"Well, Dick," said I, "I still don't see why you should conclude that
this is the trail of a pack-train. It seems to me much more likely to be
due to water only. In the first place, though there is room enough and
to spare on the ledge, your supposed trail is on the very outer edge,
where a false step would send the burro head-first into the canon; and
in the next place, it keeps to the very edge, no matter whether the
ledge is wide or narrow."

"That's exactly the point," explained Dick. "It is just that very thing
which makes me feel so sure that this is the trail of a pack-train.
You've never seen pack-burros at work in the mountains, have you? Well,
I have lots of times: they are frequently used to carry ore down from
the mines. If you had seen them, you could not have helped noticing the
habit they have of walking on the outside of a ledge like this, where
there is a precipice on one side and a cliff on the other. A burro may
be a 'donkey,' but he understands his own business. He knows that if he
touches his pack against the rock he will be knocked over the precipice,
and he has learned his lesson so well that it makes no difference how
wide the ledge may be--he will keep as far away from the rock as he can.
As to a false step, that doesn't enter into his calculations: a burro
doesn't make a false step--there is no surer-footed beast in existence,
I should think, excepting, possibly, the mountain-sheep."

"I never thought of all that," said I. "Then I expect you are right,
Dick, and this is an old trail after all. What is your idea? To follow
it down, I suppose."

"Yes, certainly. Our animals won't make any bones about going down a
wide path like this. They are all used to the mountains. So let us get
them at once and start down."

Dick was right. Our horses, each led by the bridle, followed us without
hesitation, while old Fritz, half a burro himself, took at once to the
trail which one of his ancestors, perhaps, had helped to make.

Without trouble or mishap, we descended the steeply-pitching ledge down
to the margin of the creek, crossed over to the other side, and
continued on our way up stream over the slope of decomposed rock fallen
from the towering cliff which rose at least a thousand feet above
us--the cliff being now on our right hand and the stream on our left.

This sloping bank was scantily covered with trees, and among them we
threaded our way, still following the trail, which, however, down here
had lost any resemblance to a made road, and had become a mere thread,
more like a disused cow-path than anything else.

Presently, we found that the canon began to widen, and soon afterward
the cliff along whose base we had been skirting, suddenly fell away to
the right in a great sweeping curve, forming an immense natural
amphitheatre, enclosing a good-sized stretch of grass-land, with
willows and cottonwoods fringing the nearer bank of the stream.

As we sat on our horses surveying the scene, we found ourselves
confronting at last the imposing north face of the mountain. Up toward
its summit we could see the great semi-circular cliff which we supposed
to be the upper half of an old crater, while the country below it, bare,
rocky and much broken up, was exceedingly rough and precipitous.

Starting, apparently, from the neighborhood of this crater, there came
down the mountain a second very narrow and very deep gorge, whose
waters, when there were any, emptied into the stream we had been
following; the two canons being separated by a high, narrow rib of
rock--a mere wedge. Curiously enough, however, this second canon did not
carry a stream, though we could see the shimmer of two or three pools as
they caught the reflection of the sky down there in the bottom of its
gloomy depths.

"Well, Dick," said I, "I don't see any sign yet of a pathway up to the
top of this 'island' of yours. This basin is merely an enlargement of
the canon; the walls are just as high and just as straight-up-and-down
as ever."

"Yes, I see that plainly enough," replied Dick. "Yet there must be a
way up somewhere. Those pack-trains didn't come down here for nothing.
We shall find a break in the wall presently--up in that gorge, there, it
must be, too. So let us go on. Hark! What's that?"

We sat still and listened. The whole atmosphere seemed to vibrate with a
low hum, the cause of which we could not understand. It kept on for five
minutes, perhaps, and then died out again.

"What was it, Dick?" said I. "Wind?"

"I suppose it must have been," replied my companion; "though there isn't
a breath stirring down here. If the sky had not been so perfectly clear
all morning I should have said it was a flood coming. It must have been
wind, though, I suppose."

Satisfied that this was the cause, we thought no more of it, but, taking
up the trail once more, we followed it down to the mouth of the second
canon, and there at the edge of the watercourse all trace of it ceased.

"That seems to settle it," remarked Dick. "You see, Frank, the walls of
this canon are so steep and its bed is so filled with great boulders
that even a burro could get no further. The copper must have been
carried down to this point on men's backs, and if so, it was not carried
any great distance probably. The mine must be somewhere pretty near now;
we shan't have to search much further, I think, for a way up this
right-hand cliff. Let us unsaddle here, where the horses can get plenty
of grass, and go on up on foot."

The ascent of the chasm was no easy task, we found, but, weaving our way
between the boulders which strewed its bed, up we went, until presently
we came to a place where some time or another a great slice of the wall,
about an eighth of a mile in length, falling down, had blocked it
completely, forming an immense dam nearly a hundred feet high. It must
have been many years since it fell, for its surface was well grown up
with trees, though none of them were of any great size. It seemed
probable, too, that the base of the dam must be composed of large
fragments of rock, for, though there was no stream in the bed of the
gorge, it was very plain that water did sometimes run down it. If so,
however, it was equally plain that it must squeeze its way through the
crevices between the foundation rocks, for there was no sign at all that
it had ever run over the top.

Scrambling up this mass of earth and rocks, we went on, keeping a sharp
lookout for some sign of a pathway up the cliff on our right, but still
seeing nothing of the sort, when presently we reached the upper face of
the dam, and there for a moment we stopped.

Beneath us lay a stretch of the ravine, forming a basin about two
hundred yards long, in the bottom of which were three or four pools of
clear water. At the upper end of this basin was a perpendicular cliff,
barring all further advance in that direction, over which, in some
seasons of the year, the water evidently poured--sometimes in
considerable volume apparently, judging from the manner in which the
sides of the basin had been undermined. The sides themselves continued
to be just as unscalable as ever; in spite of Dick's assurance that we
should find a way up, it was apparent at a glance that there was neither
crack nor crevice by which one could ascend.

"Well!" cried my partner, in a tone of desperation. "This does beat me!
I felt certain that the trail would lead us to some pathway up the
cliff; but, as it does not, what does it come down here for at all?"

"There is only one reason that I can think of," I replied, "and that is
that they must have come down here for water--there is probably none to
be found up on top of the 'island.'"

"That must be it, Frank. Yes, I expect you've struck it. And in that
case the pathway we have been hunting for must be down stream from the
site of the old bridge after all."

"Yes. So we may as well go back to-morrow morning, I suppose, and start
downward. It is rather late to go back now--and besides, there is no
water up there: we had better camp here for to-night, at any rate."

"That's true. Well, as we have some hours of daylight yet--if you can
call this daylight down here in this narrow crack--let us climb down the
face of the dam and examine the basin before we give up and go back, so
as to make quite sure that there is no way up the side."

Accordingly, having clambered down, we walked up the middle of the
basin, our eyes carefully scanning the wall on our right, when, having
traversed about three-quarters of its length, we suddenly heard again
that humming noise which we had taken for a wind-storm among the pines.
With one accord we both stopped dead and listened. The noise was
decidedly louder than it had been before, and moreover it appeared to
be increasing in volume every second.

"Frank!" exclaimed my companion. "I don't like the sound of it! It seems
to me suspiciously like water! Let us get out of here! This is no place
to be caught by a flood!"

We turned to run, but before we had gone five steps we heard a roar
behind us, and casting a glance backward, we saw to our horror an
immense wall of water, ten feet high, leap from the ledge at the end of
the basin and fall to the bottom with a prodigious splash.

In one second the whole floor of the basin was awash. In another second
our feet were knocked from under us, when, without the power of helping
ourselves, we were tumbled about and swept hither and thither at the
caprice of the rapidly deepening flood.

Happily for myself, for I was no swimmer, I was carried right down to
the dam, where, by desperate exertions, I was able to scramble up out of
reach of the water. Dick, however, less fortunate than I, was carried
off to one side, and when I caught sight of him again he was being swept
rapidly along under the right-hand wall--looking up stream--in whose
smooth surface there was no chance of finding a hold. As I watched him,
my heart in my mouth, he was carried back close to the fall, where the
violence of the water, now several feet deep, tossed him about like a
straw.

Half paralyzed with fear lest my companion should be drowned before my
eyes, I stood there on the rocks, powerless to go to his aid, hoping
only that he might be swept down near enough to enable me to catch hold
of him, when, of a sudden, there occurred an event so astounding that
for a moment I could hardly tell whether I ought to believe my own eyes
or not.

Out from the wall on the left, up near the fall, there shot a great dark
body, which, with a noiseless splash, disappeared under the water. The
next moment a man's head bobbed up, a big, shaggy, bearded head, the
owner of which with vigorous strokes swam toward Dick and seized him by
the collar. Then, swimming with the power of a steam-tug, he bore down
upon the dam, clutched a projecting rock, drew himself up, and with a
strength I had never before seen in a human being, he lifted Dick out of
the water with one hand--his left--and set him up on the bank.

Running to the spot, I seized hold of my partner, who, almost played
out, staggered and swayed about, and helped him further up out of reach
of the water. Then, turning round, I was advancing to thank his rescuer,
when, for the first time, I saw that the man was almost a dwarf--in
height, at least--though his astonishing strength was indicated in his
magnificent chest and arms.

"The Badger!" I cried, involuntarily.

At the sound of that name the man turned short round, and without a word
leaped into the water again. Sweeping back under the right-hand wall, he
presently turned across the pool and struck out for the opposite side.
Ten seconds later he had disappeared, having seemingly swum through the
very face of the cliff itself!




CHAPTER XIII

THE KING PHILIP MINE


I think it is safe to say that Dick and I were at that moment the two
most astonished boys in the State of Colorado.

Where had the man sprung from? And how had he disappeared again? There
must be, of course, some opening in the rock which we had failed to
notice; a circumstance easily explained by the fact that we had not gone
far enough up the basin, and by the added fact that our attention had
been fixed upon the opposite wall.

Then, again, though the identity of the man could hardly be doubted, why
should he take offence, as he seemed to do, at being addressed as "The
Badger"?

This was a question to which we could not find an answer; and, indeed,
for the moment we postponed any attempt to do so, for our attention was
too much taken up by the action of the water, which, continuing to rise
with great rapidity, forced us to retreat higher and higher up the dam.

For about half an hour it thus continued to rise, until there must have
been at least fifteen feet of it in the basin, by the end of which time
we noticed a sudden diminution in the amount coming over the fall. A few
minutes later the flow had ceased altogether, when the water in the pool
at once began to subside again, though far less rapidly than it had
risen.

Our first impulse after our narrow escape from drowning had been to run
to the other end of the dam and get back forthwith to our horses, but
this we had found to be rather too risky an undertaking to attempt, for
the water, coming out from under the dam, was rushing down the bed of
the canon, seething and foaming between the obstructing boulders in such
a fashion that we decided that discretion would be a good deal the
better part of valor--that it would be an act of wisdom to wait a bit.

Moreover, when the flood, leaping from the cliff, had bowled us over in
such unceremonious style, we had had our rifles in our hands, and as
those indispensable weapons were at that moment lying under fifteen feet
of water, there was nothing for it but to wait till the pool drained off
if we wished to recover them.

As there was no telling how long we might have to wait, and as we were
both wet through and very cold--Dick being besides still shaky from his
recent buffeting--I collected a lot of dead wood and started a roaring
fire, before whose cheerful blaze our clothes soon dried out and our
spirits rose again to their normal level.

It was then that I first fully appreciated the value of my partner's
habit of carrying matches in a water-tight box--a habit I strongly
recommend to anybody camping out in these mountains.

For three hours we waited, by which time as we guessed there remained
not more than a foot of water in the pool. I had gone down to measure it
with a stick, and was leaning with my hand against the smooth, wet wall
on my right, when I heard sounds as of a human voice speaking very
faintly and indistinctly. The sounds seemed to come from the rock where
my hand rested, and putting my ear against it, I plainly heard a strange
voice say, "Hallo, boys!"

"Hallo!" I called out, at the top of my voice, startled into an
explosive shout. "Who are you? Where are you?"

"Who's that you're talking to?" cried Dick, springing to his feet and
looking all about.

"I don't know," I replied. "Come here and put your ear to the rock."

Dick instantly joined me, when we both very clearly heard the voice say:

"You needn't shout. I can hear you. Do you hear me?"

"Yes," said I; and repeating my question, I asked: "Who are you, and
where are you?"

"Before I tell you that," replied the voice, "I want to ask _you_ a
question, if you please. Are you Americans?"

"Yes," I replied. "Two American boys."

"Thank you. One more question, please: Did old Galvez send you up here?"

"No!" I replied, with considerable emphasis. "We never saw old Galvez
till yesterday."

"Good! Then I'll come down if you'll wait a minute."

It was less than a minute that we had to wait, when from behind a slight
bulge in the left-hand wall, up near the head of the basin, there
appeared the figure of a young fellow, seemingly about twenty years old,
who, with his trousers tucked up, carrying a rifle in one hand and his
boots in the other, came wading down to us.

With what interest we watched his approach will be imagined. Neither of
us doubted that it was the young fellow whom Galvez had mentioned as
having visited Hermanos during his absence, and as soon as he had come
near enough for us to distinguish his features, I, for one, was sure of
it, for, with his hook nose and his gray eyes, he did indeed bear a
curious resemblance to my partner.

Standing on the bank at the edge of the water, we waited for him to come
near, when, having advanced to within six feet of us he stopped and eyed
us critically. He was a good-looking young fellow, not very big, but
with a bright, intelligent face which at once took our fancy. Apparently
his judgment of our looks was also favorable, for, smiling pleasantly,
he said:

"Good-evening, boys. Which of you is Dick?"

"I am," replied the owner of that name.

"I just wanted to congratulate you, that's all, on your escape just now.
It might have gone hard with you if it hadn't been for my good friend,
Sanchez."

"Sanchez?" I repeated, inquiringly. "Is that The Badger's proper name?"

"Yes," replied the stranger. "Pedro Sanchez. The name of El Tejon was
bestowed upon him by old Galvez, and consequently he objects to it.
Your use of that name just now made him suspicious that you might be
emissaries of the padron, and it was that which caused him to jump back
into the water so suddenly."

"I see. I'll take care in future. Here! Give me your hand"--seeing that
he was about to come up the bank.

"Thank you," replied the stranger, reaching out his hand to me and
giving mine a shake before he let go--a greeting he repeated with Dick.
"I'm very glad to find you are a couple of American boys and not a pair
of Mexican cut-throats, as we rather suspected you might be. Let us go
up to your fire there and sit down. The water will take another
half-hour yet to drain off completely."

Accordingly, we walked up to the fire, where the stranger dried his feet
and pulled on his boots again.

"Why did you suspect us of being Mexican cut-throats?" asked Dick. "Did
you think that old Galvez had sent us up here on a hunt for you or for
El--for Sanchez, I mean?"

"Yes, that was it. We've been watching you for two days past. We saw you
go down to Hermanos yesterday and start up the trail this morning. From
the fact of your having gone down to the village, Pedro was inclined to
believe you were hunting him or me; but, for my part, I rather inferred
from your actions that you were hunting the old copper mine."

"The old copper mine!" we both cried.

"Yes. Did I make a mistake? Weren't you?"

"No, you didn't make any mistake," replied Dick. "What surprised us was
that you should know anything about it."

The young fellow laughed. "Do you suppose, then," said he, "that you are
the only ones to notice the pots and pans down there at Hermanos?"

"No, of course not," replied Dick. "The professor was right, you see,
Frank," he continued, turning to me, "when he said that the first white
man who came along would notice those copper utensils and go hunting for
the mine."

"Yes," said I; and addressing the stranger again, I added: "So it was
the copper mine you were seeking after all, was it? Old Galvez thought
you came up here looking for Sanchez."

Thereupon I related to him what the padron had said on the subject, when
the young fellow, smiling rather grimly, remarked, with a touch of
sarcasm in his voice:

"Nice old gentleman, the Senor Galvez. So he professed not to know my
name, did he? He's a bad lot, if ever there was one. He was right,
though, in supposing that I came up here to look for Pedro. That was my
main object, though I intended at the same time to keep an eye open for
the old mine."

"And have you seen any indication of it?--if we may ask."

"Oh, yes," he replied, with unaccountable indifference. "There was no
trouble about that. Pedro discovered it years ago and he took me
straight to it."

At this unlooked-for blow to all our hopes and plans, Dick and I gazed
at each other aghast. At one stroke apparently, our expedition was
deprived of its object. We might just as well turn round and go home
again, as far as the King Philip mine was concerned. Our hopes had been
so high; and here they were all toppled over in an instant. Intense was
our disappointment.

For half a minute we sat there speechless, when our new acquaintance,
observing our crestfallen looks, remarked:

"I'm afraid that is a good deal of a disappointment to you, isn't it?
But, perhaps you will be less disappointed when I tell you that the old
mine is valueless to me or you or anybody else."

"How's that?" exclaimed Dick.

"Why, it's---- But come and see for yourselves," he cried, springing to
his feet. "That's the best way. You'll understand the why and the
wherefore in five minutes."

"What! Is it near here, then?" asked my partner.

"Yes, close by. Behind the bulge in the wall on the left here."

"On _that_ side!" cried Dick. "Not on the right, then, after all? Well,
that is a puzzler!"

"Why is it a puzzler?" asked the stranger. "I don't understand you."

"Why, if the mine is on the _left_ of the creek, what was that bridge
for up above here, crossing over to the _right_?"

"Bridge! What bridge? What do you mean?"

Upon this we told him of the niches in the rock up above, which we
supposed to have been receptacles for bridge-stringers.

"That's queer," remarked our friend. "I had not heard of those before.
I wonder if Pedro knows anything about it. It is a puzzler, as you say."

"Yes, I can't make it out," continued Dick; and after standing for a
minute thinking, he repeated, with a shake of his head: "No, I can't
make it out. I can't see what that bridge was for. Well, never mind that
for the present; let's go and see the old mine."

"Come on, then. But before we go, I'll just speak to Pedro, or he may be
going off and hiding himself somewhere up in the old workings. Do you
notice," he asked, "how smoothly the swirl of the water has scoured out
a sort of half-arch at the base of the canon-wall all the way from the
end of the dam here, under the waterfall, round to the bulge on the
other side? It forms a perfect 'whispering gallery.' Hallo, Pedro!" he
called out, putting his face close to the rock. "It is all right. We are
coming up now."

Descending to the bed of the pool, whence all the water except three or
four permanent puddles had now drained away, we first searched for our
rifles, and having recovered them, followed our guide around the bulge
in the wall, and there found ourselves confronting the old
mine-entrance.

About ten feet above the floor of the pool was a big hole in the rock,
evidently made by hand--for it was square--leading up to which were
several roughly-hewn steps, more or less rounded off and worn away by
the water. On top of the steps, framed in the blackness of the opening
behind him, stood the squat figure of Pedro Sanchez--in his rough shirt
of deer-skin representing very well, I thought, the badger in the mouth
of his hole.

[Illustration: "BEHIND HIM, STOOD THE SQUAT FIGURE OF PEDRO SANCHEZ."]

"Pedro," said our new friend, "these gentlemen were seeking the old
mine, as I thought. You have nothing to fear from them."

"On the contrary," cried Dick, bounding up the steps and holding out his
hand, "we have to thank you for your good service just now!"

Stretching out his long arm, the little giant smiled genially, showing a
row of big white teeth.

"It is nothing," said he; adding, with a twinkle in his eye: "The
senores will remember that I owed to them some return for their
assistance against the wolves."

"That's a fact!" cried Dick. "I'd forgotten that. So you remember us, do
you? I wonder at that--you didn't stay long to look at us."

"No, senor," replied Pedro, laughing. "I was out of my own country and
was distrustful of strangers."

Turning to our new friend, who was wondering what all this was about,
Dick explained the circumstances of our former meeting with Pedro,
adding:

"So, you see, we are old acquaintances after all. In fact, if we had not
met Pedro before we should not be here now, for it was his copper-headed
arrow which brought us down, oddly enough."

"That was odd, certainly. Well, Pedro, get the torch and show your old
friends over the mine. We must be quick, or it will be getting dark
before we can get back to our camp."

Pedro disappeared into the darkness somewhere, while we ourselves
climbed up into the mouth of the tunnel. It was very wet in there: we
could hear the _drip_, _drip_ of water in all directions.

"Were you in here when the flood came down?" asked Dick. "How is it you
weren't drowned--for I see the water stood five feet deep in the
tunnel?"

"Oh," replied the other, "there was no fear of drowning. There are
plenty of places in here out of reach of the water. Wait a moment and
you'll see."

True enough, we soon heard the striking of a match, and next we saw the
Mexican standing with a torch in his hand in a recess about ten feet
above us.

"That is where we took refuge," said our friend. "Far out of reach of
the water, you see. Come on, now, and I'll show you how this old mine
was worked, and why it was abandoned."

Leading the way, torch in hand, he presently stopped, and said:

"The place where we came in was the mouth of the main working-tunnel. It
follows the vein into the rock for about a thousand feet, which would
bring it, as I calculate, pretty near to the other canon--for the rock
between the two canons is nothing more than a spit, as you will
remember. Above the tunnel they have followed the vein upward, gouging
out all the native copper and wastefully throwing away all the less
valuable ore, until there was none left. If you look, you can see the
empty crevice extending upward out of sight."

"I see," said Dick, shading his eyes from the glare of the torch. "It
seems to have been pretty primitive mining."

"It was--that part of it, at least. But having exhausted all the copper
above, they next began the more difficult process of mining downward.
Come along this way and I'll show you."

Walking along the tunnel some distance, our guide pointed out to us a
square pool in the floor, measuring about eight feet each way.

"This," said he, "was a shaft. There is another further along. How deep
they are, I don't know."

"But, look here!" cried Dick. "How could they venture to sink shafts,
when at any moment a flood might rush in and drown them all?"

"Ah! That's just the point," said our friend. "Come outside again and
you'll understand."

Returning once more to the bed of the pool, we faced the hole in the
wall, when our guide continued:

"Now, you see, the floor of the tunnel is about ten feet above the
creek-bed, and before the cliff fell down, forming the dam, the water
ran freely past its mouth. But some time after the miners had got out
all the copper overhead and had begun sinking shafts, this cliff came
down, blocked the channel, and caused the water to back up into the
workings. As you remarked just now, it filled the tunnel five feet deep,
and, as a matter of course, filled the shafts up to the top."

"I see," said Dick. "You think, then, that the cliff fell in
comparatively recent times. I believe you are right, too. That would
account for there being no trees of any great size upon the dam."

"Yes. And as a consequence the mine was abandoned; for it would have
taken years to dig away this dam, and as long as it existed it would be
impossible to go on with the work with the water coming down and filling
up the tunnel once every three days, or thereabouts."

"Every three days!" we both exclaimed. "Is this a regular thing, then,
this flood?"

"Why, yes. I'd forgotten you didn't know that. Yes, it's a pretty
regular thing, and a very curious one, too. Pedro says that up in that
old crater near the top of the mountain there is a great intermittent
spring which every now and then rises up and spills out a great mass of
water. The water comes racing down this gorge, and half an hour later
leaps over the fall here, fills up the pool and the mine, and gradually
drains off again under the dam."

"That certainly is a curious thing," Dick responded. "And it also
furnishes a reason good enough to satisfy anybody for abandoning the
mine. Well, Frank," he went on, "this looks like the end of our
expedition. We've done what we set out to do:--found the King Philip
mine; and now, I suppose, there's nothing left but to turn round and go
home again."

"I suppose so," I assented, regretfully. "I hate to go back; but I'm
afraid we have no excuse for remaining."

"You think you must go back, do you?" asked our friend. "I'm sorry you
should have to do so, but if you must, why shouldn't we travel the first
stage together? I start back to Santa Fe to-morrow, and from there home
to Washington."

"You live in Washington, do you?" said Dick. "Then, why do you go round
by way of Santa Fe? It would be much shorter to go to Mosby--and then we
could ride all the way together."

"I wish I could, but I have to go the other way. I left my baggage
there, for one thing; and besides that I have some inquiries to make
there which my mother asked me to undertake."

Dick nodded. "And then you go straight back to Washington?" he asked.

"Yes. Then I must get straight back home as fast as I can and report to
my father. I had two commissions to perform for him:--one was to look
into the matter of this old mine; the other concerned the present
condition of the Hermanos Grant. The first one I consider settled, but
the other, I find, is a matter for the lawyers: it is too complicated a
subject for me, a stranger in the land and a foreigner."

"A foreigner!" I cried. "Why, we supposed you were an American."

"No," said he. "I am a Spaniard."

"A Spaniard!" we both exclaimed this time.

"Yes," laughing at our astonishment. "A Scotch-Irish-Spaniard--which
seems a queer mixture, doesn't it? Though I was born in Spain, my
forefathers were Irish, my mother is Scotch, and I have lived for
several years first in Edinburgh and then in London; and now my father,
who is in the Spanish diplomatic service, is stationed in Washington."

"And what----?" I began, and then stopped, with some embarrassment, as
it occurred to me that it was not exactly my business.

"And what am I doing out here? you were going to say. I'll tell you. My
father was out in this part of the world a good many years ago, having
business in Santa Fe, where he got track of this old copper mine; but
his idea of its whereabouts was very vague until, about a year ago, a
gentleman whom he had met when he was out here wrote him a letter
telling him of the number of copper utensils to be found down there at
Hermanos---- What's the matter?"

That he should thus exclaim was not to be wondered at if the look of
surprise on my face was anything like the look on Dick's.

"Well, of all the queer things!" exclaimed the latter; and then,
advancing a step and addressing our friend, he said, smiling: "I think
we can guess your name."

"You do!" cried the young fellow. "That seems hardly likely. What is
it?"

"Blake!" replied Dick.




CHAPTER XIV

A CHANGE OF PLAN


If the young Spaniard had provided us with two or three surprises during
the day, I think we got even with him in that line when Dick thus
disclosed to him the fact that we knew his name. For a moment he stood
gazing blankly at us, and then exclaimed:

"How in the world did you guess that?"

"I don't wonder you are puzzled," replied Dick, "but the explanation is
very simple. The Professor Bergen who wrote to your father--that's the
right name, isn't it?"

Young Blake nodded. "That was the name signed to the letter," said he.
"'Otto Bergen.'"

"Well, this Professor Bergen is my best and oldest friend; I have lived
with him for thirteen or fourteen years. We left his house to come down
here less than a week ago. It was he who told us of his meeting with a
Spaniard of the remarkable name of Blake, who, while hunting through the
records in Santa Fe, had come across mention of this old mine. And when
he and I passed through Hermanos last year and saw all those old copper
vessels there, the professor wrote at once to your father to tell him
about them. I mailed the letter myself."

"Well, this is certainly a most remarkable meeting!" cried our new
acquaintance. "Why, I feel as if I had fallen in with two old friends!"

"Well, you have, if you like!" cried Dick, laughing; whereupon we shook
hands all over again with the greatest heartiness.

"My first name," said young Blake, "is Arturo--Arthur in this
country--the name of the original Irish ancestor who fled to Spain in
the year 1691, and after whom each of the eldest sons of our family has
been named ever since. But not being gifted with your genius for
guessing names," he continued, with a smile, "I haven't yet found out
what yours are."

"That's a fact!" cried Dick. "What thoughtless chaps we are! My friend
here, is Frank Preston of St. Louis; my own name is----"

"Senores," said Pedro, cutting in at this moment, "with your pardon, we
must be getting out of this canon: it will be black night down here in
another ten minutes."

"That's true!" our friend assented. "So come along. We camp together,
of course. How are you off for provisions? We have the hind-quarter of a
deer which Pedro shot three days ago; pretty lean and stringy, but if
you are as hungry as I am we can make it do."

"Hungry!" cried Dick. "I'm ravenous. We've had nothing to eat since six
o'clock this morning. How is it with you, Frank?"

"I'll show you," I replied, snapping my teeth together, "as soon as I
get the chance."

With a laugh, we set off over the dam, and half an hour later were all
busy round the fire toasting strips of deer-meat on sticks and eating
them as fast as they were cooked, with an appetite which illustrated--if
it needed illustration--the truth of the old saying, that the best of
all sauces is hunger.

Our supper finished, we made ourselves comfortable round the fire, and
far into the night--long after Pedro had rolled himself in his blanket
and had gone to sleep--we sat there talking.

The reasons for our own presence in these parts were briefly and easily
explained, when our new friend, Arthur--with whom, by the way, we very
soon felt ourselves sufficiently familiar to address by his first
name--Arthur related to us the motives which had brought him so far
from home.

"It was not only to hunt up this old mine," said he; "in fact, that was
quite a secondary object. My chief reason for coming out was to look
into the condition of the Hermanos Grant, and to find out why it was we
had been unable for the past twelve years to get any reports from
there."

"Why _you_ hadn't been able to get reports!" exclaimed Dick. "What have
_you_ got to do with the Hermanos Grant, then?"

"It belongs to my father," replied Arthur, smiling.

We stared at him with raised eyebrows.

"But what about old Galvez, then?" asked my partner. "We supposed it
belonged to him. In fact, his nephew told us as much, and he evidently
spoke in good faith, too."

"I dare say he did," replied Arthur. "All the same, the grant belongs,
and for about a century and a half has belonged, to our family. It was
my ancestor, Arthur the First, who 'bossed' the King Philip mine and who
built the _Casa del Rey_. Old Galvez is just a usurper. I did not even
know of his existence till I reached the village three days ago. It is a
long and rather complicated story, but if you are not too sleepy I'll
try to explain it before we go to bed."

It was a long story; and as our frequent questions and interruptions
made it a good deal longer, I think it will be wise to relate it, or
some of it, at least, in my own words, to save time.

The original Arthur Blake having rendered notable service in the great
battle of Almanza, the king of Spain rewarded the gallant Irishman by
making him "Governor" of the King Philip mine, at the same time, in true
kingly fashion, bestowing upon him a large tract of land, comprising the
village of Hermanos with the inhabitants thereof, as well as the desert
surrounding it for five miles each way.

The mine having ceased to be workable, for the reason we had seen,
Arthur the First was preparing to return to his adopted country, when he
died out there, alone, in that far-off land of exile. In course of time
the existence of the King Philip mine passed entirely out of everybody's
recollection, as would probably have been the case with the Hermanos
Grant itself, had not the agent or factor, or, as he was locally called,
the _mayordomo_, placed in charge by the old Irishman, continued from
year to year to send over to the representative of the family in Spain
certain small sums of money collected in the way of rents.

They were an honest family, these factors, the son succeeding the father
from generation to generation, and faithfully they continued to send
over the trifling annual remittances, until the year 1865, when the
payments suddenly and unaccountably ceased.

It was two or three years before this that Senor Blake, having the
opportunity to do so, had come out to Southern Colorado to take a look
at the old grant, which, since the discovery of gold in the territory,
might have some value after all.

As a part of this trip he visited Santa Fe, with the object of searching
through the records for some copy of the original royal patent; for what
had become of that document nobody knew. It was possible that it had
been destroyed when the French burnt the family mansion during the
Peninsular war; again it was possible that old Arthur the First had
brought it with him to America for the purpose of submitting it to the
inspection of the Mexican authorities--for that part of Colorado was in
those days under the rule of the viceroy of Mexico.

In the limited time at his disposal, however, Senor Blake had found no
trace of it; a circumstance he much regretted, for though hitherto there
had never been any question as to the title, should the tract some day
prove of value, such question might very well arise, when the Blake
family might have difficulty in proving ownership.

For about three years after his visit things continued to jog along in
the old way, until, as I said, in the year 1865 the annual remittances
suddenly ceased and all communication with Hermanos appeared to be cut
off--for reasons unknown and undiscoverable.

Such was the state of affairs when the elder Blake took up his residence
in Washington, when Arthur, having solicited permission from his father,
came west to find out if possible what was the matter.

"When I got to Hermanos," said Arthur, continuing his story, "I found
the people in such a down-trodden, spiritless condition that I had great
difficulty in getting any information out of them--they were afraid to
say anything lest evil should befall. By degrees, however, I gained
their confidence, when I found that the Sanchez family, by whom, for
generations past, the office of _mayordomo_ had been held, was extinct,
except for a certain Pedro, a member of a distant branch, and that the
present owner of the grant was one, Galvez, who, seemingly, had come
into possession about twelve years ago.

"As I could not understand how this could be, and as nobody seemed able
to enlighten me, I decided, of course, to wait till Galvez came home in
order to question him.

"Meanwhile, I inquired about this man, Pedro Sanchez, who, I was told,
was the only one likely to be able to explain, meeting with no
difficulty in ascertaining where he was to be found; for, though Galvez
himself did not know whether Pedro was alive or dead, every other
inhabitant of the village knew perfectly well, and always had known, not
only that he was alive but where to find him.

"Presently, about dusk, Galvez came riding in, when I at once made
myself known to him. At the mention of my name he appeared for a moment
to be rendered speechless, either with fear or surprise, and then, to my
great astonishment, with a burst of execration, he snatched a revolver
out of its holster. Luckily for me, he did it in such haste that the
weapon, striking the pommel of the saddle, flew out of his hand and fell
upon the ground; whereupon I ran for it, jumped upon my horse and rode
away.

"After riding a short distance, I bethought me of Pedro, so, circling
round the village, I came up here, and following the directions of the
peons, I easily found him next morning. Through Pedro, as soon as I had
succeeded in convincing him of my identity, I quickly got at the rights
of the case."

"Wait a minute," said Dick, who, together with myself, had been an
attentive listener. "Let me put some more logs on the fire. There!" as
he seated himself once more. "That will last for some time. Now, go
ahead."

Leaning back against a tree-trunk and stretching out his feet to the
fire, Arthur began again:

"Did you ever hear of the Espinosas?" he asked.

"No!" I exclaimed, surprised by the apparently unconnected question; but
Dick replied, "Yes, I have. Mexican bandits, or something of the sort,
weren't they?"

"Yes," said our friend. "They were a pair of Mexicans who, in the year
'65, terrorized certain parts of Colorado by committing many murders of
white people. This man, Galvez, who then lived in Taos, hated the
Americans with a very thorough and absorbing hatred, and the exploits of
the Espinosas being just suited to his taste, he decided to join them.
But he was a little too late; the two brigands were killed, and he
himself, with a bullet through his shoulder, would assuredly have been
captured had he not had the good fortune to fall in with Pedro Sanchez.

"Pedro had been a soldier, too, and coming thus upon a comrade in
distress he packed him on his burro, and by trails known only to himself
brought him down to Hermanos, entering the village secretly by night.

"The occupant of the _Casa_ at that time was another Pedro Sanchez, a
forty-second cousin or thereabouts of our Pedro. He was a very old man,
the last of his immediate family, a good, honest, simple-minded old
fellow, who for thirty years or more had been factor for us. With him
Pedro sought asylum for his comrade--a favor the old man readily granted
to his namesake and relative.

"It was pretty sure that there would be a hue and cry after Galvez, so,
to avoid suspicion as much as possible, they arranged to give out that
it was Pedro who lay sick at the _Casa_, while Pedro himself went off
again that same night up into the mountain to hide till Galvez thought
it safe to move. He had done everything he could think of for his
friend, and how do you suppose his friend requited him? It will show you
the sort of man this Galvez is.

"For six weeks the latter lay hidden, when in some roundabout way he got
word that his description was placarded on the walls of Taos and a
reward offered for his capture. This cut him off from returning home and
he was in a quandary what to do, when one day his host, who, as I said,
was a very old man, had a fall from his horse and two days later died.

"Then did Galvez resolve upon a bold stroke. He came out of his
hiding-place, and without offering reasons or explanations calmly
announced that he had become proprietor of the Hermanos Grant, and that
in future the villagers were to look to him for orders! The very
impudence of the move carried the day. The ignorant peons, accustomed
for generations to obey, accepted the situation without question; and
thus did Galvez install himself as padron of Hermanos, and padron he
has remained for twelve years, there being nobody within five thousand
miles to enter protest or dispute his title."

"Well!" exclaimed Dick. "That was about the most bare-faced piece of
rascality I ever did hear of. And your father, of course, over there in
Cadiz or London or wherever you were then, was helpless to find out what
was going on in this remote corner."

"That's it exactly; and at that time, too, this corner was far more
remote even than it is now--there were no railroads anywhere near then,
you see."

"That's true. Well, go on. What about his treatment of Pedro?"

"Why, Galvez, as padron of Hermanos--a place almost completely cut off
from the rest of the world--felt pretty sure that he would never be
identified as Galvez of Taos, the man wanted for brigandage; for the
villagers had no suspicion of the fact. The only danger lay in Pedro."

"I see. Pedro being the one person who did know the facts."

"Exactly. Well, Galvez was not one to stick at trifles, and
understanding that the simplest way to secure his own safety would be
to get rid of this witness, he came riding up into the mountain one day,
found Pedro, and while talking with him in friendly fashion, pulled out
a big flint-lock horse-pistol, jammed it against his benefactor's chest
and pulled the trigger. Luckily the weapon missed fire; Pedro jumped
away, picked up a big stone and hurled it at his faithless friend,
taking him in the mouth and knocking out all his front teeth. Then he,
himself, fled up into his mountain; and that was their last meeting,
except on the occasion when Galvez came up to hunt for him and Pedro
shot his horse with the copper-headed arrow.

"There!" Arthur concluded. "Now you have it all. That's the whole
story!"

"And a mighty curious and interesting story it is, too!" exclaimed Dick;
adding, after a thoughtful pause: "That man, Galvez, is certainly a
remarkable specimen; and a dangerous one. He is not an ordinary,
every-day, primitive ruffian. That move of his in declaring himself
padron of Hermanos was a stroke of genius in its way. It won't be a
simple matter to get him out of there, if that is what you are after."

"That is what I am after," replied Arthur. "But, as I said, the
question of how to do it is too complicated for me. I know nothing of
American law, but it strikes me that, in spite of the fact that he
plainly has no right there, we may have considerable difficulty in
getting him out, for, as we can show neither the original patent nor a
copy of it, we have only our word for it that such a thing ever
existed."

"That's true," said I. "And Galvez being in possession, it may be that
he would not have to prove _his_ rights: it would rest with you to prove
_yours._"

"I should think that was very likely," remarked Dick. "It is a
complicated matter, as you say. What do you suppose your father will do?
Have you any idea?"

"Yes, I have," replied Arthur, very emphatically. "I know exactly what
he will do. When I tell him how the grant has been 'annexed' by this
man--and such a man, too--he will never rest until he has got him out.
It may be that the old brigandage business may serve as a lever--that, I
don't know--but whatever is necessary to be done he will do, however
long it may take and however much it may cost."

"As to the cost," said I, "that is likely, I should think, to be pretty
big. Is the grant worth it? Suppose, on investigation, your father
should find that the expense of getting Galvez out would be greater than
the value of the property--what then?"

Arthur laughed. "You don't know my father," said he. "The value of the
grant--which, in truth, is nothing, or nearly nothing--makes no
difference whatever. It's the principle of the thing. To permit a robber
like Galvez to remain quietly in possession would be impossible to my
father. He will regard it as his duty to society to right the wrong, and
he will do it, if it takes ten years, without considering for a moment
whether the grant is worth it or not."

"Good for him!" cried Dick, thumping his knee with his fist. "The law in
this new West is weak--naturally--and here in this out-of-the-way corner
there is none at all, but a few such men as your father would soon
stiffen its backbone. I hope he'll succeed; the only thing I'm sorry for
is that the grant has so little value."

"That is unfortunate," replied Arthur; "though, as it happens, that
particular concerns my father less than it does me."

"Is that so? How is that?"

"It is an old custom in the family to bestow the Hermanos Grant on the
eldest son on his coming of age. I am the eldest son, and I come of age
next August, when, according to the custom, I shall become the owner of
this valueless patch of desert--if Galvez will be graciously pleased to
allow me."

"What are the limits of the grant?" asked Dick.

"North, south and east," replied Arthur, "it extends five miles from
Hermanos, but on the west it stops at the foot of the mountains."

"So the only part of it which produces anything is that little patch of
cultivated ground surrounding the village."

"Yes; and as the water-supply is very limited the place can never grow
any larger. In fact, it produces little more than enough to feed the
villagers; and even as it is, the boys as they grow up have to go off
and get work elsewhere as sheep-herders and cowmen, there being no room
for them at home. It is the padron's custom, I was told, to hire them
out, their wages being paid to him, in which case you may be sure it is
precious little of their earnings they ever get themselves."

"He's a bad one, sure enough," remarked Dick. "But to go back to that
water-supply. Isn't there any way of increasing it?"

"I'm afraid not," replied Arthur. "I wish there were: a plentiful supply
of water would make the place really valuable. There is land enough, and
excellent land, too; all that is needed is water. But that, I'm afraid,
is not to be had. I've talked to Pedro about it; he knows every stream
on these two mountains, but he says that they all run in canons from
five hundred to two thousand feet deep, and there is no possible way of
getting any of them out upon the surface of the valley. What are you
thinking about, Dick?"

My partner, who had been sitting with his elbows on his knees and his
chin in his hands, frowning severely at the fire, started from his
revery, and turning toward his questioner, he replied, speaking slowly
and thoughtfully:

"If any one ought to know, it's Pedro; but, all the same, I believe
Pedro is wrong. I believe there _is_ a way of turning one of these
streams somewhere and bringing it down to Hermanos--if only one could
find the right stream."

"Why do you think so?" asked Arthur.

"I know it looks ridiculous for me to be setting up my opinion against
Pedro's," replied my partner, "but I can't help thinking that there is
such a stream. Look here!" he cried, jumping up, walking to and fro
between us and the fire once or twice, and then stopping and shaking his
finger at us as though he were delivering a lecture to two inattentive
pupils. "Where did those old Pueblos get their water from, I should like
to know? Up in these mountains somewhere, didn't they? Of course they
did: there's no other place. There was a big irrigation system down
there once, enough to support a population of three or four thousand
people probably. Well! What has become of that supply? That's what I
want to know. They had it once--where is it now?"

For some seconds Dick stood in front of Arthur, pointing his finger
straight at him, while Arthur sat there in silence gazing steadfastly at
Dick. Suddenly, the young Spaniard jumped up, stepped forward, and
slapping my partner on his chest with the back of his hand, exclaimed:

"Look here, old man! I believe you are right. I believe there is a
stream somewhere which those old Pueblos used for irrigating their
farms. It has somehow been switched off and lost. It ought to be found
and brought back. Now, look here! I can't stay here to hunt for it
myself: I _must_ get home right away. But I'll make a bargain with
you:--You find that stream and provide a way of getting the water back
to Hermanos, and I'll give you a half-interest in the grant--when I get
it. There, now! There's a chance for you!"

"Do you mean that?" cried my partner.

"I certainly do," replied Arthur. "The grant is without value as it
stands: if you can get water on to it and give it a value, it would be
only just that you should have a share in the profits. Yes, I mean what
I say, all right. If you'll supply the water, I'll supply the land.
There! What do you say? Is it a bargain?"

For a moment Dick stood staring thoughtfully at our friend, and then,
turning to me, he exclaimed sharply:

"Frank! Let's do it! Here we are, out for the summer. It's true we came
out to hunt for a copper mine, but that scheme being 'busted' at the
very start, let us turn to and hunt for water instead. What do you
think?"

"I'm agreed!" I cried.

"Good! Then we'll do it! And the very first move----"

"The very first move," interrupted Arthur, laughing, "the very first
move is--to bed! It's after eleven!"

"Phew!" Dick whistled. "I'd no idea it was so late. To bed, then; and
to-morrow we'll work out a plan of action. This has been a pretty long
day, and a pretty eventful one, too. So let's get to bed at once, and
to-morrow we'll start fair."

In spite of the long day and the lateness of the hour, however, I could
not get to sleep at once. Dick, too, seemed to be wakeful. I heard him
stir, and opening my eyes, I saw him sitting up in bed with his arms
clasped around his blanketed knees, gazing at the fire. Suddenly, he
gave his leg a mighty slap with his open hand, and I heard him chuckle
to himself.

"What's the matter, Dick?" I whispered. "Got a flea?"

"No," he replied, laughing softly. "I've got an idea. Go to sleep, old
chap. I'll tell you in the morning."




CHAPTER XV

DICK'S SNAP SHOT


The sun rose late down in that deep crevice, and for that reason, added
to the lateness of the hour at which we had gone to bed, we did not wake
up next morning till after six o'clock. We found, however, that Pedro
had been up a couple of hours at least, for he had a good fire going,
had made everything ready to start breakfast, and moreover he had been
up on the mountain and had brought down Arthur's horse and his own burro
from the little valley where they had been left at pasture.

When I, myself, awoke, I found that Dick was ahead of me. He was
standing by the fire, warming himself--for the mornings were still
cold--and talking to Pedro, who, I guessed, was explaining something,
for he was waving his long arms energetically, first in one direction
and then in another.

"Well, Dick," said I, as we sat cross-legged on the ground, eating our
breakfast, "what is this idea of yours? Does it still look as favorable
as it seemed to do last night?"

"Better," replied Dick, with his mouth full of bacon. "A great deal
better. I felt pretty confident last night that I was on the way to earn
that half-interest in the Hermanos Grant, and this morning, since
talking with Pedro, I feel more confident still."

"Is that so?" cried Arthur. "I hope you're right. What is it you think
you have discovered?"

"In the first place," replied Dick, "I have discovered that we are a lot
of wiseacres: we have been going around with our eyes shut."

"How?" we both asked.

"If we hadn't had our heads so full of the old copper mine, and if we
hadn't been so bent on finding the trail to it, we should never have
made the mistake we did."

"What mistake?" I asked. "Hurry up, Dick! Don't take so long about it.
What are you driving at?"

"Why, this!" replied my partner, suddenly sitting up straight and
wagging his finger at us. "This trail we have been following, all the
way from Hermanos up to the edge of the canon, was not a trail at
all--it was a ditch!"

"A ditch!" we both exclaimed.

"Yes, a ditch. A ditch dug by those old Pueblo Indians to carry water
down to that wide, level stretch of ground at the back of the _Casa_.
I'm sure of it. If you give up the idea of a trail and consider it as a
ditch, all its peculiarities will be explained at once. It will account
for its uniform grade, for its unexpected distinctness, and more than
everything else, it will account for the fact that the 'trail' never
once dipped down a hill or climbed one either, but
always--invariably--went round the head of every gully, deep or shallow,
that came in its way."

"Upon my word, Dick!" cried Arthur. "I believe you _have_ made a
discovery! I believe that it is the line of an old ditch, after all;
though the pack-trains doubtless used it as a convenient road as far as
the top of the canon and then switched off down here by that shelf in
the wall."

"That's my idea," said Dick, nodding his head.

"But, look here, Dick," Arthur went on, after a moment's thoughtful
pause. "Suppose it is an old ditch--where did the water come from?
That's the question. A ditch without water isn't much use."

Dick laughed. "No," said he. "I understand that well enough. The water
came from this 'island,' up here above our heads, and was carried across
the canon in a flume!"

"Ah!" I cried. "I see! What we at first supposed to have been a bridge
up there, built for the accommodation of the pack-trains, was in reality
a flume for carrying water."

"That's what I believe," replied Dick.

"Well, but see here, Dick," remarked Arthur again. "Suppose that there
was a flume there for carrying water--where's the water now? That's the
point. That's what I want to know."

"Ah!" replied my partner. "And that was what I wanted to know, too. That
was the very question that bothered me until I talked to Pedro about it
just now. I asked him if he had ever seen or heard of a stream of water
coming down from the top of this high land, and I can tell you he eased
my mind of a load when he told me he had. He says there is a good big
waterfall which jumps off the cliff on the north side of the 'island'
and falls into this stream we are camped upon now, but about twelve or
thirteen miles below this point, following the bends of the creek."

"Is that so? Then the chances are that that is the stream from which
the Pueblos used to get their water. Did you ask Pedro if he knew of any
way of getting up there?"

"Yes, I did, and I'm sorry to say he doesn't know of any. He says that
this 'island' is really an island, being compassed about on all sides by
canons of varying depths; that it includes a large tract of country,
part mountain and part plain; and that to the best of his knowledge, no
man has ever set foot on it. In that, though, I'm pretty sure he's
mistaken. In fact, it is as certain as anything can be that there is a
way up somewhere, or else, how did the Pueblos get over there in the
first place? They didn't fly across this gorge; and yet they must have
worked from both sides at once when they built their flume."

"That's true. Well, Dick, it does look as though you had made a genuine
discovery, and one likely to be of great value. What's your idea, then?
You and Frank will stay here and hunt for the old Pueblo ditch-head, I
suppose, while I dig out for home by myself. I wish I could stay and
hunt with you, but there's no knowing how long it may take, and
meanwhile my father and mother will be worrying themselves to know what
has become of me. I've been here now a good bit longer than I intended.
I must get back at once and----"

"Look here, Arthur," Dick interrupted. "Excuse me for cutting in, but
I'd like to make a suggestion. There is just a possibility--I don't
expect it, I own, but there is a possibility--that if Galvez were
informed that you know how he came to be padron of Hermanos, and also of
his connection with the Espinosas, he might get scared and skip out of
his own accord--which would simplify matters for you very much. Now,
here's what I propose--if you really are bound to leave at once."

"Yes," Arthur interjected. "I mustn't stay a minute longer than I can
help."

"Well, then, I propose that before you go--it will only make a
difference of a couple of hours--before you go, Frank and I will ride
down to Hermanos, see old Galvez, tell him what you have told us, and
recommend him to take his departure. Perhaps he'll be scared and skip
out; but if he won't, why, then you'll know where you stand. How does
that strike you?"

"Hm!" muttered Arthur, doubtfully. "I don't much like the idea of
running you into danger. Galvez is such a treacherous fellow, there's no
knowing what he might do to you."

"That's true enough," said Dick; "though I don't think he would attempt
anything on two of us at once, and in broad daylight, too. It might be
to his advantage to get rid of you or Pedro or both, but he would surely
have sense enough to see that he wouldn't gain anything by hurting
either of us."

"That's a fact. Well, suppose you go, then. But be careful."

"We'll be careful," replied my partner. "You needn't worry yourself on
that account."

By this time we were ready to start, and accordingly we all rode
together up the ledge until we came out again at the point where the old
flume used to be--where we pointed out to Arthur the sockets in the
rock--and thence, continuing to the foot of the mountain, Dick and I,
leaving the others to wait for us, galloped off toward Hermanos.

By good fortune, as we approached the village, we saw Galvez himself
down near the creek, where he was directing three of his _vaqueros_ who
were engaged in cutting out cows from a bunch of wild Mexican cattle.

Further down stream, only a short distance from the houses, we noticed
half-a-dozen Mexican children, very busy making mud pies, quite
unconcerned, apparently, at the proximity of the herd of cattle. It
happened, however, that just as we came riding up to where Galvez sat on
his horse, shouting orders to his men, a gaunt, wild-eyed, long-horned
steer broke out of the bunch on the down-stream side. One of the cowmen
dashed forward to turn it, when, to his astonishment, the steer, instead
of running back into the bunch or attempting to dodge him, charged the
rider and knocked him and his little broncho over and over. Then, wildly
tossing its head, the beast made straight for the group of unsuspecting
and defenceless children.

"Loco! Loco!" shouted Galvez. "Rope him, one of you!"

The two other men galloped forward, swinging their lariats, but the
locoed steer, going like a scared antelope, had such a start that it
looked as though it would surely reach the children before the men could
catch it. Seeing this, Galvez pulled out his revolver and fired six
shots at it in quick succession. Whether he hit the steer or not, I
cannot say, but even if he did the range was too great for a revolver to
be effective--unless by a lucky chance.

The children, hearing the shots, looked up, saw the steer coming, and
scattered like a flock of sparrows--all but one of them, that is to say.
He, a brown-bodied little three-year-old, without a scrap of clothing
upon him except a piece of string tied round his middle, stood stock
still, with his little hands full of mud, seemingly too frightened to
move, and straight down upon this little bronze statue the crazy beast
went charging.

It looked as though a tragedy were imminent!

It was at this moment that my partner and I came riding up behind
Galvez, who, sitting on his horse with his back to us, his body
interposed between us and the steer, had not seen us yet. It was no time
for ceremony. Without wasting words in greetings or explanations, Dick
jammed his heels into his pony's ribs; the pony sprang forward; Dick
pulled him up short, leaped to the ground, threw up his rifle and fired
a snap shot. Down went the steer, heels over head, gave one kick and lay
dead--shot through the heart!

It was a grand shot! The three _vaqueros_, two on their horses and one
on foot, carried away by their enthusiasm, forgot for once their
habitual dread of the padron, and waving their hats above their heads
joined me in a shout of applause; while as for Galvez, himself, he sat
on his horse with his empty revolver in his hand, gazing open-mouthed
first at Dick and then at the dead steer, seemingly rendered speechless
for the moment.

At length he turned to me, who had come up close beside him, and said:

"Can he always do that?"

"Just about," I replied, with a nod. "He is one of the best shots in the
State."

"Hm!" remarked the padron, sticking out his lower lip and thoughtfully
scratching his chin with his thumb-nail; and though that was all he did
say, the muttered exclamation conveyed to me as much meaning as if he
had talked for five minutes.

That Dick's remarkable shot had made a great impression on him I felt
certain, and it was a matter of much satisfaction to me to think that it
had; for if at any time he should entertain the idea of resorting to
violence against any of us, the recollection of how that steer had
pitched heels over head would probably cause him to think again.

The whole episode had not occupied more than two minutes, at the end of
which time Galvez, recovering himself, turned to us and said, in his
usual gracious manner:

"Well, you two, what have you come back here for?"

"We have come down to speak to you," replied Dick, as he slipped another
cartridge into his Sharp's rifle. "We have just parted with Senor Blake
and El Tejon."

The padron scowled at the mention of the two names.

"Oh, you have, eh? Well, what then?" he asked.

"Senor Blake," my partner continued, "wished us to say that he has
learned how you came to be padron of Hermanos. Pedro has told him the
whole story--everything--the Espinosa business and all."

"Oh! And is that all?"

"That's all," said Dick.

The padron, I have no doubt, had been expecting some such communication
and had made up his mind beforehand what to say, for, after sitting for
a few seconds looking at Dick without a word, he smiled an unpleasant,
toothless smile, and said:

"That's all, is it? Well, you go back to your Senor Blake and tell him
that here I am and here I stay, and if he thinks that three beardless
boys and a shiftless, half-crazy peon can make me move, why, he's
welcome to try. There! That's all on my side." He started to ride off,
but after a few steps stopped again to add: "Except this:--I recommend
you two boys to get along back home as fast as you can and leave this
young Blake--if that is really his name--to manage his own affairs. You
may find it dangerous to be mixed up with them."

He said this in an aggressive, menacing tone; but I noticed, all the
same, that his eye wandered involuntarily toward the dead steer, and I
congratulated myself again on the lucky chance that had given Dick the
opportunity to show his skill with a rifle. Galvez, I was convinced,
would be exceedingly careful how he provoked a quarrel with any one who
could shoot like that.

"Very well, senor," said Dick. "We will deliver your message. That is
all we came for." And with that we turned round and rode away again.

In the course of an hour we were back at the foot of the mountain, where
we found Arthur sitting on the ground waiting for us.

"Well, what luck?" he cried. "What did Galvez have to say?"

We told him all about our interview with the padron, not forgetting the
episode of the wild steer, at hearing which Arthur expressed much
gratification.

"That was a very fortunate chance," said he. "Galvez may profess to
despise three beardless boys, but after seeing one of them shoot a
running steer at three hundred yards, I expect he will think twice
before he stirs up a fuss with them. It is just the sort of thing--and
the only sort of thing, too--to make an impression on a man like that.
What is your idea, Dick? Do you think he intends to stick it out, or was
he only 'bluffing'?"

"I don't know," replied my partner. "I'm afraid he means to hold on. But
though at present he puts on 'a brag countenance,' as the saying is,
when he has had time to reconsider he might change his mind and skip. My
impression is, though, that he means to hold on."

"I think so, too," said I. "What is Pedro's opinion?"

"Ah! Yes. Let us ask Pedro."

"Senores," said the Mexican, when Arthur had explained the whole matter
to him in Spanish, "the padron is a pig, a mule. He will not move."

"Then that settles it!" cried Arthur, jumping up, walking away a few
paces and coming back again. "I never really expected that Galvez would
move, though it was worth trying. So now I'll be off at once. As for
that old ditch-head, though I should have liked very much to stay and
help hunt for it, you three can, as a matter of fact, make the search
just as well without me. And whether you find it or whether you don't,
makes no difference in one way--the business of getting Galvez out of
Hermanos will have to proceed regardless of that or any other
consideration. We have two things to do, you see:--To turn out Galvez
and to find that ditch-head. The first is my business; the second is
yours; and the sooner I get about mine the better, if I am to give you a
clear title to your half-interest when you are ready to claim it."

"As to that," remarked Dick, "I don't think we ought to hold you to that
bargain. It was made more or less in joke, anyhow."

"No, no, it wasn't!" cried Arthur, emphatically. "Not a bit of it! I
meant it then and I mean it still. I'm quite content. You provide the
water and I'll provide the land, as I said. It's a fair bargain. I don't
want to be let off. But before I can perform my part of it I must prove
my own title, and as I can't do it at this end of the line I'll waste no
more time here, but get right back home as fast as I can and report the
conditions to my father."

"Well," said Dick, after a moment's thoughtful silence, "I believe you
are right. I believe that is the best way after all, unless----"

"Unless what?"

"Unless we abandon the whole thing."

"Abandon----!" cried Arthur; but he got no further, for Dick, holding up
his hand, said, laughingly:

"All right, old man! All right! You needn't say any more. I only
suggested it just to see what you would say. So you are determined to go
through with this thing, are you? Very well, then, you may count on us
to do our part if it's doable. Eh, Frank?"

I nodded. "We'll find that ditch-head," said I, "if we have to stay here
till snow flies."

"Good!" cried Arthur. "Then that does settle it. I'll be off this
minute. Bring my horse, Pedro: I'm going to start at once."

"Look here, Arthur," remarked Dick. "I think it would be a good plan if
Frank and I were to escort you to the other side of Hermanos. Galvez, I
expect, guessed what you were after when you first told him your name,
and now he'll be sure of it, and it might be pretty dangerous for you if
you should meet him alone; so we'll just ride part way with you and see
you safely started."

"Thanks," replied Arthur. "I shall be glad of your company. Well, let us
get off, then. Good-bye, Pedro. I expect you'll see me back here before
very long. _Adios!_"

Thus taking leave of the burly Mexican, Arthur started off, Dick and I
riding on either side of him.

Keeping about a mile to the north of Hermanos, we circled round that
village, and were making our way southeastward toward the Cactus Desert,
when we saw off to our right a great cloud of dust, and in the midst of
it a bunch of cattle accompanied by three men.

At first we were suspicious that Galvez might be one of them, but pretty
soon we discovered that they were the three _vaqueros_ we had seen that
morning. They, on their part, quickly detected us, when one of them
immediately turned his horse and came riding toward us.

As soon as he had come pretty close I saw that it was the one whose
horse had been knocked over by the locoed steer. This man, advancing to
Dick, pulled off his hat, and speaking with considerable feeling, said:

"I wish to thank the senor who shoots so straight. It was my little boy
who was in danger."

"Was it?" cried Dick. "I'm very glad, then, that I happened to make such
a good shot. The steer was locoed, of course."

"_Si, senor_," replied the man. "It happens sometimes. This one was very
bad. It should have been killed long ago, but the padron would not. I am
grateful to the senor, and if I can serve him at any time I shall be
glad."

"Thank you," said Dick. "What is your name?"

"Jose Santanna," replied the man.

"Well, Jose," continued Dick, "I'm much obliged to you for your offer,
and if I need your help at any time I'll come and ask you."

"_Gracias, senor_," replied the man; and with that he turned and
galloped after his companions.

"That's a good thing for us," remarked Arthur. "We may find it very
handy to have an ally in the enemy's camp. And now, you fellows," he
continued, "you may as well turn back. I'm safe enough now, and there is
no need for you to come any further. I hope it won't be long before you
see me back again. Meanwhile you'll search for that ditch-head, and if
there is anything you can do toward getting the water down, you'll go
ahead and do it. That's the plan, eh?"

"That's the plan," repeated my partner.

"Very well. Then, good-bye, and good luck to you!"




CHAPTER XVI

THE OLD PUEBLO HEAD-GATE


It was about two in the afternoon that we parted with our friend, and
wishing him the best of success, we watched him ride away until the
shimmering haze drawn by the heat of the sun from the surface of the
valley, finally obscured him from our view altogether. Then, turning our
ponies, we rode back up the mountain and once more descended to our
camp, where we found Pedro waiting for us.

As it was then too late to begin any fresh enterprise, especially one so
difficult as the attempt to climb the canon-wall was likely to be, we
determined to postpone the expedition until next morning. In order, too,
that we might be in good fettle for the adventure, we went to bed that
night as soon as it got dark; no more late hours for us; late hours at
night not being conducive to clear heads in the morning--and it was more
than likely that clear heads might be very essential to the success of
the task in hand.

About an hour after sunrise we set off on foot down the left bank of
the stream, making our way along the steep slope of stone scraps, big
and little, which bordered its edge, and after a pretty rough scramble
we reached a spot about a mile below camp where Pedro had told us he
thought there was a possible way up--a narrow cleft in the rocky wall,
none too wide to admit the passage of the Mexican's big body--and
following the sturdy hunter, who acted as guide, we began the ascent.

There was no great difficulty about it at first, for the crevice, though
still very narrow, was not particularly steep. After climbing up about
three hundred feet, however, the ascent became much more abrupt, and
presently we came to a place where the bed of the dry watercourse was
blocked entirely by a smooth, water-worn mass of rock, twenty feet high,
filling the whole width of the crevice, and overhanging in such a manner
that even a lizard would have had difficulty in climbing up it.

We were looking about for some means of surmounting this obstacle, when
Pedro, who had stepped back a little to survey it, called our attention
to what appeared to be a number of steps, or, rather, foot-holes in the
rock about ten feet up, just above the bulge.

"Hallo!" cried Dick. "This looks promising. Those holes were made with
a purpose. I believe we've struck the original Pueblo highway after
all."

"It does look like it," I agreed. "But how are we going to get up
there?"

"Senor," said Pedro to Dick, "if you will stand on my shoulders, I think
you can reach those holes."

"All right," replied Dick. "Let's try."

It was simple enough. Dick easily reached the lower steps, which, it was
hardly to be doubted, had been cut for the purpose, and scrambled up to
the top. Then, letting down the rope we had brought for such an
emergency, he called to me to come up. With a boost from Pedro, and with
the rope to hold on by, I was quickly standing beside my partner, when
up came Pedro himself, hand over hand.

If this was really the road by which the Pueblos originally came up--and
from those nicks in the rock we felt pretty sure it was--it was the
roughest and by long odds the most upended road we had ever traveled
over. It was, in fact, a climb rather than a walk: we had to use our
hands nearly all the time.

We had come within a hundred feet of the top, when, looking upward, I
was startled to see on an overhanging ledge a large, tawny, cat-like
animal calmly sitting there looking down at us.

"Look there, Dick!" I cried. "What's that?"

"A mountain-lion!" exclaimed my partner. "My! What a shot!"

It happened, however, that we were at a point where it was necessary to
hold on with our hands to prevent ourselves from slipping back; it was
impossible to shoot. The "lion" therefore continued to stare at us and
we at him, until Dick shouted at him, when the beast leisurely walked
off and disappeared round a corner.

"Well!" remarked my companion. "I never saw a mountain-lion so calm and
unconcerned before. As a rule they are the shyest of animals."

"All the animals up here are like that," remarked Pedro. "Many times
since I have lived on the mountain I have seen them come down to the
edge of the canon to look at me--deer and even mountain-sheep and
wolves; yes, many times wolves. They have no fear of man."

"That's queer," said I. "I wonder why not."

"Senor," replied Pedro, looking rather surprised at my lack of
intelligence, "it is simple: since the days of the Pueblos there has
been no man up here."

"Why, I suppose there hasn't!" cried Dick. "That didn't occur to me
before, either. It will be interesting to see how the wild animals
behave, Frank. It will be like Robinson Crusoe on his island."

He spoke in Spanish, as we always did when Pedro was in company, not
wishing him to feel that he was left out. It was Pedro who replied.

"I know not," said he, "the honorable gentleman, Senor Don Crusoe, of
whom you speak, but for ourselves we must have care."

"Why, Pedro. What do you mean?"

"The wolves up here are many, and they will surely smell us out."

"Well, suppose they do, Pedro. What then?" asked Dick, jokingly. "You
are not afraid of wolves, are you?"

This seemed a reasonable question, remembering how boldly he had faced
them that time at the head of the Mescalero valley.

"Most times I have no fear," replied Pedro, simply, "but up here it is
different. These wolves know not what a man is; they will smell us out,
and they will think only, 'Here is something to eat;' they do not know
enough to be afraid."

"I suppose that is likely," Dick assented. "You are quite right, Pedro:
we must take care. I don't suppose there will be anything to fear from
them during daylight, but we'll keep a sharp lookout, all the same. Come
on, let us get forward."

In another ten minutes we had reached the top, when, turning up-stream,
we presently came to the dry gully which led down to where the old flume
once stood. Thence, turning "inland," as one might say, we followed up
the bed of this gully, finding that it had its head in a little grassy
basin which looked as though it had once been a small lake. In crossing
this basin we stirred up from among the bushes a band of blacktail deer,
which ran off about fifty yards and then stood still to look at us;
these usually shy animals being evidently consumed with curiosity at the
sight of three strange beasts walking on their hind legs. Undoubtedly,
we were the first human beings they had ever encountered.

We did not molest them, but pursuing our course across the little
basin, we were about to proceed up a narrow, stony draw at its further
end, when a sudden scurry of feet behind us caused us to look back. The
band of deer had vanished, and in their stead were four wolves, which,
when we turned round, drew up in line and stood staring at us!

As Dick had said, the wild animals up here were making themselves
decidedly "interesting."

Pedro had an arrow fitted to his bow in an instant, while Dick and I
simultaneously cocked our rifles and stood ready. The wolves, however,
remained stationary; it was evidently curiosity and not hunger that
inspired them. Seeing this, I picked up a pebble and threw it at them,
just to see what they would think of it. The stone struck the ground
close under their noses, making them all start, passed between two of
them and went hopping along the ground, when, to our great amusement,
the whole row of them turned, ran after the stone, sniffed at it, one
after the other, and then came back to the old position. It looked so
comical that Dick and I burst out laughing; whereupon the wolves, who
had doubtless never heard such a sound before, retreated a few paces,
where they once more turned round to stare at us.

"Well, Pedro!" cried Dick. "They don't seem to be very dangerous. If all
the wolves up here are like that we needn't be afraid of them."

"They are not hungry just now," replied Pedro, so significantly that our
merriment was checked; "and you see for yourselves," he added, "that a
man is a new animal to them. They know not what to make of us. It is
that which makes me uneasy. A big pack of hungry wolves would be very
dangerous, for the reason that they have never learned that we are
dangerous, too. For me, I am afraid of them."

Such an admission, coming from such a man, one who, we knew, was not
lacking in courage, was impressive; so, in order that he should not
regard us as merely a pair of careless, light-headed boys, Dick assured
him in all earnestness that we had no intention of treating the matter
lightly; that we fully understood and agreed with his view of the
matter.

"You are quite right, Pedro," said he. "We can't afford to be careless.
A pack of wolves is dangerous enough when you know what to expect of
them, but when you don't----! It will pay us to be careful, all right;
there's no doubt about that. Come on, now. Let us get ahead. Those
beasts back there have gone off--to tell the others, perhaps."

Proceeding up the stony draw for about half a mile, we presently came
upon a most unexpected sight:--a little lake, covering perhaps a space
of twenty acres, its surface, smooth as a mirror, reflecting the trees
and rocks surrounding it, and dotted all over with hundreds of wild
ducks and geese.

"Here's the head of the ditch!" cried Dick, exultingly. "Here's where
the Pueblos got their water! They drew from this lake down the gully we
have just come up. The mouth of the draw has been blocked by the caving
of the sides, you see, but it will be an easy job to dig a narrow trench
through the dam, and then the pitch is so great that the water will soon
scour a channel for itself. Don't you think so, Pedro? The water must
have run down here, filled the grassy basin where the deer were, flowed
out at its lower end down the gully to the flume, and then by the ditch
over the foothills to the valley. Wasn't that the way of it, Pedro?"

It was natural that Dick should address his question to the Mexican
rather than to me, for Pedro, one of a race that had followed
irrigation for centuries, knew far more of its practical possibilities
than I did, and his opinion was infinitely more valuable than mine was
likely to be. In reply, he nodded his big head and said, gravely:

"That is it. It is not possible to doubt. The Pueblos drew their water
from the lake at this point. That is very sure. But----"

"But what?" asked Dick.

"This lake is small, and I see nowhere any stream coming into it,"
replied Pedro.

"That's a fact," Dick assented. "Perhaps it is fed by underground
springs. Let us walk round the lake and see where the water runs out and
how much of a stream there is. That is what concerns us. Where it comes
from doesn't matter particularly--it's how much of it there is."

Our walk round the little lake, however, resulted in a disappointment
which staggered us for the moment. There was no outlet. The lake was
land-locked; the one insignificant rivulet we found running into it
being evidently no more than enough to counterbalance the daily
evaporation.

"Well," remarked Dick, after a long pause, "there is one thing sure:
the Pueblos never built a flume and dug that big, long ditch to carry
this trifling amount of water. This lake, after all, was not the source
of supply, as we were supposing. It was a reservoir, perhaps, but
nothing more. The real source was somewhere higher up."

If Dick was right--and there could be hardly a doubt that he was--the
most promising direction in which to continue our search would be on the
west side of the lake, whence the little rivulet came down. An
examination of the ravine in which the stream ran showed evidence that
it had at one time carried much more water than at present, so, with
hopes renewed, we set off at once along its steep, stony bed.

The country on that side was very rough and precipitous, and the ravine
itself, reasonably wide at first, became narrower and narrower, and its
sides more and more lofty, until presently it became so contracted that
we might have imagined ourselves to be walking up a very narrow lane
with rows of ten-story houses on either side. The sky above us was a
mere ribbon of blue.

After climbing upward for about half a mile, we began to catch
occasional glimpses ahead of us of a frowning cliff which bade fair to
bar our further progress altogether, and we were beginning to wonder
whether we had not chosen the wrong ravine after all, when suddenly,
with one accord, we all stopped short and cocked our ears. There was a
sound of running water somewhere close by!

There was a bend in the gorge just here, and we could not see ahead, but
the instant we detected the sound of water, Dick, with a shout, sprang
forward, and with me close on his heels and the short-legged Pedro some
distance in the rear, dashed up the bed of the ravine and round the
corner.

What a wonderful sight met our gaze! Out of the great cliff I mentioned
just now there came roaring down a magnificent stream, which, falling
into a deep pool it had worn for itself in the rocks, went boiling and
foaming off through a second ravine to the right--a fine thing to see!

But what was finer, and infinitely more interesting, was the original
Pueblo head-gate, so set in the narrow gorge in which we stood that the
water, which, if left to itself, would have flowed down our ravine, was
forced to run off through the other channel.

It was a remarkable piece of work for such a primitive people to have
performed, considering especially the very inferior tools they had to do
it with. The walls of the gorge came together at this point in such a
manner that they were not more than five feet apart and were so
straight-up-and-down that they looked as though they had been trimmed by
hand--as possibly they had been to some extent. Taking advantage of this
narrow gap, the Pueblos had cut a deep groove in the rocks on either
side of the ravine, and in these grooves they had set up on end a great
flat stone about five feet high and three inches thick--it must have
weighed a thousand pounds or more.

Against this stone head-gate, on its inner side, the water stood four
feet deep, and it was obvious that when the gate was raised the flood
would go raging down the gorge we had just ascended into the little lake
below, leaving the bed in which it now ran high and dry.

Undoubtedly, it was this stone door with which the Pueblos used to
regulate their water-supply, prying it up and holding it in position,
perhaps, with blocks of wood, which, after the Indians deserted the
valley, had in time rotted away, allowing the gate to fall, thus
shutting off the water entirely.

However that may have been, one thing at any rate was
certain:--Whenever our flume and our ditch were ready, here was water
enough for thousands of acres only waiting to be let loose.

For a long time Dick and I stood with our hands resting on the top of
the head-gate and our chins resting on our hands, watching the water as
it went foaming and splashing down the other ravine, and as we stood
there, there came over us by degrees a sense of the real importance to
us of this discovery. We were only boys, after all, and we had gone into
this enterprise more or less in the spirit of adventure, but now it
gradually dawned upon us that we had in reality arrived at a point where
the roads forked:--Here, ready to our hands, was work for a lifetime,
and we had to decide whether we were going into it heart and soul or
whether we were not. Every boy arrives at this fork in the roads sooner
or later, and when he does, he is apt to feel pretty serious. I know we
did.

With us, however, the question seemed to settle itself, for Dick,
presently straightening up and turning to me, said:

"Frank! What will your Uncle Tom say? Will he be willing that you should
stay out in this country and take to wheat-raising and ditch-building
and so forth?"

"If I know Uncle Tom," I replied, "he'll be not only willing but
delighted. If we make a success of this thing--as we will if hard work
will do it--just imagine how proudly he will point to us as proofs of
his theory that a fellow may sometimes learn more out of school than in
it. In fact, if I'm not much mistaken, he will be eager to help; and if
we need money for the work, as we certainly shall, I shan't hesitate to
ask him for it. I shall inherit a little when I come of age, and I'm
pretty sure Uncle Tom will advance me some if I need it. But how about
the professor, Dick? How will he fancy the idea of your settling down in
this valley? For if we _do_ go into this thing in earnest, that is what
it means."

"I know it does," replied my companion, seriously. "And I'm glad of it.
I'll let you into a little secret, Frank. For some time past the
professor has been worrying himself as to what was to become of me: what
business or occupation I was fit for with my peculiar bringing-up--for
there is no getting over the fact that it has been peculiar--and the
professor, considering himself responsible for it, has been pretty
anxious about the result. Now, here is an occupation all laid out for
me, and nobody will be so pleased to hear of it as the professor. It
will take a burden off his mind; and I'm mighty glad to think it will."

"I see," said I. "I should think you would be: such a fine old fellow as
he is. So, then, Dick, it is settled, is it, that we go ahead? What's
the first move, then?"

"Why, the first move of all, I think, is to get back to the lake and eat
our lunch, and while we are doing so we can consult as to what work to
start upon and how to set about it. What time is it, Pedro?"

"Midday and ten minutes," promptly replied the Mexican, casting an eye
at the sun; while I, pulling out my watch, saw that he had hit it
exactly, as he always did, I found later.

"Then let us get back to the lake," said Dick. "Hark! What was that? The
water makes so much noise that I can't be sure, but it sounded to me
like wolves howling."

Pedro nodded his big head. "It will be well to go down to where there
are some trees," said he. "This arroyo, with its high walls, is not a
good place."

As we walked down the ravine and got further away from the water, we
could hear more distinctly the cry of the wolves. Pedro stopped short
and listened intently.

"There is a good many of them," said he. "I think they come hunting us.
Let us get up on this rock here and wait a little."

In the middle of the ravine lay a great flat-topped stone, about six
feet high, and to the top of this we soon scrambled--there was plenty of
room--and there for a minute or two we waited. The cry of the hunting
wolves grew louder and louder, and presently, around a bend a short
distance below, loping along with their noses to the ground, there came
a band of sixteen of them. At sight of us they stopped short, and
then--showing plainly that they knew of no danger to themselves--with a
yell of delight at having run down their prey, as they supposed, they
came charging up the ravine!




CHAPTER XVII

THE BRIDGE


As the pack came racing up the gulch, we waited an instant until a
narrow place crowded them into a bunch, when Dick called out, "Now!" and
we all fired together into the midst of them. Three of the wolves fell,
two dead--I could see the feather of Pedro's arrow sticking out of the
ribs of one of them--and one with its back broken.

I had hoped that the strange thunder of the rifles would send them
flying--but no. They all stopped again for a moment, and then, maddened
seemingly at the sight of the broken-backed wolf dragging itself about
and screeching with pain--poor beast--they all fell upon the unfortunate
creature and worried it to death. Then, with yells of rage, on they came
again.

The pause had given us time to re-load. Dick and Pedro, quicker than I,
fired a second shot, and once more two wolves fell writhing among the
stones. The next moment we were surrounded, and for a minute or two
after that I was too much engaged myself to note what the others were
doing.

A gaunt, long-legged wolf sprang up on the rock within three feet of me.
I fired my rifle into his chest. Another, close beside him, was within
an ace of scrambling up when I hit him across the side of his head a
fearful crack with the empty rifle-barrel and knocked him off again.
Then, seeing a third with his feet on top of the rock, his head thrown
back in his straining efforts to get up, I sprang to that side, kicked
the beast under his chin and knocked him down.

Meanwhile my companions had been similarly engaged and similarly
successful. Pedro in particular, having dropped his bow and taken in one
hand the short-handled ax he always carried with him, while in the other
he held his big sheath-knife, had laid about him to such effect that he
had put four of the enemy out of the fight--two of them permanently.

Dick was the only one who had received any damage, and that was to his
clothes and not to himself. His rifle being empty, he had used it to
push back the wolves as they jumped up. In doing so he had stepped too
near the edge of the rock, and one of the watchful beasts, springing up
at that moment, had caught the leg of his trousers with its teeth,
tearing it from end to end and coming dangerously near to pulling my
partner down. Pedro, however, quick as a flash, had delivered a
back-handed "swipe" with his ax at the wolf's neck, nearly cutting off
its head, and Dick was saved. It was an unpleasantly close thing,
though.

It was a short, sharp tussle, and at the end of it nine of the sixteen
wolves lay scattered about the bed of the ravine, dead or helpless. This
seemed to take the fight out of the remaining seven--as well it
might--who retreated down the arroyo, turning at the corner and looking
back at us with their lips drawn up and their teeth showing, seeming to
convey a threat, as though they would say, "Your turn this time--but
just you wait a bit."

Such unexpected fierceness and such determination on the part of the
wolves--by daylight, too--scared me rather; Dick also, I noted, looked
pretty sober, as, turning to the Mexican, he said:

"You were right, Pedro: these wolves _are_ dangerous--a good deal more
so than I had supposed. Our chances would have been pretty slim if we
hadn't had this rock so handy. If this sort of thing is going to happen
at any time, day or night, it will add very much to the difficulty of
the work up here. We shall have to be continuously on the lookout; it
won't do to separate; and wherever we are at work, we shall have to
prepare a place of refuge near at hand. I don't like it. I've seen
wolves by the hundred, but I never saw any before so savage and so
persistent as these. I tell you, I don't half like it."

"And I don't either," said I, glad to find that I was not the only one
to feel uneasy. "Did you notice, Dick, how thin they all were? I've
often heard the expression, 'gaunt as a wolf,' and now I know what it
means. They seemed half-starved."

"That is it, senor," remarked Pedro. "The wolves up here are very
many--too many for the space they have. Here they are, the canons all
round them, they cannot get away. All the time they are half-starved,
all the time they hunt for food, all the time they are dangerous. Often
in winter they eat each other. It is well if we move away from here.
Pretty soon there will come another pack to eat up these dead ones."

"Let us get out, then!" I cried. "I've had enough of them for one day!"

The others were quite ready to move, so, jumping down from our fortress
we started along the ravine again, this time keeping our ears wide open
for suspicious sounds, and feeling a good deal relieved when, on the
edge of the lake, we sat down to our lunch with an old low-branching
pine tree close by, up which we could go in a jiffy if need be.

But though the presence of so many wolves on the "island" was something
we had not anticipated, something, moreover, which was likely to add
very much to the difficulty of our undertaking, we did not for a moment
contemplate its abandonment. It meant the use of great caution in going
about the work, but as to backing out, I do not think the idea so much
as occurred to either of us.

As soon as we had sat down to our lunch, therefore, we began the
discussion of the best method of procedure.

"It is a big undertaking, Dick," said I, "a very big undertaking; but it
looks like a straightforward piece of work; and it seems to me that what
has been done once can certainly be done again, especially as we have
our line already laid out for us. Don't you think so?"

"Yes, I certainly think so," replied my partner. "What those Pueblos
accomplished with their poor implements, we can surely do again with
our superior tools. And some of it, at least, we can do ourselves, I
believe--with our own hands, I mean. When it comes to digging out the
ditch on the other side of the canon, it will pay us to hire Mexicans;
but the preliminary work of bringing the water down to the canon, and,
perhaps, the building of the flume, I believe we can do ourselves."

"The building of the flume," said I, "is likely to be a pretty big job
by itself. We can undoubtedly get the water down that far--that is
simple--but the building of the flume is quite another thing. A small
flume won't do; it has to be a big, strong, solid structure, and it
strikes me that the very first thing to be done--the laying of the two
big stringers across the canon--is going to take us all we know, and a
trifle over. In fact, I don't see myself how we are to do it."

"I think I do," rejoined my partner; "but we shall need tools for the
purpose. We can't build a big, solid flume with one pick, one shovel and
two axes."

"No, we certainly can't," I replied.

"We shall need, too, a large amount of lumber," continued Dick, "heavy
pieces, besides boards for floor and sides--two inch planks, at
least--three inch would be better. We shall need several thousand feet
altogether."

"Well?"

"Well, there is no lumber to be had nearer than Mosby, and to bring it
from Mosby is out of the question. In the first place it would cost too
much; and in the second place it is too far to pack it on mule-back."

I nodded. "You mean we shall have to cut it out ourselves, here on the
spot."

"Yes; and to do that we shall need a long, two-handled rip-saw, and a
saw-pit to work in. Besides this, the other tools we shall require, as
far as I can think of them on the spur of the moment, are two or three
pulley-blocks for placing the big timbers, hammers, nails, cross-cut
saws and a big auger; for I propose that we pin the heavy parts together
with wooden pins: it will save the carriage on spikes, and be just as
good, if not better. Don't you think so, Pedro?"

Pedro approved of the idea, and we were about to continue the
discussion, when there broke out a great yelling and snarling of wolves
up the arroyo. Dick and I sprang to our feet, and instinctively cast an
eye up into the adjacent tree in search of a convenient limb; but
Pedro, unconcernedly continuing his meal, remarked:

"It is only that they eat the dead ones."

"Well, they're a deal too close to be pleasant," said Dick. "I vote we
move on down to the canon and get a little further away from them."

As I was heartily of the same opinion, we moved down accordingly, and
there on the brink of the gorge surveyed the scene of our future labors.

"Look here," said Dick. "Here's where we shall have to cut our
timbers--on this side. See what a splendid supply there is right at
hand."

He pointed to a scar on the mountain close by where a landslide had
brought down scores of trees of all sizes.

"When did that come down, Pedro?" he asked.

"Only last spring, senor," replied the Mexican. "And the trees are sound
and good."

"Mighty lucky for us," continued my partner; "for, you see, on the other
side trees are scarce and they average rather small. But on this side,
there are not only seasoned trees of all sizes in abundance, but it will
be a down-hill pull to get them into place--a big item by itself.
Besides that, just back here on this little level spot we can dig our
saw-pit very conveniently. The only question to my mind is, whether we
should not move our camp over to this side. If it were not for the
wolves I should certainly say, 'Yes'; but as it is, I feel rather
doubtful. The nearest water is up there at the lake, and if we did move
over to this side that is where we should have to make our camp."

"It's a long way up to the lake, Dick," said I, "and it might be
dangerous going to and from our work--especially going back in the
evening. In fact, it might easily happen that we couldn't get back at
all."

"That's what I was thinking of," replied my partner.

"On the other hand," I continued, "if we keep our present camp, it will
be very inconvenient, and will waste a great deal of time, to come to
our work every day by way of those stone steps we climbed this morning."

"Yes, that's it. But there's yet another way which, I think, would get
us over both difficulties; one which would combine all the advantages
and at the same time do away with the danger--or, to say the least, the
inconvenience--of being harried by the wolves, and that is to build a
bridge here. Then, if we move our camp to that little 'park' just below
here, where we found that spring yesterday, it would only take us five
minutes in the morning to come up here, cross the bridge and go to work.
How does that strike you? What do you think, Pedro?"

"It is good," replied Pedro. "First thing of everything a bridge; and
that is easy. We make it to-day before the sun set."

"We do, do we?" cried Dick, laughing. "That will be pretty expeditious;
but if you think you know how, Pedro, go ahead and we'll follow."

Pedro's eye twinkled. "The senor means it?" he asked.

"Certainly," replied Dick.

"_Bueno_," said Pedro, briefly.

There was a little pine tree growing just on the brink of the chasm, and
without another word the Mexican drew his ax from his belt, stepped up
to the tree and cut it off about four feet from the ground, allowing the
top to fall from the precipice into the stream below.

"What's that for, Pedro?" I asked, in surprise.

Pedro grinned. "I show you pretty quick," said he. "Come, now. We go
back to the other side."

Though we could not fathom his plan, having voluntarily made him captain
for the time being we could not do less than obey orders; so away we
went at a brisk walk back to the crack in the wall, down the steps in
the rock, along the bank of the creek to camp--where we picked up our
own ax--then up the ledge to the point opposite the one we had just
left--a two-mile walk to accomplish thirty feet.

Here, the first thing Pedro did was to take his lariat, a
beautifully-made rawhide rope strong enough to hold a thousand-pound
steer, tie a stone to one end and throw the stone across the canon. I
could not think what he was doing it for, until I saw that he was
measuring the width. We made it about twenty-seven feet, its remarkable
narrowness being accounted for by the great overhang of the cliff on our
side.

[Illustration: "I COULD NOT THINK WHAT HE WAS DOING IT FOR."]

"Now," said Pedro, "we go up the mountain here a little way and cut some
poles. It is just close by up here."

We soon found the place, and there we cut off three poles about thirty
feet long and eight inches thick at the small end. These we trimmed
down to about the same thickness at the butt, and having roughly squared
them, we dragged them down to the edge of the gorge.

So far it had been a simple proceeding, but what puzzled me was how
Pedro proposed to lay these sticks across the canon. This, too, as it
turned out, proved to be a simple matter, but its first step was one to
make your hair stand on end to look at, nevertheless.

It was now we found out why Pedro had cut off the little tree on the
other side. Taking his lariat, he swung the loop above his head a time
or two and cast it across the gorge. The loop settled over the
tree-stump, when the Mexican pulled it tight and then proceeded with
great care to tie the other end of the rope to a tree which stood very
convenient on our side.

What was he up to?

Dick and I stood watching him in silence, when he stepped to the edge of
the cliff, took hold of the rope with both hands, and swung himself off
into space!

My! It gave me cold shivers all down my back to see him hanging there
with nothing but that thread of a rope to prevent his falling on the
rocks a thousand feet below!

Motionless and breathless, Dick and I watched him as he went swinging
across, hand over hand--the rope sagging in the middle in an alarming
manner--and profound was our relief when he drew himself up and stepped
safely upon the opposite wall.

But though this tight-rope performance had given us palpitation of the
heart, Pedro himself appeared to be absolutely unaffected. With perfect
calmness and unconcern, he turned round and said in the most
matter-of-fact tone:

"Now undo the rope and tie it to the end of one of those poles."

As Pedro evidently regarded his feat of gymnastics as nothing out of the
common, we affected to look upon it in the same light, so, following his
directions, we tied the rope to one of the poles, when the Mexican began
pulling it toward him, we pushing at the other end. Presently the pole
was so far over the edge that it began to teeter, when Pedro called to
us to go slowly. Then, while we pried it forward inch by inch, Pedro
retreated backward up the gully until the end of the pole bumped against
the wall on his side, when he came forward, keeping the rope taut all
the time, lifted the pole and set its end on the rocks. The first beam
of our bridge was laid.

The other two poles we sent across by the same process, and then,
scraping a bed for them in the sand and gravel, we laid them side by
side, two with their butt-ends on our side, the other--the middle
one--reversed.

Pedro then took from his pocket a long strip of deer-hide with which he
bound the three poles together, when we, at his request, having once
more tied the rope to the tree, he laid his hand upon it, using it as a
hand-rail, and walked across to our side, where with a second buckskin
thong he bound the poles together at that end.

Next he walked back to the middle of the bridge, and holding the rope
with both hands, jumped up and down upon the poles, to make sure of
their solidity, and finding them all right, he went to the far end,
loosened the loop from the tree-stump, threw it across to us, and then,
without any hand-rail this time, walked back across the flimsy-looking
bridge to our side!

What a head the man must have had! The bridge at its widest did not
measure thirty inches, and yet the Mexican--barefooted, to be
sure--walked erect across that fearful chasm without a thought of
turning dizzy. I suppose he was born without nerves, and had never
cultivated any, as we more civilized people do by our habits of life.
For years he had lived out-of-doors, always at exercise, used to
climbing in all sorts of dangerous places, and what perhaps may have
counted for as much as anything else, he was one of the few Mexicans I
have known who abjured that habit so common among his people--the habit
of smoking cigarettes.

I know very well that I, though I did not smoke cigarettes either, and
though I thought myself pretty clear-headed, would never have dared such
a thing, unless under pressure of great and imminent danger.

"What did you untie the rope for, Pedro?" I asked. "Why not leave it for
a hand-rail?"

"Because the wolves will eat it," replied Pedro. "We will bring one of
your hempen ropes and tie there: the wolves will not trouble that."

"By the way, Pedro!" cried Dick. "How about those wolves? Won't they
come across the bridge?"

"I think not," the Mexican answered. "They are wary and suspicious--it
is the nature of a wolf--and I think they will fear to venture."

At that moment the sun set behind the peak, and as though its setting
had been a signal, there arose in three or four different directions the
howls of wolves. They were coming out for their nightly hunt.

"Senores," said Pedro, "we will see very soon if the wolves will cross
the bridge. It will not be long before they find our trail and then they
will come down here. Let us hide us and watch. Up here, behind these
rocks, is a good place."

A little way up the bank, only a few steps back from the edge of the
gorge, we lay down and waited. Presently, from the direction of the
lake, there suddenly arose a joyous chorus of yelps, which proclaimed
that our trail had been discovered. And not to us only was the "find"
proclaimed. A second pack, hearing the call, hastened to join the hunt,
hoping for a share in the spoil; we caught a glimpse of them as they
came racing down one of the slopes which bordered the gully. The
swelling clamor drew nearer and nearer, and pretty soon, with a rush of
pattering feet, the wolves appeared; there must have been thirty of
them.

Down to the edge of the canon they came, and there they drew up. One of
them, a big, gray old fellow, the leader of one of the packs, probably,
advanced to the end of the bridge, sniffed at it and drew hastily back.
One after another, other wolves came forward, sniffed and withdrew. It
was evident that Pedro had guessed right: they dared not cross.

At this balking of their hopes they set up a howl of disappointment.
Poor things! I felt quite sorry for them. They were _so_ hungry; and yet
they dared not cross. Nevertheless, though I might feel sorry for them,
I was more than glad that they feared to venture, for against such a
pack as that our chances would have been small indeed.

"Senores," whispered Pedro, "I try them yet a little more. It is quite
safe. Stay you here and watch."

With that, taking his ax in his hand, he rose up in full view of the
pack and walked down to the end of the bridge.

Such an uproar as broke forth I never heard. Many of the wolves ran up
the banks on either side of the gully in order to get a sight of Pedro,
and every one of them, those in front, those behind and those on the
sides, lifted their heads and yelled at the man calmly standing there,
scarce ten steps away.

But they dared not cross.

One of them, indeed, crowded forward against his will by those behind,
was pushed out on to the bridge a little way, when, striving to get
back, his hind feet slipped off. I thought he was gone, but by desperate
scratching he succeeded in saving himself, when, rendered crazy by
fright and rage he attacked the nearest wolves, fought his way through
to the rear and fled straight away up the gully.

This seemed to settle the matter. The whole pack, as though struck with
panic, turned and pursued him. In ten seconds not one of them was to be
seen.

As Dick and I rose up from our hiding-place, Pedro came back to us.

"You see," said he, "we are quite safe."

"Yes," replied Dick. "It is evident we have nothing to fear from them on
this side--and I'm mighty glad of it. Well, let us get down to camp. I
think we've done a pretty good day's work, taking it all round, and I
shall be glad of a good supper and a good rest."

"So shall I," was my response. "And as to our day's work, Dick, I'm much
mistaken if it isn't by long odds the most important one to us that
either you or I ever put in."




CHAPTER XVIII

THE BIG FLUME


As the first step in restoring the old Pueblo irrigation system, we
moved camp next morning as arranged. Packing our scanty belongings upon
old Fritz, we rode up the ledge, past the site of the proposed flume,
and down the mountain a short distance to a point between two of the big
claw-like spurs, where, two days before, in riding down to speak to
Galvez, we had come across a little spring which would furnish water
enough for ourselves and our animals.

Thence, walking back to the bridge, taking with us, besides our rifles,
the two axes and one of our long picket-ropes, Pedro first tied the
latter to the tree on our side, and then, taking the other end in his
hand, he walked across and fastened it to the stump on the far side.

It was now our turn to cross, and very little did either of us relish
the idea. Dick, who had volunteered to go first, took hold of the rope,
set one foot on the bridge, and then--he could not resist it--did just
what he ought not to have done:--looked down. The inevitable consequence
was that he took his foot off again and retreated a few steps.

"My word, Frank!" said he. "You may laugh if you like, but I'll be shot
if I'm going to walk across that place. Crawling's good enough for me."

So saying, he again approached the bridge, and going down on his hands
and knees, crawled carefully over.

For myself, I found it equally impossible to screw up my courage far
enough to attempt the passage on foot. In fact, even crawling seemed too
risky, so I just sat myself astride of the three poles and "humped"
myself along with my hands to the other side, where the grinning Pedro
gave me a hand to help me to my feet again.

It was ignominious, perhaps, to be thus outdone by an ignorant,
semi-savage Mexican; but, as Dick said, "You may laugh if you like": I
was not going to break my neck just to prove that I was not afraid--when
I was.

At that hour in the morning the wolves, I suppose, were all asleep. At
any rate we heard nothing of them. But knowing very well that they
might turn up again at any moment, we wasted no time in starting our
first piece of work, namely, preparing a place of refuge against them.

Choosing a spot on the level near the point where we expected to dig our
saw-pit, we cut a number of good, heavy logs, with which, after
carefully notching and fitting them, we erected a pen, seven feet high
and about ten feet square inside. It was the plainest kind of a
structure: merely four walls, without even a doorway; but as it was not
chinked it would be a simple matter for us to clamber up and get inside;
whereas, for a wolf to do the same--with safety--would be far from
simple with us waiting in there to crack him on the head with an ax as
soon as he showed it above the top log.

It may be that we were unnecessarily cautious in providing this refuge.
If the wolves should molest us--a contingency pretty sure to occur some
time or other--it was probable that we should hear them coming in time
to retreat by the bridge, which was not more than a hundred yards
distant. But on the other hand, if they should not give us timely notice
of their approach, it might be very awkward, not to say dangerous--for
Dick and me, at least.

"For Pedro it might be all right," was my partner's comment, "but for
us--no, thank you. I have no desire to be hustled across that bridge in
a hurry. Just imagine how it would paralyze you to try to crawl across
those poles, knowing that there was a wolf standing at the far end
trying to make up his mind to follow you. No, thank you; not for me.
We'll have a refuge here on 'dry land.'"

It was a long day's work, the building of this pen, for we were careful
to make it strong and solid; indeed, we had not yet quite finished it,
when, about four in the afternoon, we heard the first faint whimperings
of the wolves, a long way off somewhere. So, fearing they might come
down upon us before we were quite ready for them, we postponed the
completion of the job until the morrow, and re-crossing the bridge in
the same order and the same manner as before, we went back to camp,
where we spent the remaining hours of daylight in making things
comfortable for a lengthened stay.

To this end we built a little three-sided shelter of logs about four
feet high, the side to the east, facing down the mountain, being left
open. This we roofed with a wagon-sheet we had brought with us in place
of a tent, dug a trench all round it to drain off the rain-water,
covered the floor with a thick mat of pine-boughs, and there we were,
prepared for a residence of six months or more, if necessary.

"Now, Frank," said my partner, as we sat by the fire that evening, "we
have about got to a point where we have to have tools. One of us has got
to go to Mosby to get them, while the other stays here with Pedro. The
question is, which shall go. Take your choice. I'll stay or go, just as
you like."

"Then I think you had better go, Dick," I replied. "You know better than
I do what tools we shall need; you are far more handy at packing a mule
than I am; and besides all that, it will give you an opportunity to see
the professor."

"Thanks, old chap," said Dick, heartily. "That is a consideration. Yes,
I shall be glad to go, if you don't mind staying here with Pedro."

"Not a bit," I replied. "He's an interesting companion; and if one
needed a protector it would be hard to find a better one. No; I'll stay.
I don't at all mind it."

"Very well," said Dick. "Then I think I'll dig out the first thing in
the morning. It will take me, I expect, about six days: two days each
way and perhaps two days in Mosby. It depends on whether I can get the
tools there that I want."

"I should think you could," said I, "unless it is the big rip-saw."

"I don't think there'll be any trouble about that," replied my partner.
"Before the saw-mill came in, two or three of the mines used to cut
their own big timbers by hand, and I've no doubt the old saws are lying
around somewhere still. If they are, I'm pretty sure I can get one for
next-to-nothing, for, of course, they are never used now."

"There's one thing, Dick," said I, after a thoughtful pause, "which
makes me feel a little doubtful about your going alone, and that is lest
Galvez should interfere with you. If he caught sight of you, either
going or returning, he might make trouble."

"He might," replied Dick. "Though I don't much think he is likely to
trouble you or me. Anyhow, when I leave to-morrow, you can take the
glass and just keep watch on the village for an hour or so to see that
he doesn't make any attempt to cut me off. If he should, you can raise a
big smoke here to warn me and ride down to help."

"All right. I will. But how about when you come back?"

"Why, I'll arrange to leave The Foolscap, as we did before, at four
o'clock in the morning, which would bring me about half way across the
valley by sunrise. On the sixth morning, and every morning after till I
turn up, you can take the field-glass and look out for me. From this
elevation you would be able to see me long before Galvez could, and then
you might ride down to meet me."

"That's a good idea. Yes; I'll do that."

Our camp was so placed that we could not only see the whole stretch of
the valley between us and The Foolscap, but also the village and the
country beyond it for many miles, and for about two hours after Dick's
departure I sat there with the glass in my hand watching his retreating
figure, and more especially watching the village. For, though in reality
I had little fear that Galvez would attempt to play any tricks on him,
particularly after Dick's exhibition of rifle-shooting, I was not going
to take any avoidable chances.

At the end of that time, however, I rose up, put away the glass, and in
company with Pedro went over to the other side of the canon, where we
first finished up the building of the pen, and then, picking out a big,
straight tree suitable for a stringer, I went to work upon it, trimming
off the branches, while Pedro with the shovel began the task of digging
out the saw-pit.

That evening, and each succeeding evening, just before the sun set, we
stopped work and retreated across the bridge in order to avoid any
trouble with the wolves, which, as a rule, did not come out in force
until about that hour. Once only during the time that Pedro and I were
at work there by ourselves did any of them venture on an attack. It was
a pack of about a dozen which came down on us one evening just before
quitting-time, but as we heard them coming, we retired into the pen,
whence I shot one of them before they had found out where we were;
whereupon the rest bolted.

I think the survivors of the fight in Wolf Arroyo--as we had named the
ravine where we had had our battle--must have imparted to all the others
the intelligence that we were dangerous creatures to deal with, for the
wolves in general were certainly much less venturesome than they had
been that first day. At night, though, they came out in droves, and
continuous were the howlings, especially when the wind was south and
they could smell us and our animals only a hundred yards away on the
other side of the canon.

At sunrise on the sixth day, and again on the seventh, I searched the
valley with the glass to see if Dick was within sight, but it was not
until the morning of the eighth day that I saw him and old Fritz coming
along, not more than five miles away. He must have made a very early
start.

Jumping on my pony, I rode to meet him, while Pedro remained behind to
watch the village.

I was very glad to see my partner safely back again, and especially
pleased to hear the news he brought.

The professor, he told me, was delighted with the turn of events which
bade fair to provide Dick with a settled occupation, and one so well
suited to his tastes and training; while as to Uncle Tom, Dick had
written to him an account of the present condition of the King Philip
mine, and had given him a full description of the undertaking upon which
we proposed to enter. In reply, my genial guardian had sent to me a
characteristic telegram, delivered the very morning Dick left Mosby. It
read thus:

"Go ahead. Money when wanted. How about book-learning now?"

"How's that, Dick?" said I, handing it over to my companion to read.

Dick laughed. "You made a pretty good guess, didn't you?" he replied.

It was a matter of intense satisfaction to both of us to find our
guardians so heartily in favor of the prosecution of our design, and it
was with high spirits and a firm determination to "do or die" that we
carried over the bridge the assortment of tools with which old Fritz was
laden, and that very afternoon went systematically to work.

It was not until we really went about it in earnest that we fully
realized the magnitude of the task we had set ourselves when we
undertook to build that flume. We were determined that if we did it at
all we would do it thoroughly well, and in consequence the timbers we
selected for the stringers were of such size and weight that we should
have been beaten at the word "go" if we had not had for an assistant a
man like Pedro, who combined in his own person the strength of five
ordinary men. It was a pleasure to see him when he put forth all his
powers. Give him a lever, and let him take his own time, and the most
obstinate log was made to travel sulkily down hill when Pedro took it in
hand.

After measuring with particular accuracy the space between the sockets
on either side of the gorge, we sawed off one big timber to the right
length, and getting it into position over the saw-pit we squared its two
ends and then sawed it flat on one side, leaving the other sides
untouched.

I had always understood that working in a saw-pit was a disagreeable
job, but not till I had practical experience of it did I discover how
correct my understanding had been. I discovered also why the expression,
"top sawyer," was meant to indicate an enviable position.

It fell to Pedro to be top sawyer, for the harder part of the work is
the continuous lifting of the saw; but for all that, the man below has
the worst of it, for if he looks up he gets a stream of sawdust into his
eyes, and if he looks down he gets it in the back of his neck. There is
no escape, as Dick and I found--for we took it in turns to go below and
pull at the saw-handle.

However, we were not going to shirk the task just because it happened to
be unpleasant, and being fairly in for it, we made the best of it.

Our first big timber being at length prepared, we got it down to the
edge of the canon, and then were ready for the next move--the most
important move of all--getting it across the gorge. This could not be
done by main strength, as had been the case with our bridge-timbers, for
this stick, twenty-nine feet long and sixteen inches square, though
pretty well seasoned, was an immense weight.

But what could not be done by force might be accomplished by
contrivance. The most bulky part of old Fritz's load had been composed
of ropes and pulley-blocks, and it was with these that we intended to
coax our big stick across the gap.

Going over to the other side, we set up a framework of stout poles--a
derrick, we called it--to the top of which we attached a big pulley.
Threading a strong rope through this pulley, we carried it back and
fastened it to a windlass which Dick built; he having seen dozens of
them at work among the mines, having observed, fortunately, how they
were made, and being himself a very handy fellow with tools. The
windlass was securely anchored to two trees, when, the other end of the
rope having been carried over and tied to our big log, we were ready to
try the experiment of placing it athwart the chasm.

With this object, Dick and Pedro turned the windlass, while I, crossing
the bridge once more, pried the log forward from behind. It was a slow
and laborious operation, but inch by inch the great log went grating and
grinding forward, until at length its end overlapped the further edge of
the gorge. Soon, with a sullen thump, my end fell into its socket, when
Dick lowered his end into the socket opposite, and our first big
stringer was successfully laid.

It was a good start and greatly heartened us up to tackle the rest of
the work.

Our second big stringer we prepared and laid in the same manner--flat
side up--and then came the most ticklish job of all--the placing of the
two supports beneath each stringer. Without Pedro, with his steady
nerves and his cat-like agility, we could not have done it.

Tying a rope to the stringer, Pedro descended the face of the cliff and
set the butt-end of the supporting beam in its socket--the other end
being temporarily tied in place--repeating the same process on the other
side. These beams we had measured and prepared with great care, so that
when their bases were set, the beveled smaller ends, by persistent
pounding, could be tightly jammed into the notch previously cut for
their reception in the under side of the big stringer. It was a good
piece of work, and very thankful I was when it was safely accomplished;
for though to one with a clear head it might not be very dangerous, it
looked so, and I was, as I say, greatly relieved when it was done.

It might seem that we made these stringers unnecessarily strong, and
perhaps we did. But we intended to be on the safe side if we could. Our
flume was designed to be eight feet wide and five feet deep, and though
the pitch was considerable and the water in consequence would run fast,
if it should by chance ever fill to the top there would be by our
calculation thirty-three or thirty-four tons of water in it.

Having now our foundation laid, the rest of the work was plain,
straightforward building, in which there was no special mechanical
difficulty. One part of our task, however--the sawing of the lumber--we
soon found to be so slow that we decided, if we could get them, to
procure the assistance of two or three Mexicans from Hermanos, and with
that object in view we sought an interview with our friend, Jose
Santanna.

To do this we supposed we should have to go down to Hermanos, but on
consulting Pedro, we found that there was another and a much easier
way.

I had often wondered if Pedro, during all the years he had lived on the
mountain, had subsisted exclusively on meat, or whether he had some
means of obtaining other supplies, and now I found out. I found that he
had a regular system of exchange with the villagers, by which he traded
deer-meat and bear-meat for other provisions, and that by an arranged
code of signals, familiar to everybody in the village, with the single
exception of Galvez himself, he was accustomed to let it be known when
he desired to communicate with the inhabitants.

Accordingly, Pedro that day at noon went down to a certain spot on one
of the spurs, and there built a fire, and piling on it a number of green
boughs he soon had a column of smoke rising skyward. This was the
signal, and that same evening he and we two boys, going down to the same
spot, sat down there and waited, until about an hour after dark, we
heard the sound of a horse's hoofs, and presently a man rode into sight.
It proved to be Santanna himself, much to our satisfaction.

He, as soon as he learned what we wanted, engaged to send us up three
stout young Mexicans, an engagement he duly fulfilled--to the rage and
bewilderment of Galvez, as we afterward heard, who could not for the
life of him make out what had become of them.

With this accession of strength we needed a second saw, and Dick went
off to Mosby to get one. In a few days he returned with two saws instead
of one, and with a load of dried apples, sugar and coffee with which to
feed our hungry Mexicans. Flour--of a kind--we could get from the
village, and deer-meat, though poor and tough at that season of the
year, we could always procure.

Dick also brought back with him that commodity so necessary in all
business undertakings--some money. The professor had insisted on
advancing him some, while Uncle Tom had enclosed fifty dollars in a
registered letter to me.

Thus armed, we procured two more Mexicans, and setting Pedro and his
five compatriots to work with the three saws, while Dick and I did the
carpenter work, we very soon began to make a showing.

As it was obviously too dangerous to attempt to work on the bare
stringers, we first laid a solid temporary floor of three-inch planks,
and having then a good platform we could proceed in safety to set our
big cross-pieces--upon which the permanent floor was afterward laid--and
to go ahead with the rest of the building.

There being no stint of timber, we could afford to make our flume
immensely strong--and we did. The framework was composed mostly of
ten-by-ten pieces, while the planks for the floor and sides were three
inches thick. The wings at each end of the flume were extended up stream
and down stream eight feet in either direction; and to prevent the water
from getting around these ends we built rough stone walls on the edge of
the gorge and filled in the spaces with well-tamped clay, of which we
were fortunate enough to find a great supply close at hand.

I do not intend to go into all the many details of the work, or to
relate our mistakes or the accidents--all of them slight,
fortunately--which now and then befell us. There was one little item of
construction, however, which seemed to me so ingenious and withal so
simple and so effective that I think it is worth special mention.

When we came to lay our floor and build the sides, the question of
leakage cropped up, when Dick suggested a plan which he said he had
heard of as being adopted by sheepmen on the plains in building
dipping-troughs.

Each three-inch plank, before being spiked in place, was set up on edge,
and along the middle of its whole length we hammered a dent about half
an inch wide and half an inch deep. Then, taking the jack-plane, we
planed off the projecting edges to the same level. The consequence was
that when the plank became water-soaked, this dented line swelled up and
completely closed any crack between itself and the plank above or beside
it. It was an ingenious trick, and proved so successful that it was well
worth the time and trouble it took.

In fact, by the expenditure of time and trouble, in addition to a very
modest sum of money, we did at length put together a flume which, I
think I may say, was a very creditable piece of work. It was strenuous
and unceasing labor, and at first it was pretty hard on me, but as my
muscles became used to the strain I enjoyed it more and more, especially
as every evening showed a forward step--a small one, perhaps, but still
a forward step--toward the accomplishment of our object.

Week after week we kept at it, steadily and perseveringly pegging away,
and at last, one day near the end of July, summoning our six Mexicans to
witness the ceremony, Dick and I, in alternate "licks" drove the last
spike, and the flume was finished!




CHAPTER XIX

PEDRO'S BOLD STROKE


All this time the wolves had let us alone. Frequently, toward evening,
we would detect them standing on the hillsides watching us, but they
were afraid to come near: the hammering and sawing, the stir and bustle
checked them and they kept aloof--by daylight.

Every night, though, they came down to the edge of the canon to howl at
us, and as the flume neared completion there was danger that they might
summon courage to cross by it--the old bridge we had long ago tumbled
into the stream. To prevent this, we at first set up every night a
temporary gate across it, but later, we adopted a safer and better plan.
We set two doors in our flume, one in the down-stream end, the other in
the side, about the middle, so that by closing the former and opening
the latter, all the water could be made to fall into the stream below.
Our supply could thus be regulated at the flume instead of going all
the way up to the old head-gate for the purpose.

These gates being set, Pedro and another Mexican went up and opened
connection between the lake and the low place where we had stirred up
the deer the first day we were up there, and very soon there was a
second little lake formed. Then, the flume being ready, we two and Pedro
went up and raised the stone head-gate three inches. The rush with which
the water came out was astonishing, and before the day was over it had
come on down to the flume and was pouring through the side gate into the
gorge--making a perfect defence against the wolves.

During the two months, or thereabouts, that we had been engaged in this
work, Dick had made altogether three trips to Mosby, on which occasions
he had written to Arthur, detailing our progress. Arthur, on his part,
had written to us--or, rather, somewhat to our surprise, he had written
to the professor instead of directly to Dick--once from Santa Fe and
once from the City of Mexico, whither he had been sent to institute a
search of the records there. His last letter stated that up to that time
no trace of the old patent had been found, but that, in spite of that
drawback, his father was vigorously stirring things up at his end of the
line, and that we might expect to see "something doing" in the enemy's
camp at any time. He stated also that he had hopes of rejoining us some
time early in July.

In consequence, we had been constantly on the watch for him for nearly a
month, but here was the end of July approaching and no Arthur had
appeared.

As we were very anxious to know when to expect him, and as we were also
in need of new supplies, the moment the flume was finished Dick set off
once more for Mosby, while Pedro and I, transferring all our tools from
the far side of the gorge, picked out a new working-ground on our side.

There was nothing further to be done on the "island," but though the
flume was finished and ready for use, we still had need of a large
amount of lumber in the construction of our ditch, for at the head of
every draw it would be necessary to build a short flume, or, in some
places, a culvert, to allow a passage for the rain-water which otherwise
during the summer thunder-storm season would wash our ditch full of
earth and rubbish.

As it would be too inconvenient, unfortunately, to cut lumber in the
old place and carry it across the flume, we moved all the tools, as I
said, over to our side, and following along the line of the ditch for
about half a mile, we selected a spot above it on the mountain and there
set our Mexicans to work felling trees and digging new saw-pits.

From the place selected we could see out over the plain in all
directions; a fact which had been one of our reasons for choosing that
particular spot.

Indeed it had become a matter of great importance that we should be able
to keep a watch on the valley, for we believed we had more than ever
reason to fear some act of hostility on the part of the padron. Dick had
no more than gone that day, when we were surprised by receiving a
daylight visit from our friend, Jose Santanna, who informed us that
Galvez of late had been showing unwonted signs of unrest; that he was
growing more and more suspicious, irritable and evil-tempered. That the
evening before a man had ridden into the village and had handed Galvez a
paper--some legal notice, I guessed--upon receipt of which the padron
had at first broken into a towering rage; had then gone about for half
a day in a mood so morose and snappish that no one dared go near him;
and that finally he had ordered his horse and ridden away, saying that
he was going to Taos.

"To Taos!" I exclaimed. "What has he gone to Taos for?"

Jose shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands, palms upward, as
much as to say, "Who knows?"

"Have we scared him out after all, I wonder," said I. "Did he say
anything about coming back, Jose?"

"He said he would return in four days," replied the Mexican.

"And is that all you know about it?"

"_Si, senor_, that is all. I know no more."

From this conversation it was plain to me that the law was beginning to
work, and that Galvez was becoming uneasy. Knowing his character, I,
too, became uneasy, for, should he be rendered desperate, there was no
telling what tactics he might resort to. It was this consideration that
made me so anxious for the safe return of my two partners.

From my vantage-point on the mountain I kept up a pretty constant watch
for the next few days; no one could come across the valley from any
direction without my seeing them--during daylight, that is--and unless
Galvez had slipped into Hermanos after dark I was sure he had not
returned, when, about three o'clock on the afternoon of the fourth day I
espied Dick, a long way off, coming back from Mosby. It was twelve hours
earlier than I had expected him, and wondering if he had any special
reason for making such a quick trip, I got my pony and hurried off to
meet him.

I had a feeling that Dick was bringing news of some sort, and his first
words after shaking hands proved the correctness of my impression.

"Well, old chap!" he exclaimed. "I've got news for you this time that
will make you 'sit up and take notice':--Arthur may be here any day; and
he has at last got track of that patent."

"Got a letter from him, then, did you?" I asked.

"Yes; written from Cadiz, in Spain, more than three weeks ago."

"From Cadiz!" I cried. "What's he doing there?"

"His father sent him over to go through a chest of old papers they have
in their house there. Arthur says--I'll give you his letter to read as
soon as we get to camp--he says that he spent a fortnight reading all
sorts of musty documents, without success, when at last he came upon an
old note-book with the name of Arthur the First on its fly-leaf, and in
that he found a single line referring to the patent--the only mention
that has turned up anywhere."

"And what does that say?"

"It says---- Here, wait a minute; hold my rifle. I'll show you what it
says."

So saying, Dick took the letter out of his pocket, and finding the right
place, handed it to me. The passage read: "It was an old memorandum-book
in which my very great-grandfather used to note down all the particulars
of the copper shipments and other matters dealing with the K. P. mine;
but on the last fly-leaf was this entry, written in English: 'Mem. In
case of accident to myself: The King's patent and the King's commission
are in a hole in the wall above the door of the strong-room.' Where the
strong-room may have been," Arthur went on, "I don't know, unless it is
in the _Casa_. Ask Pedro."

"What do you think of that?" asked Dick.

"I think---- Well, I think we'll do as Arthur says: ask Pedro."

In the course of an hour we had reached camp, when Dick, as soon as he
had greeted the faithful Mexican, at once propounded the important
question.

"Pedro," said he, without any preface, "did you ever hear of the
'strong-room'?"

"Surely," replied Pedro, with an air of surprise at being asked such a
question. "Everybody knows the strong-room. It is a little room on the
east side of the _Casa_; it has a door and no window; it is where one
time the copper was stored, waiting for the pack-trains to come and take
it away."

"It is, is it!" cried Dick. "Then, Frank, I shouldn't be a bit surprised
if those deeds were in there now. How are we to find out?"

"Go and look!" I exclaimed, springing to my feet. "Now's our chance!
Galvez is away--gone to Taos. Let us make a try for it at once. He's due
to be back to-day, and then it will be too late. Come on! Let's get out!
We haven't a minute to lose! Will you come with us, Pedro?"

To my surprise, and, I must confess, to my disappointment also, Pedro
shook his head. I supposed he was afraid to leave his mountain, and for
a moment my opinion of his courage suffered a relapse. But I was doing
him an injustice, as I heartily owned to myself, when, pointing out over
the valley, he said, quietly:

"It is too late already, senor. Look there!"

Half a mile the other side of Hermanos, riding toward the village, were
three horsemen, one of whom we recognized as Galvez. Who the others
might be, and why the padron should be bringing them to Hermanos, we
could not guess. We were destined, however, to learn all about them
later in the day.

As a matter of course, the sole subject of our thoughts and our
conversation was the King's patent, and whether or not it was still in
its hiding-place above the door of the strong-room. The only way to find
out was to get in there and search for it, but how to do that was the
question. Many plans did we discuss and discard, and we were still
discussing as we sat round the fire that night--our Mexican workmen
being encamped some distance away--when Pedro suddenly jumped up, and
signaling to us to keep quiet, stood for a moment with his head bent
forward, listening intently. His sharp ears had detected some sound
inaudible to our less practised hearing.

Making a quick backward motion with his hand, he whispered sharply:
"Get away! Get away back from the light of the fire while I go see!"

We speedily retreated up the hill a little way and hid ourselves among
the trees, while Pedro, with the stealth of a wild animal, slipped
silently off into the darkness. So quick and so noiseless were the
movements of the clumsy-looking Mexican that I thought to myself I had
rather be hunted by wolves than by that skilful woodsman, with his keen
senses, his giant strength and his deadly, silent bow and arrow. I did
not wonder any more that Galvez kept himself aloof.

For two or three minutes silence prevailed, when we saw Pedro step back
into the circle of light, and with him another man. It was our friend,
Jose Santanna, again.

"Well, Jose!" cried Dick. "What can we do for you?"

"Senor," replied the Mexican, "I came up to tell you something--to warn
you. The padron is come back. He has been to Taos and he has brought
back with him two men. They are bad--like himself. I go up to the _Casa_
this evening while they are at supper and I hear them talking and
laughing together through the door which is open. They say they like
now to see three boys and a stupid peon"--he nodded toward Pedro--"get
them out. They say if they catch Pedro they hang him, and if they catch
'that young Blake' they shoot him. They are dangerous, senor."

"We shall have to keep our eyes wide open," said Dick. "Do you think
they'll venture up here, Jose?"

"I think not," replied the Mexican. "One of the men say, 'Let us go up
on the mountain and catch them,' but the padron, he say very quick, 'No,
no. I do not go up on the mountain. While they are there they do no
harm, but if they come down here, then----!'"

"I see," said Dick. "They mean to hold the fort against all comers. It
is pretty evident, I think, that Galvez has been back to his old haunts,
hunted out a couple of his old-time cronies, and brought them back to
garrison the _Casa_, meaning to defy the law to get him out."

"That's it, I expect," said I. "And our chances of getting into the
strong-room are a good deal slimmer than ever."

It certainly did look so; yet, as it happened, I never made a greater
mistake.

Who would have guessed how soon we were to get that chance? And who
would have guessed that the man who was to provide the opportunity--and
that by a plan so bold that I am astonished at it yet--was the man whom
I had that day mentally accused of cowardice? How I did apologize to him
in my thoughts!

"Jose," said Pedro, "does the padron still go to bed every night at ten
o'clock, as he used to do?"

"_Si_," replied the cowman.

"Does he always come out to the well to get a drink of cold water just
before he goes to bed, as he used to do?"

"_Si_," replied the cowman once more.

"Those two men, are they to sleep in that room next the padron's?"

"_Si_," replied the cowman for the third time.

"Good!" exclaimed Pedro. "What time is it, senor?" turning suddenly to
Dick.

"Half past eight," replied my partner, looking at his watch.

"Good!" exclaimed Pedro once more.

For a minute he sat silent, his lower lip stuck out, frowning at the
fire, while we sat watching him, wondering what he was thinking about,
when, with an angry grunt he muttered to himself, "Stupid peon, eh!
Humph! We'll see!" Then, jumping up, he said briskly: "Senores, get
your horses. We will search the strong-room to-night."

Still wondering what scheme he had in his head, we saddled up and
followed him as he rode down the mountain and out upon the plain, too
much engaged for the moment in picking our way to find an opportunity to
ask questions.

It seemed to me that our guide must have something of the wild animal in
him, for, though it was very dark, he never hesitated for a moment, but
went jogging along, threading his way through the sage-brush without a
pause or a stumble. Either he or his burro must have had the cat-like
gift of being able to see in the dark.

In about an hour we saw dimly the walls of the _Casa_ looming up near
us, and passing by it, we went on down to the creek where we dismounted
and tied up our horses to the trees. Then, following down the creek for
a short distance, we presently came opposite the front gate of the
_Casa_, about a hundred yards distant. The village on the other side of
the stream was dark and silent, but in one of the rooms in the _Casa_,
facing the gateway, we could see a light burning.

"That is the padron's room," whispered Jose. "He has not gone to bed
yet."

Against the light of the open door we could see between us and the house
the long, black arm of the well-sweep, and advancing toward it, we had
come within about thirty steps of it when Pedro requested us to stop
there and lie down, while he himself went on and crouched behind the
curbing of the well. We could not see him; in fact we could see nothing
but the lights in the window and doorway, the well-sweep, and, very
dimly, the outline of the building.

There we lay in dead silence for a quarter of an hour, wondering what
Pedro expected to do, when we heard voices, and the next moment the
figures of two men showed themselves in the lighted doorway. One of them
carried a candle, and the pair of them went into the next room--all the
rooms opened into the courtyard--and shut the door. For five minutes the
light showed through the little window and then went out. The padron's
friends had gone to bed.

For another five minutes we waited, and then the padron himself
appeared. We could hear the jingle of his spurs as he came leisurely
down to the well to get his nightly drink of cold water. We lay still,
hardly daring to breathe.

Presently, we heard the squeak of the well-sweep and saw it come round,
dip down and rise again. Then we heard the clink of a cup: Galvez was
taking his drink. He never finished it!

At that moment Pedro's burly form rose up from behind the curbing; he
took two steps forward, and with his great right hand he seized Galvez
by the neck from behind, giving it such a squeeze that the unfortunate
man could not utter a sound. We heard the cup fall to the ground with a
clatter.

Then, grasping the helpless padron by the back of his trousers, the
little giant swung him off his feet and hoisting him high above his
head, stepped to the rim of the curbing. The next moment there was a
muffled splash--Galvez had been dropped into the well!

He had been dropped in feet foremost, however, and as the well was only
twelve feet deep with four feet of water in it, his life was not
endangered.

At this point we all jumped up and ran forward, reaching the well just
as Galvez recovered his feet, as we could tell by the coughing and
spluttering noises which came up from below. As we approached, Pedro
leaned over the coping and said in a low voice:

"Good-evening, Padron. This is Pedro Sanchez. If you make any noise I
drop the bucket of water on your head."

This gentle hint was not lost upon Galvez, who contented himself with
muttered growlings of an uncomplimentary nature, when Pedro, turning to
Dick, whispered sharply:

"Run quick now to the strong-room. I stay here to guard the padron."

In company with the barefooted Jose, we ran into the courtyard, where
the Mexican pointed out to us the door of the strong-room, the first on
the right, and while Dick and I pulled it open, taking great care to
make no noise, Jose himself ran on to the padron's room, whence he
quickly returned with a candle in his hand.

While Dick stood guard outside, in case the padron's two friends should
come out, I slipped into the little room, where, finding an empty
barrel, I placed it in front of the doorway, jumped upon it, and taking
my sheath-knife, I stabbed at the adobe wall just above the lintel of
the door. The second or third stroke produced a hollow sound and
brought down a shower of dried mud, when, vigorously attacking the spot,
I soon uncovered a little board which had been let into the wall and
plastered over with adobe.

In a few seconds I had pried this out, when I found that the space
behind it was hollow, and thrusting in my hand I brought out a brass box
shaped like a magnified cigar-case.

"Dick!" I whispered, eagerly. "I've found something! Come in here!"

My partner quickly joined me, when we pried open the box, finding that
it contained a parcel wrapped up in a piece of cloth. Imagine our
excitement when on tearing off the wrapping we found that the contents
of the package consisted of two parchment documents, written in Spanish!
We had no time to examine them thoroughly, but a hasty glance convincing
us that we had indeed found what we sought, and there being nothing else
in the hole, I crammed the parchments back into the box, shoved the box
into my pocket, buttoned my coat, and away we went back to the well.

"Find it?" whispered Pedro.

I replied by patting my pocket.

Pedro nodded; and then, having first lowered the bucket into the well
again, he leaned over the coping and said softly:

"Padron, you may come out now as soon as you like."

With that, leaving Galvez to climb out if he could, or to remain where
he was if he couldn't, we all turned and ran for it.

Having recovered our horses, Jose bolted for home, while we went off as
fast as we dared in the darkness for camp.

There, by the light of the fire, we examined our capture. One of the
parchments was the commission of old Arthur the First to the
"Governorship" of the King Philip mine; the other was the original
"Grant" of the Hermanos tract from Philip V, King of Spain, the Indies
and a dozen other countries, to his trusty and well-beloved subject,
Arturo Blake.

"This _is_ great!" cried Dick. "This will settle the title without any
chance of dispute. Galvez may as well pack up and go now. I wonder what
he'll do?"

"I don't know what Galvez will do," said I; "but I can tell you what
_we_ must do, Dick. We must cut and run. This patent must be put away in
a safe place--and it isn't safe here by any means. Galvez will be about
crazy with rage at having been dropped into the well; and for another
thing, he'll see that hole above the door, and he'll know that whatever
it was we took out of the hole, it must be something of importance to
have induced us to come raiding his premises like that."

"That's true," said Dick, nodding his head.

"And I shouldn't be a bit surprised," I continued, "now that he has two
other unscrupulous rascals to back him, if he were to come raiding us in
return. What do you think, Pedro?"

"I think it is likely," replied the Mexican. "I think it is well that
you go, and stop the Senor Blake from coming here. Those men are
dangerous. For me, I have no fear: I can take care of myself."

"Then we'll skip," said Dick. "It's safest; and it's only for a time,
anyhow, for, of course, Galvez's legal ejection is certain, sooner or
later, now that we have the patent in our hands. So we'll get out,
Frank, the very first thing to-morrow."

It was the night of July 28th that we came to this resolution; though,
as a matter of fact, we were not aware of it at the time, for we had
lost track of the days of the month. It was the astounding event of the
day following that impressed the date so indelibly on our memories.

Men plot and plan and calculate and contrive, thinking themselves very
clever; but how feeble they are when Dame Nature steps in and takes a
hand, and how easily she can upset all their calculations, we were to
learn, once for all, that coming day.




CHAPTER XX

THE MEMORABLE TWENTY-NINTH


Though we had intended to get off about sunrise we failed to do so, for
we found that Galvez was on the lookout for us. No sooner had we started
than we saw the three men ride out from the _Casa_ with the evident
intention of cutting us off, so, not wishing to get into a fight if it
could be avoided, we turned back again.

Thereupon, the enemy also turned back; but, watching their movements, we
saw that soon after they had entered the house, the figure of one of
them appeared again on the roof, and there remained--a sentinel.
Plainly, they were not going to let us get away if they could help it.

At midday, however, we saw the sentinel go down, presumably to get his
dinner, when we thought we would try again. Pedro therefore went off to
get our horses for us, but he had hardly been gone a minute when we were
startled to see him coming back with them, running as fast as his short
legs would permit.

"What's the matter, Pedro?" cried Dick. "What's wrong?"

"I see the Senor Arturo coming!" shouted the Mexican.

"What!" cried Dick, and, "Where?" cried I, both turning to look out over
the plain.

That man, Pedro, must have had eyes like telescopes to pretend to
distinguish any one at such a distance, but on examining the little
black speck through the glass I made out that it was a horseman, and
after watching him for a few seconds I concluded that it was indeed our
friend, Arthur, returning.

"Frank!" cried my partner. "We must ride out to meet him at once! Pedro,
you stay here and watch the _Casa_. If those three men come out, make a
big smoke here so that we may know whether we have to hurry or not."

"It is good," replied the Mexican; and seeing that he might be relied
upon to give us timely warning--for he at once began to collect
materials for his fire--away we went.

Riding briskly, though without haste, we had left the mountain and were
crossing a wide depression in the plain, when, on its further edge,
there suddenly appeared the solitary horseman, riding toward us at a
hard gallop. Dick turned in his saddle and cast a glance behind him.

"The smoke!" he cried; and without another word we clapped our heels
into our ponies' ribs and dashed forward.

As Arthur approached--for we could now clearly see that it was he--we
observed that he kept looking back over his left shoulder, and just as
we arrived within hailing distance three other horsemen came in sight
over the southern rim of the depression, riding at a furious pace, their
bodies bent forward over their horses' necks. Each of the three carried
a rifle, we noticed, and one of the three was Galvez.

At sight of us, the pursuers, seemingly taken aback at finding
themselves confronted by three of us, when they had expected to find
only one, abruptly pulled up. This brief pause gave time to Arthur to
join us, when Dick, slipping down from his horse, advanced a few steps
toward the enemy, kneeled down, and ostentatiously cocked his rifle.

Whether the padron's quick ears caught the sound of the cocking of the
rifle--which seemed hardly likely, though in that clear, still
atmosphere the sharp _click-click_ would carry a surprisingly long
distance--I do not know; but whatever the cause, the result was as
unexpected as it was satisfactory. Galvez uttered a sharp exclamation,
whirled his horse round, and away they all went again as fast as they
had come.

"See that!" cried Arthur. "What did I tell you, Dick? We have to thank
that locoed steer for that."

"I expect we have," replied Dick.

"Not a doubt of it," said I. "I was sure that Galvez was much impressed
by the way that steer went over, and now I'm surer. Lucky he was, too,
for those three fellows meant mischief, if I'm not mistaken."

"That's pretty certain, I think," responded Arthur. "And it was another
piece of good fortune that you turned up just when you did. How did it
happen?"

We explained the circumstances, but we had no more than done so, when
Arthur exclaimed:

"Why, here comes old Pedro now! At a gallop, too! Everybody seems to be
riding at a gallop this morning."

Looking toward the mountain, we saw the Mexican on his burro coming down
at a great pace, but we had hardly caught sight of him when he suddenly
stopped. He was on a little elevation, from which, evidently, he could
see Galvez and his friends careering homeward, and observing that the
affair was over and that his assistance was not needed, he forthwith
halted, and, with a mercifulness not too common among Mexicans, jumped
to the ground in order to ease his steed of his weight.

There he stood, nearly two miles away, with his hand on the burro's
shoulders, watching the retreating enemy, while we three rode toward him
at a leisurely pace.

As will be readily imagined, there was great rejoicing among us over the
safe return of our friend and partner, and a great shaking of hands all
round, when, hardly giving him time to get his breath again, Dick and I
plunged head-first into the relation of all we had done since we saw him
last: the finding of the head-gate and the building of the flume;
triumphantly concluding our story with the recovery of the patent the
night before.

"Well, that was a great stroke, sure enough!" exclaimed Arthur. "That
will settle the business. The 'stupid peon' got ahead of the padron that
time, all right. But before we talk about anything else, Dick," he went
on, "I have something I want to tell you about, something in my
opinion--and the professor thinks so too--even more important--to
you--than the title to the Hermanos Grant."

"What's that?" cried my partner, alarmed by his serious manner. "Nothing
wrong, is there?"

"No, there's nothing wrong, I'm glad to say. Quite the contrary, in
fact. I'm half afraid to mention it, old man, for fear I should be
mistaken after all, and should stir you up all for nothing, but--why
didn't you tell me, Dick, that your name was Stanley?"

"Why, I did!" cried Dick.

"No, you didn't, old fellow. If you remember, you were going to do so
that first day we met, down there in the canon by the opening of the
King Philip mine, when Pedro interrupted you by remarking that the
darkness would catch us if we stayed there any longer."

"I remember. Yes, that's so. Ah! I see. That was why you addressed your
letters to the professor instead of to me."

"Yes, that was the reason. It didn't occur to me till I came to write to
you that I didn't know your name."

"That was rather funny, wasn't it?" said Dick, laughing. "But I don't
see that it made much difference in the end: I got your letters all
right."

My partner spoke rather lightly, but Arthur on the other hand looked so
serious, not to say solemn, that Dick's levity died out.

"What is it, old man?" he asked. "What difference does it make whether
my name is Stanley or anything else?"

"It makes a great difference, Dick," replied Arthur. "I believe"--he
paused, hesitating, and then went on, "I'm half afraid to tell you, for
fear there might be some mistake after all, but--well--I believe, Dick,
that I've found out who you are and where you came from!"

It was Dick's turn to look serious. His face turned a little pale under
its sunburn.

"Go on," said he, briefly.

"You remember, perhaps," Arthur continued, "how I told you that one
reason why I had to go back by way of Santa Fe was because I had some
inquiries to make on behalf of my mother. Well, as it turned out, Santa
Fe was the wrong place. The place for me to go to was Mosby, and the man
for me to ask was--the professor!

"When I reached Mosby yesterday," he continued, "I rode straight on up
to his house, when the kindly old gentleman, as soon as I had explained
who I was, made me more than welcome. We were sitting last evening
talking, when I happened to cast my eye on the professor's book shelf,
and there I saw something which brought me out of my chair like a shot.
It was a volume of Shakespeare, one of a set, volume two--that book
which the professor found in the wagon-bed when he found you. I knew the
book in a moment--for we have the rest of the set at home, Dick!"

Dick stopped his horse and sat silent for a moment, staring at Arthur.
Then, "Go on," said he once more.

"I pulled the book down from the shelf," Arthur went on, "and looked at
the fly-leaf. There was an inscription there--I knew there would
be--'Richard Livingstone Stanley, from Anna.'"

"Well," said Dick. His voice was husky and his face was pale enough now.

"Dick," replied Arthur, reaching out and grasping my partner's arm, "my
mother's name was Anna Stanley, and she gave that set of Shakespeare to
her brother, Richard, on his twenty-first birthday!"

For a time Dick sat there without a word, not at first comprehending,
apparently, the significance of these facts--that he and Arthur must be
first cousins--while the latter quickly related to us the rest of the
story.

Dick's mother having died, his father determined to leave Scotland and
seek his fortune in the new territory of Colorado, whose fame was then
making some stir in the world. In company, then, with a friend, David
Scott--the "Uncle" David whom Dick faintly remembered--he set out,
taking the boy with him.

From the little town of Pueblo, on the Arkansas, Richard Stanley had
written that he intended going down to Santa Fe, and that was the last
ever heard of him. At that time--the year '64--everything westward from
the foot of the mountains was practically wilderness. Into this
wilderness Richard Stanley had plunged, and there, it was supposed, he
and his son and his friend had perished.

As for Dick, he seemed to be dazed--and no wonder. For a boy who had
never had any relatives that he knew of to be told suddenly that the
young fellow sitting there with his hand on his arm was his own cousin,
was naturally a good deal of a shock.

If it needed a counter-shock to jolt his faculties back into place, he
had it, and it was I who provided it.

In order to give the pair an opportunity to get used to their new
relationship, I was about to ride forward to join Pedro, when I saw the
Mexican suddenly commence cutting up all sorts of queer antics, jumping
about and waving his arms in a frantic manner.

"What's the matter with Pedro?" I called out. "Look there, you fellows!
What's the matter with Pedro?"

"Something wrong!" cried Dick. "Get up!"

Away we went at a gallop, keeping a sharp lookout in all directions lest
those three men should bob up again from somewhere, while the Mexican
himself, jumping upon his burro, rode down to meet us.

"What's up, Pedro?" Dick shouted, as soon as we had come within hearing.
"Anything the matter?"

"Senores," cried Pedro, speaking with eager rapidity, "those men come
hunting us. I watch them ride back almost to the _Casa_, and then of a
sudden they change their minds and turn up into the mountain. They think
to catch us, but"--he stretched out his great hand and shut it tight,
his black eyes gleaming with excitement--"if the senores will give me
leave, we will catch them!"

If his surmise was right, if those men were indeed coming after us as he
believed, there was no question that if any of us could beat them at
that game, Pedro was the one. Dick was a fine woodsman, but Pedro was a
finer--my partner himself would have been the first to acknowledge
it--and it was Dick in fact who promptly replied:

"Go ahead, Pedro! You're captain to-day! Take the lead; we'll follow!"

"_'Sta bueno!_" cried the Mexican, greatly pleased. "Come, then!"

Turning his burro, he rode quickly back to camp, and there, at his
direction, having unsaddled and turned loose our horses, we followed him
to the flume, taking with us nothing but our rifles.

There had been a little thunder-storm the day before, and the soil near
the flume was muddy. Through this mud, by Pedro's direction, we tramped;
crossed the flume on the gangway we had laid for the purpose, leaving
muddy tracks as we went; jumped down at the other end and set off
hot-foot up the gully to the little new-made lake and thence on up to
the old lake; in several soft places purposely leaving footmarks which
could not escape notice.

"What's all this for, Pedro?" asked Dick. "What's your scheme?"

"The padron will see our tracks crossing the flume," replied Pedro. "He
will think you take Senor Arturo up to show him all the work you have
done, and he will follow. If he does so, we have him! When he is safe
across, we slip back, and then I hide me among the rocks on the other
side and guard the flume. Without my leave they cannot cross back again.
Thus I hold them on the wrong side, while you ride away at your ease to
Mosby. Now, come quick with me!"

So saying, Pedro turned at right angles to the line of the ditch,
climbed a short distance up the hillside, and then, under cover of the
trees, started back at a run, until presently he brought us to a point
whence we could look down upon the flume, its approaches at both ends,
and the line of the ditch up to the head of the little lake.

Hitherto it had been all bustle and activity, but now we were called
upon to exercise a new virtue, one always difficult to fellows of our
age--patience.

It must have been nearly an hour that we had lain there, sometimes
talking together in whispers, but more often keeping silence, when Dick,
pulling out his watch, said in a low voice:

"If those fellows are coming, I wish they'd come. It's twenty minutes
past two; and we're in for a thunder-storm, I'm afraid. Do you notice
how dark it's getting?"

"Yes," whispered Arthur. "And such a queer darkness. I'm afraid it's a
forest fire and not a thunder-storm that is making it."

"I believe you're right," replied Dick. "It _is_ a queer-colored light,
isn't it?"

We could not see the sun on account of a high cliff at the foot of which
we were lying, and if we had had any thought of getting up to look at
it, we were stopped by Pedro, who at this moment whispered sharply to us
to keep quiet. His quick eyes had detected a movement on the far side of
the canon.

Intently we watched, and presently the figure of a man stepped out from
among the trees. Advancing cautiously to the end of the flume, he
examined the tracks in the mud, climbed up to the gang-plank, inspected
the tracks again, and turning, made a sign with his hand; whereupon two
other men stepped out from among the trees. The three then crossed the
flume, jumped down, and set off up the gully.

We watched them as they followed the ditch up to the new lake, and
thence to the draw which led up to the old lake. At the mouth of the
draw they paused for some time, hesitating, doubtless, whether they
should trust themselves in that deep, narrow crevice--a veritable trap,
for all they knew.

Presumably, however, they made up their minds to risk it, for on they
went, and a few minutes later were lost to sight.

By this time the darkness had so increased that the men were hardly
distinguishable, though they, themselves, seemed to take no notice of
it. The sun was behind them, and so intent were they in following our
tracks and keeping watch ahead, that they never thought to cast a glance
upward to see what was coming.

"Pedro," whispered Dick, as soon as the men had vanished, "let us get
out of here. Either the woods are on fire or there'll be a tremendous
storm down on us directly."

Pedro, however, requested us to wait another five minutes, when, jumping
to his feet, he cried:

"Come, then! Let us get back! We have them safe now!"

Down we ran, but no sooner had we got clear of the trees than Pedro
stopped short. In a frightened voice--the first and only time I ever
knew him to show fear--he ejaculated:

"Look there! Look there!"

Following his pointing finger, we looked up. The uncanny darkness was
accounted for:--a great semi-circular piece seemed to have been bitten
out of the sun!

"The eclipse!" cried Arthur. "I'd forgotten all about it. This is the
twenty-ninth of July. The newspapers were full of it, but I'd forgotten
all about it!"

"A total eclipse, isn't it?" asked Dick, quickly.

"Yes, total."

"Then it will be a great deal darker presently. We'd better get out of
this, and cross the flume while we can see."

In fact, it was already so dark that the small birds, thinking it was
night, were busily going to bed; the night-hawks had come out, the
curious whir of their wings sounding above our heads; and then--a sound
which made us all start--there came the long-drawn howl of a wolf!

"Run!" shouted Dick. "They'll be after us directly!"

Undoubtedly, the wolves, too, were deceived into the belief that night
was approaching, for even as Dick spoke we heard in three or four
different directions the hunting-cry of the packs. Wasting no time, as
will be imagined, away we went, scrambled up on the gang-plank of the
flume, and there stopped to listen.

"I hope those men"--Dick began; when, from the direction of the draw
above there arose a fearful clamor of howling. There was a shot! Another
and another, in quick succession! And then, piercing through and rising
above all other sounds, there went up a cry so dreadful that it turned
us sick to hear it. What had happened?

The hour that followed was the worst I ever endured, as we crouched
there in the darkness and the silence, not knowing what had occurred up
above.

At length the shadow moved across the face of the sun, it was brilliant
day once more, when, the moment we thought it safe to venture, down we
jumped and set off up the line of the ditch. We had not gone a
quarter-mile when we saw two men coming down, running frantically. In a
few seconds they had reached the spot where we stood waiting for them,
not knowing exactly what we were to expect of them.

Never have I seen such panic terror as these men exhibited; they were
white and trembling and speechless. For two or three minutes we could
get nothing out of them, but at length one of them recovered himself
enough to tell us what had happened.

The wolves had caught them in that narrow, precipitous arroyo, coming
from both ends at once. The two men, themselves, had succeeded in
scrambling up to a safe place, but Galvez, attempting to do the same,
had lost his hold and fallen back. Before he could recover his feet the
wolves were upon him, and then----!

Well--no wonder those men were sick and pale and trembling!

That the padron's designs against us had been evil there could be no
doubt--in fact, his shivering henchmen admitted as much--but, quite
unsuspicious of the coming of the midday darkness, and knowing nothing
of the fierce nature of these "island" wolves, he had run himself into
that fatal trap. It was truly a dreadful ending.

Does any one wonder now that the date of the eclipse of '78 should be so
indelibly stamped on our memories?


There being now nothing to interfere with us, we went down to Hermanos
and took possession of the _Casa_, and from that time forward the work
on our irrigation system moved along without let or hindrance from
anything but the seasons.

But though it was now plain sailing, and though we eventually got
together a force of twenty Mexicans to do the digging, the amount of
work was so great that we had not nearly finished that part of the ditch
which wound over the foothills when frost came and stopped us. We at
once moved everything down to the village and began again at that end,
keeping hard at it until frost stopped us once more, and finally for
that year.

In fact, it was not until the spring of '80 that we at last turned in
the water--a moderate amount at first--but since then the quantity has
been increased year by year, until now we are supplying at an easy
rental a great number of small farms, many of them cultivated by
Mexicans, but the majority by Americans.

The largest of the farms is that run by the two cousins and myself, and
its management, together with the supervision and maintenance of the
water-supply keeps us all three on the jump.

As for old Pedro, he stuck to his mountain until just lately, when we
persuaded him to come down and take up his residence on the ranch;
though even now, every fall he goes off for a three-months' hunt and we
see nothing of him till the first snow sends him down again.

He is a privileged character, allowed to go and come as he pleases; for
we do not forget his great services in turning this worthless desert
into a flourishing community of busy wheat-farmers and fruit-growers;
nor do we forget that it was really he who started the whole business.

As to that, though, we are not likely to forget it, for we have on hand
a constant reminder.

Above the fireplace in our house there hangs, plain to be seen, a relic
with which we would not part at any price--the "indicator" which pointed
the way for us when we first set out on this enterprise--the original
copper-headed arrow!


THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's The Trail of The Badger, by Sidford F. Hamp

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TRAIL OF THE BADGER ***

***** This file should be named 43989.txt or 43989.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/9/8/43989/

Produced by sp1nd, Martin Pettit and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

