The Project Gutenberg EBook of The White Spark, by Orville Livingston Leach

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The White Spark

Author: Orville Livingston Leach

Release Date: October 23, 2013 [EBook #44016]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WHITE SPARK ***




Produced by Diane Monico and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)











THE WHITE SPARK

[Illustration]

A New Book, giving out a New
Philosophy and the Mysteries
of the Universe


The Handbook of the Millennium and the New
Dispensation




SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS


This book is called The White Spark as the white spark or vacuum cell
in Nature IS THE RIGHT HAND OF GOD--it is a ubiquitous principle of
the universe and is the cause and parent of electricity, combustion,
radium, snow-flakes, flowers, trees, leaves, crystallization, wireless
telegraphy, animal forms and EVEN LIFE ITSELF.

This book is the key to every department of human endeavor, as it
enunciates the basic principle and THE PRIME MOVER of the universe.

It tells the road to health, the cause and cure of disease, the truth
about the germ humbug and drug treatments, serums and antitoxins.

It shows why luminosity is produced on the flesh of various organisms,
why a slice of pollock when first iced, then heated to 100 degrees and
then thrust into a temperature of 50 degrees becomes luminous.

It shows the farmer that he can become a magician of agriculture--tells
that the nitrogen of the air is only a dust of quartz rocks, like
the invisible moisture of the air is "a dust of water"--that the
nodules on the roots of the clover and legumes do not abstract
nitrogen from the air, for if they did nature would have placed these
bacteriological growths on the vine and not the root, the scientists
have the cart before the horse in this case and the nodular cells form
the proteids from sand or silica, this book tells how it is done.

It tells what a trance is and how the soul can leave the body
temporarily.

How JESUS CHRIST is carrying out the biblical prophesy by TELEPATHY.

Gives the truths about the ideal society, alcohol, drunkenness, causes
of crime, longevity and law.

It shows why milk from the cow at 100 degrees of temperature if
suddenly cooled to 50 degrees by the small stream process will keep
long and remain free from bacteria--how radioactivity kills the germs
of fermentation and prevents ptomaine poisoning and why out door
livers or moderately working farmers are the centennarians.

Gives the statistics to prove the evils of alcohol and fast living.

Shows that all force even gravity is a radioactive emanation from the
white sparks and that universal gravitation is a vagary, that the
planets move on orbits which are RIBBONS OF FORCE like the gulf stream.

The author is the man who converted the great scientists to the idea
that matter was simply "A HOLE IN THE ETHER" and that the ether was
the real and only element in the universe.

This proves the truth of the biblical statement, that God made the
world out of nothing, and that matter is simply spirit in motion.

This book shows how all the conditions of crime react upon us, that
physiology and rectitude are interdependent and although you do not go
to hell, yet hell will come to you if you transgress the laws of God
and Nature.

It shows the power of mind over the body and that the religion of
Jesus is not a fluke to satisfy a whim but is a great commercial like
business. There is no vicarious atonement in Nature, She does not
bandy and has no favorites, you get what you pay for, She keeps no
books but has an automatic adjustment which regulates accounts as you
go along and marks your soul for the future as well.

This book advocates churches and pastors or teachers who are God's
Noblemen and it advocates THEOCRATIC DEMOCRACY for if you love God
and your neighbor you are the CORRECT LAW.

But you can never overrule the law that your temper, rage, cruelty
and vindictiveness will be uncontrollable as long as you use tobacco,
alcohol and meats, and WAR WILL NOT BE ANNIHILATED UNTIL YOU REFORM
YOUR DIET AND HABITS. "Abstinence begets spirituality--dissipation
crime", and yourself, your wife, children, associates, animals and
humanity suffer--you have misapprehensions, moroseness and misery.

War is the result of selfishness, greed, graft, ignorance and
animalism and it advocates education of the individual to the end that
he shall combine and amalgamate his power with his fellow citizen,
when he can control WAR and government.

This book shows that diffusion of light and the freezing of water into
ice is from one white spark radiating "high frequency" straight cold
rays against its warm neighboring molecule and causing it to become a
white spark itself, it gives "contagion," it shows that the ether or
spirit gives "contagious transmission of ideas."

It explains MONISM as being correct and that there is but one God.

It explains that all of the material of a combustive nature Naturally
is censored by going to the intestines, and here it is emulsified and
coated with an incombustive coat of albumen, if an oil and if starch
is turned into sugar which in turn is changed to an oily substance in
the liver later and this is subsequently emulsified for eligibility
to the blood, but alcohol, essential oils and the organic bases sneak
into the blood surreptitiously, therefore "medicine" is not food,
there may be times when a stimulant is a pathological aid and the
germs often make a stimulant in the body to help over a bad condition,
as when the system contains useless material which is a load on the
organs or when minerals or "humors" embalm the system, but only a
limited amount is a medicine, any more is a poison, these cases are
anomalies and under proper conditions are transgressions of Nature.

This book shows that we can live upon a few cents per day and be
stronger and better in every way--it shows why many who gave up eating
meat failed and how they can discard the evil and cease to make
graveyards of their stomachs--the author has experimented with dogs
and cats and found that by feeding milk and well cooked oat-meal from
the weaning period till maturity they throve and were happier gentler
and more active and vivacious.

Meat causes man to be peevish, ill tempered and criminal, like
tobacco, alcohol and drugs.

The differentation of animal bodies can be met by the cooking of the
cereals, the short intestines and other conditions of carnivorous
animals are not inhibitions to the discarding of meat as a food.

Man and animals require pure soft water, hard and polluted water
is a cause of much unsuspected poisoning and the hidden cause of
"epidemics" and diseases--all water should be analyzed before being
accepted as satisfactory.

Mineralized waters are not desirable and the waters from some wells
and springs are fit for plants but will disorder the liver and
constipate the bowels--many farms are in the grip of misfortune and
losses from having bad water for the use of the home and the animals.

All of the unused elements which are thrown into the large intestine
as waste should be discharged regularly and in cases of constipation
a mild laxative like Cascara Sagrada or Senna should be taken to help
Nature.

The great category of medicines of the doctors is a farce and there
is no mysterious "selective affinity" for certain drugs, but all
elements have either one of two actions--a stimulating process or a
refrigerating or embalming process, some remedies go to the liver and
counteract the embalming action and aid the flow of bile and some may
be of a resinous nature and saponify in the alkalies of the intestines
and aid their action.

It will be seen that the book simplifies medicine to TWO PRINCIPLES,
one counteracting the other like heat and cold but these actions are
unnatural and undesirable; it is only by avoiding discrepancies and
ameliorations that we follow Nature.

The book explains that the differentations and forms in the universe
are the results of two forces, the curved force and the straight
force, just the same as every word in English language is made up
of letters having only two kinds of lines, the straight and the
curved lines. The book tells just what occurs in the life cells and
protoplasm; this is a remarkable discovery and to show how much so, we
quote from Le Bon the great Scientist, he says: "THE SCHOLAR CAPABLE
OF SOLVING BY HIS INTELLIGENCE THE PROBLEMS SOLVED EVERY MOMENT BY
THE CELLS OF THE LOWEST CREATURE WOULD BE SO MUCH HIGHER THAN OTHER
MEN THAT HE MIGHT BE CONSIDERED BY THEM AS A GOD." (From EVOLUTION OF
FORCES, p. 363).

Haeckel declared that a cell did not go to the bottom of the secret
of life and that we must allow that the naked protoplasm itself held
the secret of life, this book proves that protoplasm is composed of
molecules with centers of sulphur and phosphorus which conformed into
WHITE SPARKS by the alternations of heat and cold, the SPARKS contain
spirit and each spark has a quiet center or consciousness and a
potential of radiation of force.

This book is terse and compact, is printed on good paper and bound
with red cloth with gold letters.

[Illustration: READ IT!]

[Illustration: THEN TELL YOUR NEIGHBORS ABOUT IT]




THE
WHITE SPARK

By

ORVILLE LIVINGSTON LEACH

[Illustration]

Printed by the
OXFORD PRESS
Providence, R. I.




The White Spark




Part First.


This work is an exposition of a NEW PHILOSOPHY, and although it has
been taught to a number of highly educated men,--in a technical way,
we have had many suggestions made to us to publish a work which the
"work-a-day" people can understand,--some have said: "It is too far
above me," and "why don't you explain it so everybody may understand
it."

In this section we have especially planned to overcome all such
incongruities.

First of all we want to say that nature is a strict economist of time,
material and energy--her acts and laws are the simplest possible.

When you see any philosophy that is complicated, it is wrong, but
if it teaches simplicity it is right--the orthodox creeds have
maintained that the universe contained two distinct and eternal
elements--MATERIAL AND SPIRIT--but this is complication--can be
reduced,--WE ARE MONISTS AND "PANTHEISTS" and we are right,--there is
ONLY ONE ELEMENT IN THE UNIVERSE, AND THAT IS THE PRISTINE SPIRIT.

This is all that is needed to form the universe, and we will show
that matter is simply an enclosure of SPACE or nothing, having an
outline of spirit which is in such swift motion that it holds the
outline--water can be sent through the air so swiftly that it will
turn aside a steel bar.

To better illustrate the fact we will take a blackboard and paint it
all over with whitewash, then we take a wet sponge and wipe out round
figures--these will show as black spaces outlined by the white--these
black spaces represent SPACE or nothing, while the white represent
SPIRIT--the black spots then represent MATTER. They are really
nothing, only a form outlined and held by motion of spirit or "ETHER."

The statement in catechisms that "GOD MADE THE WORLD OUT OF NOTHING"
is then correct, although the statement has been called impossible by
many scientists.

Our philosophy was the first to enunciate the true nature of matter,
atoms, molecules and electrons. Previous to this atoms were considered
as solid indivisible particles. Later the scientists said matter
was condensed spirit or ether. I imagined so myself once, but upon
reflection I said, "THE ETHER CAN PASS THROUGH EVERYTHING, SO WHAT
COULD HOLD IT OR COMPRESS IT?" And spirit or ether could not compress
ether, as ether is all alike.

To show our part in teaching the world the truth we will go into a
little history.

As the readers of this work have probably never read THE LATCH KEY, I
will reprint two paragraphs verbatim, numbers 6 and 17.

Paragraph 6 will require some explanation. Count Rumford claimed that
heat was nothing but a motion, and in some cases this is so, a motion
of the atoms in a body, but a line of spirit from the sun will cause
atoms on the earth to move, and thus is the real cause of heat, and
so radiation of force or spirit from burning wood will create heat.
Perhaps we have in this paragraph used the nature of spirit rather
vaguely in saying heat is the "prime mover," but heat in one way is
spirit, or analogous to spirit.


6.

Matter Is Only Space or Nothing, With a Wall of Spirit.

Fire was held in sublime awe by the Egyptians and the sun was
worshipped as the source of Divine Power. The wonderful Pyramids are
supposed to have been erected for the glorification of these subtile
forces in Nature.

Modern thought reverts to ancient ideas.

Fire is simply spirit in motion.

Heat is a circular or circumscribed motion or =direction= in
which spirit is moving--it is the "Prime Mover" of organization, the
creator of matter and the parent of the universe!

A centrifugal act occurring from the intellectual fiat of
spirit--leaving a center, a whirling away of spirit to a certain
circumference or distance from a center leaving space in the
center--this is materialization, a creating of matter, the formation
of an atom, from nothing!


17.

The Point of a Pin Illustrates the Annihilation of Matter.

A point continued to an absolute end must end in spirit! Matter is cut
down to something beyond our senses; the absolute end of a point may
contain an atom, but matter ends here--here where one single whirl of
spirit surrounds the smallest amount of space possible. Beyond there
is no whirl or motion of spirit, consequently no matter, yet there is
now unparticled spirit.

If electricity had been studied correctly no scientist would ever have
imagined that matter was condensed ether. In Maxwell's Elementary
Treatise on Electricity on page 49 he says: "WE KNOW ABSOLUTELY
NOTHING WITH RESPECT TO THE DISTANCE THROUGH WHICH ANY PARTICULAR
PORTION OF ELECTRICITY IS DISPLACED FROM ITS ORIGINAL POSITION." * * *
"THE ACTUAL VELOCITY OF ELECTRICITY IN A TELEGRAPH WIRE MAY BE VERY
SMALL, LESS, SAY, THAN THE HUNDREDTHS OF AN INCH IN AN HOUR, THOUGH
THE SIGNALS WHICH IT TRANSMITS MAY BE PROPAGATED WITH GREAT VELOCITY."

It is the very fact that the ether is not compressible that allows a
wireless signal to be given a thousand miles away instantly. It is
just the same as if you had a long stick and punched a bell 20 feet
away.

I sent my work, "The Latch Key," to Sir Oliver Lodge and Sir William
Crookes in 1904. Its philosophy was buried for three years before the
ideas were presented to the British Association for the Advancement of
Science.

Sir William Crookes wrote to me in 1904 stating that he had received
my pamphlet, but he was just leaving home for a vacation of two weeks
and when he returned he would give it his attention.

In Sir Oliver's great work, called "Life and Matter," he wrote: "But
it appears now that an atom may break up into electric charges, and
these again may some day be found capable of resolving themselves into
pristine ether. In that case the ether alone persists. It is the most
fundamental entity."

In another book called "Modern Views of Electricity" he said: "Ether
is somehow affected by the immediate neighborhood of gross matter, and
it appears to be =concentrated= inside it to an extent depending
on the =density= of the matter."

So it is seen that Sir Oliver at this time believed that matter was
compressed or condensed ether.

In my pamphlets I explained that the ether could not be compressed,
as it was capable of passing through all substance, and that matter
was not =more= of the ether, but instead was =less=, and
that atoms were simply spots of pure space or "nothing," and that the
ether or its moving lines or sheets simply whirled around on empty
space while what was called a vacuum was really the habitat of real
material, or the ether.

In 1907 Sir Oliver accepted this new version of the nature of matter,
and it was the cause of much excitement in the British Association,
so much so that the report reached America and Prof. Serviss wrote an
article about it in the Boston Sunday American in October, 1907, in
which he says: "The answer as recently given by Sir Oliver Lodge is
amazing beyond belief. The solidest thing in existence, he avers, is
the very thing which for generations has been universally regarded
as the lightest, the most imperceptible, the most utterly tenuous
and evanescent beyond all definition or computation--the ether!" And
in the same article he says: "Matter, Prof. Osborne Reynolds has
asserted, instead of being, as we innocently believe on the evidence
of our senses, the only real and solid thing in nature is, in fact,
the absence or deficiency of mass."

The following is an article by Sir Oliver Lodge in regard to spirits:

     "Though for many years, ever since the eighties, I have
     tried all sorts of other methods of explaining these things,
     they have gradually been eliminated one after the other,
     and now no explanations remain except the simple one that
     the people who communicate are really the individuals they
     claim to be. Not always, of course. One has to prove them
     in every case. But still the conclusion is that survival of
     existence can be scientifically proved by actual psychical
     investigation.

     "That all leads to a perception of the unity running
     through all states of existence. That is why I say that
     man is not alone; that is why I say that I know he is
     surrounded by other intelligences. If you once step over the
     boundary beyond man, there is no limit to higher and higher
     intelligences up to the Infinite Intelligence himself. There
     is no stopping; you go on and must go on until you come to
     God.

     "It is no strange land to which I am leading you. The Cosmos
     is one. We here on this planet are limited in certain ways
     and are blind to much that is going on; but I tell you we
     are surrounded by beings working with us, cooperating,
     helping such as people in visions have had some perception
     of. And that which religion tells us, that saints and angels
     are with us, that the Master Himself is helping us, is, I
     believe, literally true."

In presenting this work to the public we claim no right to inject any
fallacies into the mind of the reader, and as far as we can discover
there is no cause for any misapprehension in regard to our statements.
THERE IS ONLY ONE TRUTH to any question, and all we base our claims
upon is our ability to present facts pertaining to our enunciations.

Fallacies are very short lived among persons who use their brains, and
the only credit which any philosophy earns is from the good precepts
which it inculcates, the value which it proves to the world and the
TRUTH WHICH IT HOLDS.

It is usually the case that a careless person resents any philosophy
which conflicts with their habits, no matter how many facts you
present to them or how much history you cite to them in proof of your
statements.

The use of tobacco and liquor deadens the users' alertness to
safeguarding their own welfare, and in many cases with poisons and
also diet the only thing we can do is to try to have you learn the
truth, and if the end of the rope has been reached and you are at the
ebb of life and hope, you will have more willingness to conform to the
laws of life. If you don't need our philosophy as a "missionary," some
time, you may want it as a doctor. Learn it, anyway.

The greatest field for fruitful efforts is with the children. If we
can prevent their using improper articles of food and drink and teach
them the nature of their effects, then we may find better soil for
the seeds of rectitude. Of course a little dissipation may not always
cause great trouble.

There is but ONE GOD and we may tell about SAVIOURS, "SONS OF
GOD" and the TRINITY, but there is only one SAVIOUR and that is A
TEACHER--either a SPIRIT or a HUMAN BEING--and the only salvation is
in the following of Natural Laws which are GOD'S BIBLE. There are
Natural laws which are OCCULT LAWS, and these sometimes contravene
what we may call "LAWS OF MATTER."

A TEACHER OF THE TRUTHS OF NATURAL SCIENCE IS GOD'S NOBLEMAN, and
KNOWLEDGE IS OUR ONLY SALVATION.

The use of stimulants is just the same as if you should use a 104 volt
electric lamp on a current with 250 volts. It would be burnt out;
and so your nerves which are the wires of the body are wasted away
by stimulants. They are all alike practically. Alcohol and essential
oils act as a kindler to the natural combustives in the tissues and
the alkaloids or organic bases, as nicotine, morphine, etc., act like
radium.

Quinine is an alkaloid also, and I will here reprint a selection from
the original LATCH KEY which explains the manner in which the organic
bases become dangerous. They all contain nitrogen, which may account
for their affinity for the nerve substance.


32.

Light and Heat From Radium Are From the Absorption of Ether.

The emission of light from a substance spontaneously, as in the case
of "Radium," is not a new phenomenon. Nearly forty years ago Prof.
Stokes enunciated the fact.

He filled a glass tube with a solution of sulphate of quinine and
then moved it through the spectrum, entering at the red ray. When it
had passed through all the colors and entered the region of the ultra
violet, or where the invisible magnetic rays were, the tube lighted up.

A solution of horse chestnut acted in the same way, so also did glass
stained with oxide of uranium.

Paragraph 45 was sort of a mysterious alchemical article explaining a
secret of life. Life comes from the formation of WHITE SPARKS or vacuo
in matter, and therefore bioplasmic elements MUST BE LIQUID, SOLUBLE
OR MOBILE. They must be capable of conforming into ROUND GLOBULES.
Then the second feature must come in--heat and cold to expand the
molecule and cool the outside and allow the inside to later contract
and form a vacuum in the center, the home of SPIRIT.

"Decay" generates life as it makes solid substances soluble. Of
course, excessive decay creates a gas and then this evaporates.


45.

Secrets of Silicon.

Moses was a great alchemist, skilled in all the arts and sciences of
the Egyptians. The works or writings of Moses are called Books of the
Old Testament and not works on alchemy, but tradition tells us that
his sister Miriam wrote an extensive work on alchemy--(the Catholic
Bible has the name Miriam translated as Mary).

In Genesis Chap. 3, verse 19, we read, "Till thou return unto the
ground, for out of it thou was taken; for dust thou art and unto dust
shalt thou return."

Some scientists scoff at the idea of Moses and some scoff at the idea
of "Spontaneous Generation," but we can prove that both are true.

Life can be produced from MINERAL ELEMENTS ALONE.

Silicon has always been a source of dispute among chemists in regard
to its classification. Some consider it a regular metal, but it is
usually called a "hyalogen" or glass former like Boron.

Silicon is never found in its pure metallic state in nature, but is in
combination with oxygen, as is then called by various names as Silica,
Silex, Silicic Acid and SAND, which is the most abundant of mineral
substances.

The most important and useful elements as air, water and sand God
gives FREE TO ALL, they are found everywhere.

Sand is at one time a crystallized substance and at another time it
may be A COLLOID substance and thus become the same nature as an
"organized substance," as albumen.

Sand is insoluble in pure water, but it is dissolved by alkaline
solutions. Natural waters which contain alkaline carbonates always
have some sand in solution.

Sand from its two fold nature seems to be the bond between death and
life or the solution to the theory of "from dust to life."

Sand when in solution is a colloid.

If 8 or 10 parts of carbonate of soda or potash are mixed with 12 or
15 parts of sand and 1 part of charcoal on being heated they melt and
form a mass resembling ordinary glass, but it entirely dissolves in
=hot water=.

If now chlorohydric acid be added to the solution it neutralizes the
alkali and the silica or sand separates as A TRANSPARENT JELLY. A
colloid! It is "hydrate of silica," but it is now fixed like albumen
or an organized substance and is insoluble in water or acid.

If it is kept moist it remains a colloid, but by drying it and
separating it from its partner, water, the colloid making alchemical
mysterious WATER, the sand turns to dust again--a gritty powder!

At common temperatures carbonic acid is stronger than silica, and
upon many of the combinations of silica the air acts as a destructive
agent, its carbonic acid slowly uniting with bases or alkali and
liberating the silica, and at the moment of its liberation the sand is
soluble in water.

Sand, it will be seen, acts both as an acid and combines with an
alkali and as a base and combines with acids.

Sand in solution enters the roots of plants and from its transforming
nature or transmutation, it performs great wonders in nature, it
performs miracles in the animal body and in water itself.

It is the ideal agent for the generation of =vacuo spaces= or
life cells, from its being in one state when warm and in another when
cold, from its being capable of forming soft cell walls and then
concreting around a quantity of ether or spirit upon cooling. It
proves itself the "Philosopher's Stone."

Hot and cold and silicon! What a wonderful combination! It explains
the mysteries of the universe, radio-activity and life.

It may be well to here state that there is no chemical difference
between a dead man's brain and nerves and a live man's brain and
nerves. This in itself shows that the cause of life and intelligence
is simply from some conformation of matter which allows the presence
of Spirit. This is the invisible process of the formation of WHITE
SPARKS or the making of a hollow center to molecules.

LIFE is not a principle per se of organic matter, but organic
matter is arranged into round molecules with cell center of silicon
phosphorus, sulphur or iron.

The hard and fast nature of the elements is an imagination and it is
only a short step of nature from quartz or silicon to carbon and I may
also say to nitrogen the gas of the atmosphere.

THE FARMER CAN BECOME A MAGICIAN by intellect. We once proved that by
the use of lime or an alkali vegetables can be made to grow IN SAND. A
tomato plant was planted in a mixture of sand and plasterer's mortar
(a mixture of quick lime and sand) and a bushel of tomatoes were
gathered from this one plant. The lime makes the sand soluble and acts
the same as manure which produces carbonic acid which at the moment of
its formation acts as a solvent of sand and this gives growth. Water
is the great element of life and growth--with the heating effect of
the sun and the alternations of temperature or cooling after heating
we augment the life and growth.

I will reprint some more of the articles which were in THE LATCH KEY,
as they seemed to strike the readers more impressibly than anything
which I ever wrote, and in fact THE LATCH KEY seemed to have hypnotic
influence. First of all IT WAS ANONYMOUS and no author's name appeared
and further it was given away.

One lady in later years found out the author and wrote to me for a
few copies, saying she could not help crying when she read paragraph
37. Perhaps the paragraph took on the "poetical" and thus reached her
sentiments.


37.

The Secret of Life!

The little chapel peacefully resting under the overhanging trees, with
the solemn graveyard beside it, tells the story of life's longings and
miseries. Yet within the little chapel, however humble, can be learned
the secret of life's joy and success and the eternal happiness of the
soul!

Life's sentiments are fragrant, space only is fraught with pain!

Spirit fledges space, unlocks the caverns of misery and sheds the
light in the gloom.

Man grovels in the dark mid the skulls of despair till he lists to the
whisper of spirit. The lisping pines, the rustling oaks, the sunshine
in the meadow and the moonlight on the hill speak in accents calm and
clear. Our motto:

     "SPIRITUS EXCELLO."

Water is the great agent of life or conformation as it is mobile.

Molecules which are round when whirled or heated take to orbits, but
the metallic substances having molecules of a disc shape whirl on
their axes. I herewith give articles 26 and 42 of the LATCH KEY:


42.

Why Ashes or Water Do Not Burn.

Fire is the action of atoms or molecules in separating farther apart.
To be sure, ashes have atoms, but for atoms to whirl apart their
motion must be so that they can separate. If the heat causes them to
whirl on their axis only, the substance may get red hot, but will not
burn.

And some substances do not burn because the heat and motion applied
whirls the molecules or groups of atoms apart and wastes its motion in
that way. Water acts this way (steam).

Crystallization is the result of the formation of vaco cells or white
sparks, and I reprint paragraph 26 to explain this fact:


26.

Annealing and Malleability of Metals.

Crystallization has been considered in paragraph 21, but when matter
is cooled very slowly through long periods of time, vacuo spaces are
not formed.

Ordinary cast iron is crystallized, but when it is heated in a furnace
and gradually cooled through several days or weeks, it becomes
"malleable iron."

The iron which is used as an electro-magnet for a telegraphic machine
will not work unless the iron is annealed very soft by being heated
and allowed to cool in the ashes as the fire gradually dies out.

Crystallization is the most wonderful dovetailing process conceivable.
When a liquid is cooled the molecules become radio active and radiate
lines of force. These lines are nearly straight, unlike heat lines,
and therefore they are cold lines. They drive matter in planes and
straight lines or surfaces instead of into globules or liquids which
move. The discs of ice cannot move or roll about like the globules of
water, and ice is hard like quartz or a form of flint or silica.

All objects are formed by the action of TWO forces, either a curling
force or a straight force. Plants form leaves in the air, and where
there is more obstruction and curving influence they form roots. ALL
CELLS ARE ALIKE in their first state, but are changed in the process
of growth or from influences.

A slip from a geranium when stuck into the earth will form roots. It
seems to me that each cell in an egg contains a counterpart of the
whole body of a chicken--that is, it contains electrons or occult
matter which, once having passed through all parts of a fowl's body,
in the blood photographs these parts.

We can account for the various parts of the egg yolk turning its
cells into different forms by the location which the particular cell
occupies--as cells in various parts,--at the center,--or at the
surface,--would be subject to curling forces or straight forces. At
the center forces would be obstructed and curled, and at the surface
just the opposite, and a hundred variations, according to the location
and surroundings.

How many times I have wished that a social condition could be
instituted by which EVERY LIVING BEING in the world or the
universe could be happy and free from fear, worriment, hunger, and
exposure--where peace, plenty and pleasure existed for all--where all
could have a horse, automobile, golf link or any correct thing which
their ideas called for to make them enjoy themselves.

FOUR HOURS' labor per day is enough for any one and there is enough
in the world to give every one happiness and plenty if THE SOCIAL
CONDITION was arranged correctly.

While there are many unfeeling capitalists, yet the poor are not
always right. They don't know how to act for their own welfare. They
may know what they want, but don't know how to get it. An ignorant
poor man will often sell his vote or he is too ignorant to learn that
he should obey correct laws.

The London Spectator recently gave a biography of former Secretary of
State JOHN HAY and I give an excerpt from the same:

     "It was natural that Hay should despise the arts of the
     demagogue. He speaks with scorn of what he calls 'gutter
     Ciceros,' and of the practice adopted during a sharp
     electoral campaign of 'hiring dirty orators by the dozen to
     blather on street corners.' He very rightly held that it
     was the special duty of statesmen in democratic countries
     to have the courage of their opinions. He himself wrote a
     novel, entitled 'The Bread Winners,' which was widely read,
     and which was really an elaborate defence of capital against
     the attacks of labor; and in 1905 he wrote to President
     Roosevelt: 'It is a comfort to see the most popular man
     in America telling the truth to our masters, the people.
     It requires no courage to attack wealth and power, but to
     remind the masses that they too are subject to the law is
     something few public men dare to do.'

     "America at her best can produce men of a very high type.
     Such a man was John Hay."




Part Second

Spirits and the Spirit Land.


1. Reveries in the Country.

It was a day in January. The desultory snow-flakes were skudding
here and there and a white mantle was becoming visible on the fence
tops and pine trees, and as I gazed dreamily from the window of my
study I heard the church bell in the belfry of the village church
peal out its glad tidings of love; and as its decadence faded away,
a thought peaceful and quiet captured my soul,--it seemed as if the
reverberating voice of the holy bell had told me a story--a secret of
happiness and peace.


2. Redemption of the World.

And as I settled back in my broad wicker arm chair before the blazing
hearth fire I said to my inner soul: "How beautiful is this moment!
Can I perpetuate the sentiments which give me joy on this Sabbath
day, can I delve into the laws of comfort and rest and emerge with a
TROPHY TO REDEEM THE WORLD?"


3. Spirit and Matter.

The scintillating sparks in the fireplace rose up on the wings of a
golden glow, paused for a moment and then I saw a flash of pure white
light gleam like the star of Bethlehem. I had seen the wild, red coals
changed to peaceful, redeemed souls of light.


4. A Truism of Nature an Eternal Principle.

The church bell, emblematic of religion, and the "white spark," a
ubiquitous principle of the universe; visions of the superstructure of
the millennium, rose up before me--religion and science hand in hand,
science the fact and religion the herald or harbinger.


5. Matter Only the Wake of Spirit.

I had seen that from out the depths of the base matter come forth a
substance pure and glorious. Transmutation then had proved that there
is no vile, low or corrupt matter in the universe, and the idea is a
relic of the ignorance inculcated in the dim vistas of the past. All
matter is simply a figure sculptured by the pencil of spirit, vortices
which use space as a playground, speed which holds the lines stiff and
refractory against ultra intrusion.


6. Science of the White Spark.

Now I see two visions--two houses in the precinct of nature--the first
a structure of spirit for the abode of space or nothing; second, a
structure of space for the abode of spirit, the all, the great, the
powerful, and the conscious; the first, a minute affair, an atom; the
second, a collocation of atoms forming a shell or larger structure
for the abode of spirit, and this is formed by a heated or mobile,
molecule conforming substance, suddenly cooled by oxygen or a cold
temperature, when a shell is formed and indurated, and a hollow center
made.


7. Symbol of the White Spark.

I introduce a new symbol  deg. the emblem which will represent the white
spark, the circle or hollow globe, for this is what the white spark
is, and this spark prevails throughout the universe. It is a hollow
molecule, holding an air-tight reservoir, excluding everything but
spirit or the ether.


8. The Spark is a Receptacle of Mind and a Potential of Force.

The white spark is alive. It has a shell formed of rotating atoms
which roll in the spirit or magnetic lines of force. The lines
converge to a common center. Here they must halt for an instant. Force
cannot be lost, so it is transmuted into consciousness. This mind can
now radiate lines of force from the center out again.


9. Mathematics of the Spark.

If you take a silver dime and lay it on the table you will find that
it always takes just six dimes to form a ring around it. This leaves
six spaces between the dimes, and it is the same with atoms, and a
molecule seen from the side if radio-active, and if we could see the
lines of force, would show six streams of force, and the snow-flake
always has six points.


10. Crumbling Sparks and Permanent Sparks.

The sparks of combustion explode from the inner force, but the
"sparks" of a magnet and radium do not, and the sparks formed in
protoplasm or in the nerves and brain last longer than the sparks of
combustion, and the sparks in the spiritual bodies of departed souls
are like radium.


11. Location of the Spirit Land.

In paragraph 6 I refer to two visions of houses in the precinct of
nature. Now I refer to a third, the greatest, most beautiful and
wonderful abode in the universe. This house has no interior of simple
space or nothing, and again it has no outer wall of matter. It is the
pristine spirit and it is in the interstellar spaces outside of the
planets.


12. Conditions in the Spirit Land.

In this land there is no gravity or obstruction. What is built and
placed there is free from destruction and decay. Living spirits can
move by a thought and build by their desires; spirits can outstrip the
earth in its flight in its orbit, can come to earth and leave at any
time or part of its orbit. This is a home of joy.


13. Attributes of Spirit.

The soul is kept in our body by the magnetism of our blood. When a
person goes into a trance there is an embargo on the blood and the
soul can leave the spark cells of the nerve substance of the brain
and occupy a spiritual body or electrical vapor in the atmosphere
or ether. During sleep or failing powers of the mind, the soul is
drowned out by matter, the permanent spiritual center of the spark
is overflowed with matter and consciousness is temporarily turned
to motion. Spirit always, in any amount, has the attributes of
intelligence and power; the ether transmits intelligences.


14. Superiority of Spirit.

When our soul leaves our body it enters its own, it becomes clear and
bright as in childhood; there is no fear, pain or dimness of thought
and mind. We meet our friends, we remember and visit our earthly
friends in the human body, we strive for their uplift and happiness,
we live in happiness and peace, yet our earthly career affects our
degree of spiritual advancement, and the truths which you can learn
at the little country chapel and the emulation of the "SERMON ON THE
MOUNT" will prove to be your "WAND OF HOPE."


15. The Pope Says the Advent of the Saviour Is Near.

In a decree of Pope Benedict sent out from Rome on January 19, 1915,
he says: "Those days which Christ predicted seem in fact to have come,
'You shall hear of wars and rumors of wars. For nation shall rise
against nation and kingdom against kingdom'." Christ can return to
earth in spirit. There is no need for Him to come otherwise. He can
talk to a person adapted to receive telepathic instructions and give
the world His message.

Some readers may be averse to the claims that Jesus Christ is
anything but an imaginary person from the inventions of the priests
of the early ages, and others may claim that contemporary with the
dates applied to the fictitious legend there was a great teacher and
the teachings recorded were from this teacher. But what difference
does a name make? The only issue of any value is what is taught. No
great teacher cares a whit about what the people think about his
personality if they accept his works. The name Jesus has been applied
to the teacher of the good things in the New Testament for so long a
time now that we can well afford to grant the application, whatever
might have been his acceded name.

All the ether in interstellar space is intelligent, and if we connect
our mind with it we gain power and intuition by a "sixth sense," but
to do this we must not throw the blanket of too much blood about the
brain. "Prophets" have to diet and fast.




Part Third

How to Generate the White Spark or "Vaco-Cells" in Our Body.


All the life and thought on this earth and in any material and on any
other earth or body in the universe comes from a peculiar transaction
by which all matter is cleared away and a space left wherein there is
nothing but the invisible ether or spirit.

The origination of all tangible matter was from the degradation of
spirit and the transmutation of thought into motion, and it is by the
motion of spirit that matter is formed from spirit.

Therefore to regain the conditions of thought and to regulate the
adjustment of material or matter conditions must be instituted which
simulate the original state, and evade the decadence from contiguosity
of matter and generate SPIRIT in vaco-cells with life and power.

This great principle is the keynote of all that we hope for in
existence. It is the most vital science and yet it has remained
totally hidden from the ken of mankind.

This NEW SCIENCE opens up a field in the new order which holds the
greatest hopes for utopian success ever given to man.

It is not gold, power, notoriety or glamor that make for this great
process of joy and health. It is not the costly foods and luxuries
which bring us within reach of this coveted condition.

When we learn the facts we find that the great part of mankind are
very much misinformed and that human knowledge is upside down. We
find that peace and happiness like air and water are not under a ban,
but that God is on the side of the unostentatious and simple living
people, and that what has been considered by some as poverty is really
greatness in disguise.

Nature never places any premium on truth and like all good things
should be free of access.

Among the things which we give, you will find new methods of
combatting disease, a means of economic freedom and of rising above
misfortune.

We will show that most diseases are caused by the food and drink which
is used. The theories of the "howling germ doctors" are all insane
emanations from an ignorant mind. We will prove that there are two
distinct types of disease with an admixture of these two types.

The first type is malarial and is caused by a mal-assimilation of
sugar and grease, fat or oil in the system. The second type is
"small-pox" and is caused by the non-assimilation of the nitrogenized
element of meat, or gelatinous elements.

When you know the cause you can avoid the disease. GERMS or MICROBES
are not the cause of disease, but are beneficent provisions of nature
to reduce meat proteids, etc., which are blocking the system, to a
state in which they can be eliminated from the blood, and therefore we
always find the poisonous URIC ACID in all cases of small-pox, etc.
Even an excess of vegetable proteid is injurious.

In malarial diseases we always find an excess of carbonic acid or
other acidulous products of decaying or germ inhabited sugars or
glycerines (from grease, etc.).

A diet of skim-milk and white bread will cure malaria, and a diet of
SKIM-MILK and oat-meal will cure kidney disease.

During health the blood is always ALKALINE, while the tissues or
nerves and ganglia or brain are always acidulous. NOW THIS IS WHAT I
WANT TO IMPRESS UPON THE MIND, for it relates to my discovery of the
WHITE SPARK PRINCIPLE. An acid acts like heat, while an alkali acts
like cold. The molecules in an acid are rotating in orbits, while the
molecules of an alkali rotate on an axis, so we can see how when the
blood becomes acidulous as in disease WHITE SPARK CELLS OF LIFE CANNOT
BE FORMED.

SUGAR has proven itself a bane to humanity. It is a modern product and
was not used by the ancients. Honey had a limited field as a luxury,
and here I will say the high cost of luxuries has been a protective
principle for poor people.

Sugar has no limit of solution. Water will absorb it until an immobile
syrup is formed, and glycerine, a product of grease, acts similar to
sugar in the system.

Syrup has a great affinity for LIME, and children who eat candy and
sweet foods have bad teeth, as the lime required for the teeth is
absorbed from the blood by the sugar. Any chemist knows the great
affinity of syrup for lime, and this is why he makes the syrup of lime
which is used in prescriptions where lime is required.

Sugar acts as an acid, chemically, forming Saccarites with the bases
or alkalis. Sugar destroys the natural alkaline state of the blood.

There has been a great scare around Boston about a "NEW DISEASE."
The doctors have various ideas about its nature and treatment. It
is generally called ACIDOSIS and is supposed to be the result of
eating too much sugar; but some doctors say it is AN EPIDEMIC and is
not caused by sugar. In the disease the blood has been found to be
acidulous.

Sugar will fill the system with an embalming element, and thus the
tissues are saturated with an element which acts on the system like
ashes thrown on a fire. They extinguish it, and as sugar prevents
oxidation in the system, the VACO-CELLS or "WHITE SPARKS" cannot form.

There are times when electrical machines will produce only a few weak
sparks and at other times powerful sparks are produced, and it has
been proved that this state of non-electrical atmosphere is the cause
of EPIDEMICS when the system is loaded with either sugar or gelatinous
products of a meat diet.

Fasting is often necessary in disease, for disease is usually a
congestion of the blood and a distention of the blood vessels, and
when we lessen the quantity of blood or the excessive pressure from
the effects of stimulants, etc., we allow the blood vessels to get a
grip on the blood and force it along. A dog or horse will never eat
when he is sick.

An invalid for a time may do best on a little toasted white bread
and skim-milk, as oat-meal, etc., may contain too much gluten, which
is not needed in the system at this time. There is a difference in
proteids. Gluten is more like gelatine and is used where toughness is
required as in the skin, tendons and muscle. The vital proteids are
required in the nerves and brain.

It is not well to eat eggs for breakfast in all kinds of sickness, but
a soft boiled egg for dinner may be good for some.

The excessive use of meat is a cause of cancer, and it is the gelatine
which is to blame. There are two factors, however, which should be
considered. We may eat gelatine, sugar or grease, and if we work
hard in the open air we overcome the disease in a measure. It has
been proved that carnivorous fishes have cancers if the fishes are
crowded in a pool, but removal to running water cures them, as running
water contains more air and oxygen which gives more nerve power and
eliminates the useless material.

It is the same with malaria. Work in the pure air burns off the
hydro-carbons better and the blood becomes more mobile.

When we use oat-meal, mush, etc., with skim-milk we don't get much
solid food, for we fool ourselves by taking lots of water which we
would not use otherwise. In winter stabled horses are seen to excrete
dark heavy urine, as they are fed on grain or proteids and drink
little water. Vegetables contain much water and are useful.

The air in closed rooms is dead, but out-door air is in motion. Decay
and filth fills the air with gasses and oxygen is displaced, which
means death to "the white spark" of the nerves, the generators of
power.

If you have money and leisure you can dissipate more with less
inconvenience than as if you had no money or time.

It has been proved that the use of alcohol, tobacco, etc., wastes the
tissues and nourishment the same as hard work and overworks the liver,
kidneys and lungs; but work is the poor man's bulwark, and thus it is
that the abstemious person is always a better, wiser, more reasonable
and industrious employe than the other.

The "sport" has a debauch and then a "loaf" or else he soon goes to
the sanitarium. Stimulants always lessen your powers after each dose
or after the first effects are worn out.

We can show you how to overcome poverty without a labor union
propaganda, or a lodge benefit, for you can live on a few cents per
day and become better off thereby, if you follow the right method.
Many have tried to live on boiled potatoes, beans, skim-milk and
vegetables, but have failed; but the trouble was this: the system had
been adapted to the stimulation of creatinin, the stimulant of meat,
and when this was withdrawn there was a slack action to the stomach
and general system. But I have proved that if you use some onions or
celery or some mild condiment like pepper or the like you can avoid
meat without trouble.

Many reformers have failed because they drop stimulants, yet still eat
soups and meats or cakes and rich dishes. YOU MUST DROP THESE THINGS
WHEN YOU DROP ALCOHOL AND DRUGS, for meat gelatines, grease and sugar
make a heavy refractory blood and nature calls for an increased nerve
action, but this stimulation is a first stage of inflammation with
its weakening reaction. Starch is transformed into grape sugar in the
intestines, yet nature regulates this better than when sugar is taken
directly into the stomach, as this goes directly to the liver.

The simple living person gets up earlier, works easier and gets more
enjoyment from the sunshine, the open fireplace and all the beauties
of nature.

A fine cigar may stimulate the brain, but like Emerson you may decline
when you should be in your prime, and perhaps, like him, lose your
memory. Emerson in his last years attended the funeral of his old
friend, Longfellow the poet, but could not remember this man's name at
his last rites.

I believe it is utterly impossible for any person to live a real safe
moral life, according to the Christian code, and subsist upon the
ordinary food and drink of the times. For instance, the use of coffee
will often create immoral feelings which a saint could not overcome.
Tobacco creates sensations in a like manner. Anything which creates
undue nerve action causes a congestion of the inner organs. I might as
well tell you to place a torch in a powder magazine and then prevent
an explosion as to tell you to become a true Christian and live upon
highly exciting foods or drugs.

There was never a true saint which did not practice self-restraint in
regard to foods, drinks and habits.

You will see that I am an advocate of the simple life, yet I want
to say that I am not trying to drive anyone against their will,
and I also want to say that I do not say you will go to immediate
destruction, always, by diverging from my creed. Some persons from
the nature of their ordinarily proper habits withstand much that is
taboed by science, yet this does not change the facts that correct
physiological habits are the only ones to be condoned.

The use of some fruit sauce may not always prove serious, of course,
and the farmer who eats baked apples and milk may plod along in his
own way and retain good health, yet an invalid who can barely keep
alive had better be fed on easily assimilated concentrated life
building food. As explained elsewhere, a person who does not use
alcohol or tobacco, etc., can use some fruit sauces, etc., and as the
poisons have not weakened the nerves which govern the liver and vital
organs, the liver can take care of the acids and sugars. Stimulants
create wastes in excess and overpower the kidneys and liver, and when
they are discarded there is loss of required nerve power.

When a nation has any serious business on hand or when Arctic
explorers want to get to their goal they abolish the use of ALCOHOL.

Russia has been under prohibition for the short time of the war, and
the decrease of crime has already proved what a monster DRINK has
been. In 33 precincts of Moscow for the first half year of 1914 there
was an average of 986 criminal cases a month, while for the first
temperance month there were only 406. Crime was reduced 54.7 per cent.

Within two weeks after the closing of the wine shops of Russia she
felt as if RESURECTED, and it was proved that perfect temperance was
possible and that alcohol was not a necessity.

This is only the working out of a Natural Law and is the enactment of
one branch of codes, and it holds true of drugs and all of the many
branches of physiological requisites.

Individual freedom many times is a menace to a person's welfare. This
is proved by the "freedom" with which persons can get drunk.

If the monarch was a wise and conscientious ruler, an absolute
monarchy would be a blessing. God is an absolute monarch and his law
is absolute. Nature has no favorites and we must obey the law or pay
the penalty.

Society is to blame for crime. If municipalities would enact
ordinances preventing the dispensing of injurious foods and drinks,
and otherwise control the PREVENTION of a person's dissipation, it
would necessarily vanish.

But we see the evils of giving legislatures power to enact coercive
medical laws when ignorance controls the legislators.

The forcing of citizens to submit to the inoculation of virus or serum
in themselves or their animals is equal to the monstrosities of the
medieval ages. The recent epidemic of hoof and mouth disease, the Germ
Doctors themselves admit, was caused by a hog cholera serum which
was tested by the government bacteriologists and pronounced clean
and was sold by a Chicago firm. The hoof and mouth disease has never
been proved to be a generator of specific "germs," as no microscope
has ever detected any such germ, and the poison will pass through a
porcelain filter. So how can the virus be "tested?"

There is an epidemic of "Grip" about now, and a health doctor, Dr.
Chapin of Providence, R. I., says: "Persons with mild attacks
continue at their work and thus rapidly spread the disease. It is for
this reason that isolation and official control have never been able
to check an outbreak. The epidemics run out themselves after a few
weeks."

Well, then, we are safe! Let them run out instead of poisoning
thousands of healthy persons with Typhoid and other serums.

Every German soldier, it is claimed, is given the three inoculations
of Typhoid Serum before going to the front, but recent medical reports
say the Typhoid fever has been malignant in the men in the trenches.

There has recently been a great amount of study about the ductless
glands of the animal body. It has been variously claimed this thing
and the other for their uses, but I am going to tell what nature
made them for, THEY ARE FOR THE REDUCTION OR "DECAY" OF PROTEIDS
WHICH MAKES THEM VERY SOLUBLE AND READY FOR THE FEEDING OF THE NERVES
AND CELLS. The elements which go into them never come out, but are
reabsorbed. With one exception, the male sacs eject the nerve food
for the propagation of the species, but it is a cause of disease and
weakness.

It is proved that the ductless glands (or sacs) take in proteids which
become formed into granules and gradually decay or are broken down
enough to be reabsorbed.

The loss of the fluids of these glands is the loss of an alkaline
nerve food, and many diseases would be avoided if chastity had been
preserved. They prevent the acidity of the blood, which is the cause
of many diseases.

The bacteriologists must learn that they cannot fool nature. If your
system holds substances which nature must remove by germs it is of no
use to kill the germs, because this does not remove the cause. If we
kill all the specific germs of one disease, then nature will give some
other germs in place of them.

There has been a great cry that consumption has decreased. Perhaps
it has, but nature still gives just as much action with her required
eliminating process as ever. Here is what Dr. Hutchinson writes in the
Boston American, January 10, 1916:

     "Although, in the main, the march of modern medicine has
     been a series of triumphs, at certain points its progress
     has been checked, if not actually defeated.

     "While we have been steadily beating back typhoid,
     tuberculosis and diphtheria, most of the diseases which have
     baffled us have been either maladies of later life, like
     cancer and arterial sclerosis, or conditions depending upon
     long continued action of a variety of imperfectly known
     causes, like heart disease, Bright's disease and insanity.

     "But there is also one disease among the pure infections
     whose germ has been identified, whose active cause known for
     nearly thirty years past, which still defies us, and that is
     pneumonia.

     "In fact, for some ten or fifteen years past, we have been
     faced with the singular and disquieting paradox, that of the
     two greatest and most fatal diseases of the lungs, while
     tuberculosis has been steadily declining, pneumonia has been
     rapidly increasing in deadliness.

     "Twenty years ago tuberculosis caused about one-seventh
     of all the deaths in the United States; pneumonia, about
     one-fifteenth. To-day tuberculosis has fallen to about
     one-twelfth of the deaths, while pneumonia has risen to
     one-tenth.

     "One reason why pneumonia so baffled medical skill was that,
     although the germ, or rather germs--for there are at least
     four varieties of them, each producing a different type of
     the disease--were well known, the infection seldom naturally
     spreads to other human beings, and it was for a long time
     rather difficult to transmit it experimentally to animals.

     "Further than that, the pneumococcus which produced the
     most serious types of the disease was, if not identical
     with, quite hard to distinguish from two or three types of
     streptococci which were found in abundance in the human
     mouth, about the roots of the teeth and in the tonsils, even
     in conditions of perfect health.

     "So that we were driven to the discouraged conclusion that
     some 'state of the system,' or lowered resisting power or
     other unknown factor, was necessary in order to allow the
     pneumonia coccus to get a foothold in the lungs and produce
     the disease; and there the case hung for a number of years.


The Open Air Cure.

     "Considerable improvement in all but the most virulent type
     of cases was produced by the introduction of the open air
     treatment, with abundant feeding similar to that relied upon
     in tuberculosis. But we could not honestly say that we knew
     of any drug or remedy which appeared to have a directly
     curative effect upon the disease."

Can't you see that the product is 22 in either case? And don't you see
that the "germ doctors" have not fooled nature?

There is a great epidemic of "grip" and pneumonia sweeping the
country--one of the worst ever known. In Providence, R. I., the
disease has been the cause of more deaths in a given time than was
ever known. Here is what the Evening Bulletin says in the issue of
January 10, 1916:

     "Fifteen persons in Providence died of pneumonia or grip
     during the second half of last week, making 35 lives claimed
     here by the epidemic in the first eight days of January.

     "This is the largest number of deaths from these diseases
     which the city has ever had in a similar period. Physicians
     report that there is no indication of a let-up in the
     epidemic as yet, and that a continuance of the unusually
     high death rate may be expected.

     "There were nine deaths from pneumonia last Thursday, Friday
     and Saturday, and six fatalities from grip. The deaths for
     the first eight days of the month are as follows: Pneumonia
     24, grip 10, acute bronchitis 1."

At the Rhode Island State Institutions there are nearly 300 cases of
the disease--100 at the State Prison alone--but at the State Reform
School for girls there is not one case, as this school gives better
hygienic care to the inmates. But the great reason is the girls are
not dissipated and nature does not have to produce the germs in their
systems.

Reformers are often bombarded with statistics by brewery owners,
distillers and those whose ideas are regulated by personal benefits.
The favorite weapon is the story of the man who lived to be old and
always drank or smoked. Here is a reprint of such a story:

     HALE AND HEARTY AT 102.

     New Jerseyman Chews Tobacco as Preventive of Disease.

     Newton, N. J., Dec. 22.--Charles Ashford Shafer, Sushex
     County's oldest resident, celebrated his one hundred and
     second birthday at the home of his son, George Shafer,
     to-day. Mr. Shafer is still active, hale and hearty, and
     walks several miles a day. He was born a few miles from here
     and has spent all his life in this section. For many years
     he conducted a distillery. The centenarian declares that
     chewing tobacco is a means of preventing disease, and he has
     been chewing it since a boy. Mr. Shafer reads without the
     aid of glasses.

But wait a minute--here is a better one:

     TEETOTALER DEAD AT 115.

     West Virginian Never Tasted Liquor or Tobacco in His Life.

     Wheeling, W. Va., Nov. 29.--Henderson Cremeans, known to be
     the oldest man in West Virginia and probably the oldest in
     the United States, died to-day at the home of his grandson,
     Clark Cremeans, near Point Pleasant, Mason County, aged 115
     years. He never tasted liquor or tobacco in his life.

And when we study statistics of the insurance business we may rest
assured that they are correct, for an insurance company gets a premium
on every policy and regulates its action upon the correct statistics.
Here is another reprint:

     SAYS PROHIBITION IN RUSSIA WILL SAVE 500,000 MEN

     Insurance Expert Claims That If Czar Carries Out Present
     Intention, Loss of Half Million in War Will Be Made Up in
     Decade.

     New York, Dec. 11.--Results of an investigation in which
     an entirely new set of statistics had been gathered were
     put before the Association of Life Insurance Presidents at
     their annual meeting at the Hotel Astor yesterday and threw
     a new light on the influence of alcoholism, overeating,
     undereating, and other factors in shortening lives.

     The investigation, which has just been completed, concerned
     the causes of premature deaths in the last 25 years among
     the 2,000,000 policy holders of 43 leading insurance
     companies. The object of the investigation was to determine
     which types of persons could be insured safely at regular
     rates, which ones should pay extra premiums, and which ones
     should be refused. The results were given by Arthur Hunter,
     chairman of the bureau that made the investigation.

     "If the Government of Russia carries out its present
     intention to abolish permanently all forms of alcoholic
     beverages, the saving in human life will be enormous," said
     Mr. Hunter. "The loss of 500,000 men as the result of the
     present warfare could be made good in less than ten years
     through complete abstinence from alcoholic beverages by all
     the inhabitants of Russia.

     "Among saloon proprietors, whether they attended the bar
     or not, there was an extra mortality of 70 per cent., and
     the causes of death indicated that a free use of alcoholic
     beverages had caused many of the deaths. The hotel
     proprietors who attended the bar, either occasionally or
     regularly, had as high a mortality as the saloon keepers.

     "Among the men who admitted that they had taken alcohol
     occasionally to excess in the past, but whose habits were
     considered satisfactory when they were insured, there were
     289 deaths, while there would have been only 190 deaths had
     this group been made up of insured lives in general. The
     extra mortality was, therefore, over 50 per cent."

Cardinal Gibbons says: "Reform must come from within," and he opposes
prohibition; but there is no question but what prohibition is the
right thing as has been proved, for in some persons the only thing
"within" is alcohol and ignorance.

SOCIETY is about our only hope. Lord Bacon wrote the first half of
a book on this subject of an ideal society or community, and he
described as a first requisite his "SOLOMON'S HOUSE," a college or
school where NATURAL SCIENCE was taught.

Thomas More portrayed the same ideas in his "UTOPIA," a beautiful
island where ideal laws and conditions prevailed. Campanella also had
an idea in his "CITY OF THE SUN."

Where temptation is removed better conditions exist, for human nature
always wavers and no one is permanently wise. The lad in the country
is healthier than the one in the city. Why? Because there are less
temptations in the country.

What is it that perfects animals but forcing proper rules upon them?

I have experimented with fowl and found that you can perfect them by
proper treatment. I raised 56 pullets one spring, and that winter I
had eggs galore. The fowl were healthy and happy. I fed them only two
meals a day on cracked corn and wheat or the regular "scratch feed"
of the market in the morning, and at night gave them scalded meal,
seasoned with some salt, pepper and onions; sometimes cooked potato
parings, etc., were used. I supplied the fowl with fresh ground bone
which held some fat, of course. I always had gravel and ground oyster
shells before them, also plenty of fresh water. They had their run and
found grass both in summer and winter, and had a dry, roomy house.

Meat is not only unnecessary to animal life, but is injurious. My
hens laid more eggs than any others about and were bright, active and
healthy, yet they had no meat during all the winter. The bone was not
necessary, for I had at times fed poultry a little fat or oil instead
of the ground bone, and they did just as well.

The mind has a great effect on the digestion, and it is necessary in
selecting our food and drink to have it agreeable. Of course, this
does not mean that because something tastes good we should use it, for
poisons often taste pleasant. We mean that from a variety of salutary
food we should select what we like, and again any combination,
adjustment or preparation which enhances the food is very useful. For
instance:

Potatoes mashed, mixed with eggs, flour, pepper and salt and other
articles which are not injurious, and then fried in a little butter
are very agreeable, and many such manipulations of foods are wise.

But spices, coffee, tea and such condiments contain tannin and poisons
and should be eschewed.

If a person should suddenly change his diet from a liberal one to
mush and skim-milk it might give him indigestion and disgust, for the
organs try to adapt themselves to certain kinds of food; and if the
persons cannot take a vacation while reforming their diet, it might
be better to wait until they can. After a fit of sickness one can
start with the right kind of food and drink and improve by it.

People who are raised on simple food relish it and keep happy and
healthy. Here is a reprint which proves this to be true:

     "According to census reports, persons who live 100 years
     or more are very scarce. The United States, with a
     population of more than 90,000,000, is given credit for
     only 46. Germany's population is 60,000,000 and its quota
     of centenarians is 70. Great Britain, with a population of
     46,000,000, has 94. France, with 40,000,000, claims 164.
     Bulgaria, with 4,000,000 inhabitants, boasts of 3,300, and
     Roumania, with 6,000,000 people, has 3,320 centenarians. The
     last named little countries eat little meat and use a great
     deal of milk and dark bread."

The persons who used tobacco, etc., and lived to be old might have
lived much longer if they had been abstemious. William Smellie in
his "Philosophy of Natural History" records cases where persons have
lived to be over 150 years old, and some of the oldest people, for
instance, Capt. Diamond, was a simple living man and lived to be 113
(when I last heard from him). He never even used sugar and was an old
bachelor, showing that simple life allows continence.

It has been proved that meat allows an alkaloid condition in the
intestines which generates poison producing germs, while vegetable
food, like oat-meal, etc., produces an acid condition which, it is
claimed, "prevents the generation of microbes and poisons which
produce premature old age." The large intestine when retaining the
elements from the bowels too long becomes a "filth reservoir."

Prof. Metchnikoff says that animals having a greater length to the
large intestines do not live as long as those with shorter large
intestines, which cannot breed the poisonous bacteria so well, yet he
is puzzled by the long life proportionately of the squirrel, which
has a long intestine, and he says he has found few of the "dreaded
bacteria" in the intestine of the squirrel. (This is because the
squirrel has not the noisome elements here which harbor germs.)

The recent discoveries that VEGETABLE food inhibits the generation
of the microbes or renders them unnecessary is an object lesson which
tells us to live upon the foods as I recommend, for the squirrel lives
upon vegetable food or nuts, which are seeds with Vaco-Cell forming
molecules.

We need not discard the use of a few condiments of a mild nature
from our food, and a little salt, pepper or onion, etc., may not be
prohibited.

It has been found that a good regime is made up of a breakfast of
skim-milk and well cooked oat-meal; a dinner of boiled potatoes, eggs
or fish and boiled rice and skim-milk, and a supper of skim-milk, rice
and perhaps boiled beans. If you are not a hard worker you should not
use too many beans or any excess of proteid foods, and a few boiled
onions, etc., may be added to the dinner if desired. A little butter
may be used with food if skim-milk is used, but the use of an excess
of rich milk loads the blood with too much grease.

The outside hull of grains, beans, peas, etc., contain cellulin,
an indigestible woody fibre which acts as a mechanical laxative to
the bowels and aids health if you can use coarse food. Of course,
invalids could not always use such food, as their stomach can hardly
digest milk or eggs. Fruit and acids should not be used as foods by
invalids.

The germ of grain and seeds in general is a great nerve food or "spark
generator," but as it is highly organized it changes easily and so is
not used in fine flour.

My theory is that the whole universe is interdependent and that there
can be no separation of its component parts. We and all things are
joined together the same as a knitted sock--joined by invisible lines
of force; and as all matter is simply a peculiar aspect or motion of
spirit or the ether, and as no part of the ether can be separated or
absolutely isolated, it is an axiom that the universe is ONE. Nothing
can be moved except there is a fulcrum. It may be infinitesimal or
like an isthmus though.

The great scientists are now admitting this to be a fact. Prof. Edgar
Lucien Larkin says: "In the ultimate, what distinction can be drawn
between organic and inorganic matter, since mind is matter or force?
Therefore, is it not but matter or force under a different aspect or
relation to surrounding appearances, or, in other words, are not all
things a unit?"

This scientist further says: "The ultimate distinction between
inorganic and organic matter is the inscrutable mystery." And here is
where I am able to explain this GREAT MYSTERY.

LIFE is spirit and I have discovered a process in Nature, which we
explain in other works more extensively, by which she forms invisible
"VACUUM CELLS" in matter, which are conscious and with a potential
of radio-activity, and this is the principle of all life and form in
organic bodies and in the snow-flake, etc. The process is simple and
is from alternations of heat and cold.

In the bioplasmic foods of nature the germ of seeds, for instance,
we find a peculiar arrangement of the molecules. They contain a cell
center of SOLUBLE SULPHUR, SILICON OR PHOSPHORUS. This arrangement
facilitates the formation of the white spark, and the formation of
this wonderful food in plants depends upon the soil.

Alkali, and carbonic acid gas, in the nascent state, makes SULPHUR,
SILICON, Phosphorus and IRON soluble. I have evaporated five gallons
of spring water and obtained the solid residue and found out the
wonderful nature of the cell center elements. These minerals are
hydrated and at a temperature of 100 degrees they are liquids, and
at 50 degrees they are solids. This explains the reason why certain
proteid foods are "bioplasmic" and how easily the white sparks are
generated in the nerves and brain. The bodily or tissue temperature
when life is active is 100 degrees and the oxygenized blood and
evaporation from the lungs and skin reduces the temperature of the
molecules to 50 and the life vacuo are formed. Oxygenized blood cells
are discs rotating on an axis like an alkali.

I have in other publications explained that meat was a second-hand
food, in which many life molecules were exploded (gelatine), and that
the proteid portions of milk, eggs and vegetable foods contained
"CARTRIDGES OF LIFE AND POWER," that is, molecules having sulphur or
phosphorus centers which under proper conditions formed VACO-CELLS,
especially the germ of all seeds which is absent in fine flour
usually.

I discovered the paradox of temperatures by accident. I had been in
correspondence with Sir William Crookes, President of the British
Association for the Advancement of Science in England, and in
connection with a scientific matter he had advised me to evaporate the
water of a certain Spring, and it was in following out his directions
that I found "THE CENTER FORMING MOLECULAR ELEMENTS," which nature
uses in forming foods.

There have been many changes in the ideas of scientists within a few
years. Several years ago I was taken to task for stating that the
wave lengths of a line of force could be shortened or increased by
the nature of the substance which it passed through, but one of the
Great Professors--Garrett P. Serviss--has just stated: "So the waves
of radiant energy sent out from the sun are not heat, but have been
set going by heat in the sun and CAN BE TRANSFORMED into heat again on
encountering the earth."

Anyone may perform two interesting experiments which prove the
statements which I make in regard to "the white spark."

When the soldering compound which is sold to fill up holes in
marbleized iron ware is melted and dropped into cold water, peculiar
little bodies are formed--little rubber bags or cells filled with
powdered sulphur at the center; the compound being composed of
sulphur, rubber and quicksilver in this experiment follows the natural
laws, and the opposite features of heat conduction causes the sulphur
to be encased with the more organic rubber.

The other experiment is dropping melted tinsmith's solder into water
at a temperature of 75 degrees when hollow balls are formed, if care
is taken in dropping the metal in a globule.

The great provisions of Nature are so sufficient and magnificent that
it is proved that the worriments of mankind are imaginary, and it is a
fact that they are the result of physical disorders brought about by
improper food, drink and habits.

When I see the beautiful sunshine pouring life-giving rays upon
everyone and every atom in the world, when I see the grandeur and
stable travel of the bodies of the sidereal system, when I see the
unperturbed growth of the trees, plants and grains, the gentle rain
and the whispering winds, I can say surely the human acts of greed,
malice and crime are the results of a distorted mind.

Judge Swann says FIFTY per cent. of those who are brought to trial
in the criminal courts of New York City are addicted to the use of
narcotics.

Judge Collins says that since the "BOYLAN LAW" allows the sale
of medicines containing a certain percentage of narcotics, the
Health Department cannot pass laws restricting such sales without
contradicting the state statutes.

Coffee, tea and other insidious poisons are agents of the "DEVIL"
also. Chocolate and roasted wheat, peanuts, etc., are poisonous.
Roasting often creates empyrean oil.

It is the ascetics or those who live upon vegetable foods, milk and
eggs with some fish, or those who do not overeat and live the "SIMPLE
LIFE," who look upon the grandeur of Nature properly and ignore the
contingencies of life which others commit suicide over or ply the cry
of incongruity in Nature.

Consider the religious martyrs of the medieval ages and see how the
little "Jap" with his ration of rice went to battle without fear and
endured hardships and put the Russian Army beneath his feet.

It is the same with the abstemious prize fighter. He has more coolness
and endurance than the beef steak eater and libertine, as proved by
Freddy Welsh, the world's champion lightweight.

The Harvard Football Squad had a number of men stricken with
appendicitis after training upon a meat diet, supposing that meat was
a requisite to hard work, a fallacy too often disproved.

Jess Willard, the world's champion pugilist, says he never smoked nor
drank liquor in his life, and at the end of the battle with Johnson he
felt as if he could fight "a thousand rounds."

We all wish PEACE, HAPPINESS, HEALTH, STRENGTH and SUCCESS. The only
differences between us are HOW TO OBTAIN THESE DESIRES, and yet a
little candid observation will show us the truth.

The first transaction must be a determination and an agreement to
become independent of all other codes and methods except those by
which the above objects can be attained.

There are many habits which appeal to us as being a means of personal
well being, and yet they are insidious enemies.

It is the regime which has a reaction for our health and happiness
which we should follow, and we must have sense enough to eschew the
methods which are sure to bring a subsequent disaster to us, even if
they may induce a temporary pleasure, for there can be but one correct
path which leads to elysian joys.

Nature is wiser than we are and we must not set ourselves up as her
superiors, for if we do we are sure to fall. We must not make use
of her productions until she has finished them, and we must not
use things for food or drink which she has arranged for some other
purpose. Sugar is an unfinished product of nature, and leaves, barks,
etc., containing poisons are not intended for our consumption, and we
should not breathe smoke into our lungs when it is intended that only
pure air should pass into them.

We should not entertain passion for passion's sake when it was
intended only for reproduction. Secretions in ductless and sac filling
glands are for reabsorption. If I take the finished products of nature
and undo them again, I am as unwise as if I used them before nature
finished them. The breweries take the beautiful grains and degenerate
them and people use the liquid poisons and do not realize that they
are insulting nature and ruining themselves. We take grains, etc., and
roast or burn them into poisons and seduce ourselves with the mistaken
idea that we are using harmless and innocent food or drink.

We steal the property of others, we extort from them, we are jealous
of them with the delusion that we are the benefitted parties, but
nothing is more untrue than this idea.

All of the mental, social and physical effects of greed, malice and
immorality are indelibly disastrous to us, and we have a mistaken idea
of our needs and of the things which make happiness.




What the European War Has Demonstrated.


We have previously stated that FOUR HOURS labor per day was enough for
any one, and this would carry on the world's industry adequately and
to prove this we give an excerpt from an article by the great English
Divine--Rev. R. J. Campbell, his statistics prove that POVERTY IS
UNNECESSARY and that wage earners can be paid enough to buy what they
wish to make happiness--, pianos and other so-called luxuries, and
automobiles could of course be substituted for pianos if their desires
should require such.

At the present price of automobiles they are within reach of the man
who will give up drinking and using tobacco or other narcotics and I
want to say that I believe riding in one of the new type steel bodied
automobiles with a magneto ignition is a great health augmenter as
these cars when running become charged with electricity and I quite
often get a shock from one of my automobiles if I happen to touch part
of my hand to the body of the car while the other part has hold of
the side shift lever. This statical electricity has been proved by
Dr. W. J. Morton, of New York City, to be a wonderful therapeutical
agency. When properly supplied to the body it causes the blood discs
to take up more oxygen from the air and augments the power of the
vital apparatus. (See his address published in the November, 1893,
Transactions of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers.)

Riding in a carriage or car will aid the circulation of the body
fluids without waste of our own energy, the motions massage the body,
the same as muscular action.

Work is a benefit to us but how much do we need is a question,--a
sick person can not work and a person's training and condition must
regulate this,--too much work draws the vital force from the vital
organs and mental work is absolutely injurious in sickness, the brain
draws on the vitality to the detriment of the vital organs of the
body, yet again the cultivated mind has a power to govern the base
faculties which debilitate the body.


Part of the English Divine's Article Which We Have Referred to:

     "One of the strangest paradoxes about this period of
     destructiveness through which we are passing is that there
     is very little dire poverty about. It has taught me a
     lesson, a lesson which probably the workers as a class
     are assimilating too, namely, that destitution and the
     degradation which so generously accompanies it =could be
     got rid of in a month= in time of peace if we were only
     in earnest to do it.

     "It is caused simply by an unfair distribution of wealth. We
     always knew that, but what we did not know was that it could
     be so speedily remedied. We thought it would take a long time
     even if the nation were willing to tackle the problem
     seriously, which it has not yet shown any anxiety to do. We
     were afraid of drastic experiments of a social nature, with
     the consequent displacement of capital, the shock given to
     that very delicate entity, the national credit, and so on.

     "Go more slowly, was the universal cry. Give us breathing
     space. These drastic changes one after the other--all in
     the direction of making the rich pay more into the pockets
     of the poor--are very dangerous. You are impairing public
     confidence; do wait awhile before you attempt anything
     further. You are imposing a tax on industry which is certain
     to hinder productiveness.

     "And we were wrong, the whole lot of us--Kaiser, German
     Bureau, British Tories, hesitant Liberals, landowners,
     bankers, manufacturers, shopkeepers, taxpayers generally,
     and probably the proletariat, too. It is nothing short of
     amazing. Here we are hurling our accumulated stores of
     wealth into hell, the hell of war, and the workers as a
     whole were never so well off.

     "We are able to pay, and we do pay, without complaining.
     We are doing it without suffering very greatly, without
     hearing the cry of hunger going up from our congested areas
     as it has too often done in time of peace, and without the
     slightest apprehension that we are drawing near to the end
     of our strength.

     "We shall be able to go on doing it for years if need be. The
     savings of the working classes have hardly yet been touched
     for national purposes, and if report speaks true there
     has been a not too creditable increase in the purchase of
     cheap luxuries--and luxuries not commonly accounted cheap,
     too, such as pianos--among a section of these, unskilled
     laborers especially. They are not unpatriotic, but is it to
     be wondered at that they should suddenly feel themselves
     well-to-do and fail to realize that war is economic wastage
     as well as wholesale murder?

     "'Three pounds a week, and no 'usband!' a lady engaged in
     munition work is credited with saying--'Wy, it's 'eaven!'
     There is humor in the sentiment, one must confess, though it
     was not complimentary to the absent husband.

     "We have withdrawn not less than four million men from
     productive occupations and set them to smash and kill
     instead.

     "Think of it! And then remember that those men have to be
     equipped and maintained somehow or other by the rest of us,
     and that most of them are the very pick of the country's
     early manhood. And we can afford to do it! We can do it, and
     in the process make an end of destitution for the time being
     and secure to wage-earners a higher standard of comfort
     than they have ever enjoyed before.

     "Will the electors of Great Britain, rich and poor, try to
     digest that fact and grasp its implications? The logic of it
     is that we can if and when we choose get rid forever of the
     crying disgrace of starvation and misery at one end of the
     social scale and senseless ostentation at the other.

     "The thing is demonstrated now.

     "The army as it exists to-day is a fine all-around leveller.
     A good many artificial prejudices and social distinctions
     are being swept away by the power of actual daily
     comradeship in the face of death. These four million citizen
     soldiers have votes. How will they use them when they come
     home?

     "Let the lesson be driven well home. We can do all that is
     required if we want to do it. Behold the economic miracle of
     to-day, and consider what is possible to-morrow. There need
     never be another hungry mouth. No honest man ought to have
     to dread the loss of a job or to lower his self-respect by
     seeking the aid of the Poor law.

     "It is all nonsense to say that the problem of destitution
     is unsolvable or that our resources will not bear the
     institution of a standard living wage for everybody and not
     for the aristocracy of labor only.

     "After the debacle of 1871 France was apparently ground
     to powder, her manhood decimated, her trade ruined, her
     treasury empty, and an enormous indemnity to pay to her
     triumphant foe. She recovered so quickly and completely, to
     the surprise of everybody, that in 1875 Bismarck, like the
     bully he was, wanted to hit her again, and would have done
     so but for Queen Victoria and the British Government."

I have shown how to rise above poverty even when the capitalists grind
the worker down to a wage inadequate to his service, yet this is not a
just condition, and when the war in Europe is over many workers will
be back to their countries, to work. There may be lack of employment
then, but let the FOUR HOURS per day schedule be put in operation and
let the pay be proper and all will be well.

Let the capitalist adjust himself to the fact that the worker is HIS
BROTHER and that THEOCRATIC DEMOCRACY is God's Law.

The air, the water and all necessities are one man's as much as
another's.

The Kaiser, King George or the President of France must drink the same
water which his lowly brother has once drank and breathe the same air
which he has breathed.

A King has water brought to him--it may be that this water,--the very
identical molecules, were once in the blood and body of a lowly tiller
of the soil; he may have drank it, excreted it, it went to the river,
to the ocean, then evaporated to the mountain top, and was again
precipitated to the earth and leached into the King's well.

The VOTERS HAVE THE POWER TO ADJUST THE LAW; if they belie themselves
who is to blame?

Let them institute the INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM AND THE RECALL OF
JUDGES first, then make the proper laws to raise man to the social
position where he belongs.

It is well known that much of the poverty and misery of the world has
been caused by ALCOHOL, and the use of narcotics is also not far
behind in the cause of degradation and misery.

The prohibition laws which have been instituted in Russia prove these
statements to be correct and to show the wonderful prosperity which
ensues from temperance. I give a statement from Russian Minister of
Finance Bark. He says:

     "On the other hand, there is nothing illusory or specious
     about the Russians' prosperity. It rests upon the
     incontrovertible fact of the Russian people's increased
     earnings and savings.

     "When, a year ago, the savings banks showed a monthly
     increase of 50,000,000 rubles, it was regarded as
     phenomenal. But that was only the beginning. During the
     month of January the savings banks alone showed an increase
     in deposits of 120,000,000 rubles. This is accounted for
     principally by the growing thrift and economy of the
     peasants since the enforcement of prohibition, by their
     greater earning power and the higher wages they command.
     This marvellous prosperity makes Russia capable of raising
     large numbers of successful internal loans, and it is by
     this means chiefly that we hope to defray the expenses
     of the war, which have now reached 1,000,000,000 rubles
     monthly."

Blessings often come to us masquerading as evil; this terrible war has
its benefits. While death must come to everyone sometime, it may be
that we put too much stress on the fact that so many lives have been
sent to the BETTER SHORE within such a short space of time, and it is
best to believe in the axiom THAT WHAT IS--IS RIGHT.

There probably will never be another war, and perhaps, it must be that
this one is the lever to throw THE "DEVIL" into OBLIVION.

The Germans have seen the revelations as well as the other
belligerents. Here is what a writer in Berlin says:

     "On Tuesday and Friday there is no meat to be had. On Monday
     and Thursday the consumption of fats is forbidden. Some
     alcoholic drinks are forbidden to be sold after 9 o'clock at
     night. They are mostly liqueurs.

     "The enforced abstinence from meat on two days of the week
     has been accepted everywhere with personal satisfaction.
     You agree with the German when he tells you that he has
     eaten too much meat all his life, and is glad the government
     has made him reform. So on these days he eats fish, oysters
     and vegetables, and declares he feels the better for it."

This item from Augustus Baech is illuminating and instructive. Grease
is not a colloid; it does not absorb the gastric juice like a better
organized element, and thus the stomach is irritated. There is a law
of Nature by which the molecules affect matter; crystalline substances
in solution are readily drawn into colloids. A system of symbols
helps understanding in the matter--let us represent an acid by a
perpendicular line, an alkali by a horizontal line, a crystal by a
pyramid and a colloid by a globule; flat surfaces oppose round ones
and a confusion of straight forces would produce a spiral force.

There is a great law of HUMAN BROTHERHOOD, yes, more than that--a law
of the brotherhood of all animal life.

The hatred of the English, Germans and Russians in this flaming war of
passion is wrong--let us remember St. Peter's vision of the basket
let down from heaven with all kinds of men in it.

The reform of diet and habits will relieve the tension of malice,
hatred and jealousy, the lessened rage of sexual passion will curtail
the undue birth rate, the nations will not need to conquer more
territory and the social conditions will be adjusted.

How beautiful would it be to see all men living in peace, harmony,
prosperity and happiness.

Let us regain our reason and settle down to truth and common sense and
have peace and correct understanding between individuals and nations.
IT CAN BE DONE, and THIS WILL BE THE MILLENNIUM.




Transcriber's Notes

Minor punctuation typos have been silently corrected.

Page 7: Possible typo: "differentations" for "differentiations."
  (Orig: the differentations and forms in the universe)

Page 7: Changed "Scientis" to "Scientist."
  (Orig: Le Bon the great Scientis,)

Page 8: Changed "conciousness" to "consciousness."
  (Orig: each spark has a quiet center or conciousness)

Page 47: Changed "miscrocope" to "microscope."
  (Orig: as no miscrocope has ever detected)

Page 65: Changed "CARTIRDGES" to "CARTRIDGES."
  (Orig: vegetable foods contained "CARTIRDGES OF LIFE AND POWER,")

Page 74: Changed "debiliate" to "debilitate."
  (Orig: base faculties which debiliate the body.)

Page 82: Changed "axion" to "axiom."
  (Orig: believe in the axion THAT WHAT IS--IS RIGHT.)








End of Project Gutenberg's The White Spark, by Orville Livingston Leach

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WHITE SPARK ***

***** This file should be named 44016.txt or 44016.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/4/0/1/44016/

Produced by Diane Monico and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
