The Project Gutenberg eBook, Minnie Brown, by Daniel Wise


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Minnie Brown
       or, The Gentle Girl


Author: Daniel Wise



Release Date: October 31, 2013  [eBook #44081]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MINNIE BROWN***


E-text prepared by Chris Curnow, Sue Fleming, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made
available by Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 44081-h.htm or 44081-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/44081/44081-h/44081-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/44081/44081-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/minniebrownorgen00wiseiala





[Illustration: MY UNCLE TOBY'S LIBRARY

Minnie Brown.]


MINNIE BROWN;

Or, The Gentle Girl.

by

FRANCIS FORRESTER, ESQ.

Author of "Arthur Ellerslie," "Redbrook," etc.







Boston:
Geo. C. Rand, 3 Cornhill.
Wm. J. Reynolds & Co.
1853.

Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1853, by
Daniel Wise,
In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District of
Massachusetts.

Stereotyped at the
Boston Stereotype Foundry.
Press of G. C. Rand, Cornhill.




MINNIE BROWN.


Minnie Brown had not so handsome a face as some little girls; yet
people called her a beautiful child. Her beauty was not in her eyes,
her cheeks, her chin, her nose, her forehead, or her hair. These were
all well enough; her face was pretty enough in its way, but it was no
prettier than the faces of many other girls whom no one ever thought to
be very beautiful. Still, almost all who knew Minnie spoke of her as a
beautiful child. Why was this? What was there in Minnie to make people
call her beautiful?

I will tell you. Minnie's mind was beautiful. She had a lovely spirit,
a mild temper, and an obliging disposition. Minnie appeared to love
every one. She was never angry, unkind, or rebellious. She almost
always wore a pleasant smile on her rosy lips; a light of loving
tenderness generally shone in her soft blue eyes. She always spoke in a
gentle voice. Whoever looked upon her felt pleased at her appearance;
and hence it was that she was called a beautiful child.

I do not mean to say that Minnie was faultless. There has never been
but one faultless child in the world, and that was the sinless Child of
Mary. But Minnie's faults were very few. Her natural disposition was
very gentle, and she had learned to pray to Christ as her loving Savior
and holy elder Brother. And thus, by studying to oppose all that was
bad in her heart, by encouraging all that was good, and by expecting
her Brother Savior in heaven to help her, she had become such a child
as I have described.

But Minnie had many trials of her patience and goodness, like all other
children. These troubles, however, did not set her crying and fretting
as some girls do, when vexatious trials annoy them. Her mother had
taught her that trials were for her good. Minnie always remembered this
lesson, because of the way in which it was taught to her. It was by
means of a little tree, which Minnie's father set out in front of their
cottage, one spring, with great care. Mr. Brown was a man of taste. He
spared no pains to make his residence a pleasant one. He meant this
tree to grow into a shade tree; and a beautiful little tree it was.
It was tall, slender, smooth, and had very graceful branches. Minnie
admired it very much. She hoped it would live and become a great tree.

[Illustration]

At first, it appeared as if it would do so. The buds swelled, the
leaves began to show their green edges, and Minnie was looking every
day to see them burst into beauty. But the weather grew very cold, wet,
and windy. For more than a week, the sun refused to shine. The sky was
as dreary, and the air as cold, as rough November. Minnie often looked
out of the window at the little tree in the storm; and when it swayed
to and fro, she said to her mother,--

"I hope that little tree will live, mother."

"I hope so, too, my child," replied Mrs. Brown.

But when the fine weather and sunshine returned, the tree gave signs of
drooping.

"I think it will die," said Mr. Brown, one day, after examining its
appearance.

"I hope not," said Minnie.

But the tree did die, and in a few weeks was fit for nothing but to be
cut down and burned.

"What made it die, mother?" inquired Minnie, one day, as she was
watching the men who were digging it up.

"It was not vigorous enough to endure the late storm. Your father took
it from the middle of the woods because of its beauty. It had always
been sheltered from the storm by other trees; and so it died when it
was exposed without shelter."

"Would it have lived, if it had been grown on the _edge_ of the woods,
mother?"

"Probably it would. Had it always stood in the face of storms, it would
have grown up hardier."

"Well, that's funny. I should never have thought of such a thing."

"Perhaps not," replied Mrs. Brown. "There are a vast many things you
have yet to learn. In one respect you are like a young tree."

"Why, mother! How can I be like a young tree?" asked Minnie, with an
air of surprise.

"Well, you need storms to blow on you while you are young, that you may
be able to endure trouble when you are older."

"Storms, mother! What storms?"

"I mean _trials_, Minnie. When you are ill used by a schoolmate, and
are tempted to be revengeful, you are tried as the tree is tried by
a storm. If you remain patient and loving under the trial, you are
benefited by it, and will be more likely to endure the next trial you
meet. Thus all your little storms, or trials, will be for your good."

"What, always?"

"Yes, Minnie, always, if you act right under them."

"Was it for my good to be pushed into the pond by Ralph Rattler,
mother?"

"If it has led you to exercise a spirit of forgiveness towards Ralph,
it has done you good."

Minnie paused a moment, as if in deep thought. She was asking herself
if she had really forgiven Ralph for pushing her into the pond at the
risk of her life. She thought she had. A gush of feeling poured up from
her heart. Her eyes filled with tears, and, looking lovingly into her
mother's face, she said,--

"I do think, mother, that I have forgiven Ralph."

"That is right, my dear Minnie. And having done so, you are better
prepared to suffer wrong patiently than you were before."

"But, mother," added Minnie, "I don't think I love Ralph quite so well
as I do Arthur, who saved my life. Is that right?"

"I suppose you cannot help the preference you feel for Arthur, my
child. He is a good boy. Ralph is not. Arthur loves his mother, and is
the best boy in the village. Ralph is disobedient, proud, and unlovely.
But while you thus prefer Arthur because of his better qualities, you
must feel nothing but kindness and pity for wicked Ralph, and a desire
to benefit him."

"That is just as I do feel, mother. But what's that?"

"I think I heard the door bell ring. Run and see, Minnie."

Minnie stepped quickly to the door. A little girl, named Lillia, stood
on the threshold.

"How do you do, Lillia!" said Minnie.

"I am very well, Minnie. I want you to come down to my house and play a
while. Mother's gone out, and I am all alone."

"I'll ask my mother," replied Minnie. "Wait a moment."

Minnie returned to the parlor, and said to her mother, "Lillia Leet is
at the door. She wants me to play with her at her house a little while,
because her mother is out. May I go, mother?"

"Do you wish to go, Minnie?"

"I am not very particular, mother. Only Lillia is alone, and perhaps
she will feel bad if I refuse."

"You may go, then. Only be sure and return to tea."

"Yes, mother, I'll be at home by tea time."

Now, Minnie had been taught to be neat and careful. So she did not
leave her things in disorder because she was going out, or because
Lillia was waiting for her. But she took the book she had been reading,
and placed it carefully away in the bookcase. Then she put her
needlework into the work basket, and carried it into the closet. After
which, she took down her bonnet and shawl, and joined her playmate at
the door.

Lillia had grown impatient at this little delay. She was not a very
amiable girl, and did not try to control herself.

"Come, Minnie," said she, a little pettishly; "I thought you would be
all day getting ready."

"O," replied Minnie, gently, "I had to put my book and work away."

"Well, come, let us make haste, now. I've got a new swing at my house."

"A new swing! Where is it fixed, Lillia?" said Minnie.

"Out in the garden, under the arbor."

"O, that is a beautiful place, it will be so nicely shaded by the grape
vine."

The two girls soon arrived at the summer house. Lillia took hold of the
swing, and showing the large new rope to Minnie, said,--

"Don't you think this is nice, Minnie? See how strong it is. There is
no fear of its breaking down, as your old thing did last summer."

"Yes, it is a beautiful swing, indeed, Lillia. You will have a nice
time with it; and--"

"Swing me," said Lillia, interrupting Minnie. She had placed herself in
the seat of the swing, and was pushing herself to and fro.

Minnie obeyed her wish, and pushed the swing with right good will,
until Lillia was able to touch the top of the arbor with the tips of
her toes. Then she cried out,--

"Push away, Minnie! It swings nicely, don't it?"

"Yes, it's a capital swing," replied Minnie, who was almost out of
breath through her labor in swinging her companion.

But Lillia kept swinging on, laughing and chatting in great glee,
without once offering to give Minnie a chance to enjoy it; but whenever
she failed to swing her briskly, cried out,--

"Push away, Minnie! It is capital fun!"

Minnie bore this selfish treatment a long time. But finding herself
very tired, and seeing that Lillia showed no disposition to relieve
her, she stopped, and began to tie on her bonnet, and to place her
shawl on her shoulders.

"Where are you going, Minnie?" asked Lillia.

"I am going home," replied Minnie.

"Well, that's real hateful in you," answered the selfish Lillia. She
did not seem to see that the ugliness was in her own conduct, and not
in Minnie's. She had really abused her gentle companion, who had borne
her selfish conduct without a word of complaint. But Minnie now thought
it was time to bear this treatment no longer. So the only reply she
made to Lillia's reproachful speech was to say,--

"Good by, Lillia."

And she tripped along the garden, out at the gate, and up the street,
saying to herself, "I must love Lillia, if she is selfish. I hope I
shall never treat others as she has treated me."

Not long after this little incident, Minnie's father was seen with a
ladder, busily employed among the branches of a grand old oak tree,
which stood on the greensward in the rear of his house. While thus
employed, Minnie came home from school. Seeing her father in the tree,
she ran into the yard, and asked,--

"Pa, please tell me what you are doing."

"What do you think I am doing, Minnie?"

"I don't know, pa; but this coil of rope makes me think you are fixing
me a swing."

"Well, suppose I am; what then?"

"O, then I shall be very happy, for I want a swing very much."

"Well, that is what I am doing, Minnie. In half an hour you will have
as good a swing as you can desire."

"Thank you, dear pa. I shall love you better than ever, and I shall be
so happy to have a swing."

And then Minnie jumped round upon the grass, and hummed a pretty little
song. She was so pleased she hardly knew how to express her joy. So
she carolled it forth like the birds, in a sweet and simple song. After
some minutes spent in singing and watching her father, she said,--

"Pa!"

"What do you want, Minnie?"

"May I go and invite Fanny, and Rhoda, and Jeannie to try my new swing
when it is done?"

"Certainly, my child. Run and get them. The swing will soon be ready."

Minnie ran off in search of her playmates. She did not invite Lillia.
Not because she bore any ill will towards her, but because she knew
her presence would only prevent the other girls from being happy.
Selfish Lillia would want to swing all the time. In a short time she
returned with her three friends. The swing was ready; and Minnie said,--

"Fanny shall swing first, because she is the youngest. Then Jeannie
shall have a turn, and then Rhoda."

"But when will you swing yourself, Minnie?" inquired one of the girls.

"O, never, mind me; I can swing any time, you know."

Then the girls began to swing, and Minnie was never happier than while
she was thus busied in affording her schoolmates pleasure.

[Illustration]

This was a secret she had learned from her mother. And it is a very
precious secret, which very few persons understand. Lillia did not
understand it; for she always looked after her own pleasure alone. Yet
there was not a more unhappy child in that village than Lillia. But
Minnie had found out that to make others happy was to be happy herself.
You may feel sure, therefore, that this first trial of her swing was
much more delightful to her than Lillia's was to her. Her three friends
were highly gratified, and when they had all had a good swing, they
exclaimed,--

"Now, Minnie, you must get in, and we will swing you."

Then Minnie jumped into the seat of the swing. Fanny and Jeannie stood
in front of her, to push the swing back-wards, and Rhoda stood behind
on the opposite side, to push her forwards. A right merry time she
had, until it was necessary for them to part.

"You will come again soon, girls, won't you?" said she to her happy
little friends.

"Yes, good Minnie, we will. You are so kind, you may be sure we will
come again."

Then they all kissed her, and wished her good evening.

"Good evening, girls," she replied; and then she sprang, agile as a
fawn and fresh as a fairy, into the house.

Minnie was not one of those children who have two sides to their
character. Some boys and girls are like the statue of a noble
personage, which was brass on one side and iron on the other. When from
home, they appear mild, gentle, obliging; but when with their parents,
they are fretful, peevish, and disobedient. Minnie was the same gentle,
obedient little being at home as she was abroad. But even there she had
her little trials.

She was very fond of reading. No little girl read a good story with a
greater relish than Minnie. And, like all other children, she did not
love to be disturbed in the midst of an interesting book. But she had
found that this disposition needed to be brought under control, or it
would lead her astray.

A pretty story is easier to read than a dry lesson. Many little girls
neglect the lesson for the story, because the latter is the easiest.
Minnie often felt tempted to do this. One evening, just as she sat down
to get her lessons for the next day, her father brought in her favorite
magazine. She was greatly interested in certain parts of it, and had
been looking for it anxiously several days. When her father laid it on
the table, he said,--

"Here is a new number of your magazine, Minnie."

"O, I am so glad, pa! Do let me see it!"

Mr. Brown gave it to her. She carefully cut its leaves, and was soon
busy in looking at its pictures, stories, and puzzles. Her lessons were
entirely put out of mind, and the poor spelling book and geography
looked quite forsaken, as they lay pushed aside on the table.

Her good mother silently watched Minnie. She knew it was too late for
her to read the magazine, and to get her lessons besides. She also knew
that Minnie _ought_ to get the lessons. Yet she felt loath to try her,
by bidding her lay the magazine aside. Hence she waited to see what
Minnie would do.

Minnie had got fairly and fully interested in the charming little
magazine. A half hour had passed since her father gave it to her,
and still she was poring over its pages. It was plain that she had
forgotten the lessons entirely.

"Minnie!" said her mother.

"Yes, ma!" replied the little girl, without taking her eyes from the
book.

"Minnie, my child! Are your lessons learned?"

"No, mamma!"

"Had you not better study them, Minnie, and leave the magazine until
to-morrow?"

"Can't I finish this story first, mother?" asked she, while a slight
cloud of impatience gathered on her brow.

"Does my Minnie think it _right_ to neglect her lesson for the
magazine?" asked her mother, gravely.

"No, mother, it is not," replied the child, roused by this appeal to
her sense of right.

"Then what will you do, Minnie?"

"Study my lesson, mother," said she, firmly, as she resolutely closed
the magazine, and handed it to her mother, adding, "Please, mother,
keep it until to-morrow. It is so interesting, I am afraid I shall read
it if I keep it myself."

This was a noble act in a little girl. It was an act of self-conquest
which very few children would have done so readily. I like her plan of
giving the magazine to her mother. It was putting a means of temptation
out of the way. It was easier for her to study the lessons with the
magazine out of sight, than it would have been to keep it lying on the
table. Thus did Minnie triumph over an indoor trial.

On another occasion, Minnie was very busy over her lessons, and she
was very anxious to get them well. She had just begun a new study. It
was difficult at first, and required all the attention she could give
to it. But Minnie was not one of those children who say, "I can't,"
to every hard lesson. She always said to every duty, "I'll try;" and
she was trying with all her might, when her mother called to her, and
said,--

"Minnie!"

"Yes, mother!"

"I want you, my child."

Now, some children whom I have seen, when thus disturbed, have looked
very cross. Their eyes have flashed with angry fires, and they have
been wont to use pert words, such as, "Can't you let me get my lesson?"
"What do you want?" "I should think you would like to have me study;"
and similar wicked phrases.

But Minnie did not belong to this class of girls. It was not often her
mother called her off from her studies. She was a sensible woman; she
knew that a parent should not make needless trials for a child. But at
this time she was doing something she could not very well leave. Hence
she had called Minnie.

Minnie did not like to be called away from her lessons, and was for a
moment inclined to feel angry. But a glance at her mother checked the
wrong feeling, and she stepped up to her mother's side, who said to
her,--

"Minnie, go into the bed room and see if baby is asleep. Take your
cousin with you. He wants to look at the baby."

Minnie felt a little pang at her heart for the angry feeling which had
tried to rise up against her mother. So she kissed her, and without
saying a word took her cousin by the hand, and went into the bed room
to look at her baby brother. Carefully stepping up to his little cot,
she gazed upon his plump, happy face. His eyes were closed, and his
lips moved, as if in his dreams he was talking with the angel watchers
who guard an infant's bed. So Minnie knew he was asleep, and returned
with her report to her mother; after which she resumed her studies,
feeling very glad because she had gained another victory over a little
trial of patience and temper.

[Illustration]

But Minnie's trials were not all over. Children have their troubles all
through childhood. Indeed, trouble is like an evil genius, who visits
all parts of the world, peeps in at every house, sits at every table,
and meddles with every body. You need not wonder, therefore, that
Minnie, good and gentle though she was, had frequent trials.

This new trial was caused by Lillia. Fanny, Rhoda, and Jeannie had told
that selfish girl about Minnie's swing, and the fine time they had
enjoyed with her. Lillia was vexed because she was not invited too. She
could not bear a slight. Her selfish heart always felt galled at the
least neglect from others. So, when Fanny and the other girls told her
of Minnie's swing, she said,--

"How did you know that Minnie had a new swing?"

"Why, Minnie told us, to be sure, and invited us to a kind of swing
party."

"Invited you, did she?"

"Yes, she came to our house, and asked us to go with her."

"The hateful creature! Why didn't she invite me? It was only the other
day I took her into my father's arbor, and let her swing all the
afternoon."

This was a wicked lie. A selfish child, like Lillia, never regards the
truth. She seeks only to gratify her evil passions, as Lillia did by
this falsehood.

But the girls looked at her as if they doubted her word. It seemed so
unlike Minnie to be ungrateful or neglectful of any one, they hardly
knew what to make of it. At length Fanny remarked,--

"I never saw any thing hateful in Minnie."

"And I think Minnie is a very lovely girl," added Rhoda.

"So do I," exclaimed Jeannie. "And if she didn't ask you to her house
after swinging in your arbor, it was for some good reason, I know,
Miss Lillia."

These words were, like coals of fire in Lillia's heart. They really
gave her great pain, and she looked fierce with anger; but keeping down
some of her passion, she said, as calmly as she could speak,--

"You don't know Minnie as well as I do. She is deceitful."

"Minnie Brown deceitful! It can't be!" exclaimed Rhoda.

"Yes, she is one of those smooth sort of folks, who say one thing to
your face and another behind your back," replied Lillia.

"I don't believe that," said Fanny.

"Nor I either," added Jeannie.

"No: I suppose not. You all think Minnie is a little saint, I dare say.
But I could tell you something that would change your minds; only I
won't do it," said Lillia.

"What is it?" asked all the girls, in a breath, their curiosity being
fairly aroused.

"I shan't tell you. If I should, you wouldn't believe it."

"Yes we would. Come, Lillia, do tell us," said Fanny, in a coaxing
voice.

"No I won't."

"She hasn't any thing to tell," observed Rhoda, tauntingly.

"Yes, I have something to tell, too, Miss Rhoda, and it's something
about you."

"About me?"

"Yes, about you!"

"And is it about me, also?" asked Fanny.

"Yes."

"And me, too?" asked Jeannie.

"Yes, it's about you all."

"What can it be?" asked they again. Then, drawing closer to Lillia,
they said, "Come, dear Lillia, do tell us."

"Well, since you are so anxious, I will tell you. Minnie said to me the
other day, that she thought you, Miss Fanny, was a very hateful thing;
that Rhoda was a proud thing; and that Jeannie told lies."

The girls now looked at each other with blank surprise; and Fanny
asked,--

"Did she say so, truly, Lillia?"

"She did, truly. She told me so down in the garden, the day that she
was with me to try my new swing."

"Well, I declare!" exclaimed Fanny. "I should have never thought such a
thing of Minnie!"

"Nor I," observed Rhoda.

"Nor I," added Jeannie; "and I won't speak to Minnie again."

Upon this, the girls all agreed to treat Minnie with neglect; and
having spent some time longer with Lillia, they parted, and returned to
their several homes.

The purpose they had formed was a wrong one. They ought not to have
believed so unlikely a story about Minnie. And if it was clear that
Minnie had said what Lillia charged against her, they ought to have
gone to her, and asked her to explain herself. Certainly it was wrong
to treat her with contempt, without giving a reason.

It was not long before the innocent Minnie, tripping lightly along the
street, met Fanny and Rhoda. As usual, she ran towards them with a
smile upon her pleasant face, and said,--

"How are you, girls? I am _so_ glad to meet you!"

But the girls turned their faces the other way, and passed on without
saying a single word in reply.

Poor Minnie! She was cut to the heart. What her two friends meant by
such conduct, she could not imagine. So she burst into tears, and
walked back to her home weeping.

On the way, she met Jeannie, who, seeing her in tears, did not pass her
in silence, but stepping up to her, said,--

"What is the matter, Minnie?"

It was some time before Minnie could find voice enough to explain the
cause of her tears. When she had done so, Jeannie told her all that
Lillia had said.

"O," said Minnie, "it was cruel of Lillia to say so."

She then related all that had taken place at Lillia's on the afternoon
of her visit to the swing in the arbor, and denied having ever said
a word against either Lillia or any of the other girls. Jeannie, who
was quick to perceive the state of things, was satisfied, and tenderly
kissing Minnie, said,--

"Never mind, Minnie, I will go and find the girls, and tell them. I
know they will believe you. Don't cry, dear Minnie; I'll make it all
right."

And then she ran off in search of the other girls. But Minnie hurried
home to tell her sorrow to her mother. Mrs. Brown was out. Looking out
at the window, Minnie saw her father seated under the old tree in the
yard. She instantly ran out, and leaning her head on his shoulder,
sobbed and wept violently.

"What is the matter, my child?" inquired Mr. Brown, in a voice soft
with sympathy. Mr. Brown was very fond of his daughter, and was greatly
moved to see her so deeply grieved.

[Illustration]

But Minnie only sobbed the louder for some time. At last, she was able
to restrain her tears enough to tell him her troubles. He then soothed
her young heart, and told her to remember the little tree and the
storms; and that this was one of the trials which were to fit her to
endure the storms of her future life; and he told her she must bear it
bravely.

Minnie smiled through her tears. Her heart grew strong again as she
thought of that little tree, and she said,--

"I will try, dear pa; but, O, it is hard to have such stories told
about me, and to have the girls treat me so."

"Yes, Minnie, it is a very severe trial. But, if you bear it bravely,
and ask God to make you strong to suffer, and especially if you do not
indulge any harsh feeling against Lillia, it will do you good in the
end."

Just then some bright eyes were seen peeping through the railing of the
yard. Jeannie had found the other girls, and all three of them had come
to tell Minnie they did not believe Lillia. Fanny and Rhoda asked her
to forgive them for not speaking to her, and promised not to believe
ill of her any more.

Minnie's eyes grew bright now. The storm was over, and the sun shone in
her heart as brightly as ever. Good, kind, gentle Minnie!

The summer, with its bright suns, birds, flowers, fruits, and
pleasures, had passed swiftly away. Winter, with its snows, storms,
and long evenings, had arrived, and Christmas, merry Christmas, was at
hand. Minnie, her father and her mother, were seated in the parlor,
around a bright wood fire, which blazed and crackled away in good
old-fashioned style. Minnie was busied with a puzzling sum, knitting
her little white brow, and pursing her pretty red lips, as she vainly
tried to solve it. Her father, after watching her for some time, said
to her,--

"Minnie!"

"Yes, pa!"

"I intend to let you have a Christmas tree this year."

"O, a Christmas tree! Dear, good pa, how I do love you!" said Minnie,
as she threw down her pencil upon the slate; and, clapping her hands,
she danced round the room for joy.

As Christmas was nigh, it was proper to talk over the proposed tree
and the party who should be invited. "You may select as many of your
schoolmates as you may choose," said her father, in reply to her
question about the number of the party.

"O, thank you, pa. I will ask Fanny, and Rhoda, and Jeannie, and
Lillia, and Ettie, and----"

Here her father interrupted her, by asking,--

"Why do you think of asking Lillia, my child?"

"Because she has been my enemy, pa, and I want to make her love me, if
I can."

"That's right, Minnie. Christ will love and bless you, if you always
try to return enmity with kindness."

The list was now completed by the addition of several other names.
Arthur Ellerslie was among the boys to be invited. And that night, I
think, Minnie had a dream. And the principal object in that dream was
a Christmas tree, sparkling with lighted wax tapers, and loaded with
choice presents for boys and girls.

The days were short and few between that evening and Christmas. But to
Minnie old Time seemed to walk with leaden feet and slow steps. Yet
they passed away as days always will, and Christmas night arrived at
last.

There were great doings at Minnie Brown's that night. The sun had
hardly set, before a bevy of boys and girls, Minnie's invited guests,
began to arrive. Uncles and aunts, and bright-eyed cousins, from the
neighboring town, had arrived in the afternoon. And now the back parlor
was pretty well filled; and such a good-natured buzzing, laughing,
and chatting as were heard there, it would do your heart good to hear
again; for the voices sounded like music--the music of happy hearts.

Mr. Brown was something of a wag, in his way. He was, withal, a man
who did not think it beneath him to mingle with children on proper
occasions, and to minister to their joy. So it pleased him, on this
pleasant evening, to play the part of "Old Father Christmas."

[Illustration]

Dressed in old-fashioned costume, with a yule log on his shoulders, a
wreath about his head, and a right jovial twinkling in his eyes, he
introduced himself to the company with many smart sayings, which added
not a little to their amusement.

After a time, the folding doors were thrown open, revealing a splendid
Christmas tree in the front parlor. It reached to the ceiling. Lighted
wax tapers burned on almost every branch. Between these tapers hung a
large number of gifts for the various members of the happy company.

This display called forth fresh bursts of pleasure from the young
people. When their cries of "O, dear!" "How beautiful!" "Splendid!"
"What a magnificent tree!" "How grand!" &c., had ceased, "Old Father
Christmas" invited them to step forward and receive the various gifts
of love and friendship the tree contained.

Among all the gifts on that tree, there was none so beautiful as
that which fell to the share of Minnie. It was a rich rosewood box,
containing various articles, such as delicate little scent and cologne
bottles, scissors, &c. Inside of the lid there was a looking-glass; and
on the top of the lid, outside, a pretty little silver plate, on which
was very neatly engraved the name of MINNIE BROWN.

This choice box was handed round among the company with great care. But
it happened that it was a long time getting to that part of the room
where Lillia stood. She was very impatient to look at it. When it came
near to her, she tried to snatch it out of the hand of a little girl,
who was passing it to Fanny. Her effort was a rough one. She struck
the box with her hand, and down it went upon the floor, smashing the
bottles and breaking the looking glass in its fall.

"O Lillia, see what you've done!" exclaimed Fanny.

"How could you do so, Lillia?" said several voices at once.

"Poor Minnie! I'm sorry her box is broken," observed a good-natured
aunt.

These and similar remarks passed from lip to lip after this accident.
As for Lillia, she was ashamed and frightened at what she had done; and
she stood gazing on the wreck of Minnie's box, pale and tearful.

Minnie was grieved. A tear swam in her eye at first; but she remembered
the little tree, and restrained herself. She saw how bad Lillia felt,
and thought she would not add to her grief by seeming to feel too much
herself. So, taking the box, she said, in a cheerful voice,--

"Never mind! The box is not broken; only the bottles and the glass. Pa
will get some new ones to fit it, and it will be as good as before.
Never mind! Lillia did not mean to do it."

That night, when the party broke up, Minnie kissed Lillia, and
whispered in her ear,--

"Don't feel bad, Lillia! You didn't mean to break my bottles, and I
shall love you just the same as ever."

It was by such acts as these that Minnie made herself beloved. Her
character grew more and more beautiful, and she was known, all over the
village, as MINNIE, THE GENTLE GIRL.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MINNIE BROWN***


******* This file should be named 44081.txt or 44081.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/4/0/8/44081



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
