The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Beggar's Purse, by Samuel Hopkins Adams

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Beggar's Purse
       A Fairy Tale of Familiar Finance

Author: Samuel Hopkins Adams

Release Date: December 1, 2013 [EBook #44327]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BEGGAR'S PURSE ***




Produced by David Widger





THE BEGGAR'S PURSE

A Fairy Tale of Familiar Finance

By Samuel Hopkins Adams

1918



NOTICE

IT was our original intention to print and distribute a small number
of these booklets gratuitously among our Mends with the hope that this
story might aid in the sale of War Savings Stamps.

However, before the booklet was finished we had a number of requests
from large firms who desired to purchase them in quantities for
distribution among their own people. This we had not planned on.

In taking the matter up with Samuel Hopkins Adams, the author, he
suggested that he was willing to forego any remuneration if we would
furnish these books at cost. This we gladly consented to do, and we will
print and deliver any size edition, selling them at actual cost.

We are glad to do this, for we will feel well repaid for our efforts, if
every book is the means of selling one War Savings Stamp.

SMITH & PORTER PRESS, INC.

530 ATLANTIC AVENUE, BOSTON, MASS.



Foreword

The thought in mind that this story might suggest a way to increase the
sale of War Savings Stamps, the publishers and the author, who receive
no remuneration, have kindly consented to allow us to print and
distribute gratuitously this booklet.

Smith & Porter Press, Inc.




THE BEGGAR'S PURSE


VAN TENNER was a man who pursued his way through life by fixed habits.
He lived in Philadelphia. That was one of the habits. He ate regularly,
slept regularly, rose regularly, worked regularly and went to the club
regularly; all this within the limits of a very comfortable income. He
never overstrained this income. That's what kept it so comfortable.
It also kept E. Van Tenner comfortable. They were very comfortable
together, which is fortunate, as there were only the two of them to look
after each other. That is to say, E. Van Tenner was a bachelor. As
to his age, face, form and apparel, the illustrator may, if he will,
apprise you. Not I. They have no essential bearing upon this, my tale,
which is no love story, for love and E. Van Tenner were strangers.

But though love had passed him by, war came home to him, touching him
with intimate shock upon the income and then upon his habits; but this
he endured, not without discomposure, indeed, but without resentment,
for one of his best habits was to be honestly and thoroughly patriotic.
In sundry phases war came to him; but the particular phase which, at the
time of the beginning of this chronicle, interrupted him in the task of
figuring up personal accounts, wore white whiskers and an ingratiating
expression and was a professional beggar, not for pay but for
patriotism.

The professional and patriotic beggar fixed E. Van Tenner with a bright
and amiable eye and said--that is, he would have said if E. Van Tenner
hadn't first said:

"No." And then repeated it with level and considered firmness: "No. No.
No."

"But----" began the professional beggar.

"I subscribed liberally to the first Liberty Loan."

"I know. But----"

"More liberally to the second Liberty Loan."

"Exactly. Nevertheless----"

"As for War Saving Stamps--I see them in your glittering eyes--I know
all the arguments----"

"Except one," interrupted the beggar. "Quite useless," said E. Van Tenner
firmly. "However, proceed!"

"My argument," said the beggar, "is based upon the word 'savings'. War
_Savings_ Stamps. I propose that you shall start modestly with one of
these stamps, purchased out of what you save on current expenses without
giving up anything that you need or want or aren't better off without."

"That," commented E. Van Tenner, smiling, "suggests magic."

"Magic, pure, deep and white," confirmed the beggar promptly. "What are
your plans for to-day?"

"A trip on business to New York."

"Good! How long?"

"Twenty-four hours," said the precise E. Van Tenner.

"Do you carry a pocketbook--or your money loose?"

"Loose."

"Take this purse. It calls for but one condition: That you keep all
your money--bills and change--in it and spend only from it. If this is
faithfully done, within twenty-four hours you will have saved enough to
buy one--no, two stamps; which at the present price will come to eight
dollars and twenty-eight cents."

To Van Tenner's skeptical eye the purse placed in his hand seemed an
ordinary-enough affair--a cheap, flattish wallet, without distinguishing
mark until he opened it and found, set into the flap, a celluloid tablet
flanked by a small pencil. Across the top of the tablet ran the legend
"What's the good?"

"A colloquial expression of the philosophy of indifference," observed E.
Van Tenner with a smile.

"On the contrary," retorted the beggar, "it is a serious and profound
inquiry into first causes. The magic inheres in it. Under-stand, now:
You are not to scrimp and scrooge at all. Parsimony by people who can
afford to spend does harm, not good. And this magic, being white magic,
works only for good. But if you undertake to remove money from that
purse for any purely wasteful purpose the magic will be loosed; and you
shall see what you shall see--or, more accurately, feel what you shall
feel."

"The purse will stir in my pocket, I suppose," laughed E. Van Tenner.

"Much deeper," replied the beggar gravely. "In your conscience."

"I accept your challenge," said the other. He emptied his pockets and
deposited all his money under the guardianship of the inquiry "What's
the good?"

"To start from the moment when I leave my office for the train."

"I shall expect to hear from you on your return," replied the beggar,
and vanished by the magical process of stepping into a bewitched
compartment which, at the touch of a brass-buttoned wizard's hand upon
a lever, dropped harmlessly down a frightful chasm and disgorged him
unharmed upon the street.

On the punctual fifteen minutes before train time E. Van Tenner picked
up his small, light traveling bag and walked the two blocks to
the station. There he was met by an obsequious porter to whom he
mechanically surrendered the insignificant burden. Instinctively he felt
in his change pocket to see whether he had any silver. None. Nor in his
trousers pocket. Why, what had he--

Oh, of course. The beggar's purse, in his breast pocket. He reached
in for it and the purse bit him. At least that was his first startled
thought, so queer and unpleasant a thrill ran up his finger. Then it
was the porter's turn to be startled, for E. Van Tenner, retrieving his
luggage, addressed to him a positive monosyllable: "None."

"Wha'--wha' that you say, suh?"

"Didn't you just ask me 'What's the good?"'

"Me? Lawd! No, suh!"

"Well, somebody did," asserted E. Van Tenner, vague but emphatic. "I'll
carry my own bag, thank you."

"Ghos'es! He's hearin' ghos'es," surmised the alarmed African, staring
after his escaped patron as that haunted gentleman made his way to the
Pullman window.

Here he again felt for the wallet. Though there was no shock this time
it seemed to come forth reluctantly, and the magic phrase as it met his
eyes took on a quality of insistence.

"Well, what is the good?" repeated E. Van Tenner.

"Beg your pardon?" said the astonished agent from his window.

"I--that is to say--have you a chair for New York on this train?"

"Just one left, sir."

"Keep it!" the horrified Van Tenner heard himself say. Or was it himself
that had said it? At any rate he was ten paces from the window on his
way to a day coach before he recovered. Not until then did it occur to
him that on his last trip the parlor car had been so hot and stuffy as
to leave him with a headache all day. Perhaps he would be just as well
off in a day coach; even better, possibly. He found a seat, disposed
himself in it and essayed to return the beggar's purse to his pocket. It
resisted. Its reluctance was quite uncanny until E. Van Tenner observed
that in some way the pencil had got afoul of the pocket flap.

"Oh, that's it!" said he, enlightened, and proceeded to make the
following entries of cash saved, on the magic tablet:

     Station porter Parlor car            $0.55
     Pullman porter                         .15

Hardly had he settled in his place when he heard a familiar voice behind
him. He turned. I t was Welland, a near neighbor to his apartment.
Welland was in the automobile business, from which he was reputed to
draw from twenty-five to thirty thousand dollars a year in commissions.
It was a surprise to E. Van Tenner to find so glossily prosperous
a person, with a reputation as a free spender, in the day coach. He
mentioned his surprise.

"War, my dear sir, war," said Welland. "This nation is at war. I haven't
ridden in a parlor car since last summer."

"Economy?"

"Principle."

"I see no principle involved except economy."

"Don't you? The fewer heavy parlor cars the less demand on coal and
rolling stock. Here I am, unable to get my normal supply of automobiles
from the factory, because the railroads can't handle them. And, mind
you, they're a necessity. They relieve the strain of suburban railway
traffic. Men in every other line of necessary business are up against
the same thing. So I'm doing my part to relieve the situation by riding
in a light day coach, which seats a hundred or so passengers instead of
a heavy Pullman, which seats maybe forty."

E. Van Tenner glowed inwardly with self-satisfaction in that he had
taken the unaccustomed and plebeian coach. He felt sure that the
beggar's purse would warmly approve of Welland, When that gentlemen,
on his suggestion, moved forward to share his seat he anticipated a
pleasanter journey than he would have enjoyed in the parlor car. On the
outskirts of the city the train was halted for a minute. Welland pointed
out of the window to a great mass of scrap iron which was being
pulled apart and loaded on flat cars by a busy gang of workers. To his
astonishment he perceived that the workers were women.

"You see that," said his companion. "Why do you think they put women on
such rough work?"

"Because they can be had for lower wages, I suppose."

"Not at all. They're getting men's pay; have been for months. I saw the
advertisements in the papers, offering it. No, sir! It's because the
railroad can't find men enough. Yet back in the parlor car there's a
husky roust-about picking up towels and flicking dust off chair backs
for tips, while those women hustle iron. He gets none of my money!"

The trip to New York was exceptionally brief, E. Van Tenner thought. At
the terminus two Red-Caps swooped upon Welland and himself, only to be
repelled in disorder.

"As long as women handle bulk metal I guess I can carry my own suit
case," observed Welland, stepping easily along under the burden of
a week-end trunk. "You've no idea how much good muscle one puts on,
juggling weights like this. Regular traveling gymnasium. Well; here's
where I leave you."

Bidding his companion good-by E. Van Tenner committed the following
entry to his celluloid:

     Red-Cap...........$0.15

He made his way to the outer air, where a waiting chorus celebrated his
arrival by bursting, full-throated, into song:

"Taxi! Taxi! Taxi, sir! Taxi t'yer hotel. Here y'are, taxi!" The
familiar sounds led him unthinkingly to the nearest cab, operated by a
youthful bruiser with the arms of an ape and the jaw of an alligator.

"Where to?" he growled.

E. Van Tenner laid a hand on his purse, drew it forth and----

"What's the good?" it demanded in black and authoritative print.

"How much to the Hotel Von Gorder?"

"'Bout forty cents," returned the tough, as one disdaining such petty
considerations.

"Thank you," returned E. Van Tenner politely, and entered the amount on
his tablet. "I'll walk."

"Walk!" bellowed the outraged chauffeur. "Whaddaya tryin' to do--kid
me?"

The protrusive jaw was thrust up under E. Van Tenner's retiring nose.

The small, greenish eyes bored into his. "Yuh took me," snarled their
owner. "Now gidin!"

Ordinarily a pacifist in all personal relations E. Van Tenner would,
unsupported by ulterior influences, have meekly obeyed rather than risk
a verbal or possibly physical encounter. But magic is magic and will
carry him whom it upholds by its might through the imminent deadly
breach even to the cabby's mouth. Something tingled upward from the
hand that held the beggar's purse; something that snapped back E. Van
Tenner's spare shoulders to a springy squareness and fired his brain and
nerved his voice; and with unutterable surprise he heard himself speak
in tones that were more than peremptory, that had the flick and sting of
a military command: "Where is your draft registration card?" The red and
savage face turned pallid and receded. The gorilla frame drooped away,
then gathered itself and sprang--not upon E. Van Tenner but upon the
driver's seat of the taxi, which straightway departed with snorts of
pain and terror.

"Well, well!" thought E. Van Tenner, inexpressibly shocked at his
newself. "In another moment I should have hit that fellow upon the nose.
I am sure that I should."

A wild, infuriated yell from the motorman of a cable car, which the
routed taxi had missed by a scant inch, drew E. Van Tenner's eyes to
the legend on the car, which, he perceived, ran within one block of his
hotel. To save time he jumped aboard, and reached his destination as
quickly as he would have done in the taxicab. On the way he corrected
his entry by deducting five cents for fare; then on reflection added
fifteen cents as the probable tip to the chauffeur, this representing
the sheer blackmail of the dread of being considered a short sport. At
the journey's end his account read:

     Station porter               $0.15
     Parlor car                     .55
     Pullman porter                 .25
     Red-Cap                        .15
     Cable car vs. taxi             .35
     Chauffeur's blackmail          .15

Making a promising total of $1.60 already. E. Van Tenner perceived that
instead of by a beggar he had been visited by one who was perhaps
a prophet. The last item in the account particularly pleased the
accountant. He began to suspect that much of the change that he
systematically dribbled out was simply the blackmail paid by vanity to
extortion. At once he was to meet with a double verification of this. At
the hotel desk he asked for room with bath.

"Something about five dollars, Mister--er--er?" inquired the official
behind the register.

"Yes," assented E. Van Tenner, and instantly felt a pang in the purse.
"That is--ah--haven't you anything for four dollars?"

"Oh, yes; we have some as low as that," returned the clerk
superciliously; "if----"

He left unfinished a conditional clause that obviously was designed to
conclude--"you don't feel that you can afford a good room." So frail was
E. Van Tenner's humanity--let him that is without vanity cast the first
stone--that he hesitated. He didn't dare take out the beggar's purse
and look it in the face. But, then, neither did he dare look the
supercilious hotel clerk in the face; that is, until----

"Reservation for J. Q. Smith; room and bath, three dollars," said a
brisk newcomer at his side; and another clerk answered promptly: "Yes,
Mr. Smith; Room 1118."

"I'll take the four-dollar room," said E. Van Tenner firmly; and the
clerk, whose supercilious expression was worth thousands per year to
the hotel, admitted defeat for once and said: "Very well; will you go up
now?"

No; he decided that he would lunch at once; but first he would wash up.
In the washroom he was beset by a human bluebottle who buzzed round him
with a futile and superfluous whisk broom, despite his protests, and all
but blocked his way when he sought an egress without paying for it in
the form of a tip. But the spirit in the purse was having its way with
E. Van Tenner now, and an inspired inquiry as to whether the brush
brigand was of military age removed him from the path.

The next obstacle was more formidable. The door of the cafe was guarded
by two young and unbeautiful descendants of the horseleech's daughters.
Always before he had contributed automatically in response to their
unspoken "Give! Give!" though he knew that he was only enriching
some unknown capitalist in the background who rented this particular
blackmailing privilege from the hotel for eight thousand dollars per
year. But--what would the fearsome beggar's purse say or do should he
attempt to extract the minimum of ten cents to protect him from their
cackle of disdain? Fortified as he was he could now face the contempt
of man but not of these befrizzled Amazons. Yet to pass them while
retaining possession of hat and coat was impossible. Already their
grasping hands were extended for his apparel. E. Van Tenner turned and
fled.

Do not assume, however, that his retreat was caused by cowardice alone.
Ingenuity, doubtless instigated by the beggar's purse, is entitled to
half credit. E. Van Tenner took the elevator--free--to his room and hung
his hat and coat--gratis--in the clothes press. The room, he noted with
satisfaction, was precisely the same as the five-dollar variety except
that it was a few floors higher. He entered one dollar saved on room,
ten cents each on washroom and coat check; and descending passed,
unarmored but unscathed, the gantlet of the disarmed horseleech's
great-granddaughters. Already his total was two dollars and eighty
cents. Good progress toward one stamp!

Upon his return to the room to resume his cast-off garments some
indefinite discomfort in the region of his left big toe attracted E.
Van Tenner's unfavorable notice. Could the magic wallet have established
connections in that quarter? It seemed highly improbable. Investigation
supplied a simpler reason--a large hole yawned in his sock. A block
distant was a high-class department store. Thither he made his way,
and was presently applying a rather exigent taste in hosiery to the
consideration of some chastely fancy designs in striped silk. Three
dollars was about his usual price. But, came the chilling thought, what
would the purse say or do? Tentatively he drew it forth. It made no
protest. The legend "What's the good?" had lost its accusing aspect.

"After all," reflected E. Van Tenner, "the beggar said that I wasn't to
scrimp myself." Then to the clerk: "I'll take this pair."

Still maintaining, strict neutrality the wallet gave of its wealth. He
returned it to his breast pocket.

"Will you take them with you, sir?" asked the salesman.

"No. Send them to----Ouch!"

"To where?" The man lifted startled eyes above a poised pencil.

"I'll have them sent to the----Ugh!"

It was most astounding! The magic purse, quiescent during the deal, was
now catching at his breath like an ice-water douche over the heart. Had
it gone back on the bargain? Must he give up those chaste yet sprightly
socks? Not without a struggle.

"Could you deliver them this afternoon?"

"We could if it isn't too far."

"Then have them sent to----Oh, Lord! No use!"

"Are you ill, sir?" asked the floorwalker, approaching anxiously.

Some unknown incitement forced a question to E. Van Tenner's lips: "See
here, does it cost you anything to deliver goods?"

"Certainly. In time and labor from twelve cents per package upward."

So that was it! The magic was working beyond the limits of his own
exchequer. Obviously it didn't propose to sit by and watch him waste
anybody's money, even a store's.

"I'll take them with me," said he. "Thank you, sir," said the floorman.

As he departed with his purchase E. Van Tenner felt a sensation as if
a very soft and satisfied kitten were purring against his chest. "All
right," said he, speaking down his shirt front; "but don't you get too
dictatorial." Business took up the rest of the afternoon; business in
which the purse played an honorable and unprotesting part, though its
course at one point called for a taxi expenditure of something more than
two dollars. That, however, was to save necessary time. E. Van Tenner
was relieved to find the magic receptacle so reasonable. He began
to feel that he could live on terms of amity and confidence with it
indefinitely. But when he came to pay the chauffeur the wallet produced
the exact amount with a precision that he could not but feel to be
significant. In vain did he search for a tip.

"What's the good?" demanded his mentor. "What's the good of making a
present to a man in whom you have no possible interest and who hasn't
done anything that he isn't paid to do by his employer?"

"Not the slightest," admitted E. Van Tenner in the face of the disgusted
taxi man; and even added cheerfully: "That's the precise amount, I
believe."

So swiftly and blithely does one become hardened to impotent scorn! Thus
was twenty-five cents added to the mounting record.

His evening was free. He decided upon a light and hasty dinner, followed
by the theater--if the magical arbiter would permit. By repeating his
simple expedient of leaving his outer apparel in his room he eluded the
coat-check impost, and genially smiled at the disgruntled Amazons, who
seemed to be asking each other whether this comparatively nude intruder
had perhaps pawned his overcoat.

"Dry Martini," ordered E. Van Tenner upon seating himself. Instantly and
miraculously the beggar's wallet seemed to have dropped from his
vest pocket to the pit of his stomach, upon which it pressed with a
destructive insistence.

"Wait a moment!" said its proprietor slave hastily to the waiter; then
added in a low but indignant undertone: "See here! It isn't your affair
to censor my morals and habits. You're a committee on finance, and
that's all!" He plucked forth the purse into the light of day. "What's
the good?" it inquired with an air of sweet reasonableness.

E. Van Tenner reflected. After all, what was the good? Either he had an
appetite for dinner, in which case he didn't need the cocktail; or else
he needed the cocktail to create an appetite for dinner, in which case
it was high time that he quit the habit. Hadn't the beggar distinctly
told him that he needn't give up anything which he would'nt be better
off without. "Never mind the Martini," said he wearily? During dinner he
looked over the theatrical advertisements in his paper, and hesitating
between those classically named productions whereto a discriminating
public taste is addressed, Atta Boy, Oh, Slush, and Gertie's Green
Garters, fixed upon the latter. He must now retrieve his coat and hat,
upon which he had saved another dime. Ascending to his room he switched
on the lights, got into his outer garments, locked his door and started
for the elevator. A slight but insistent cramp in the pocketbook halted
him. What could that mean? He wasn't spending any money. If it was a
protest against theatergoing it was premature. Let it wait till he got
to the theater! He started again, and caught his breath over a more
pronounced pang. His eyes, turning upward, were arrested by the glowing
glass of his transom. To be sure! He had left the lights on, thereby
wasting coal for the hotel--upon which he had already saved a dollar and
fifty-five cents.

"You are certainly some little economist!" he murmured to the occupant
of his pocket as he returned and left the room in darkness.

At the theater a ducal personage behind a grille negligently informed
him that there was nothing available in the orchestra before a week from
Wednesday; but an undistinguished individual in the lobby--who may
or may not have been there for that very purpose--mentioned that the
Bilbosh Agency had some good seats. Thither went E. Van Tenner. Yes;
the agency had a few seats left. There was one in the eighth row,
three dollars and thirty cents, please. At the mention of the price the
beggar's purse leaped from E. Van Tenner's hand and fell flat on its
face upon the floor.

E. Van Tenner took it forth and gave it air. Now in our amiable and
easy-going bachelor there was a definite streak of obstinacy. He had
undertaken to see Gertie's Green Garters and see it he would, always
assuming that the magic receptacle would permit. He retraced his steps
to the theater, retired to a corner of the lobby and drew forth the
chancellor of his exchequer.

"What's the good?" it questioned. But the effect was that of inquiry,
not of challenge.

"The good is that I've done a day's work and am entitled to some
amusement. What's the harm?"

The beggar's purse appeared to accept this view complaisantly. Back to
the ticket window stepped E. Van Tenner.

"What is the best seat you have for tonight?" he asked the duke of the
diagram. "Tenth row in the balcony; one sixty-five."

"Can you see the stage from it?"

"Oh, yes," replied the duke wearily. "You can see the stage." His tone,
aimed at the inquirer's vanity, commented: "If you're the kind of cheap
person who goes into the balcony." But E. Van Tenner's vanity was now
armored like the tropic ant-eater.

"I'll take it," he said; and the beggars purse opened automatically.

Rather to his surprise he found that his view of the play was just as
unobstructed as in the orchestra seats to which he had been accustomed;
and his hearing was much less interrupted--not to mention the fact that
he had saved one dollar and sixty-five cents at one fell swoop. Thus he
felt justified at the close of the performance in stopping for a bite of
supper. A flaring light directed him to a place where, all too late, the
frantic dissonances of a jazz band burst upon his shocked ears. Before
he could retreat a coat-room attendant had his garments in pawn.
Perforce he must go forward. As he dropped into a gilded and fragile
chair a pair of ample ladies, wearing carefully greased evening gowns,
appeared upon the stage and burst into metallic shrieks, supported by
the musical spasm of the orchestra. E. Van Tenner essayed to forget his
sufferings in contemplation of the menu--and got a fresh shock. He had
seen prices before, but never such prices as these. Even without the
magic purse he was sure that they would have given him pause. As for the
purse, he did not dare bring it out in sight of that array of figures.
Something light, a bit of fish and some stuffed green peppers, he had
thought to order. The fish were evidently goldfish; solid gold at that.
As for the peppers, his eyes encountered this legend:

Green peppers (1) stuffed with rice and tomato--80 cents.

At first he thought it a misprint; it must be thirty cents; or possibly
fifty. Consideration of the other vegetables dispelled that hope. They
were on an equal scale. But--eighty cents for one green pepper! Was
there, then, a fatal shortage in the green-pepper market? Or a crop
failure in the rice or tomatoes whereof the stuffing was compounded?

     "Cut it short!
     Be a sport!
     Buy a quart!"

shrieked the songsters, coyly adjusting their shoulder straps.

Enlightenment burst upon E. Van Tenner. The prices of the menu,
suggesting the daily stock market report before the depression, became
clear. Somehow that awful vocality and the hardly less agonizing
accompaniment had to be paid for. His green pepper at eighty cents was
to pay for it. It was stuffed, that green pepper, not with rice and
tomato but with ragtime jazzeries and syncopated shrieks. E. Van Tenner
laid the menu on the table and would have risen and escaped, but there
hovered over him, portentous and awful, the head waiter himself.

"You haf ordered?" he inquired.

"I--that is--no; I think I won't order this evening," quavered the
patron.

"There is a table charch of one dollar," said the official severely.

E. Van Tenner, overawed, reached for the beggar's purse. It flatly
refused to open. As the owner strove with it there was instilled into
his veins a calm and chill determination, born of a discovery that he
had made--or had the purse magically indicated it?--regarding the menu.

"I shall not pay it," he said quietly.

"You shouldt haf to pay it." The head waiter's threatening tone took on
a little more pronounced accent.

"You're a German, aren't you?" inquired E. Van Tenner blandly.

"Dot is my bisaness," retorted the other excitedly. "You pay dot table
charch!"

"No; I shall not pay the table charge. But I will do this: I will pay
you one dollar for that menu card, which, I observe, has on it two,
four, seven, eleven--eleven different kinds of meat, on a Meatless
Tuesday! Come; what do you say?"

The head waiter said nothing. His jaw dropped. He put his hand to
his chin undecidedly, then turned and fled, taking the card with him.
Glowing with virtue--which, after all, was the purse's, not his--E.
Van Tenner departed, not even tipping the coat-room attendant, to such
heights was his courage inspired, and found a chop-house where he supped
excellently on a strict Hoover basis, and entered an estimated saving of
eighty-five cents, and ten cents extra for the defrauded hat boy.

All that night he slept the deep, sweet sleep of one justified of good
deeds. The beggar's purse, at least equally justified, slept equally
well under his pillow. In the morning it started work for him again.
It saved him the usual coat-room charge, and rudely checked his mildly
emotional impulse to drop a quarter in the tin cup of a pitiable and
shivering mendicant cripple who owns two tenement houses on the
East Side and has amassed a small fortune by distraining on tenants'
furniture. He hardly knew whether to repeat the entry on the morning's
taxi or not, since he felt it already a habit not to hire a cab when
he could conveniently take a car. But he was clearly to the good on one
item of a quarter, when in carrying his grip from the elevator he was
charged upon by a livered youth. Horror was writ large in that youth's
face; horror that a guest of the golden Von Gorder should carry a grip
weighing almost four pounds across ten yards of floor alone and unaided.
As Christian strove with Apollyon so strove E. Van Tenner with the
liveried youth for that grip, which he finally delivered safe out of the
enemy's hands, and himself bore, triumphant, to the street car.

In the returning train, where he won to the day coach through the
stricken hopes of the embattled Red-Caps, he figured out his day's
savings to date as follows:


   Station porter............................................$0.15
   Parlor car...................................................55
   Pullman porter...............................................25
   Red-Cap......................................................15
   Cable car vs. taxi...........................................35
   Chauffeur's blackmail........................................15
   Pride of hotel room that went before a fall in price.......1.00
   Washroom hold-up.............................................10
   Coat check...................................................10
   2d Chauffeur's supertax......................................25
   Cocktail forgone.............................................25
   3 Check-room petty larcenies.................................30
   1 Theater-ticket-agency grand larceny......................1.65
   Cabaret highway robbery......................................85
   Victory in wrestling match with hall boy.....................25
   Cripple's curse..............................................25
   Cable car vs. taxi [he decided to put it in, including tip] .50
   Triumph in footrace with Red-Caps............................15
   Parlor-car fare and tip......................................80

   Making a grand, impressive, but insufficient total of.....$8.05


Insufficient, because two of the beggar's War Savings Stamps would cost
$8.28. At the Philadelphia terminus he would save fifteen cents more
of his accustomed expenditure by dispensing with the porter's service.
Still he would be eight cents short of the total. Suddenly E. Van Tenner
felt himself bitterly disappointed. The zest of the game had got into
his veins. Had he braved hotel clerks, striven with bell boys, bearded
head waiters and outfooted the fleet and determined Red-Cap only to fail
in sight of the goal?

Perish the----"Evening papers! All the magazines! Here y'are before the
train starts."

"Evening Sentinel and Sat--" began E. Van Tenner, and dropped his voice
and the beggar's purse simultaneously. "Never mind. Don't want--I mean
need--'em." For here was his eight cents saved! With a triumphing
heart he retrieved the wallet, took out the pencil and entered upon
the celluloid tablet the final and victorious eight cents--that is, he
thought he had entered it. But lo! the line upon which he had written
remained blank. He examined the pencil.

Its point was perfect. The celluloid surface invited it. Again he
essayed to set down the consummating eight cents. It was as if he had
written with a wand upon water.

"This is not white but black magic," said E. Van Tenner, appalled.

In response there came back to him again the words of the beggar: "What
you save on current expenses without giving up anything that you need or
want or aren't better off without." Obviously, then, the beggar's purse
was backing up the beggar's undertaking. It considered that he was
better off with than without his favorite reading. E. Van Tenner pursued
the boy and spent the eight cents.

All the way back to Philadelphia, however, his mind reverted painfully
to the problem. In vain did he pass up a subsequent train boy's
blandishments on the subject of chocolate; he never ate chocolate. The
sensitive tablet refused to be gulled into accepting an entry on any
such pretext. Equally idle was it to pretend that he might have given a
quarter instead of fifteen cents to the porter at Philadelphia. Fifteen
cents was his un erringly methodical tip. To make matters worse
the train was nearly an hour late. Consequently there would be no
opportunity of further saving; not even eight cents.

Heavy-hearted he disembarked. The beggar had asked to be informed about
the experiment. Well; he'd tell him. Too bad! Might as well get it over
with. And there was only ten minutes' leeway. He'd phone from that
hotel opposite. Possibly the beggar could, of his magic, evolve some
last-moment plan. So approaching the telephone girl he began: "Broad,
Four-four----" and gasped.

The beggar's purse had stirred. It had more than stirred. It had
flopped. It was now doing more than flopping. It was turning frantic
handsprings in his pocket.

"Never mind that call," said the perturbed E. Van Tenner. "I'll--I'll
write."

The beggar's purse settled down and went to sleep.

"How--how much would that call have been?" asked E. Van Tenner
breathlessly.

"Local. Ten cents."

"And a letter--no, a postal card--is two cents. That's eight cents
saved. The exact amount! Gimme a postal card. No; I don't need to write.
I'll save the whole ten cents and be two cents to the good. I've done
it! I've done it! Whoopee!" said E. Van Tenner, dancing upon the marble
floor.

"Police!" said the telephone girl.

With the purpose of calling up the beggar on his own phone, free of
charge, E. Van Tenner hurried joyously to his office. The beggar was
there awaiting him.

"Well?" said he.

"Yes," said E. Van Tenner.

"Two stamps?"

"And two cents over for a third. The magic worked."

"What about the price of the lessons?"

"Lessons?"

"Haven't you learned anything in the last twenty-four hours?"

E. Van Tenner considered. "I've learned that every time I spend a
dollar I spend an extra quarter for vanity and a dime for timidity. I've
learned how to go without things I don't want, and to stop doing
things I dislike myself for doing. I've learned the difference between
parsimony and thrift."

"Is it worth anything to you?" insinuated the worker of white magic.

"How many stamps can I take?"

"One hundred and ninety-eight more. That'll make your total investment
$828 and it'll bring you in $1000 at maturity."

"I'll buy." Thus did E. Van Tenner, exwaster, join the Take-the-Limit
Club.









End of Project Gutenberg's The Beggar's Purse, by Samuel Hopkins Adams

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BEGGAR'S PURSE ***

***** This file should be named 44327.txt or 44327.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/4/3/2/44327/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

