                           UNDER ONE SCEPTRE




This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license.



Title: Under One Sceptre, or Mortimer's Mission
       The Story of the Lord of the Marches
Author: Emily Sarah Holt
Release Date: December 18, 2013 [EBook #44464]
Language: English
Character set encoding: US-ASCII


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNDER ONE SCEPTRE ***




Produced by Al Haines.




                          _Under One Sceptre_

                                  _Or_

                          _Mortimer's Mission_

                 _The Story of the Lord of the Marches_


                                   BY

                            EMILY SARAH HOLT

                               AUTHOR OF
         "MISTRESS MARGERY," "THE WHITE ROSE OF LANGLEY," ETC.



    "The gesture was heroic.  If his hand
    Accomplished nothing--well, it is not proved--
    That empty hand thrown impotently out
    Were sooner caught, I think, by One in Heaven,
    Than many a hand that reaped a harvest in,
    And keeps the scythe's glow on it."
      ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING.



                             _NEW EDITION_



                                 LONDON
                          JOHN F. SHAW AND CO.
                           48 PATERNOSTER ROW
                                  1899




                               *PREFACE.*


A great authority once pronounced _Don Quixote_ to be the saddest book
ever written. The very word quixotic has come to imply not only unusual,
but absurd action.  Yet what would the world be if all the Quixotes,
secular or religious, were taken out of it?  There are not a few of them
among the ranks of those of whom the highest authority has pronounced
that the world is not worthy.  They generally come to be understood at
last--but it is often not till the next century.

This is the story of a Don Quixote who lived, fought, and died, five
hundred years ago.  Like his prototype, he too tilted with the windmills
and tried to liberate the captive lions.  And the windmills stood firm
against his spear, and the lions turned upon and tore him.  It usually
is so.  The energy seems totally wasted--the heroism vain and lost. Yet
now and then the windmill falls, discovered to be really an enchanter's
castle, revealing rotten foundations and evil things: and then men
remember the dead knight who gave the first stroke.  Or, more often,
they do not remember him.

He would be thought indeed quixotic who should set before him as his
life-work what Roger Mortimer did.  Yet who can declare it impossible?
Some day, the castle of the enchanter may fall, and the free air of
heaven may blow into the dark dungeons and dispel the fetid mists.
Ireland may be free with that freedom which Christ only gives, and which
many an English heart longs to secure to her.  But will any one remember
the hand which was the first to strike the frowning portals of the
fortress, and which has been dust for five hundred years in the vaults
of the Abbey of Wigmore?

It is well for him that he has won the better reward of his Father which
is in Heaven.  And we know, on the word of our Master Himself, that the
unfading garland will be all the fairer because no human hands wreathed
earthly bays for the head which it is to crown.




                              *CONTENTS.*


                               CHAPTER I.

THE TWO BEGIN THEIR JOURNEY

                              CHAPTER II.

WATCHWORDS

                              CHAPTER III.

CAST ON THE WORLD

                              CHAPTER IV.

WHAT CAME OF SELF-WILL

                               CHAPTER V.

A CHANGE IN ROGER'S DESTINY

                              CHAPTER VI.

FAIR AND FICKLE

                              CHAPTER VII.

ROGER HAS HIS WISH

                             CHAPTER VIII.

MISCALCULATION

                              CHAPTER IX.

ROGER FINDS HIS MISSION

                               CHAPTER X.

MARCUS CURTIUS

                              CHAPTER XI.

HOME TO USK

                              CHAPTER XII.

LAWRENCE'S REWARD

HISTORICAL APPENDIX




                       *THE LORD OF THE MARCHES.*


                              *CHAPTER I.*

                     *THE TWO BEGIN THEIR JOURNEY.*

    "O guide me through this life's uncertain wild!
      And for aught else beneath the circling sun,
    So Thou in Thine own bosom keep Thy child,
      Father!  Thy will be done!"


That every baby enters the world with a spoon of some metal in its
mouth, is an old saying which is easy of interpretation. And in the
ancient town of Usk, in Monmouthshire, on the first day of September,
1373, were born two babies, not many yards apart, whose spoons were made
of exceedingly diverse metal.

The baby who was born in the morning of that day, in the Castle of Usk,
brought with him a spoon of gold, beautifully embossed, and exquisite in
shape. He found the world--as represented by the mantle in which his
nurse enveloped him--soft, rich, velvety, and fur-lined.  If he cried,
the sound won immediate attention; and the faintest sign of illness on
his part struck despair into hearts which beat with the bluest blood.

The baby who was born in the evening, in a squalid mud hovel, one of a
dozen which nestled close under the Castle wall, was accompanied by a
battered old spoon of the very rustiest iron.  His world was a
sheepskin, extremely dirty, and not particularly fragrant.  His cries
were answered--when they were answered--by a rough toss in the arms of
his eldest sister, a slipshod, shock-headed girl of eleven years; and
the possibility of his early death neither dismayed nor grieved any one,
for even his mother was of opinion that he was one too many in the
hovel, which could scarcely find room for the nine persons who occupied
it.

Baby Number One was baptized in the chapel of the Castle, borne in his
velvet wrapper by a lady of title, with the accompaniment of sweet music
and joyous bells.  His sponsors were a bishop, an abbot, and a prioress.
He received the family name of Roger; for a hundred and fifty years
back, the heirs of that family had been Rogers and Edmunds alternately,
and it was the turn for the former. Roger Mortimer--an ominous name!
For this boy was the heir of the earldom of March, one of the proudest
coronets of England; and his mother, a fair girl of eighteen, was a
Princess of the Blood.

Baby Number Two was christened in the parish church, one of a batch of
ten, and might not have been christened at all if the curate had not
been one who looked sharply after his baptismal fees.  He received the
name of Lawrence, which was the first that occurred to his parents.
Very naturally protesting in his baby style against a sprinkling with
cold water, he was tumbled with no particular care into the thin arms of
Mariot, who rewarded him with a private shake for his vocal performance,
the only music which accompanied the ceremony.  As to surname, he could
not be said to have any.  What did the son of a serf want with a
surname?  As he grew older, however, some distinction between him and
other Lawrences being felt desirable, his neighbours took to calling him
Lawrence Madison, or son of Maud,--his mother being a woman with a
tongue, and as such a more prominent character than her quiet and silent
husband.

The family physician, Master Gilbert Besseford, carefully drew out the
horoscope of the young Lord. It appeared from this elaborate document
that he was to be a highly accomplished and intellectual youth, since
Mercury was busy about him; that he would be most fortunate in wedlock,
for Venus was doing something; that he would rise to the highest honours
of the State, and might possibly achieve a crown, as Jupiter was most
benevolently disposed to him.  At any rate, something was to happen
about his twenty-fifth birthday, which would place him in a position
that none of his fathers had equalled.  He would have a long life and a
happy one.

Two items of the horoscope were true.  He was to be indeed an
intellectual and accomplished youth: and in his twenty-fifth year a
crown was to be his, to which few of his fathers had attained.  But
those around him thought of a corruptible crown, and that which God had
prepared for him was an incorruptible. And the happy wedlock, and the
long life, and the rise to worldly honour, were not the portion of Roger
Mortimer, but of Lawrence Madison in the hovel below.

That Roger should exercise in the future considerable influence over the
fortunes of Lawrence, was extremely probable; since they would some day
stand to each other in the relations of master and vassal, and the
former possessed absolute power over the latter.  But the idea that
Lawrence could in any sense sway the fortunes of Roger would have been
laughed to scorn by the household at the Castle. Yet this was to be.

In a small, but very prettily furnished boudoir in one of the Castle
turrets, sat the Countess Dowager of March.  She was considered an
elderly woman, though we should think her only middle-aged; for in the
days of our shorter-lived forefathers, who looked upon fifty as old age,
and sixty as advanced senility, a woman of forty was some way down the
hill.  From a father whose character stood high both as warrior and
statesman, and a mother whose remarkable wisdom and good sense were a
proverb among her contemporaries, Philippa Montacute had inherited a
character of unusual power, moral and mental. Her energy was tempered by
her prudence, while warm affections and shrewd common sense held sway
together over her actions.  The character was not transmitted, except in
the affections, to that handsome, eloquent, amiable young man of
one-and-twenty, who was the only one left living of her four children:
but it was to be reproduced in every point save one, in the baby
grandson for whose birth the chapel bells were ringing melodiously, and
in whose honour all the thralls were to have a holiday the next day.
Alas, that the omitted item was the one which should have been a girdle
to all the rest!  Warm-hearted, energetic to impulsiveness, with plenty
of good sense and fine understanding, the gifts bestowed on little Roger
did not include prudence.

The Countess sat alone in her bower in the September twilight, and took
"blind man's holiday," her imagination and memory scanning both the
future and the past.

It was not quite dark when the door of the bower opened, and a woman of
some thirty years came forward, dropping a courtesy as she approached
her mistress.

"Come in, Wenteline," said the Countess; for thus the medieval English
pronounced the old British name, Guenllian.  "Is David yet back from his
errand?"

"An't please your Ladyship, he came but now, and he brings tidings,
agreeably to your Ladyship's pleasure, that among the thralls be two
babes to-day born.  Maud, the wife of Nicholas in the huts, hath a
man-child; and your Ladyship's god-daughter, Philippa, wife of Blumond
the fishmonger, a maid-child."

"Good," answered the Countess, feeling for the gold and ivory tablet
which hung by a silver chain from her girdle, that she might therein
enter the information for which she had sent.  "Then, as born on the
birthday of the heir, they shall be allowed some privileges.  What names
are the babes christened by?"

"Please it your Ladyship, the little maid is Beatrice--so baptized by
Dan Robesart this afternoon.  For the knave, being born but an hour
back, he is not yet baptized; but they think to call him Lawrence."

Both names went down on the Countess's tablet, after Guenllian had
lighted a candle for that purpose.

"Did David give the thralls to wit of the games and rejoicings allowed
to-morrow?"

"Ay, my Lady: and he saith one and all were greatly gladded thereby.  My
young Lord shall be right welcome to all his vassals some day to be."

The Countess drew a long breath of semi-apprehension. "May he be none
the less desired, God grant, when they shall lay his head beneath the
mould!  O my maid, how great and awesome a thing is the life of a man on
earth!"

"Madam, I heard once the parson of Ludgarshal, Dan John, to say"----

"Have on.  A good man is Dan John.  What said he?"

"That our Lord bound Him to care for the childer of them that feared
Him; and that no prayer so made should ever be lost."

"But how answered?" was the low-toned reply. "Wenteline, our prayers be
sometimes heard in a manner that crusheth the heart of him that prayed
them.  If the babe were to die!"

"Very dear Lady, it might be, elsewise, that a twenty years' space
hereafter, you should heartily wish that he had died the sooner.  Surely
it can be no evil thing for a little child to go right to God, while he
is yet lapped about with the white robes of his chrisom."

"I have buried three, Wenteline: and of them one went so.  The other
were pretty little childer that prattled at my knee.  And it was like
burying a piece of mine own heart to part with every one."

"Yet now, my Lady--would you have them back now?"

"Know I what I would?  Surely it is better for them.  And may God's will
be done.  Only to-night, Wenteline--to-night, holding that little babe,
the thought came sorrowfully of my Roger, and how he faded from me like
a white flower of the earth, or a star that goes out in the sky.  Hand
me yonder French Bible, Wenteline.  Let me read a little touching the
City where my childer dwell, and the King unto whose presence they be
gone.  May be it shall still my yearning when I think of them as there,
and not here."

There were no Bibles at that date but in French or Latin; seven years
were yet to elapse before John Wycliffe, to whom Guenllian had just
referred, was to begin the translation of the first English Bible. But
French Bibles and Latin Psalters were no unusual possession of noble
families.  Those families who were not noble were expected to get to
heaven without any; for one of the most singular medieval ideas was that
which restricted all intellect to those of noble blood.  Blood and
brains went together. If a man had not the former, it was out of all
calculation that he should possess the latter.

Guenllian reached down from a high shelf the French Bible, bound in dark
green velvet, with golden rims and embossed corners, and amethysts
gleaming from every corner.  The Countess unfastened the clasps, and
turned to the last chapters of the book. She read, to herself and
Guenllian, of the Golden City and the River of Gladness and the Tree of
Life, until the world seemed to grow small and dim, and the world's
conventionalities to become very poor and worthless.  And then, turning
a little further back, she read of the Good Shepherd who calleth His
flock by name, and leadeth them out; and they know His voice, and follow
Him.  Then the golden clasps were closed, and the lady sat in silence
for a few moments.

"Wenteline," she said, "we have tried to follow the Shepherd, thou and
I, in the sunlit plains. Thinkest thou thy feet would fail if we come
by-and-by to the arid slopes of the stony hills?"

Guenllian looked down, and nervously played with her chatelaine.  "I
cannot tell, an' it like my Lady. You look not for such troubles,
Madam?"

"They that be sure of Satan's enmity had best look for trouble," was the
pithy answer.  "It is not here--yet.  But it may be."

And it was to be.  But it came not until Philippa Montacute was safe in
the shelter of the Golden City, and under the shade of the Tree of Life.
Then it broke fiercely on the unsheltered heads of those on the stony
slope, and the baby that lay that day in the velvet wrapper came in for
some drops of the thunderstorm.

The children in the Castle and in the hovel grew and thrived.  They were
both pretty, but had Lawrence Madison been kept as clean and dressed as
nicely as the little Lord, he would have been the prettier of the two.
As he grew old enough to take note of things, to tumble about on the
sheepskin at the door, while his mother and Mariot attended to their
duties within, and to listen and talk, a great ambition arose in his
young heart.  He did not envy the young heir at the Castle: an idea so
lofty and preposterous never suggested itself for an instant. Lawrence
would as soon have thought of grumbling because he was not an archangel,
as because he was not my Lord Roger of March.  But he did indescribably
admire and envy the fishmonger across the street.  He had a whole coat,
and a clean apron; he looked like a man who always had plenty of nice
things to eat, and a fire to warm himself by in cold weather.  And the
fishes were so beautiful! Lawrence had crept across the street and
looked up at their lovely prismatic scales, as they lay in the baskets
level with his head.  He had seen Blumond's wife as she came to the door
with her child in her arms.  Little Beatrice was kept cleaner and nicer
than he was.  Why did not Mother give him nice things to wear like hers?
And why, that evening when she and Father were talking about
something--what were they talking about?--did Father look across at
Lawrence, and say, with a lowered brow and a sulky tone quite unusual
with him, something about letting a freeman manage for himself, and not
be beholden to a villein?  Now that he thought about it--and Lawrence
was given to thinking about things--Father did seem more cross with him
than the others.  What had he done?

After many long cogitations on this and other puzzles, of which nobody
knew, since he kept them all to himself, Lawrence finished by astounding
his world.

Lawrence's world was very small, for it was bounded by a few yards of
the street at its widest extent.  The inner circle of this sphere,
namely, the hovel, was built of mud and wooden laths, and was about
fifteen feet in longitude.  Separate rooms were an unimaginable luxury.
Nine persons--Lawrence's father, mother, and grandmother, his two
brothers, three sisters, and himself--ate, slept, and mostly worked, in
the one chamber which formed the whole of the hut. There were also
additional inhabitants in the shape of two cats, three hens, and a small
and lively pig. It was not easy to move without falling over somebody or
something which was apt to resent it in a way not suggestive of polished
society.  Perhaps it was quite as well, considering these circumstances,
that the space was not cumbered with much furniture. Alike of bedsteads,
chairs, and tables, the hut was entirely guiltless, and the inhabitants
would scarcely have known what to do with them.  A bundle of straw
littered down in a corner, with a sheepskin thrown over it, was their
idea of the utmost luxury in the way of sleeping accommodation--a luxury
which they could rarely attain: and the ordinary bed was one of dry
leaves from the neighbouring forest, which, when they were able to reach
such a pitch of comfort, were stuffed into a sack.  A long form, set
against the wall, represented the chair element, and was reserved for
the elders, the children squatting on the mud floor with the pig, cats,
and hens.  The minds of the inhabitants had not reached the table idea.

Nicholas, the father of Lawrence, was by trade a tanner--not a
master-tanner by any means.  He worked for a man who in his turn worked
under another, and all were serfs, at the Earl's tan-pits, a mile from
the city.  Maud, his wife, was the daughter of another serf, the
blacksmith who shoed the Earl's horses.  To all these the Lord of Usk
was a sort of minor divinity, almost too far above them to be thought of
as a human creature like themselves, and much too inaccessible for any
complaints or requests to reach him, except through the medium of a
dozen persons at least.  People of this kind were not expected to have
any manners, beyond the indispensable one of making the most obsequious
reverences to the meanest dweller in the Castle, or to a priest. The
sailor's pithy description of the savages with whom he met--"Manners,
none; customs, nasty"--were in most cases only too descriptive of the
medieval villein.

Does not this manner of life among the lower orders, five hundred years
ago, account for much of the power obtained by the priesthood, and the
blind obedience with which the people followed the clergy?  The priest
was something more to the masses than he was to the aristocracy.  To the
latter, he was the man who stood between them and God: to the former, he
was also the mediator between man and man.  He was the only person among
the upper ranks who treated these poor down-trodden creatures, not as
machines out of which so much profit was to be ground, but as men and
women with human sins and sorrows.

The children saw very little of their father.  He went to work as soon
as it was light, and often did not return before they were fast asleep
on the leaves. They saw only too much of their mother, whose tongue was
never still when awake, and was governed by a cross temper and a
discontented mind.  The grandmother was an old woman bent by rheumatism,
and enfeebled by years of hard work and hard usage. The girls, Mariot,
Emmot, and Joan, had nothing to look forward to but similar lives, and
after them--they hardly knew what.  They had a dim notion that there was
a pleasant place where some people went at death, and where nobody did
any work: this was derived from the priests.  They had also a notion,
dug up out of the natural soil of the human heart, that having met with
very little comfort in this life, it was sure to be waiting for them in
the next.  Of God their principal idea was that He was a very great and
rich man, above even my Lord, and was in some mysterious manner
connected with hearing mass.  The boys might expect the serf's usual
life--hard work and many blows, with such intervals of pleasure as an
animal would be capable of appreciating, chiefly connected with eating
and drinking, an occasional dance or game on the village green on
saints' days, and any rough horse-play among themselves.

They were not badly off in respect of food, for their master fed them,
and it was to his profit that they should be in good bodily condition.
They had therefore, plenty of food of the coarsest kind, and sufficient
clothing of the same quality, which they had about as much notion of
keeping clean as a monkey has of writing letters.  Wages, of course,
were never heard of between master and serf. Whatever they needed had to
be reported to their superior in office, and they received it if and
when he found it convenient.

Is it not a singular fact that the less a man has, the more contented he
is often found to be?  The majority of these serfs, thus comfortlessly
situated, were more contented men than their descendants, who have
privileges and possessions of which they never dreamed, and many of whom
are never satisfied with them.

These were the circumstances in which Lawrence was placed, and such were
the persons whom he astonished when his time came to do so.

"Get out of the way, childer!" said Mariot one night, not crossly, but
like the tired girl she was, as she came and threw herself down on the
sheepskin among them at the door.  "I am weary as a dog. There never is
any pleasure in life--our lives, anywise.  Simon, have done!--and Emmot,
give o'er pushing.  Let a body have a bit of rest, do!"

And rolling one corner of the sheepskin into a bolster, Mariot made
herself comfortable--as much so, that is, as the circumstances admitted.

"Mariot, what is a villein?"

"What's _what_?" exclaimed Mariot, her head coming up in astonishment.
"Lo' you now, if Slow-o'-Words hasn't found his tongue!"

"What's a villein, Mariot?"

"What we all are--saving thee, little plague o' my life."

"Why amn't I like you?" said Lawrence, opening his eyes wide.

"The deer knows!" replied Simon grumpily.

"Well, but I know beside the deer," said Mariot. "Well, what for but by
reason thou wert born on the same day as the young Lord up yonder,--thou
and Blumond's Beattie--and ye were both made free therefor."

"What's _free_, Mariot?"

"It means, do what you will."

"Does it so?  May I have one of those fishes, then?"

"Oh, well--it means not, do ill and thieve.  Wait a bit, Lolly, till
thou art grown bigger, and thou wilt know what free means--better than
ever we are like to know it."

"Why isn't everybody free, Mariot?"

"What wot I?  They aren't."

"Is Beattie free too?"

"Ay."

"But we were _made_ free.  Is nobody free that isn't made?"

"Lots of folks."

"Then why isn't everybody?" repeated little Lawrence meditatively.

"Oh, give o'er, and reive not my head!" cried Mariot.  "Loll, if thou
goest about to ask questions that none can answer, I shall want thee
dumb again I promise thee."

"Can't nobody answer them?  Couldn't the parson?"

"The parson, in good sooth!  The like of thee to ask questions at the
parson!  Shut thine eyes, and go to sleep: I'm as sleepy as a squirrel
in winter."

Lawrence crept on his hands and knees to the edge of the sheepskin,
avoiding his brother Simon, who lay on his face in the middle of it,
amusing himself by kicks up at the atmosphere: and looking out into the
still summer evening, saw Blumond's wife Philippa carrying in the
baskets of fish, and little Beatrice trotting beside her.  Prettiest of
the three children was Beatrice, with dainty little ways which woke
Lawrence's admiration, and made her a perpetual attraction to him.  In
fact, he hardly knew which he liked best, Beatrice or the fishes!

As to the magnificent people in the Castle, Lawrence barely presumed to
lift his eyes to them.  Now and then, as he sat on the sheepskin, some
squire on horseback or messenger on foot would flash past in the Earl's
livery--blue and gold, guarded with white--who was to the children in
the huts as good as a show at Whitsuntide Fair.  But before Lawrence was
quite two years old, the Castle was deserted, and the Earl and all his
family had removed to Ludlow. Thence came rumours from time to time of
their doings.  A daughter was born, in honour of whom a holiday was
given to the villeins; and two years later, a son, for whom they had a
great feast.  But immediately after that came sadder news, for the royal
mother, yet only twenty-two, survived her boy's birth scarcely six
weeks.  All the bells of Usk tolled in mourning, catafalques of black
and silver were in every church, and the chant of doleful litanies for
the dead floated through the perfumed aisles.  And after the death of
the young Countess, the Earl and Countess Dowager returned no more to
Usk; for two years later, the Earl was made Viceroy of Ireland, and
removed thither, while his mother and children remained at Wigmore.

The connection between England and Ireland had hitherto been disastrous
to both parties.  Had the Pope intended by his gift of that island to
punish all the royal dynasty for their sins, past and future, he could
not have succeeded better; and had he desired to visit on the Green Isle
the penalty for all her crimes, he could scarcely have devised a sorer
punishment than the infliction of such rulers as England sent her for
several hundred years.  The conquerors and the conquered understood each
other as little as Celt and Teuton commonly do: and what was still
worse, they did not try to do so.  The English notion of governing was
first to kill off the Irish chieftains, and then to divide the land
among a quantity of Norman adventurers whose capacity for "land-hunger"
was something remarkable.  When Earl Edmund of March assumed the
government, it was only seventeen years since the passing of the Statute
of Kilkenny, which forbade marriage between the English and the Irish,
and commanded the use of the English language and customs on pain of
death.  Even Lionel, Duke of Clarence, who was considered one of the
gentlest of men, had, as his first step on landing in Ireland, forbidden
any Irishman to approach his camp.  His son-in-law was a wiser man.
There was Irish blood in his own veins--in small proportion to the
English, it is true; still, he was the descendant of an Irish King, and
the pedigree-loving Celts were not likely to forget it. He began by
showing a strong hand upon the reins, and in six months had Ireland at
his feet.  Then he laid aside whip and spur, and permitted his natural
character to take its course.  The result was that he became exceedingly
popular, as a ruler usually is in Celtic nations who ordinarily exhibits
himself in an amiable light, and yet shows that he has power, and can
use it when required.  Earl Edmund shut himself up from no one.  Any
Irishman who pleased could have access to him at any time, and his
native eloquence recommended him strongly to their easily touched
feelings.  But his beneficent reign did not last long, and perhaps his
short tenure of power was quite as well for his popularity.  Human
nature, in all countries, is apt to become accustomed to kindness, and
to take advantage of it.  And doubtless the Earl's popularity was partly
due to the fact that he succeeded rulers harsher and less attractive
than himself.

One great disadvantage on the part of England was that while she
realised to the full the inferior civilisation of the Irish, she failed
to discover that they possessed a faith purer than her own.  The true
old and Catholic religion implanted by St. Patrick and others of his
type had received far less corruption from Rome than the religion of
England.  But the English were much more concerned in improving the
manners of the Irish nobles than in improving their own spirituality.
That an Irish king wore no trousers, and that his attendant minstrel
shared his plate and glass, struck them infinitely more than the
condition of his morals.  When once they had satisfied themselves that
the Irish believed in the Triune God, and had heard of the existence of
a Bishop at Rome who was the Pontiff of Western Christendom--points
apparently of equal importance to them--they gave themselves no further
trouble on the religious question.  Political and social questions came
nearer and pressed more heavily.

With the usual individuality of our race, they resented the use of a
separate language, to which the Irish, as individual in their way, clung
as for very life.  If, instead of trying to suppress the venerable and
beloved tongue, England had given Ireland an open Bible in it--if she
had insisted on the study of Holy Writ, and had left the manners to take
care of themselves under its influence, what a different future there
might have been!

Are we still as blind as five hundred years ago, or shall we some day
see that peace for Ireland, as for every other land and soul, must come
through the teaching of the Spirit, and the blood of the Cross?




                             *CHAPTER II.*

                             *WATCHWORDS.*

    "Then out and spake a gude auld man--
      A gude death micht he dee!--
    'Whatever ye do, my gude maister,
      Take God your Guide to be.'"
        --OLD BALLAD.


While Earl Edmund was governing across the sea, his little son Roger
grew in health and stature under the loving care of his grandmother at
Wigmore.  The Earls of March had many castles and seats, but Wigmore
Castle was the family seat of the Mortimers.  The old Countess was
extremely anxious that the boy should grow up a good man; the rather
because she recognised in him a quality beyond her own energy and
activity--that passionate, impetuous nature which belonged to his
mother's blood.  She brought him up on a course of philosophy, and above
all of Scripture, in the hope of calming it down.  The eradication was
hopeless enough; but the Scripture sank deep.  Young as he was when he
lost her, Roger Mortimer never forgot those lessons at his grandmother's
knee.  But the quiet years of holy teaching were not long.  In the
spring of 1381, Earl Edmund sent letters to his mother, requesting that
his eldest son might be sent over to him, as he wished him to make
acquaintance with the tenants on his Irish lands.  The whole province of
Ulster would lie one day at the pleasure of its future Earl.

Sir Thomas Mortimer, a distant relative of the Earl, brought his noble
kinsman's letters.  He was appointed the governor of little Roger, and
was to take care of him on his perilous journey.  In order to impress
the Irish with a sense of the child's grandeur and importance, he was to
have a distinct establishment; and the Earl had suggested that the
majority of the new servants had better come from his Welsh estates.
Two Celtic races, which centuries ago were one, would, as he thought, be
more likely to amalgamate with each other than either with the Saxon.
Perhaps he forgot that the meeting of two fires will scarcely extinguish
a conflagration.

Sir Thomas therefore had come through Usk, where he had imparted the
Earl's commands to the keeper of the Castle, ordering him to have ready
by a certain day, to meet him at Holyhead, such and such persons--so
many men and boys to fill so many offices--much as he might have ordered
as many garments or loaves of bread.  The villeins were bound to serve
in the menial offices; and for higher places, the neighbouring gentry
and their sons would only be too glad to hear of the vacancies.

One appointment was to be made, at her son's request, by the Countess
herself.  This was perhaps the most important of all, for it was the
choice of a woman who should look after the child's necessities, and
fill so far as possible the place of the dead mother and the absent
grandmother.  The boy, having passed his seventh birthday, was
ostensibly emancipated from the nursery: yet, with no lady at the head
of the household, the presence of some responsible woman about the child
became needful. The Countess's choice was soon made.  It fell on her own
waiting-woman, Guenllian, in whom she had more confidence than in any
one else.  It was an additional recommendation that Guenllian had been
about the child from his infancy, so that he would feel her to be a
familiar friend.  Yet, though she was sending with him the person of all
others in whom she most relied, the Countess suffered severe anxiety in
parting with her boy, who, after his father, was her one darling in all
the world.  What would become of him?  Suppose he were drowned in
crossing the sea, and never reached his father!  Suppose he were
murdered by the "wild Irish," who, in the eyes of all English people of
that date, were savages of the most dreadful type.  Or, worse
still,--suppose he grew up to be a monster of wickedness,--that pretty
little child who now lifted his pure blue eyes so honestly and
confidingly to hers!  She thought it would break her heart.  And strong
as that heart was to cleave to God and do the right, yet, as the event
proved, it was not one to bear much suffering.

"Very dear Lady," suggested Guenllian tenderly, "can you not trust the
young Lord into the merciful hands of God?  Can my young Lord go whither
He is not?"

"Thy faith shames mine, my maid.  May God verily go with you!
Wenteline, thou wilt surely promise me that my darling shall be bred up
to prize this," and she laid her hand on the French Bible.  "Let the
Word of the Lord never be out of his reach, nor of his hearing.  Rising
up and lying down--coming in and going out--let him pillow his soul upon
it, and be made strong."

Guenllian gave the required promise very quietly. Her mistress knew she
might be trusted.

"And if it should come--as we hear rumour afloat--that Dan John busieth
himself to render the Book into the English tongue, then will I send it
o'er so soon as may be.  An whole Bible in English!  Ay, that day that
seeth it shall be a merry day for England."

The French Bible was the Countess's parting gift to her grandson.  It
was no mean gift, for the writing of its fellow, which was to remain
with her, had cost her more than twenty pounds.

To the child himself she said comparatively little. She wished her words
to sink deep and take root; and she knew that an important means to that
end was that they should be few.  So, as her last words, she gave him
two mottoes, in the language which was only then ceasing to be the
mother tongue of English nobles.

"_Fais ce que doy, advienne que fourra_."  And--"_Un Dieu, un Roy,
servir je day_."

And thus, with a thousand prayers and blessings, the boy left her.

"Ah, when to meet again?" she sighed, as from the castle turret she
watched him go, turning to kiss his hand to her as he rode away towards
Shropshire. "O my darling, mine heart misgiveth me sore!--when to meet
again?"

Never any more, Philippa Mortimer, till both stand in the street of the
Golden City, and under the shade of the Tree of Life.

Little Roger and his suite travelled, as was usual at the time, on
horseback.  The charette was reserved for short journeys in civilised
places, where there was some semblance of a road; while the litter was
the vehicle of ladies and invalids.  A dark roan-coloured "trotter," or
saddle-horse, was selected for the little lord, and fitted with a black
velvet saddle embroidered in gold.  The harness was also black. There
was no saddle-cloth, as this was an article used on ceremonial
occasions; and as the horse was going on a journey which would lie
chiefly upon turf, he was not shod.

Roger himself was dressed in a long robe of dark blue damask, relieved
by narrow stripes of white and red; and over it he wore a hood of black
velvet. On the top of this sat a brown felt hat, in shape something like
a modern "wide-awake," with one dark-green plume standing straight up in
its front, and fastened to the hat by a small golden clasp.  A little
white frill surrounded his throat beneath the hood, which latter article
could be cast aside if the weather were sufficiently warm.  The sleeves
of the robe were extremely wide and full, and lined with white; and
beneath them were closer sleeves of apple-green, but these were far
wider than gentlemen wear them now.  Dark-green boots, with white
buttons, and spurs of gilt copper, completed the young gentleman's
costume.  His stirrups were of white metal, and in his hand was an
excessively long white whip, much taller than himself.[#]  It was the
first time that Roger had been allowed to ride alone on a journey, and
he was as proud of the distinction as might be expected.

[#] This description is mainly taken from one of Creton's illuminations.
Harl. MS. 1319, illum. ix.

Before the convoy went two running footmen, attired loosely in a costume
somewhat resembling the Highland kilt, one of whom bore a pennon with
the Earl's arms, and the other a trumpet, which was sounded whenever
they drew near to any town or village.  Every man carried a drinking-cup
at his girdle, and his dagger served for a knife.  The travellers
beguiled the long day by singing songs and ballads, among which was a
new song just become popular, of which the first line only has descended
to us, and that has a decidedly minor tone--"_J'ay tout perdu mon temps
et mon labour_."

Thus accoutred and equipped, conducted by two knights, eight squires,
fifty men-at-arms, and a hundred archers, Roger set forth on his
journey.  A pleasant ride of eight miles brought them to Clun Castle,
which belonged to Roger's cousin, the young Lord Le Despenser, and the
keeper of the castle was delighted to show hospitality to one so nearly
related to the owner.  Here they stayed for dinner, Roger being seated
in the place of honour at the head of the dais, and all present anxious
to gratify his slightest fancy. Eight miles more, after dinner, brought
them to Montgomery, where the castle received its heir for the night.

In the streets of the towns, but especially on the bridges and in the
church porches--where in Roman Catholic countries they usually lie in
wait--were always congregated a larger or smaller swarm of beggars, who
invariably seized upon a group of travellers with avidity.  And as
giving of alms, however indiscriminate, was a good work in the eyes of
the Church, Sir Thomas Mortimer had provided himself with a purse full
of pennies, out of which he doled twopences and fourpences to every
crowd of suppliants.

The next day was Sunday; but the only difference which it made in the
day's programme was that, before the travellers set forth, they attended
mass in the fine old cruciform church of Montgomery.  Mass being
conducted in a tongue unknown to the vulgar of all nations, may be
attended in any country with equal advantage--or disadvantage.  The
stage that day was rather shorter, but they were now among the
mountains, and travelling became a slow and wearisome process.  They
reached before night the village of Languadan, where they stayed the
night, Sir Thomas and his precious charge being accommodated at the
village inn, and the guard encamping outside in the open air.  A third
day's journey of thirteen miles brought them to Kemmer Abbey, and a
fourth, long and fatiguing, winding round the base of Snowdon, to
Beddgelert.  They made up for their extra work by riding only ten miles
on the Wednesday, which ended at Caernarvon.  Here they returned to more
civilised life, and found better accommodation than they had done since
leaving Montgomery.  But the Thursday's journey was again long and
tedious, for they had to sail across the Menai, and round Anglesey.
Five boats awaited them here, the St. Mary, the Michael, the Grace Dieu,
the Margaret, and the Katherine: their tonnage ran from sixty to a
hundred and fifty tons.  They were simply large, deep brown boats, with
one mast and no deck, and neither cabin nor any other form of shelter.
Sir Thomas and Roger embarked on the Grace Dieu, which was the largest
of the boats, and the guard were packed into the other four, the squires
going with their betters.

On arrival at Holyhead, Sir Thomas was met by the deputy keeper of Usk
Castle, who presented to him two more squires, three "varlets," and a
boy, who were to serve in the household of the young Lord.  One of the
squires was named Reginald de Pageham, and his family had been in the
service of the Earls of Ulster from time immemorial.  The other was
named Constantine Byterre, and was the son of a squire of the Earl.  The
varlets were villeins from Usk.  And the boy was Lawrence Madison.

If any reader of modern ideas should desire to know how or why a child
of seven years old was selected for a servant, be it known that in the
Middle Ages that was the usual period for a boy to commence service.  He
was to fill the posts of page of the chamber and whipping-boy: in other
words, and practically, he was to fetch and carry for his little master,
to learn and play with him, and when Roger was naughty and required
chastisement,--which could scarcely be expected not to occur,--Lawrence,
not Roger was to be whipped.

The combination of boy with boy was a curious one.  Roger had been most
carefully brought up, led by tender hands every step of the way hitherto
traversed.  Lawrence had scrambled up on hands and knees, as he might,
with no leading at all except the rare catechising in church, and the
personal influence of Beatrice and the fishes.  But these three had been
for good.  The Rev. Mr. Robesart, the only one of the clergy of the
parish church at Usk who cared to catechise the children, had been one
of those rare stars among the medieval priesthood who both loved the
perishing souls of men, and were themselves in possession of the Bread
of Life to break to them.

Little Beatrice had repeated her lessons to Lawrence, whom she was
pleased to like, in a funny, patronising little way, and they had done
him at least as much good as they did to her.  And the fishes had also
had a share in his education, for their beauty had gratified his taste,
and their helpless condition had stirred feelings of pity which do not
often find such ready entrance into a boy's heart as they did into that
of Lawrence Madison.

It was not on account of any intellectual or moral qualifications that
Lawrence had been chosen for his post of service.  It was simply because
he was a pretty child, and would look well in the Earl's livery. His
parents were only too thankful for such a chance of promotion for him.
He was one too many for their financial resources.  On Lawrence's part
there was only one person whom he was sorry to leave, and that was the
little playmate over the way.  He had gone proudly across to the
fishmonger's, to show himself in his new splendours, and to say
farewell.

"Love us, sweet Saint Mary!" was Philippa's exclamation.  "How fine art
thou!"

"Oh, how pretty, how pretty!" cried little Beatrice. "Lolly, where
gattest such pretty raiment?"

"'Tis my Lord his livery, child," said Blumond. "And what place hast
thou, lad?  Kitchen knave?"

This was the lowest position that a boy could have in a noble household.
Lawrence's head went up in a style which would have amused most students
of human nature.

"Nay, Master Blumond," said he: "I am to be page of the chamber to my
Lord's son."

"Gramercy, how grand we are!" laughed Blumond. "Prithee, good Master
Lawrence, let me beseech thee to have a favour unto me."

Lawrence had an uneasy perception that the fishmonger was laughing at
him.  He struggled for a moment with the new sense of dignity which sat
so stiffly upon him, and then, speaking in his natural way, said,--

"I shall never forget you, Master Blumond, nor Philippa, nor Beattie.
But I wis not when I shall see you all again.  The little Lord goeth to
Ireland, and I withal."

"Where's Ireland?" asked Beattie, with wide-open eyes, "Ireland" having
immediately presented to her imagination a large park with a castle in
the middle of it.

"That wis I not," answered ignorant Lawrence. "'Tis somewhere.  I shall
see when we be there."

Blumond was a little wiser, but only a little. "Well, now, is't not
across seas?" suggested he.

Lawrence's eyes brightened, and Beatrice's grew sorrowful.

"Wilt thou ever be back, Lolly?" she said in a mournful tone.

"To be sure!" quickly responded Blumond.  "He shall come back a grand
young gentleman, a-riding of a big black courser, with a scarlet
saddle-cloth all broidered o' gold and silver."

There was a general laugh at this highly improbable suggestion, which
was checked by Philippa's query if Lawrence had taken leave of Dan
Robesart.

"Nay.  Should I so?" asked the boy doubtfully.

"Aye, for sure.  Haste thee up the hill, for he went into the church but
now."

And with a hasty farewell at last Lawrence ran off.

He found the priest pacing meditatively up and down the north aisle of
the church, with folded arms and a very grave face.

"Didst seek me, my son?" he inquired, pausing as Lawrence came up and
stood rather timidly at a little distance.

"An't please you, good Father, I go hence as to-morrow, and Philippa
would have me ask you of your blessing ere I went."

"That shalt thou have, right heartily."  And the thin white hand was
laid on the child's head.  "Our Lord bless thee, and make thee a
blessing.  May He be thy Guide and Shield and Comforter; yea, may He
cover thee with His wings all the day long, and be unto thee a buckler
from the face of evil.  Lawrence, my son, I would fain have thy promise
to a thing."

"What thing, Father?"

"Pass thy word to me, and never forget it, that in all thy life thou
wilt never go any whither without asking our Lord to go with thee."

The priest had somewhat failed to realise the extreme youth and worse
ignorance of the child to whom he was talking.  The reply recalled him
to these facts.

"Where shall I find Him?--in the church?  Must I hear mass every
morning?"

One of the strangest things in Romanism to a Protestant mind is the
fancy that prayer must be offered in a consecrated building to be
thoroughly acceptable.  Of course, when a man localises the presence of
Christ as confined to a particular piece of stone, it is natural that he
should fancy he must go to the stone to find Him.  From this
unscriptural notion the Lollards had to a great extent emancipated
themselves.  Mr. Robesart therefore answered Lawrence as most priests
would not have done, for in his eyes the presence of Christ was not
restricted to the altar-stone and the consecrated wafer.

"My son, say in thine heart--thou needest not speak it loud--'Jesus, be
with me,' before thou dost any matter, or goest any whither.  Our Lord
will hear thee.  Wilt thou so do?"

Lawrence gave the promise, with a child's readiness to promise anything
asked by a person whom he loved and reverenced.  The priest lifted his
eyes.

"Lord keep him in mind!" he said in a low voice. "Keep Thyself in the
child's heart, and bear him upon Thine before the Father!--Now, my son,
go, and God be with thee."

Mr. Robesart laid his hand again on the child's head, and with a slower
step than before, as if some awe rested upon him, Lawrence went down to
the hovel below the hill.

The journey from Usk to Ireland was a far more new and strange
experience to Lawrence than it could be to Roger.  The latter had taken
various short journeys from one of his father's castles to another, or
on occasional visits to friends and relatives of the family: but the
former had spent all his little life in the hovel at Usk, and his own
feet were the only mode of travelling with which he had hitherto been
acquainted.  The sea was something completely new to both.  Lawrence was
deeply interested in finding out that fishes lived in that mighty ocean
which seemed alike so potent and so interminable.  He wanted to go down
to the bottom and see the fishes alive in their own haunts, and find out
what was there beside them.  But after timidly hinting at these
aspirations to an archer and a squire, and perceiving that both were
inclined to laugh at him, Lawrence locked up the remainder of his
fancies in his own breast, and awaited further light and future
opportunities.

Meditations of this kind did not trouble Roger. He found quite enough to
look at in the visible world, without puzzling his brain by speculations
concerning the unseen.  His nature disposed him at all times to action
rather than thought.

Two months were consumed on the voyage to Ireland: not by any means an
unreasonable time, when that period or longer was frequently required
between Dover and Calais.  They were detained previously at Holyhead,
waiting for a south-east wind, only for a fortnight, which was rather a
matter for congratulation; as was also the fact that they were only
twice in danger of their lives during the voyage.  Perils in the
wilderness, and perils in the sea, were much more intelligible to our
forefathers than to ourselves.

Roger was growing dreadfully tired of sea and sky long before the shore
of Antrim was sighted. Lawrence was tired of nothing but his own
ignorance and incapacity to understand what he saw.  He wanted to
know--to dive to the bottom of every thing, literally and figuratively:
and he did not know how to get there, and nobody could or would tell
him. Surely things had an end somewhere--if one could only find it out!

The voyage came to one, at any rate; and on a beautiful summer morning,
the keel of the Grace Dieu at last grated upon the shingle of Ulster.
Half-a-dozen of the crew jumped out into the surf, and twice as many
came to help from the land.  The great boat was dragged on shore by the
help of ropes, a ladder set against her side, and Roger carefully
carried ashore by a squire.  Lawrence was left to climb down as he best
could.  Both reached the ground in safety, and found themselves in
presence of a crowd of officers and retainers in the Earl of Ulster's
livery; from among whom in a moment the Earl himself came forward, and
gave a warm fatherly welcome to his little son.  After mutual greetings
had been sufficiently exchanged between old residents and new-comers,
the Earl mounted his horse, a superb bay caparisoned with a scarlet
saddle-cloth, and Roger having been lifted on a white pony beside him,
they rode away to the Castle of Carrickfergus.

Ulster was in the fourteenth century, as it still is in the nineteenth,
in a much more settled, and to English eyes a more civilised condition,
than the Milesian parts of Ireland: but even there, that hatred of rent
which seems characteristic of the Irish race, flourished quite as
luxuriantly as now.  Fifty years before this date, Maud of Lancaster,
the girl-widow of the murdered Earl of Ulster, and great-grandmother of
little Roger, had been constrained to address piteous appeals to King
Edward III. for his charity, on the ground that while nominally
possessed of large property, she had really nothing to live upon, since
her Irish tenants would not pay their rents.

The English mind, which is apt to pride itself upon its steady-going,
law-abiding tendencies, was much exercised with this Irish peculiarity,
which it could not understand at all.  Why a man should not pay rent for
land which the law affirmed was not his own, and what possible objection
he could have to doing so beyond a wish to keep his money in his pocket,
was wholly unintelligible to the Saxon mind, which never comprehended
that passionate love for the soil, that blind clinging to the homestead,
which are characteristic of the Celt.  Those who have those qualities,
among our now mixed race, whatever their known pedigree be, may rest
assured that Celtic blood--whether British, Gaelic, or Erse--has entered
their veins from some quarter.

The Irish, on their part, were for ever looking back to that day when
they were lords of the soil, before the foot of the stranger had ever
pressed the turf of the Green Isle.  It was the land which they yearned
to emancipate rather than themselves.  In Celtic eyes a monarch is king
of the land, and the people who dwell on it are merely adventitious
coincidences: in Saxon eyes he is king of the people, and the land is
simply the piece of matter which holds the people in obedience to the
law of gravitation.  The latter must necessarily be an emigrating and
colonising race: the former as certainly, by the very nature of things,
must feel subjection to a foreign nation an intolerable yoke, and exile
one of the bitterest penalties that can be visited on man.  How are
these two types of mind ever to understand each other?

It has been well said that "there is not only one Mediator between God
and man, but also one Mediator between man and man, the Man Christ
Jesus."  Never, as Man, was a truer patriot, and yet never was a more
thorough cosmopolitan, than He whose eyes as God are always upon the
Land of Israel, and who hath loved Zion.  Can we not all learn of Him,
and bear with each other till the day comes when we shall see eye to
eye--when there shall be one nation upon the mountains of Israel, and
one King over all the earth,--one flock, and one Shepherd?




                             *CHAPTER III.*

                          *CAST ON THE WORLD.*

    "But He who feeds the ravens young
      Lets naething pass He disna see,
    He'll some time judge o' richt and wrang,
      And aye provide for you and me."
        --JAMES HOGG.


"Would it please your good Lordship to stand still but one minute?"

"No, Wenteline, it wouldn't."  And little Roger twisted himself out of
the hands which were vainly endeavouring to smoothe down his vest of
violet velvet embroidered in silver, and to fasten it round the waist
with a richly-chased silver belt.

"Then, when my gracious Lord sends Master Constantine for your Lordship,
am I to say you will not be donned, so you cannot go down to hall?"

"Thou canst say what it list thee.  I want to play at soldiers with
Lolly."

"So shall your Lordship when you be donned," answered Guenllian firmly.

Little Roger looked up into her face, and seeing no relenting, broke
into a merry little laugh, and resigned himself to the inevitable.

"Oh, come then, make haste!"

Vanity was not among Roger's failings, and impatience very decidedly
was.  Guenllian obeyed her little charge's bidding, and in a few minutes
released him from bondage.  He rewarded her with a hurried kiss, and
scampered off into the ante-chamber, calling out,--

"Lolly, Lolly, come and play at soldiers!"

The two boys, master and servant, were very fond of each other.  This
was the more remarkable since not only their temperaments, but their
tastes, were diverse.  Roger liked noise and show, was lively,
impulsive, ardent: he had no particular love for lessons, and no
capacity for sitting still.  Lawrence was grave and calm, gifted with an
insatiable thirst for knowledge, and of a quiet, almost indolent
physical temperament.  The one point on which their tastes met was a
liking for music; and even in this case Roger delighted in stirring
martial strains, while Lawrence preferred soft and plaintive airs.
Playing at soldiers, therefore, was rather in Roger's line than in
Lawrence's: but the latter never dreamed of setting his will in
antagonism to that of his master. The game had gone on for about half an
hour when a young man of twenty presented himself at the door of the
ante-chamber.  He was clad in a blue tunic reaching nearly to the knee,
and girded with a black belt round the hips, studded with gold; a red
hood encircled his neck; his stockings were diverse, the right being of
the same shade as the hood, and the left of green stripped with black.
Low black shoes, with very pointed toes, completed his costume.

"Now, Master Constantine, you may go away.  I want nought with you,"
shouted little Roger, still struggling with Lawrence, whom he had almost
forced into a corner.

"Please it your Lordship," returned Master Constantine with an amused
smile, "I want somewhat with you.  My gracious Lord hath sent me to
fetch you to hall."

"O you bad man, you have spoiled my fun!" cried little Roger.  "I had
nearly won the battle.--Come along then, Lolly, we will make an end at
after. Draw off the troops--right about face!  March!"

A smile broke over the somewhat weary face of the Viceroy, when, two
minutes later, his little son came marching into the hall, shouldering
his toy spear, and followed by Lawrence, who carried a long stick in a
manner similar as to position, but dissimilar as to the appearance of
interest.  At the edge of the dalts Lawrence dropped his stick, made a
low bow to his master, and retreated among the household beneath. Roger
bounded on the dais, kissed his father's hand, and squatted himself
down--for half a minute--on a hassock at the Earl's feet.  The father's
hand lingered tenderly among the fair curls on the boy's head.

"Little Roger," he said, "I have somewhat to tell thee."

"Is it a battle?" exclaimed Roger eagerly.

His father laughed.  "Of a truth, thou art cut out for a soldier, my
lad.  Nay, 'tis not a battle; it is a journey."

"Shall I take a journey?"

"Not yet a while.  Perchance, some day.  But what sayest?  Canst do
without me for a month or twain?"

"Whither go you, my Lord?"

"I set forth for Cork this next Wednesday."

"Where's Cork?"

"There shall be nigh all Ireland between us, little Roger."

"But musn't I go?" said Roger in a very disappointed tone.

"Not yet a while," repeated his father.  "Cork is wilder by far than
Antrim.  I must ensure me first that it shall be safe to have thee.  If
so be, I may send for thee in time."

"But must I be all alone?" demanded the child in a changed tone.

"All alone--with Wenteline and Master Byterre and Lawrence--for a little
while.  Then thou shalt either come to me, or go back to my Lady thy
grandmother."

"Oh, let me come to your Lordship!  I love not women!" cried Roger, with
the usual want of gallantry of small boys.

"In very deed, I am shocked!" said the Earl, with a twinkle of amusement
in his eyes which made more impression on Roger than the accompanying
words. "Howbeit, we shall see.  Thou shouldst dearly love thy
grandmother, Roger, for she loveth thee right well."

"Oh aye, I love her all right!--but women wit nought of war and
knighthood, and such like.  They think you be good if you sit still and
stare on a book. And that is monks' gear, not soldiers'.  I am a
soldier."

"Art thou, forsooth?" responded the Earl with a laugh.  "Thou shalt be
one day, maybe.  Now, my doughty warrior, run to thy nurse.  I have ado
with these gentlemen."

Two years had passed when this dialogue took place, since little Roger
came from Wigmore to Ireland.  He was growing a bright boy, still not
particularly fond of study, but less averse to it than he had been, and
developing a strong taste for military matters, and for the lighter
accomplishments. He danced and sang well for his age, and was learning
to play the cithern or guitar.  He rode fearlessly, was a great climber
and leaper, and considering his years a good archer, and a first-rate
player of chess, foot-ball, club-ball (cricket), hand-tennis (fives),
mall battledore and shuttlecock, and tables or back-gammon. As to
drawing, nobody ever dreamed of teaching that to a medieval noble.  The
three Rs were also progressing fairly for a boy in the fourteenth
century.

The small household left at Carrickfergus had but a dull time of it
after the Earl had ridden away for Cork.  Two months, and half of a
third, dragged wearily along, and not a word came from either Cork or
Wigmore.  The third month was drawing to its close when, late one snowy
winter night, the faint sound of a horn announced the approach of
visitors.

"The saints give it maybe my Lord!" exclaimed Constantine Byterre, who
was as weary of comparative solitude as a lively young man could well
be.

The drawbridge was thrown across, the portcullis pulled up, and Sir
Thomas Mortimer rode into the courtyard, followed by Reginald de Pageham
and various other members of the Earl's household. They had evidently
ridden a long way, for their horses were exceedingly jaded.

"How does my Lord Roger?" were the first words of Sir Thomas, and the
porter perceived that he was either very tired, or very sad.

"Well, sweet Sir: in his bed, as a child should be at this hour."

"Thank God!  Bid Mistress Wenteline down to hall, for I must speak with
her quickly."

"Sweet Sir, I pray you of your grace, is aught ill?"

"Very ill indeed, good Alan."  But Sir Thomas did not explain himself
until Guenllian appeared.

It was necessary to rouse her gently, since she slept in little Roger's
chamber, and Sir Thomas had given orders that if possible he should not
be disturbed. Fearing she knew not what, Guenllian wrapped herself in a
thick robe, and descended to the hall.

"Mistress, I give you good greeting: and I do you to wit right heavy
tidings, for Lord Edmund the Earl lieth dead in Cork Castle."

A low cry of pain and horror broke from Guenllian.

"Surely not slain of the wild men?"

"In no wise.  He died a less glorious death, for he took ill rheum,
fording the Lee, and in five days therefrom he was no more."

It was as natural for a Lollard as for any other to respond, "Whose soul
God pardon!"

"Amen," said Sir Thomas, crossing himself.  "I trust you, mistress mine,
to break these tidings to the young Earl.  Have here my dead Lord's
token"--and he held forth a chased gold ring.  "I am bidden, if it shall
stand with the King's pleasure, to have back his little Lordship to my
Lady his grandmother at Wigmore."

"Poor child!" said Guenllian tremulously.  "Poor child!"

"Aye, 'tis sad news for him," was the answer. "Yet childre's grief
lasteth not long.  Methought, good my mistress, it were as well he
should not hear it until the morrow."

"Trust me, Sir.  It were cruelty to wake a child up to such news.  Aye,
but I am woe for my little child!  Mereckoneth he were not one to grow
up well without a father--and without mother belike!  The morrow's tears
shall be the least part of his sorrow."

"Ah, well!  God must do His will," replied Sir Thomas in a fatalistic
manner.

To him, God's will was only another term for what a heathen would have
styled inevitable destiny.  In connection with the expression, he no
more thought of God as a real, living, loving Personality, than he would
have thought of Destiny in like manner.  It was simply as an impalpable
but invincible law that had to take its course.  But on Guenllian's ear
the expression came with a wholly different meaning. That Almighty Being
who to the one was merely the embodiment of stern fate, was to the other
at once God and Father--the incarnation of all wisdom and of all love.
It was His will that little Roger should be left fatherless.  Then it
was the best thing that He could do for him: and He would be Himself the
child's Father.  The very thought which was the worst part of the sorrow
to the one was the greatest alleviation of it to the other.

Little Roger's grief was according to his character--intense, but not
abiding.  Novelty had for him the charm which it has for all children;
and he soon began to look forward to the coming journey to England, and
the meeting with his grandmother, and with his brother and sisters, who
had been left in her care.  But before the journey could be taken, the
royal assent and formal licence were an absolute necessity.  By the
death of the Earl, the viceroyalty devolved on his successor in the
earldom until a fresh appointment was made; and the Viceroy must not
leave his post except under leave of the Sovereign. Master Richard
Byterre, squire of the late Earl, was sent to England to tell the news,
and obtain the necessary authorisation, and until his return the
household at Carrickfergus was occupied in quietly preparing for the
change which was about to come upon it.

But before the return of Byterre, Reginald de Pyrpount arrived from
England with the heaviest news of all.

The coffin of the Earl had been taken by sea direct from Cork to Milford
Haven, and thence to Wigmore.  Perhaps too suddenly, the tidings of the
death of her last child were broken to the widowed mother.  She came
down into the hall of the Castle, whither the Coffin had been carried:
the lid was lifted, and she gazed long and earnestly on the face of her
dead: but through it all she never shed a tear. When she had regained
her own rooms, her squire asked if it were her pleasure that the funeral
should be proceeded with on the next day.

"Nay, not all so soon," was the answer.  "Wait but a little, and ye
shall bear my coffin too."

Despite all the efforts of her anxious suite, the Countess Philippa
refused to be comforted.  She would go down, into the grave unto her
son, mourning. She took to her bed on the second day.  Her confessor
came to reason with her.

"This is not well, Lady," said he.  "You are a rebellious subject unto
your heavenly King--a child that will not kiss the Father's rod.  Submit
you to Him, and be at peace."

"Not a rebel, Father," answered the low pathetic voice.  "Only a child
too tired to work any more. Let me go to Him that calleth me."

"But there is much for you to live for, Lady----" resumed the confessor,
but she interrupted him.

"I know.  And I would have lived if I could.  I would have lived for my
little Roger.  But I cannot, Father.  Heart and brain and life are tired
out.  God must have a care of my little child.  I am too weary to tend
him.  Let me go!"

They had to let her go.  On the evening of the third day, with one deep
sigh as of relief in the ending of the struggle, she laid down the weary
weight of life, and went to Him who had called her.

The House of Mortimer of March was represented by those four lonely
little children, of whom the eldest was only nine years old.  It seemed
as if every vestige of a shield for the tender plants was to be taken
away and they were to be exposed to the full fury of the winter blasts.

For a whole year little Roger was detained at Carrickfergus, nominal
Viceroy of Ireland, with his future still undetermined.  This was not
the fault of the King, a boy only just fifteen years of age; but of the
commission of Regency which governed in his name. At the end of that
time orders came from Westminster.

Sir Thomas Mortimer was to bring home the little Viceroy, to receive his
exoneration from the arduous honour which had been thrust upon him, and
to deliver him to the Earl of Arundel, whose ward he had been made, and
with whom he was to reside till his majority.  To Sir Thomas this news
was indifferent: he desired the child's welfare, which, as he understood
it, was likely to be well secured by this arrangement.  But as Guenllian
understood it, there was fair chance of the boy's ruin.  If there were
in the world one layman more than another who hated Wycliffe and
Lollardism from the centre of his soul, it was that Earl of Arundel to
whom Roger's future education was thus entrusted.  And the astute
statesman who was really--not ostensibly--the ruler of England, knew
this quite as well as she did.  This was Thomas, Duke of Gloucester, the
youngest and cleverest of the sons of Edward III.  And we have now
arrived at a point in our story which makes it necessary to interpose a
few words upon the state of politics at that time.

The King, as has just been said, was a mere boy, and the reins of power
were in the hands of his three uncles.  Of these Princes, the one whom
nature and fortune alike pointed out as the leader was the eldest, John
of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster.  And had he really taken the lead, the
disastrous reign of Richard II. might, humanly speaking, have ended very
differently.  His next brother, Edmund, Duke of York, was so extremely
weak in mind as to be little better than half-witted, and was entirely
under the control of whoever chose to control him.  The youngest, of
whom I have spoken above, was clever in the worst sense of that word:
but the only man whom he feared was his brother John, and had John
chosen he might have reduced the active wickedness of Thomas to a point
of merely nominal value.  He did not choose.  Never was a finer
character more completely rendered useless and inert by moral indolence;
never were such magnificent opportunities of serving God and man more
utterly wasted--than in the case of John of Gaunt.

The word "moral" is used advisedly.  Of physical or mental indolence he
had none.  His greatest delight, on his own authority, was "to hear of
gallant deeds of arms" or to perform them: and few, even of royal blood,
were more thoroughly well educated and accomplished according to the
standard of his day. But all was spoiled by this moral indolence--this
_laissez faire_ which would take no trouble.  Too much has been said of
the libertinism of John of Gaunt. He was not a man of pure life; but he
was not so bad as he is usually supposed to have been.  Yet in one point
he was a perfect rehearsal of Charles the Second--that so-called
"sauntering," which I have termed moral indolence, and which it is said
that Charles loved better than he ever loved any human being.  And in
the case of John of Gaunt it is the sadder to relate, because he had
more perfect knowledge of the way of righteousness than most of those
around him.  The one instance in which he broke through the bonds of his
besetting sin was in order to stand by John Wycliffe in the hour of
persecution. Oh, how terrible is the reckoning for him who was not
ignorant, who was not even in doubt of the right--who knew his Lord's
will, and did it not!

In consequence of this sad lapse, the reins of power fell into the hands
of Gloucester.  And Gloucester was one of those men who know how to
wait, to feel the pulse of circumstances, and when the right moment
comes, to strike a decisive blow.  How far he ever loved any one may be
doubtful: but that he was a splendid hater is beyond all doubt.  There
were a few men whom he trusted and favoured; and of these--with one
exception, the chief of them--was Richard Earl of Arundel.

The wardship of little Roger Mortimer would much more naturally have
been given to one of his only adult relatives--his two grand-uncles,
William, Earl of Salisbury, and Sir John de Montacute.  But in the eyes
of Gloucester, no Montacute was a person to be trusted.  The family were
by tradition favourers of the Boin-Homines--or, in other words, among
the Protestants of that period.  And Gloucester was a "black Papist."
It is true that the Earl of Salisbury was an exception to the family
rule in this particular: but it did not suit Gloucester's views to allow
little Roger to reside in his house.  He had a wife whose mother was one
of the most prominent Lollards of the day: and he was himself much under
the influence of the Lollard Princess of Wales, whom he had loved in her
brilliant youth.  His surroundings, therefore, were dubious.  And deep
down in Gloucester's crafty brain lay a scheme in which poor little
Roger was to be chief actor, and if he were brought up as a Lollard
there would be very little hope of utilising him for it.  He must be
made the ward of somebody who would diligently cultivate any sparks of
ambition latent in his mind, who would give him a bias in favour of his
uncle Gloucester personally, and against the King, and who would teach
him to hate Lollardism.  So the child was consigned to the care of the
Earl of Arundel, and to make surety doubly sure, was solemnly affianced
to his daughter.

A very clever Jesuit is recorded to have said, "Let me have the
education of a child till he is seven years old, and you may have him
for the rest of his life."  The child thus plotted against had passed
the test age.  It might have been thought that his ruin was sure.  But
graven deep down in that fervent heart, below all the digging of
Gloucester and his myrmidons, lay the mottoes of Philippa Montacute: and
no efforts of theirs would ever efface that graving. "_Un Dieu, un
Roy_"--and "_Fais ce que doy_."  They were a hedge of God's planting
around the tender shoot.  He seemed to have said to the enemy, "Behold,
he is in thine hand; but save his moral life."

It was a bitter sorrow to Guenllian that the Earl of Arundel gave her a
civil _conge_.  He had not the least doubt that she would be invaluable
to the younger children: he could not think of depriving them of her.
And little Roger would be amply provided with care.  The Countess
herself would see to him.

Guenllian was not reassured.  The Countess was one of those soft,
languid, placid, India-rubber women who would lay aside a novel
deliberately if they knew that their children were in danger of
drowning.  She was not fit to bring up Guenllian's darling!  She pleaded
with the Earl piteously to allow her to remain with the child.  She was
sure the old Countess would have wished it.  The Earl inquired if she
had made any actual promise to this effect.  In so many words, Guenllian
could not say that she had: but that the tacit understanding had existed
she knew full well.  And she had distinctly promised that Roger should
read constantly and diligently in the French Bible.  The Earl assured
her with an insinuating smile that there was not the least difficulty
about that.  He had a French Bible, and read it.  Just then, Lollardism
was walking in silver slippers, and the Bible was ranked among
fashionable literature.  Guenllian knew well that the reading with and
without her would be two very different things.  There would be all the
difference in them between a living man and an automaton.  But she was
powerless.  The matter was out of her hands. She must let her darling
go.

She lifted up her soul as she turned away.

"Lord, they cannot bar Thee out of Arundel Castle! go with this child of
many prayers!  Teach him Thyself, and then he will be taught: save him,
and he will be saved!  Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did He,--in
heaven and in the earth and in the sea, and in all deep places.  Let
them curse, but bless Thou!"

And so, having touched the hem of Christ's garment, Guenllian went in
peace.




                             *CHAPTER IV.*

                       *WHAT CAME OF SELF-WILL.*

    "Are not the worst things that befal us here,
    That seem devoid of meaning, or contain
    The least of love and beauty, those from which
    The heavenly Alchemist extracts the gold
    That makes us rich?"
      --REV. HORATIUS BONAR.


It was not in the old Castle in Sussex, the ancient home of the Earls of
Arundel, that little Roger Mortimer found his home at first. The Earl
was about to reside for a time in Town. His city residence, Bermondsey
House, was situated on Fish Wharf, near to that delicious part of the
City of London now known as Billingsgate.  It may be safely asserted
that no member of the English peerage would be likely to select this
locality in the present day for the site of his town house.  But, five
hundred years ago, matters were very different, and the banks of the
river near London Bridge were pleasant and airy places.  This was, in
fact, a fashionable part of the City: and here the premier Earl of
England held his court, almost rivalling that of the sovereign in
costliness and magnificence. Little Roger, for the past year a
comparatively lonely child, found himself suddenly transported into the
midst of a large and lively family.  Liveliness was not, indeed, a
characteristic of the Countess, a near relative of Roger, for her father
and his grandfather were sons of one mother.  She was a calm,
imperturbable specimen of humanity, who spoke, moved, and thought, in a
slow, self-complacent style, which would have sent an impatient person
into a passion.

The Earl was almost the antipodes of his wife. The Fitzalans of Arundel
were anything but faultless persons as a rule, but too much slowness and
caution were assuredly not among their failings.  He was an extremely
clever man, gifted with much originality of conception, as well as
talent in execution: not unamiable to those whom he loved, but capable
of intense harshness, and even cruelty, where he hated. Energetic even
to passion in everything which he did, a "whole man" to the one thing at
the one moment, capable of seeing very far into that which he chose to
see, but of being totally blind to that which he did not.  Richard, Earl
of Arundel, was one of the last men to whom such a charge as Roger
Mortimer ought to have been entrusted.

The family of this dissimilar pair amounted to five in number when
little Roger joined them.  These were, Richard, a youth of sixteen
years; John, aged fourteen; Elizabeth, aged ten, and already married to
Roger's cousin, William de Montacute; Alice, aged five; and Joan, aged
three.  Both the boys were too old for Roger to feel much sympathy with
them, or they with him; while the girls, both as being younger, and as
being girls, were in his eyes beneath his notice.  He therefore remained
a speckled bird in the family, instead of amalgamating with it; a fact
which drew him closer, despite all inequalities of position, to the one
boy whom he did like, Lawrence Madison, the only one of his old
acquaintances who was permitted to accompany him to Bermondsey House.
The Earl had meant to cut all the old ties; but little Roger pleaded
hard for the retention of Lawrence, alleging truthfully that he played
at soldiers with him.  It was just because this one item was so utterly
insignificant that the Earl permitted it to escape the general doom: and
thereby, little as he knew it, rendered inoperative all the rest of his
cautionary arrangements.  It was Lawrence who helped Roger more than any
one else to keep true to his grandmother's early teaching. When Roger
went astray, Lawrence either refused aid altogether, or went only so far
as he thought right, and then stood like a granite rock, immovable by
commands or entreaties.  When the former was less obstinate, and more
capable of being influenced, the look of earnest remonstrance in
Lawrence's eyes or even his disapproving silence, were often enough to
turn away the versatile and sensitive mind of Roger from a project of
doubtful character.  The little servant did not appear to care for hard
epithets, passionate words, or even blows, to which naughty Roger
sometimes descended when his temper got the better of him: but he did
care deeply to see his little master do right and grow wiser.  The
influence of the young Arundels--which was small, since Roger never
liked any of them--was often bad, and always doubtful: but Lawrence
could be relied upon as a force ever on the side of right, or at least
of that which he believed to be so.

It was Alice, the little girl of five years old, who had been solemnly
affianced to young Roger Mortimer. She was the only one of the children
who in character resembled her mother, nor was this resemblance perfect.
It made her physically idle, and mentally dull; but it did not save her
from that moral intensity which was the characteristic of the Arundel
family. In her, instead of expending itself in mental and physical
energy as it did with most of them, it formed a most unhappy combination
with those features inherited from her mother.  Passionate with a
passion which was weakness and not strength, with an energy which was
destructive and not constructive, with a capacity for loving which
centred in herself, and a perversity of will which only served to lead
astray, she went to wreck early, a boat with no compass and no rudder.
It was well for Roger Mortimer that however men might think to order his
future life, God had not destined Alice of Arundel for him.

It is scarcely necessary to say that notwithstanding the unction
wherewith the Earl had expatiated to Guenllian on his possession of a
French Bible, he did not see the least necessity for bringing Roger in
contact with that volume.  He had indeed come upon certain passages
therein which he theoretically regarded with reverence as "good words,"
but which he was nevertheless far from elevating into rules for his
daily conduct.  It never occurred to him that his Bible and his life had
anything to do with one another.  He would have thought it as reasonable
to regulate his diet by the particular clothes he wore, as to guide his
actions by that compilation of "excellent matter" upon which he looked
as supremely uninteresting and hardly intended for laymen.

About a week had elapsed since Roger became an inmate of the Earl's
household.  He and Lawrence slept in a small turret chamber, with a
young priest, by name Sir Gerard de Stanhope, whom the Earl had
appointed governor of his youthful ward.  The boys, who went to bed
earlier than the governor, very frequently employed the interval before
his arrival, not in sleep, but in confidential conversation--the rather
since it was the only time of day when they could talk together without
fear of being overheard.

"Lolly!" said Roger on the night in question. He lay in a blue silk bed
embroidered with red and gold griffins; Lawrence in a little plain
trundle-bed which was pushed under the larger one in the day-time.

"My Lord?" obediently responded Lawrence.

"How doth this place like thee?"

"Please it your Lordship, it liketh me reasonable well," answered
Lawrence, in a tone even less decisive than the words.

"It liketh me unreasonable ill," returned Roger in a voice wherein no
want of decision could be traced.

"What ails you thereat, my Lord?"

"Lolly, I like nobody here but thee."

"That grudgeth me, my Lord."  By which Lawrence meant to say that he was
sorry to hear it. "Loves not your Lordship neither my Lord nor my Lady?"

"My Lord's a big lion, and they sometimes bite and claw you.  And my
Lady's a hen, and all she cares for is to snuggle her in the sand and
cluck. Beside, she's a woman, and women be no good.  I would there had
been some lads."

"So there be, saving your Lordship's pleasure."

"They aren't lads, they are men.  My Lord Richard were not so ill, if he
were younger, but he is a grown man: and as to my Lord John, he doth
nought but make mowes[#] at me.  I tell thee, Lolly, there is nobody
here, out-taken[#] thyself, that I would buy for a farthing."


[#] Grimaces.

[#] Except.


"Truly, I am sorry your Lordship is of such ill cheer."

"Lolly, what was it--didst hear?--that my Lord spake to Sir Gerard,
mighty low, when thou and I were going forth of the chamber this
morrow?"

"I heard not all of it," said Lawrence.  "Only it was somewhat touching
Mistress Wenteline, that had desired your Lordship to be well learned in
the French Bible."

"Doth he look to cause me learn long tasks thereout by heart?" asked
Roger, with a wry face.  "I reckoned thou shouldst hear, for thou wert
nearer than I."

"In no wise, my Lord, so far as I might hear, for he bade Sir Gerard
have a care you touched it not."

"Then I'll read it right through!" cried Roger with childish perversity.
"That cannot be an ill deed, for my Lady my grandmother was set to have
me do the same."

Lawrence made no reply.

Though nothing on earth would have drawn the confession from him, yet
for all his expressed contempt for women, little Roger sorely missed
Guenllian. She had been his virtual mother for so long that, suddenly
deprived of her, he felt like a chicken roughly taken from under the
brooding wings of the hen.  He was far more inclined to respect her
wishes than he would have been had she remained with him: and there was
also a certain zest added by the instinctive knowledge that what was
good in the eyes of Guenllian was not unlikely to be bad in those of my
Lord Arundel.  Little Roger felt as if he had the pleasure of doing
wrong, without the conscientious reaction which usually followed.

The impulsive little mind was made up that he would read that French
Bible.  That it was locked up in a tall press, at least four feet above
his reach, was rather an additional incentive than a hindrance. To be
always on the watch for a possible leaving about of the keys formed an
object in life; and the subsequent scaling of the shelves like a cat was
decidedly a pleasure to be anticipated.  The keys were in charge of Sir
Gerard, who was the Earl's librarian; and he put them every night
beneath his pillow.  He need not have taken the precaution, so far as
Roger was concerned; for to possess himself of the keys by theft would
have been utterly dishonourable and unchivalrous in the eyes of the
future knight.  Yet with odd inconsistency--are we not all guilty of
that at times?--he had no such scruple as to possessing himself of the
Bible, if he could only find the keys.  But weeks went on, and this
hoped-for discovery had not been made.

It came suddenly at last, when one morning the Earl had occasion to send
for Sir Gerard in haste, at a moment when that gentleman, having just
finished his dressing, was about to put the usual contents into his
pockets.  He left the articles lying on the table, and hurriedly obeyed
the summons: which he had no sooner done than the small Earl of March
pounced upon the keys.  He had been watching the process with
considerable fluttering of his little heart; the next moment the key of
the press was slipped off the ring, and was safe at the bottom of his
pocket. Lawrence looked on with very doubtful eyes, the expression of
which was easily read by Roger.

"Now, Loll, hold thy peace!" said he, though Lawrence had not uttered a
word.  "I must have it, and I will!"

It will easily be surmised that Roger's ambition involved no particular
desire of learning, least of all the study of divinity.  The delight of
outwitting the Earl and Sir Gerard was great; and the pleasure of doing
something that Guenllian and his grandmother had wished him to do,
deprived the action of all wrong in his eyes, and added to it a
sentimental zest. Had the two motives been weighed in a balance, the
first would have proved the heavier.

The press containing the Bible stood in a large room which opened off
the hall.  The expedition to secure it must remain a future
gratification for the present. If only Sir Gerard would not miss the
key!  Was it safe to carry it in Roger's pocket?  Roger consulted
Lawrence, who agreed with him that it was a serious risk to run.  He
advised its restoration, but to that hypothesis his young master would
not listen for a moment.

The study of the garden wall now became sensationally interesting;
likewise of sundry old trees within the enclosure.  The alternatives
seemed to have equal chances of adoption, when a little hole was
discovered in the wall, at the further end of the garden, delightfully
hidden by a small loose stone which just fitted nicely into the crevice.
The key was safely concealed, and Roger, with the most angelic innocence
of face, returned to the house to repeat his Latin lesson to Sir Gerard.

Roger had been taught that to hide any thing from his confessor was a
sin of the most deadly type. Conveniently for him, his confessor was not
his tutor Sir Gerard, but the Earl's family chaplain, Friar Thomas
Ashbourne, a fat sleepy old priest, who never inflicted a penance that
he could help, and was more frequently than not employed in mental
wool-gathering during the process of confession, merely waking up to
pronounce the absolution at the close. It was not at all difficult to
get on the blind side of this comfortable official, especially if a
morning could be selected when his thoughts were likely to be
preoccupied with some subject interesting to himself.

Roger, having a very good idea what interested Dan Thomas, laid a trap
to catch him for the next occasion of shrift.  In order to do this, he
had first to catch the cook: and for that purpose, he must angle with
the master of the household, who happily for his object was a
good-natured man, and liked children.  Running through a gallery with
the hope of discovering him, he nearly fell over the person for whom he
was searching.

"Nay, now! what make you here, my Lord?"

"O Master Wynkfeld!  I was a-looking for you. Pray you, let us have a
capon endored[#] this even for supper, with _sauce Madame_."


[#] Larded.


The master of the household laughed.  "At your Lordship's pleasure.  I
wist not you loved capon so dear."

Nor did he: but Dan Thomas did.  Little Roger stood on tiptoe, and
pulled down the master to whisper in his ear.

"Look you, Dan Thomas loveth a capon thus dressed, and I would have him
do a thing for me that I wot of."

"Oho! is that it?" laughed the master.  "Then be your Lordship assured
Dan Thomas shall have the capon."

"With _sauce Madame_, look you!"

"With _sauce Madame_: good."

"But don't you tell!"

"Tell!  Not I," responded the amused and good-humoured master: and
little Roger scampered off.

An hour later, my Lord of March was summoned to be shriven.  Having
knelt down in the confessional, and gabbled over the formal prelude to
the effect that he confessed his sins, not only to God, but to the most
blessed Lady St. Mary, to my Lord St. John the Baptist, my Lords Saints
Peter and Paul, and all the saints and saintesses in Heaven, little
Roger added at the conclusion, all in a breath, as if it were part of
the _Confiteor_,--

"Father, I begged Master Wynkfeld to have for supper a capon endored,
with _sauce Madame_, by reason I knew you loved it thus."

"That shall scantly be amongst thy sins, my son," answered Friar Thomas,
jovially.  "I thank thee: but keep thee now to the matter in hand."

Roger was doing that much more strictly than was ever supposed by Friar
Thomas, who was the most unsuspicious of men.  He proceeded at once to
the catalogue of his sins, satisfied that they would now receive small
attention from the confessor.  In silence, with as much rapidity and in
as low a voice as he dared without exciting suspicion, Roger accused
himself of having taken a key from the table and hidden it in the wall.
What key it was, he was not careful to state; if the confessor wished to
know that, he could ask him the question.  But at this point Roger's
heart gave a bound, for he was asked a question.

"Thou hiddest _what_ in the wall?"

"A key," mumbled Roger.

"A pea!" repeated the Friar, misunderstanding him, and not having much
care to investigate.  "No need to confess such like small matter, my
son. Didst thou name _sauce Madame_ to Master Wynkfeld?"

"Oh yes, Father, twice over!" answered Roger eagerly.

"Good lad.  Now keep thee to thy confession."

Which Roger diligently did for the rest of the time, and then, absolved
and "clean shriven," ran back to Lawrence in the highest glee.

"Now, Lolly, my sins be all clean gone.  Go thou to shrift, and get rid
of thine; and then, as soon as ever we can, we'll have yon big book."

It was about a week later that the desired opportunity at last occurred.
The Earl had carried away Sir Gerard--for what purpose Roger neither
knew nor cared--and he and Lawrence had been bidden to play in the
press-chamber, and be good boys till they were called to supper.  No
sooner were they safely shut in than Roger indulged in a gleeful
chuckle.

"Look, Lolly!" said he, holding up the key.  "I heard my Lord say to my
Lady that he should not be home ere supper-time, and I thought we might
have luck, so I ran and fetched the key.  Now for it! Set me that settle
under the press."

"But your Lordship cannot climb up yonder!" responded Lawrence, as he
obeyed.

"I can do what I will!" said Roger stubbornly. "Nay, but look how the
press boweth outward! How shall you pass the same?"

The press, which was itself of wood, was built into the wall, in such a
manner that the upper half projected further than the lower.

"Dost think a wooden press shall master _me_?  I'll show him I'm his
master!"

Roger sprang upon the settle, set one foot upon a carved boss, and
climbed up with sufficient agility till he was stopped by the
projection.  No efforts could get him any higher.  He returned to the
settle, looking considerably discomfited.

"I'll have it yet!" said he.  "See, Lolly--if I could catch yonder great
brass rod that sticketh out, I am sicker[#] I could climb up by that I
shall jump for it."


[#] Certain.


"Eh, good lack! do not so, my Lord! you shall hurt yourself greatly, if
you have not a care."

"Thou go whistle for a fair wind!  Here goes!"  And little Roger,
gathering all his forces, gave a wild upward leap from the settle,
intent on catching the brass rod which was part of the ornamentation of
the press, and was not very firmly fixed.  To Lawrence's surprise, he
caught it; but the next moment the end of the rod came out in his hand,
and the natural result followed.  Down came the rod, and down came
Roger, overturning the settle, and bringing his head into violent
contact with the floor.  There he lay stunned, with Lawrence looking at
him in a terrible fright.

"Gramercy, what a to-do is here!" said the voice of Master Salveyn at
the door.  "Were ye not bidden be good lads til!----  Mercy, Saint Mary!
my Lord bleeds!  How happened this?"

Lawrence tremblingly replied that he had been climbing, and had fallen.
His own nerves had received a much worse shock than those of Salveyn.

"Good lack, will lads ever be out of mischief?" demanded that gentleman.
"Shut them up in a chamber where you should think none ill could hap
them short of earth-moving,[#] and ere you shall well have turned your
back, they shall be killing either themselves or one another!  Run thou
to call Mistress Grenestede, while I bear my young Lord to his chamber."


[#] Earthquake.


Lawrence rushed off for the middle-aged and useful person in question,
the children's nurse, governess, prescriber, chemist, confectioner, and
general factotum: and in a few minutes Roger was laid in bed, and
Mistress Grenestede was bathing his injured head with warm water.  She
improved the occasion by giving a lecture to Lawrence--who did not need
it--on imprudence and rashness.  But when time went on, and her little
patient did not return to consciousness, Mistress Grenestede began to
look uneasy.  A whispered consultation with Salveyn resulted in the
sending of a varlet on some errand. Another half-hour elapsed without
change, and then Lawrence, standing beside his master's bed, half hidden
by the curtain, heard somebody say, "He is come."  A step forward to
enable him to see who it was, and a smothered exclamation of pleasure
broke from him.  Master Salveyn was ushering in a priest in long black
robe--all physicians were priests at that date--and though the new-comer
failed to recognise Lawrence, the boy knew him.

"Father Robesart!  God be thanked!"

The priest heard him, and turned towards him.

"Who art thou, my son?"

Lawrence's delight overcame his shyness.

"Father Robesart, wit you not me?  I am Lawrence, son of Nicholas,
tanner, in the huts at Usk, that went away these two years gone.  I bade
you farewell in the church aisle, and you blessed me, and told me I
should pass word to you never to go any whither that I had not first
asked our Lord to be with me."

"Good, my son.  I remember thee now, and will have more talk with thee
anon.  Now let me look on the sick child.  Is it my little Lord of
March?"

"That is he, good Father."

"How gat he this hurt?"

Mistress Grenestede and Master Salveyn knew so little about it that
Lawrence was called forward to say what he knew.  His instinct told him
that it would be best to confess the whole truth to Father Robesart,
which he did, thereby calling up a look on the face of his old friend
which was a mixture of amusement and pity.

"Poor child!" he said softly, when Lawrence's story was told,--rather
astonishing Mistress Grenestede, that one of the first nobles in England
should be thought or called a poor child.

"Please it you, Father, did my Lord a wrong thing herein?" asked
Lawrence, timidly.

"I fear he did, my son."

Mr. Robesart said no more, but proceeded to his professional duties.
When he had finished his examination of the patient, and had given his
instructions to Mistress Grenestede--which involved some learned
references to the occultation of certain beneficent planets by
malevolent ones, and hints that the herbs prescribed were to be gathered
with reference to the position of the sun with respect to the Zodiac--he
called Lawrence out into the ante-chamber.




                              *CHAPTER V.*

                     *A CHANGE IN ROGER'S DESTINY.*

    "We shall be together, my Lord and I,
      While the crowds around us come and go;
    When false hearts wander, and true hearts die,
      My Friend will still be mine own, I know."
        --SARAH DOUDNEY.


On the wide cushioned seat in the window, Mr. Robesart sat down, and
Lawrence placed himself in front, waiting to be questioned. He had to
wait in silence for a few moments, while the priest seemed lost in
thought; then he turned back to the child.

"Now, my son, I would have some talk with thee. I am faint to find thou
hast thought on my words at parting.  Hast thou done them, Lawrence
Madison?"

"Mean you, Father, if I have asked at our Lord that He would go with me
whithersoever I went?"

"That mean I, my son."

"Aye, nearly alway, Father," said Lawrence, lifting a pair of honest
eyes to his friend's face, and adding more shyly, "I forgat sometimes."

"Good lad!  Take thou God's blessing and mine"--and Mr. Robesart laid
his hand on the boy's head. "Hath He been with thee, Lawrence?"

Lawrence looked up in some surprise.  Mr. Robesart's question suggested
two entirely new ideas: that prayers might have some result attached to
them, and that the presence of God was something which he could know and
feel.  Hitherto he had always looked upon praying as something which had
to be done--a good work, and the saying of good words--but a work which
had no possible connection with any source or consequence.  As a child
once said, Lawrence "had plenty of think in him," but he sadly wanted
teaching how to put his thoughts to practical purpose.  The thoughts now
came so fast that the words were slow.  Mr. Robesart was wise, and
waited for them.  How many priceless opportunities have been thrown
away, through not waiting quite long enough at such moments!  For one
temptation to be silent when we ought to speak, are there not a score to
speak when we ought to be silent?

"Father!  How can I know?" came at last.

"If He never went with thee, thou canst not know," was the pithy answer.
"That which one hath not, how can he lose or miss?"

Lawrence was silent, playing with one of the bright buttons of his tunic
in a style which indicated that his thoughts were not on the button.

"There is one manner, my son," then continued the priest, "wherein God
goeth with all men--in His providence as their Creator and Preserver.
Were He not ever with thee after this fashion, thou wouldst not live a
moment.  But it is after another manner that he goeth with His
beloved--as their Father and Friend.  Is He that to thee?"

"There be different sorts of fathers," said Lawrence, meditatively.

"Aye.  Alas for the human fathers that do misturn[#] the heavenly
Father!  It is only the good, true, and loving, my child, that be in
their lesser way like God."


[#] Pervert, misrepresent.


"Like my sometime Lord was to him?" said Lawrence, with brightening
eyes, and a nod towards the door of the inner chamber.

Mr. Robesart smiled a little sadly.  "Aye, Lawrence. Take thou for
example the best and truest thou hast known, but remember that he must
needs fall far behind."

Lawrence went back to the button, uttering his thoughts in a low voice,
as if he spoke to it rather than to the priest.

"He alway loved to have my little Lord at his knee," he reflected in
this manner.  "And he used to lift him up, and kiss him.  And if he were
in any trouble, my Lord would stay and hear him, even were it to his own
travail.  And had he been hither this morrow, I reckon it should have
gone nigh to break his heart to see him thus.--Father Robesart! Doth God
Almighty care for any man like _that_?"

"He cares like that for thee, Lawrence Madison."

Mr. Robesart paused an instant, and Lawrence thought the sentence was
finished.  But it was not, for one word followed it.  "If----"

"If what?" said the boy quickly.

"If thou wilt have it so."

"If I will have it!  Father Robesart, never nobody loved me!  Never, in
all my life!"

"Then see thou reject not the love which passeth all loves."

"What am I to do?"

"What doth any with love?  Take it--enjoy it--return it--do thy little
best for Him that giveth it."

"But serve him, _how_?"  It sounded to Lawrence like telling a serf
child lying in the mire to rise and offer the golden cup to a king.
Would the great nobles around the throne ever permit him to approach it?
A dim idea pervaded his brain that Father Robesart, as a priest, could
give him a passport through the ranks of the angels.  But the answer
brought him back to earth again.

"My son, thou servest God when thou servest any whom God loveth."

"Doth God love my Lord?  I suppose He will, being thus noble."

"'Not many noble are called,'" said Mr. Robesart, speaking rather to
himself than to Lawrence.  "Yet 'I will be a God to thee, and to thy
seed after thee.'  Aye, little Lawrence, I cannot doubt it.  God teach
thee, poor child, better than I can!  Remember, my son, that thou
servest not God in following thy little Lord into sin and mischief.
Thou wilt serve God by keeping him out thereof."

"My Lord bade me so keep him--my Lord of March, I would say, not he of
Arundel.  I misdoubt if he care."

"Poor children!" repeated the priest sorrowfully. "Tell me, Lawrence,
what would thy little Lord with the Bible?"

"Was it wrong to get that, Father?"

"Assuredly it was wrong to steal the key."

"O Father, we never stole it!  We only took it when Sir Gerard left it
behind him."

Mr. Robesart smiled and shook his head.  "Ye stole it, my son.  What is
it but stealing to take a thing which he that ought[#] it would not
yield unto you?  But what wanted my Lord with the book?"


[#] Owned.


"Please, Father, he desired much to read the same, and my old Lady his
grandmother had bidden him so to do.  And he heard--leastwise I heard,
and he asked at me--my Lord of Arundel once to say that he would not
have him lay finger thereon; so he was set on it."

Another very pitying smile parted the lips of Mr. Robesart.  "I marvel
whether the bidding or the forbidding were the more tempting bait!  Poor
little child!"

"Please, Father----"

"Speak thy will, my son."

"Will my Lord get well again?"

"I trust, if it be our Lord's pleasure, he shall do well, my son."

"Oh, I am so glad!"  And Lawrence's sparkling eyes by no means belied
his words.

"Dost thou love thy little Lord, Lawrence?"

"Aye, Father--so much!  Please, there never was any body else but him
and Beattie."  Lawrence was very near adding, "and you."  A feeling of
reverence restrained him, but he might have done it safely.

"Who is Beattie?"

"Blumond's Beattie--at the fishmonger's at Usk."

"Oh!  I know.  A good child."

"May I love Beattie, please, Father?"

"Thou mayest love who so thou wilt, and as much as ever thou wilt, so
long as thou lovest our Lord first and most."

"Whoever I will?"

"Certainly.  Who dost thou think too great to be loved?"

"Not great, exactly; but--Father Robesart, might I love you?  I never
thought I dare, before."

Mr. Robesart was more touched than he thought it well to let Lawrence
see.  But he did what nobody had ever done to the boy in all his
life--he stooped and kissed him.  It was an affirmative of the strongest
type, and Lawrence felt it so.

Roger's recovery was more rapid than any one about him had anticipated.
His body seemed as active and as easily impressed as his mind, as much
subject to ups and downs, and generally either on the top of the mount,
or in the bottom of the valley: the transition was quick from one to the
other, and he was never in either position for long.

Three years more passed uneventfully, until Roger and Lawrence were boys
of twelve years old.  Both had developed their respective characters.
Roger was beginning to see that the lesson-books which he had in old
days unreasonably detested, were machines for imparting knowledge and
power.  If he were only a little older, his own master, and out in the
world, what could he not do!  The change in his case was more or less
radical, for he was learning to govern himself.  He had drawn no closer
to the Arundel family.  He disliked them every one--from the Earl to his
youngest child: but most especially he disliked Alice, his betrothed.
When he grew to manhood he would pay the fine, and rid himself of that
galling bond.  He did not care for girls: he wanted to feel free.

The change which had taken place in Lawrence Madison was only in the
direction of growth.  The fetters of service and etiquette pressed
lightly upon him, for he loved his young Lord more than he had ever
loved his own brothers; and love makes fetters sit easily.  Lawrence did
not care for power, as Roger did: but for knowledge his thirst was
insatiable.  And above all he longed for the knowledge of God--for the
realisation of that Presence of which the priest had spoken to him.
Like a flower shooting in the spring-time, he kept his face ever towards
the light, hoping to reach it some day.  Sir Gerard said he was not like
a boy.  Master Salveyn opined that the lad had a bee in his hood.
Mistress Grenestede shook her head with an assumption of superior
wisdom, and murmured that such lads as Lawrence Madison died early.

Outside, matters went quietly enough so far as the boys were concerned,
till on the third of April, 1383, shortly after the birth of her
daughter Margaret, the Countess of Arundel died.  Little care as she had
taken of them, yet the children felt a blank when she was gone.

Not many weeks after the death of the Countess, when the early roses
were just beginning to bud, Mistress Grenestede came into the room where
the children were studying under Sir Gerard, in a state of some
excitement.

"Give you good den,[#] Sir Gerard!  Here is somewhat befallen one of
your chicks, for sure!"


[#] Day.


"Take me with you,[#] good Mistress?"


[#] Explain yourself.


"Why, 'tis him," said the ungrammatical lady, nodding towards Roger.
"Who but my Lady Princess hath sent for to have him to come and speak
with her?"

At this date, there was in the kingdom but one Princess.  The daughters
of the monarch did not bear that title until the accession of the House
of Stuart.  "My Lady Princess," therefore, meant Joan of Kent, widow of
the Black Prince, and mother of King Richard.  She had been in her early
youth a very giddy girl, and had sobered down in later life, under the
instrumentality of Wycliffe, into the chief nursing mother of the
Lollard Church.  Her influence with her royal son was powerful, and she
was one of the three practical rulers of England at this juncture. For
the Princess to send for Roger might therefore mean something of greater
import than a mere impulse of kindliness from a lady to a child.

"Is that sooth?"[#] demanded Sir Gerard, almost as excited as Mistress
Grenestede.


[#] Truth.


"True as truth, I do ensure you.  What shall hap of it, think you?"

"Dear heart, who wist?  Shall it be now?"

"Nay, time enough.  To-morrow.  My Lord bade me don him in his best
array, and at eight o' the clock Sir Lewis Clifford shall come for him."

"Who for?" demanded Roger, quite as ungrammatically, and looking up with
an eager expression in his eyes.

"Lo' you now, if he be not a-hearkening!--Why, for you, fair Lord.  At
eight o' the clock to-morrow."

"Who cometh for me?"

"Sir Lewis de Clifford, Knight of the Body to my Lady Princess.  Now
hark you, sweet Lord; I trust you shall be of gentle conditions--not too
masterful, nor yet abashed,[#] but with good manners.  'Tis a great
thing for a young gentleman like you to be sent for to my Lady the
Princess."


[#] Frightened, nervous.


"She's only a woman!" said Roger, trying to hit the inkstand with a
paper pellet.  "Why did the King not send for me himself?"

"Good lack, sweet Lord, but you must never be thus masterful!  The King,
quotha!"

"The King doth what he will," said Sir Gerard, reprovingly.

"I would, if I were king," responded Roger, aiming another pellet at the
inkstand.

"Love us, all the saints!" ejaculated Mistress Grenestede.

"The cockerel crows well, trow?" said Sir Gerard with a laugh.  "Look
you, good Mistress, he hath the Blood in him.  'Tis no wonder.  But have
a care, my good Lord, that you use not over much homeliness[#] toward my
Lady Princess."


[#] Do not be too familiar.


"What would she with me?"

"Nay, who wist?  Carry yourself well and seemly, and you shall see."

"Shall Lolly go with me?"

Mistress Grenestede was about to exclaim, "Nay, for sure!" but she
stopped and looked at Sir Gerard.

"His Lordship were better have an elder serving-man," answered the
tutor.

"If Lolly must not go, I won't be good!"

"Heard any ever the like!"

"Then my Lord must needs send word by Sir Lewis that your Lordship is so
naughty a lad, you be not fit to go speak with my Lady's Grace?"

Sir Gerard calculated rightly that this consideration would have some
weight.  Roger was sensitive to the opinions of other people, and
particularly of those much above him in rank.

"I don't see why Lolly could not go!" said he with a pout.

"We shall see," said the tutor.  "Perchance, if your Lordship order
yourself after his will, my Lord may give leave that you shall choose
whom you list."

The Earl, on being appealed to, carelessly replied that Roger might take
the man in the moon, if he wished it, provided he were fittingly
attired.  Roger, who had got over his pet--indeed, his pets were less
frequent than they used to be--submitted with nothing more than a little
impatience to the tedious ceremony of his own arraying.  Mistress
Grenestede was very particular, for she desired Roger to make a good
impression on the Princess, upon whom she looked with very different
eyes from his.  When the young Earl's attiring was over, he found
himself in a long robe of apple-green satin, edged with cloth of gold,
ruby-coloured hose, over which the garter was clasped, and a cap adorned
with a very full, long plume of white feathers.  His shoes were
slate-coloured, with a red diamond pattern.  Gold buttons ran all down
his sleeves: a rich golden girdle, set with gems, clasped his waist; a
golden collar, with diamonds and rubies, was round his neck; and, in
compliment to the Princess, her badge of the white hart gorged and
couchant was suspended at his breast from a rich gold chain.  Thus
splendidly arrayed, Roger marched into the hall, where three persons
awaited him, clad in his own livery, blue and gold, guarded with white.
These were two squires and Lawrence.  With considerable impatience the
young Earl sat on the form awaiting Sir Lewis Clifford, who was punctual
to his time, though Roger could hardly believe it.  The party then
mounted their horses, and rode away to Kennington Palace, where the
Princess was at that time.

Kennington Palace was then in a neighbourhood at least as rural as
Hampton Court is now.  Sir Lewis led his youthful charge, followed by
the attendants, into a pleasant chamber hung with yellow say and
panelled with cedar.  Here were two ladies and a gentleman--the former
seated at work, the latter standing in the window.  Sir Lewis, leading
Roger up to one of the ladies, dropped on one knee to say--

"Here is the young Lord of March, to wait on my Lady's Grace."

[Illustration: "Here is the young Lord of March, to wait on my Lady's
Grace."]

With some curiosity Roger looked up, and saw a short, smiling,
exceedingly fat woman, clad in a crimson damask dress embroidered with
rings of gold. Threads of silver were mingled with her golden hair, and
the remains of what had been extreme beauty could be traced in her
countenance.

"Come hither, little Cousin," said the Princess affably, smiling all
over her plump face.  "Of a truth, I am right glad to see thee.  I can
go visit none now, for I am so fat I may scarce mount mine horse.  Didst
ever behold a woman fatter than I?"

Roger's head squire, who had been spending considerable pains in
coaching him for this interview, was horrified to hear him reply with
charming candour--

"No, Dame; that did I never."

"Why, thou sayest well!" laughed the Princess, evidently not in the
least offended.  "Alway speak truth, fair Cousin."

"So do I," answered Roger rather proudly.  "My Lady my grandmother told
me ever so to do; and she learned me two sayings by the which I should
rule me, and I so will.  Under your pleasure, Dame," he added in an
instant, with a sudden recollection of the squire's instructions and
those of Sir Gerard.

"Come, tell me what they were!" responded the Princess, coaxingly.
"Thou lovest my Lady thy grandmother, that can I see."

"Well, I did, middling, Dame," said Roger, coolly. "Howbeit she were
only a woman."

The squire was ready to sink into the earth, till he was relieved by the
Princess leaning back in her gilded chair with a burst of the heartiest
laughter.

"Gramercy, little Cousin, but thou art right covenable![#]  I see, we
shall be good friends.  But I desire thy two sayings.  Tell me the
same."


[#] Agreeable, amusing.


Roger repeated them rather proudly.

"'_Fais ce que doy, advienne que pourra:_' '_Un_ and _Dieu, un Roy,
servir je doy._'"

"And dost mean to rule thee by them?" asked the Princess, still smiling.

"That do I, Dame.  I will serve God and the King to my power, but none
other."

"He will do, trow?" said the Princess, looking up at somebody whom Roger
had not previously noticed.  His eyes followed hers, and he saw standing
on her right hand a young man of eighteen, clad in a tunic of black
baldekyn, figured with red balls and purplish-gray flowers.  Above it
was a white tippet; the sleeves were red, with gold cuffs; and he wore
yellow shoes with a red pattern.[#]  He was of short stature and slight
figure: his complexion was of feminine fairness, his hair flaxen tinged
with gold, his eyes blue and dove-like.  So great was his soft and
pathetic beauty, that artists selected his face as the model for "that
Face which now outshines the cherubim."


[#] This is King Richard's costume in the Golden Book of St. Albans.


Something in the face won Roger's heart.  What it was he did not know
himself.  It was, in truth, a vague remembrance of that fair young
mother who had passed away from him so early, and a likeness to whom he
detected without recognising it, in the face before him.  An
affectionate smile from the royal cousin completed his conquest of the
heart of Roger Mortimer.

"He will do, in very truth," said the King, answering his mother first:
then he turned to Roger.  "Be right welcome, fair Cousin: I trust to see
more of you in time coming."

"Sir," asked Roger, looking up, "be you Lord Richard the King?"

"Even so, fair Cousin.  What can I do to pleasure you?"

Natures like those of Roger Mortimer are always capable of intense
hero-worship.  And Roger had found his hero.  He dropped on one knee
without any prompting.

"Then, Sire, I will live and die with you!"

The King unfastened from his chain of rubies a golden broom-pod wrought
with green enamel.  It was one of his own badges.

"Then shalt thou be mine own man, by thy covenant," said he, smiling,
and attaching the badge to Roger's gold chain: "and thereto is my
token."

"Why, well said!" interpolated the Princess, who seemed unable to keep
silence long.  "Come hither, little Cousin--here, set a stool for my
Lord of March,--and tell me how it liketh thee to dwell with my Lord of
Arundel."

"Not in no wise, Dame," answered Roger, boldly.

"Not in no wise, quotha!  Why what ails thee at him?"

"I love him not, Dame, nor he me."

"Dear heart, here is a pity!  But thou lovest my Lady Alice,
trow?--though she be but a woman."  The Princess's fat shoulders shook
with laughter.

"Our young cousin's chivalry is scarce fledged, methinks," said the
King.

"If you will learn me, Sire, I will do your bidding," said Roger, who
did not know what bashfulness was. "My Lady Alice, said your Grace?
Good lack, but I cannot abear her!"

"Cannot bear her, quotha!  Nay, now, she is to be thy wife!"

"My Lord the King's command except, that shall she never!" said Roger
sturdily.

"See you, fair Son?" was the Princess's comment, with a glance at the
King.  "And wouldst thou be much aggrieved, little Cousin, if thou wert
to depart thence, and to dwell in another household, where thou shouldst
have jolly lads and lasses to pleasure and couldst see the King thy
cousin well-nigh thee, every day?"

Roger's eyes shone with delight.

"Please it you, Dame, that should like me right well.  Howbeit, I hope
there should be more lads than lasses."

The Princess indulged in another hilarious convulsion.

"Thy time will come, lad!" said she, when she was able to speak.  "Till
it do, thou canst lake thee with Tom, which is scarce the younger of
thee.--It shall do right well, fair Son: and I pray you heartily to set
the matter in train."

"Aye, methinks it were well done," answered the King.

But neither of them explained what was to be done, though Roger's
curiosity was intense. Manifestly, he was to be taken from the Earl of
Arundel, and given in wardship to some other nobleman.  That was a
delightful prospect.  If he could only be rid of Alice as well, Roger
thought he would be in Paradise. And the King had offered him a favour.
Roger turned boldly to His Majesty.

"Sire, your Grace said you would pleasure me. Pray you, have me rid of
yon Alice.  I love no maids, and her least of all."

Once more the Princess burst out laughing.  The King looked quietly
amused.

"Is that the dearest wish of your heart, fair Cousin?"

"It is so, at this present, my Liege."

"He shall have a dearer anon, or I am no prophetess," exclaimed the
convulsed Princess.

"Maybe," said the King.  "Well, fair Cousin, we will pleasure you in
this matter,--the rather seeing"--and he turned to his mother with a
smile--"that it shall pleasure your Grace as well."

At this moment a slight noise outside preceded a scratching at the door,
a lifting of the arras, and the announcement of--"My Lady's Grace of
Lancaster."

The royal hosts took leave of their little guest rather hastily, yet
very kindly, and thus dismissed, Roger was reconducted to Bermondsey
House by Sir Lewis Clifford.

There was a good deal to talk over when Roger and Lawrence were safely
tucked up in their respective beds.

"I say, Loll!" came from the big blue bed, "this is jolly!"

"I am glad your Lordship is well content therewith," was the response in
the quieter voice from the pallet.

"I am so fain to get rid of yon Alice!" said unchivalrous Roger.  "And I
am right fain, too, to be out of this dull house.  Who is Tom, I marvel,
that she said I could lake me withal?  Metrusteth he is a lad of some
mettle, and not a dull lump of stuff like yon Jack Arundel.  I would,
though, he had been something elder than me in the stead of younger.  I
love not laking with children."

Master Roger was beginning to consider himself above the degradation of
childhood.  Lawrence contented himself with replying that he trusted his
Lordship might find matters as should be to his satisfaction.

"Where shall it be, Loll, thinkest?  I would it might be in the Palace!
Aye, and said she not that I should see the King my cousin well-nigh
every morrow?  I would like that best of all.  I could die for him,
Lolly!--and shall some day, I cast no doubt."

Lawrence's reply was merely a respectful intimation that he was
listening.  He was quite as ready as Roger to die for one whom he might
love, but not by any means so ready to talk about it.

"O Lolly, I could jump up to the moon, 'tis so jolly!" and Roger
executed a _pas seul_ outside his bedclothes.  "But I say!--I hope they
shall 'noy me with no more maids!  Why can folk not leave a man be, I
would fain wit?" demanded his Lordship, loftily, lying down again, and
drawing the satin coverlet over him, by no means tidily.  "I would in
very sooth I were but a bit bigger!  Howbeit, I reckon we shall grow.
And then, Loll, thou shalt be mine own especial knight, and shalt bear
mine arms, and fight right behind me."

"I thank your good Lordship," said Lawrence dutifully, though the
prospect of fighting, whether before or behind his master, was not
particularly enlivening to his mind.  Could Lawrence have chosen his
lot, there would have been no fighting in it.

"I reckon we shall see," went on Roger, not quite in so lively a tone.
"But it shall be right jolly--any how.  And I do not--I should not----"

Roger was asleep.




                             *CHAPTER VI.*

                           *FAIR AND FICKLE.*

    "Wel were hym that wyste
    To whom he mytte tryste;
    Beter were hym that knewe
    The false fro the trewe."
      --OLD POEM OF FIFTEENTH CENTURY.


The hidden intentions of the Princess were very soon revealed.  Roger
and his suite were transferred from Bermondsey House to Woking Manor,
the seat of Thomas, Earl of Kent, the eldest son of the Princess, and
half-brother of the King.  The Countess of Kent was a sister of the Earl
of Arundel, but of a quieter and less decided character than most of her
family.  Her children, in whom Roger felt more interest than in herself,
were six in number, exclusive of two boys who had died in the cradle.
They were Alianora, aged fourteen; Thomas, aged twelve; Anne, aged six;
Edmund, aged three; Joan, aged two; and Margaret, an infant. The eldest
boy was of course the Tom to whom the Princess had alluded.  He was
present when Roger was introduced to the Countess, and Roger was
gratified to discover that Tom, though by a few months the younger, was
taller than himself.  All the Holands of Kent were tall, fully
developed, of very fair complexion, and exceedingly handsome. But
Roger's eyes had not reached beyond Tom, when they lighted on some one
else who was entering the room, and from that moment he had eyes for no
other.

If it be true, as it has been said, that the metaphorical gentleman
termed Cupid usually takes the severest vengeance on those who despise
his power, he must have been in that mind with regard to Roger Mortimer.
One instantaneous glance proved sufficient to awaken in the bosom of
Roger, who hated and despised all girls, a fervent boyish passion which
reached down to his heart's core, and never left him until his life's
end.

The girl of whom the sight proved thus potent was the Lady Alianora de
Holand, eldest daughter of the Earl and Countess of Kent.  Though only
fourteen, she was so tall and stately that she had a grown-up aspect.
She stood, when Roger saw her, just in the doorway, her arms full of
flowers which she had been gathering in the garden, and her abundant
fair hair falling about her like a golden glory.  Her little brother
Edmund had pulled it down in play; and had she known of the existence of
visitors in the hall, the Lady Alianora, who was quite old enough to be
particular about her personal appearance, would never have presented
herself before them in this dishevelled guise.  She stopped, blushed,
and hastily dropping her flowers on the nearest form, fled to her
chamber to make herself presentable,--leaving on Roger's mind an
impression of angelic loveliness.

No such impression was conveyed to Lawrence Madison.  Roger, who was in
an exalted mood which disposed him, knight-errant-like, to insist upon
all beholders' instantaneous acknowledgment of the pre-eminence of the
lady of his heart, was quite put out by the cool, indifferent tone in
which Lawrence assented to his rapturous comments on the beauty of the
Lady Alianora.  Accustomed as he was to sudden changes in his impulsive
master, yet this one took Lawrence by surprise.  He had not expected
Roger to alter in that direction.  Love, to him, was not a blow to be
struck all at once, but a plant to ripen by degrees.  The sudden and
absorbing passion which had taken possession of Roger's heart by
assault, was not merely unexpected to Lawrence; it was incomprehensible.

The transfer of Roger from the care of the Earl of Arundel to that of
the Earl of Kent was marked by one peculiarity very unusual at the time.
It was purely a personal transfer, and did not include any change with
regard to the administration of the estates, which were still left in
the hands of Arundel, except that the Earls of Warwick and
Northumberland were joined with him in the guardianship.  The care of
the heir and of the estate so generally went together as to rouse the
suspicion in this case that the severance was a fresh clever move on the
part of the Princess.  To leave the estate in the enemy's hands might be
intended as a hidden purchase of his acquiesence in the transfer of the
boy.  It was a sacrifice of the casket to secure the safety of the gem.
Perhaps the Princess was also sagacious enough to divine that--as it
turned out--there would be no sacrifice in the matter.  Arundel proved
in this case an honourable man, and administered the estates well,
resigning them without difficulty into Roger's hands when he was called
upon to do so.

Between Roger and Thomas, eternal friendship was sworn without delay.
Their characters were somewhat alike, save that Roger was slightly the
more impulsive, and considerably the more self-willed. The younger
children were in Roger's eyes quite beneath his contempt.

There was one point of the matter in respect to which Lawrence was by no
means indifferent.  The style in which the Lady Alianora behaved to her
youthful admirer enraged him beyond words.  The beautiful girl was a
born coquette.  And she treated Roger to every variety of behaviour
suggested by that despicable type of character.  One day she would lift
him up to the heights of ecstacy with her notice and favour, and on the
next would plunge him into the lowest depths of despair.  It appeared to
delight her to play with his feelings like a cat with a mouse. That she
had any of her own Lawrence could not discover.  But as time went on,
and they grew older, and the sentimental adoration of the boy, instead
of fading away, blossomed into the solid and enduring love of the man,
the sensation of aversion on Lawrence's part became stronger than ever.
He would never have used Roger as she did, had he been in her place.

Roger appeared not to perceive this blemish in his chosen idol.  All
that she chose to do was perfection in his eyes.

It may perhaps strike the reader as hardly possible that a boy of
Roger's age could have entertained such feelings.  But we have abundant
evidence that our fathers, five hundred years ago, grew up much earlier
than we do--probably in part from the shorter average duration of human
life, and in part from the forcing nature of the life they led.  A boy
of twelve, in 1385, had attained a period of life equivalent to that of
a youth of at least sixteen in the present day.

If it could have been whispered to Roger Mortimer that he was flinging
away his true and faithful heart upon a worthless weed, while there were
modest violets to be found under the leaves--that he was bartering his
priceless diamonds for glass beads which were not worth the picking
up--well, he would not have believed it.  But in truth he had met with
the evil angel of his life, and he was yielding unto her fair false
hands the perfect trust and the passionate devotion which were only due
to God. Would he ever awake from the dream? and if he did, would it be
while there was yet time left to repair his blunder, or only when it was
too late, and there remained but a long weary stretch of the wilderness
before the end should come?

Ah, the Good Shepherd goes after His lost sheep, until He find them.
But they are apt to lead Him up arid steeps and into sunless gulfs,
through thorns which tear their feet as well as His, and into dry places
where no water is beside the stream which flows from the smitten Rock.

Reserve and reticence were not in the nature of Roger Mortimer.  The
Princess very soon perceived, with equal amusement and delight, the
fulfilment of her prophecy; and urged upon her royal son the
desirability of at once betrothing Roger and Alianora. The King,
however, preferred a little delay.  There was time enough, he said: both
were yet very young; matters might alter before they were old enough to
be married.  So the formal ceremony, though fully intended, was
deferred, leaving an element of uncertainty which added to Roger's
intermittent misery.

The autumn which followed the spring of Roger's transference to Woking
witnessed some most painful events.  The second son of the Princess, Sir
John de Holand, entering into a squabble between his attendants out of
which he had far better have kept himself, killed Sir Ralph Stafford,
the favourite squire of the young Queen.  He was condemned to die, and
the Princess in an agony of grief, sent Sir Lewis Clifford to the King
at York, earnestly beseeching for mercy to his brother.  She was
refused, and it was the first refusal which her royal son had ever given
to an intercession of hers.  As the event proved, he was ready enough to
grant it as man, but he could not feel it his duty as King.  The
Princess laid it so to heart that her heart broke.  A fortnight after
the return of Sir Lewis from his fruitless errand, she lay dead at
Wallingford Castle.

In the first impulse of his anguish and remorse, King Richard granted a
full pardon to his brother, on condition of his making a pilgrimage to
Syria. He was a man of the deepest affections, and next to his wife, his
mother had been nearest to his heart. Perhaps it was the remembrance of
this one rejected appeal and the agony of its result, which made Richard
in after years so perpetual a pardoner of the transgressions of those
whom he loved.

Another result of these sorrowful circumstances was to cause the King to
carry into immediate action various intentions which he knew had been
his mother's wish.  And in pursuance of one of these, on a morning in
October, he sent for the Earl of March.

The royal officers conducted Roger, somewhat to his surprise, to the
King's private closet, and motioned to his suite to remain in the
ante-chamber.  He was to pass in alone.

Roger found, however, that the interview was not to be _tete-a-tete_.
Seated in a curule chair by the side of His Majesty was the uncle of
both, Thomas, Duke of Gloucester, the most astute man in England, and
the evil angel of the King.  Roger made his reverences to his royal
kinsman, and was directed to seat himself on a velvet settle which faced
them.  A slight motion from the young King appeared to be a preconcerted
signal at which Gloucester took up the word.

[Illustration: 'Roger made his reverences to his royal kinsman, and was
directed to seat himself on a velvet settle which faced them.']

"Methinks, fair Cousin," said he, addressing Roger, "that you be not now
to learn that your mother, the Lady Philippa of March, was daughter and
heir unto my fair brother of Clarence, whom God assoil?"

Roger intimated that this was no news to him.

"And you may lightly guess, moreover, that, my said brother standing
next in age to my most honoured Lord the Prince, whom likewise may God
pardon, had the said Prince deceased unhappily without issue him
outliving, my said brother your grand-sire should have stood next to be
king."

Roger bowed his head.  He began to wonder what was coming.  Was evil
about to befall him for the crime of being a great-grandson of King
Edward?

"Bear with me, then, my fair Cousin, while I recount unto you the causes
of that which I am about to lay before you under command of my Liege
here present."

One of the secrets of Gloucester's popularity was his exquisite veneer.
Very few persons realised how thin the coating was, or what was the
material which lay beneath.  Least likely to discover it of all was the
young King, in whose single-eyed nature suspicion had no place, and
whose warm heart was ready to take in every creature who professed a
shred of devotion to himself.

"Maybe, being as you are but right youthful, fair Cousin," pursued
Gloucester, "you shall have need to be told in words that after the old
custom of England it was not used that, the King's son dying afore his
father, his childre should be held to fill his place.  This ancient
custom, howbeit, was changed by my redoubted Lord and father King
Edward, of set purpose that the King our Liege who here sitteth should
succeed him on the throne.  In case, therefore, that our said Liege
should leave no issue--which God defend!--he must needs appoint him a
successor after his pleasure.  Now my said Liege, accounting it ill (as
in very sooth it should be) that men's minds should be unsettled
touching so weighty a matter, and knowing moreover that life standeth
alway at the pleasure of God, and that men may not dwell on middle earth
no longer than it listeth Him--" there was a vast reservoir of piety in
Gloucester, but it went no lower than his tongue--"it hath pleased my
Liege to make choice of him that shall succeed him, if in evil case he
should chance to decease without child.  To make an end, fair Cousin,
without further words, you are he whom my Lord hath chosen to sit on the
throne when the pleasure of God shall be fulfilled in him."

Roger sat dumfoundered.  The last conclusion he had expected was the one
that had come upon him.  Among all the suppositions as to the chosen
heir which had been coursing through his thoughts while his uncle spoke,
the faintest idea that it might be himself had never occurred to his
mind.

He did not know that it had been in existence, nearly as long as he had,
in the three governing minds of England, of which one had just passed
away. It was the only point of all their opinions in which the Princess
and the Dukes of Lancaster and Gloucester were agreed.  The private
reasons of each were utterly diverse from those of the other two. The
Princess wished to secure two points--the happiness of her son, and the
welfare of the Lollard Church of which she was the nursing mother.  To
this end the heir must entertain a personal affection for His Majesty
which would prevent him from coveting his position, and must be brought
up in an atmosphere which would dispose him toward the Lollard
doctrines.  The Duke of Lancaster's object was the welfare of England;
added to which he did not want to reign himself, and Roger or his
brother were the only persons who could reasonably be placed before him.
The Duke of Gloucester's object was almost the opposite of the last.  He
did wish to reign, but he cared more for the reality of power than for
the semblance, and knowing that equity would be outraged by his being
preferred to his elder brothers, he desired such a monarch as he would
easily be able to influence.  This he fancied he saw in
Roger,--warm-hearted, impulsive, readily swayed, and not too suspicious
of ulterior motives.

The only person, at that day, who had ever been able to read the true
character of Gloucester was the dead Princess.  She must have been a
very clever woman.  Her feminine instinct penetrated all the joints of
his closely-riveted armour, and without his being in the least aware of
it, "to her he had shown his naked heart."  Somebody who could be
trusted must be put in his way; and she read Roger also more accurately
than he had done.  Through all the outward impulsiveness she discerned
the heart's fidelity--through all the thorny surroundings of temptation
the ever straightforward aim at the one goal of right. Perhaps her
cleverest move of all was just that which looked on the surface the
least likely to forward her intentions.  She had removed him from the
noxious atmosphere of Bermondsey House, and had placed him in a family
which was not marked by Lollard proclivities--a family of which, in that
respect, even the anti-Lollard Gloucester could feel no suspicion.  But
she saw that Roger was more easily led than driven: that his intensely
Lollard uncle, John de Montacute, "the most pestilent of all that sect,"
was likely to have far more influence with him as an occasional and
interesting visitor, than as the man who decided his fate and sat in
judgment on all his little peccadilloes; beside which, had he been
consigned to the care of a distinctly Lollard family, Gloucester would
have been certain to scheme for his removal.  He would probably be
content to leave him at Woking, where Lollardism was something quite
outside the family notions--a matter which they left to the priesthood,
whose business they considered it to be. His suspicions of any sinister
design on the part of the Princess would scarcely be aroused by her very
natural wish that her youngest son's chosen heir should be in the care
of her eldest son.

Roger, of course, had not the slightest conception of all these wheels
within wheels which he now saw to his amazement were bearing him forward
to the throne.  The result was to him the only thing apparent, and that
left him in a state of speechless astonishment.  The only two clear
ideas in his confused head, beyond surprise, were deep devotion to the
royal cousin who had marked him by such signal favour, and a rapturous
throb of his heart at the thought that now, at least, Alianora was
safely assured to him.  He knew that a prospective crown would weigh
heavily with her, no less than with her parents: and as for him who wore
it, and who certainly would weigh less, Roger's loyal heart was content
to accept the very crumbs of affection from the hand which he loved,
rather than a plentiful board spread by any other.

The King's voice broke Roger's astounded silence.

"Methinks we have somewhat taken you by surprise, fair Cousin," said he,
with that exquisitely sweet smile which Richard knew how to give.

"In very deed, my gracious Lord, but you so have!" was the answer.
"Mefeareth, my Liege, that your bestowal upon me is far over my
dementing."

"Strive then to deserve the same, fair Cousin," said Gloucester
didactically.  "In all things submit you obeissantly to my Lord his
pleasure."

A speech which meant much more than it said, since Gloucester aimed at
governing Roger through the King.  Like other astute persons, the former
scarcely comprehended a mind which had but one aim, and assuredly never
intended to strengthen Roger's personal love for his royal cousin.  His
real intention was to attract it to himself.  But Roger's powers of
discrimination were greater than those of King Richard, and he had an
uneasy sense of some ulterior meaning on the part of his uncle, which
cooled his demeanour and lessened his words.  He had no intention of
confiding his heart's secrets to that over-clever relative.

"I am at ease thereanent," said the King, answering Roger with another
smile.  "And now, Cousin, God give you good day, for methinks you have
food enough for thought."

Roger could not have told whether he returned to Woking through smiling
valleys or barren mountains. The family of the Earl of Kent, the elder
branches of which had been admitted into the secret, were amused to see
how silent and meditative their young ward became after the proclamation
of his future brilliant destiny.  Roger was growing up fast--faster in
mind than in body.  Very grave and thoughtful grew the young heir.  The
radiant crown which hung before him, though in a probably distant
future, seemed to have descended upon his head not as an ornament, but
as a weight.  The Earl of Kent was much surprised at it.  The side of
Roger's character which was outwardly exhibited--the lighter and more
childish side of it--was the only one which he had yet seen.  But the
depths were there, and they had been stirred at last.

They were stirred in more ways than one.  The prospective crown which
had struck Roger into gravity, struck the Lady Alianora into a flutter.
To her it was merely the most becoming decoration which could rest upon
her head.  The thought of any duty or responsibility in connection with
it was entirely foreign to her mind.  But it became desirable to
cultivate Roger, and to let him see unmistakably that he was established
in her good graces.  To lose him now was not to be thought of for a
moment. But had the King changed his mind, and transferred his favours
to any other person, what the Lady Alianora called her heart would have
followed in their wake.  The dog-like fidelity which characterised
Lawrence Madison, and to which it would have been of no moment whether
his master sat upon a throne or a dunghill, was simply inconceivable to
her.

It was Sunday evening, and the churches were slowly emptying of the
worshippers at vespers. Lawrence was making his way out at the western
door, when looking up he encountered a pair of bright eyes attentively
regarding him.  They belonged to a girl of about his own age, who wore a
dress of blue camlet, and was evidently in the middle class of life. She
was very pretty, but apparently very shy.  Her eyes dropped the instant
they encountered his, but kept returning to his face as if she found
something attractive in it.  Behind her came an older woman whom
Lawrence felt certain, as soon as he glanced at her, that he had met
somewhere before.  As soon as they were clear of the sacred edifice,
Lawrence saw the girl turn round to the woman behind her, and address
her in an earnest whisper.  The woman replied aloud.

"Nay, child: it were not like, methinks."

"But it might be!  Will you not ask, Mistress Wenteline?"

The name solved Lawrence's difficulty in a moment.  In another instant
he had pressed through the crowd, and was by the side of his old friend.

"Mistress Wenteline!  Come you from Ludlow--from Usk?  Know you not
Lawrence Madison?"

"Well, of a surety, but it is!" cried Guenllian, heartily enough.  "Lad,
how camest thou hither? The maid said it were like thee, but I never
thought--Is my Lord hereaway?  My Lord of Arundel hath no place in this
vicinage, trow?"

"My Lord is not now in ward to him, good Mistress; but unto my Lord of
Kent, that dwelleth at the Manor here."

"Now God be thanked therefor!" said Guenllian warmly.

Lawrence turned to the girl.  "Methinks I should know you likewise: and
in truth, you be like some one that I have known, but I cannot give you
a name."

The bright eyes laughed, but their owner seemed too shy to speak.
Guenllian looked at both with an amused expression.

"Nay, twain friends so dear as you were of old should not have forgot
each other," said she.  "Lolly, dost not know thine old playfellow?
'Tis Blumond's Beattie."

"Beattie!" broke from Lawrence with more warmth than usual.  But as soon
as the greeting was over, both relapsed into extreme shyness.

"And pray you, Mistress Wenteline, how came you hither?"

"Marry, lad, we be tarrying a two-three days, under the King's gracious
leave, at his manor of Byfleet, and as Tuesday we journey onward to
London town.  Beattie and I, we thought we would come to Church
something a longer walk, and two of my Lord's squires be with
us"--Guenllian paused and looked about for them--"I marvel whither they
be gone in this crowd.  Beattie, canst see any whither Master Orewell or
Master Chauntemarle?"

Beattie thought she saw Master Chauntemarle's cap over yonder: but
Lawrence interposed with a question which he was burning to ask.

"But, Mistress Wenteline, how came you hither?"

"Why, look you, we be now of the following of the Lady de Percy, and the
Lord of these squires and of us is my Lord of Northumberland."

"And the Lady de Percy is at Byfleet?  Me reckoneth my Lord were right
fain to see his sister."

"Aye, and the Lady Elizabeth was ever his favourite.  But, Lolly, I
would fain see my dear child. He is at the Manor here, trow?"

"If it like you to bide for compline, Mistress, you shall then see him
with no further travail; or if you will come up to the Manor, I rest
well assured that Mistress Dayrell, which keepeth house, shall make you
right welcome."

"Beattie, run thou to Master Orewell, which I see searching us o'er by
yon yew-tree, and do him to wit of this.  Say we will return with
Lawrence to the Manor, and ask at him if he or Master Chauntemarle list
to come with us.  If not, then will we leave our returning as it shall
please God."

Beatrice obeyed, and in a minute returned with Master Orewell, who
intimated that his pleasure would be to accompany the ladies, but Master
Chauntemarle preferred to return to Byfleet.  Guenllian accordingly sent
through the latter her excuses to Lady Northumberland, and the party set
out for the Manor.

Lawrence left his friends in charge of Mistress Dayrell, who was well
pleased with the prospect of a gossip, and dashed up the stairs, three
at a time, in search of his young master.  Roger was playing hand-tennis
with the other young people--an occupation the suitability of which to
Sunday evening it never occurred to him or any one else to doubt.  The
moment that he heard who was below, he flung down his battledore, and
rushed down the stairs as quickly as Lawrence had come up them.

Guenllian had not realised the change that years could make until Roger
stood before her.  She had been unconsciously expecting to see the child
of nine, and when the handsome boy of thirteen, who looked older than he
was, came into the room and welcomed her, she could scarcely believe his
identity. But the warmth and brightness were those of the old Roger, and
they comforted Guenllian after all her fears and heart-sinkings lest he
should be changed and spoiled at Bermondsey House.

"Mine own dear child!" she said lovingly.  "Verily, I ask your
Lordship's pardon; but you shall seem always my child to me, even when
you be a man grown."

Roger had arrived at the age when a boy is rather ashamed of being
kissed, and feels it a humiliation. But like a true gentleman as he was
in nature as well as name, he put his own feelings aside, and permitted
his old nurse to pet him to her heart's content.

"And now, mine heart, give me leave to ask you," inquired Guenllian, in
whose diction the new deference was somewhat at variance with the old
familiar love, "if you be welsome and happy hereaway?"

"Very, very happy," said Roger's eyes no less than his voice.  The Lady
Alianora had been unusually complaisant for the past week.

"And how did your Lordship like at Arundel Castle?"

"Very ill, Wenteline.  I am rejoiced to be away thence."

Guenllian was privately rejoiced to hear it.

"Metrusteth Lawrence continueth a good lad?"

"Much better than Roger," said the owner of the latter name, with a
bright laugh.  "He alway were so."

"And your Lordship, as I do hear, is in right high favour with the
King?"

Roger smiled and blushed slightly.  His honours were still fresh upon
him.

"Aye, Wenteline, I have been denounced[#] heir of England."


[#] Announced, proclaimed.


"But to think of it!" exclaimed she.  "Well, my dear child, God give
thee His grace!  Thou shalt make but an ill King without it."

Guenllian thought that Roger's eyes responded, but his voice was silent.




                             *CHAPTER VII.*

                         *ROGER HAS HIS WISH.*

    "Whatever fades, but fading pleasure brings."
      --SIR PHILIP SIDNEY.


The paths that had joined for a moment parted again, and Guenllian and
Beatrice passed out of the sight of Roger and Lawrence.  The life which
they led at Woking was very quiet--so quiet that Roger at least began to
feel restless, and to complain to Lawrence, that every thing stagnated
around him.  But before six months were over, the second political
convulsion of the century had begun.  Gloucester only awaited the
removal of his brother Lancaster, who was the barricade against his
ambitious designs, to draw the bow which he was holding ready.

The Duke of Lancaster sailed from Plymouth on the ninth of July.  By
Michaelmas, Gloucester was in London, gathering his conspirators around
him. The one with whom he first took counsel was his nephew, Edward,
afterwards Earl of Rutland, eldest son of the Duke of York.  This man
seems to have delighted in dissimulation and treachery, not as means to
an end, but for their own sakes.  He cared not whom he joined, so long
as he could afterwards betray them; and he was ready to agree to
anything, if it only involved a plot.  Love, kinship, gratitude, even
interest, were no barriers in his way. This man had been one of the
dearest friends of the young King--the friendship being on the King's
side, and only the outward profession of it on Rutland's: but no sooner
did Gloucester lay his plans before Rutland, than the latter sacrificed
his friend to the pleasure of a conspiracy.

There were four of the Privy Councillors of whom Gloucester had resolved
to get rid.  These were the Archbishop of York, the Duke of Ireland, the
Earl of Suffolk, and Sir Simon Burley.  The first and last were
professed Lollards: the second, and perhaps the third, almost certainly
held those doctrines, though less openly than the other two.  There is
an old proverb that "If you want to hang a dog, it is easy enough to
find a rope:" and the conspirators found no difficulty in fixing on
charges calculated to render the four councillors impopular.  The
Archbishop, who was a Neville of Raby, and the Duke, who was ninth Earl
of Oxford, could not be accused of humble origin; but the Earl of
Suffolk was open to this impeachment, and they made the most of it, by
contemptuously addressing him as "Michael," even in full Parliament.
Sir Simon Burley had been the King's tutor, and an old friend of the
Black Prince, who had great confidence in him; it might have been
supposed difficult to find the rope in his case. But who ever knew a
Romish priest short of an excuse to disparage the character of a
heretic, by whatever name he might be called?  Behind the conspirators
himself unseen, but quietly pulling the strings which moved all these
puppets at his pleasure, stood Sir Thomas de Arundel, Bishop of Ely, and
brother of the Earl, who was at once the instigator, the assistant, and
the absolver of them all.

The Earl of Arundel had been induced by his brother to unite with the
conspirators, who were also joined by Thomas Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick,
a weak man who was as much a dupe as a criminal.  It was not till a
later period that they were joined by the cautious Henry of Bolingbroke,
Earl of Derby, and by another who ought for very shame to have held
aloof,--the King's favoured friend and trusted councillor, Thomas
Mowbray, Earl of Norfolk.  William Courtenay, Archbishop of Canterbury,
was also ready to help them, on account of his personal dislike to his
brother Archbishop, who had recently received a lucrative appointment
whereon Courtenay had set covetous eyes.

Of course the real causes of hatred were not paraded before that
innocent, deceivable creature, the public.  The true reasons for hating
the four obnoxious councillors were that they had the ear of the King,
while he declined to be governed by the five conspirators and their
priestly guides, who were accordingly much scandalised at his allowing
himself to be governed by any one--themselves of course excepted.  This
is the usual secret of complaints that a man is governed.  Put the
complainer in the place of the governor, and the complaint will not be
heard again.

The ostensible reasons were plausible.  The Archbishop of York, said the
conspirators, was covetous and arrogant, and took liberties with the
King: which of course meant that equal liberties were not allowed to
themselves, the Archbishop being in reality one of the gentlest and most
unworldly of men.  The Duke of Ireland was "a puppy;" he made the King
do whatever he liked, and bestow on him lands, titles, and offices
(instead of on the conspirators).  The Earl of Suffolk was a mere
nobody, the scum of the earth, yet he took upon himself to dictate to
the King and to oppose the nobles.  Sir Simon Burley had proposed, under
colour of an expected invasion of the French, to remove the shrine of
St. Thomas from Canterbury Cathedral to Dover Castle, on the pretence
that Canterbury was not so strong as Dover: of course he could only mean
to pocket the rich offerings, and make his own profit out of the
guardianship of the shrine.  All of them were accused of defalcations of
the Crown revenues.

There was a further charge against Ireland, which has been ever since
received as historical fact, though it was not substantiated by a single
document, nor by any thing but the bare word of the conspirators, and
some inferences from circumstantial evidence, which might or might not
be true.  The Duke had always lived unhappily with his Duchess, who was
a cousin of the King.  The differences between them were partly
ecclesiastical, he siding with the Antipope Urban, she with Pope
Clement.  There is also reason to suspect that her temper was somewhat
less than angelic.  The chroniclers tell us that Ireland fell violently
in love with a German lady in the Queen's suite, whose name was
Lancerona or Lancecrona (a suspiciously manufactured epithet): that the
Queen wrote a letter to Pope Urban entreating that he might receive a
divorce; that Urban thereupon divorced Ireland and Philippa, and that
the Duke married his German love: that his mother was extremely
indignant, and took Philippa to live with her; that the Sire de Coucy,
father of the Duchess, and the King of France, almost took up arms
against England in consequence of these wicked proceedings. The real
truth of the matter is that no evidence whatever exists to support these
alleged facts.  We have evidence that Gloucester and others took pains
to spread them as a rumour, but none to show that they were true.  Not
only is the Queen's letter not forthcoming, but there is no document to
show that a divorce ever took place![#]  There is no evidence--except
the _ipse dixit_ of Gloucester and his partisans--that Ireland ever
contracted a second marriage; while the facts that after his banishment
he was invited to visit the French Court, that his wife bore the title
of Duchess of Ireland to the day of her death, which followed his, and
that his mother ran great personal risk in warmly espousing his cause
and that of King Richard when both were at the lowest ebb, do not took
favourable to the representations of Gloucester.  It may be added that
this Lancecrona, who is stated to have been a lady in waiting and a
laundress--two utterly incompatible positions, even more so at that time
than now--does not appear at all as one of the royal suite in any
mention of them contained in the state papers, and there is cause for
suspicion which almost reaches certainty, that she never existed beyond
the inner consciousness of my Lord Duke of Gloucester.


[#] Carter, one of the most accurate of our historians, records his
opinion that "there is no reason to think that a divorce was ever
granted, _nor even solicited_, between Ireland and Philippa." (ii. 581.)


These tales, true or false, were assiduously spread among the populace,
and Gloucester very secretly, but very diligently, advised them to
refuse any further payment of taxes.  The King, said he, would have
plenty of money at his command, if the wicked councillors were only
forced to disgorge their ill-gotten booty.  Yet with all their
cleverness, Gloucester and his allies could not succeed in accusing
Suffolk of any greater covetousness than "taking from the King a
thousand marks a year since he was made an Earl"--which was the ordinary
grant from the Crown to every earl in England.

That the animosity of these plotters was really and originally religious
is shown in the fact that when the whole power in the kingdom fell into
their hands, they weeded the state offices and the royal household of
all the Lollards, and let others alone. They descended even to squires
and ladies--so long as they were Lollards.  The Lady de Poynings, a
princess's daughter, was not too high for them to aim at; nor was John
Calverley, the Queen's squire, too low to feel their vengeance.  Sir
Bernard Brocas, the Queen's Chamberlain, and the Lady Molyneux, wife of
Sir Thomas, were also swept out of her household.  Neither prayers nor
tears availed to soften them.  For four hours the Queen herself,
"Caesar's daughter," knelt to the Earl of Arundel, imploring him to
spare Calverley, whom they had condemned to death.  It was all in vain.
Arundel savagely told her to pray for herself.  She had cause enough.
Sir Bernard Brocas was also put to death: the ladies were dropped into
obscurity, where they were wise enough to remain.

The long and sad story of this persecution--it deserves no other
name--belongs to general history: but the end is soon told.  Ireland,
Suffolk, and Archbishop Neville fled abroad, and died there.  Burley
meant to have preceded them in this step, but was unfortunately
dissuaded by Ireland, at that time unable to conceive the possibility of
the conspirators presuming to put any man to death.  He generously
offered him forty thousand marks to refund in respect of the
defalcations of which Burley, "that gentle, gallant, and prudent
knight," had been falsely accused.  But the Lords Appellants, as it
pleased the conspirators to term themselves, wanted blood, not bribes:
nor did it suit them to accept as a gift what they meant to take with a
high hand.  They got the King out of the way, and instantly seized on
his old tutor, whom he was unable to deliver from their malicious hands.
Burley died on Tower Hill. The other less obnoxious councillors were got
rid of, mostly by death without the pretence of a trial: and then my
Lords Appellants, having reduced their Sovereign to the status of their
slave, courteously, and in subservient language requested him to come
home, to obey their orders, and as the first, to deliver into their
hands all the state records and twenty thousand pounds.

Ten years later, when the slave had resumed the status of the Sovereign,
after a trial on which Lancaster sat as judge, the Earl of Arundel was
beheaded in Cheapside.  And modern writers regard Richard as a tyrant,
and Arundel as a murdered patriot! There is one Book written by truer
pens than theirs, wherein other appellations are probably attached to
the names.

Perhaps few households in high positions throughout England were less
disturbed by the political earthquake than that at Woking Manor.  The
Earl of Kent, with whomsoever he might side in his heart, practically
held aloof from the entire struggle; and the Countess Alesia, though she
was sister alike of the Earl of Arundel and the Bishop of Ely, who with
Gloucester formed the soul of the conspiracy, appears herself to have
entertained no political bias, and to have followed her husband along
the quiet bye-path into which he thought it prudent to turn until the
storm blew over.  Rumours, however, were not slow in reaching them: and
no one was more eager to hear all the news than Roger.  It need hardly
be said that he was a vehement partisan of his royal cousin, and hotly
indignant against the Lords Appellants.  The suspicions which he had
entertained already concerning the fidelity of his uncle of Gloucester
were now confirmed to the full, and beyond it.

Those who, being conscious of Lollardism, or knowing themselves
suspected of it, felt danger threatening them, got out of the way, or in
some other manner prepared for the inevitable as best they could.  The
prominent Lollard, Sir John Montacute, Roger's great-uncle, made his
will, and then waited the event.  The young Lord Le Despenser, a boy of
Roger's age, was sent off by his friends to sea, being sagaciously
placed under the nominal care of the Earl of Arundel.

Having finished their work, the Lords Appellants now thought it time to
distribute their rewards.  The heaviest prize fell to Gloucester's
share, for he granted himself--of course in the King's name--all the
lands of the Duke of Ireland, about the second man in England as to
wealth, and the smaller property of the Earl of Suffolk.  He also
appropriated to himself the office of Justice of Chester, which the
conspirators had showed such indignation that Ireland should possess.
To Arundel was granted the marriage of the young Lord Poynings.  To
Edward of York was given the earldom of Rutland, with lands in the
county, and a hundred marks in money.  The Bishop of Ely received the
archbishopric of York.  Derby was more easily satisfied: he coveted only
the breastplate of Sir John Beauchamp, one of the murdered Lollards.  He
was, in truth, not anxious to show too distinctly his status as one of
the conspirators.  The Archbishop of Canterbury was made happy by a
proclamation that "whosoever should be found to possess any books,
pamphlets, or handbills, of Master John Wycliffe and others, deceased,
in English or in Latin, should be arrested and put under penalty by the
Council."  Norfolk and Warwick it was not thought necessary to notice in
the general distribution: but, perhaps to blind the eyes of the public,
perhaps to keep the King content in the menial position which they had
assigned to him, that suppressed gentleman was allowed to make a few
insignificant grants to his own friends.  He was graciously permitted to
restore a single manor to Lady Poynings, their own inheritances to Emma
Tresilian, and Idonia Brembre, and her wardrobe to Joan Salesbury,
widows of his murdered councillors.[#]  He was also allowed to grant to
his younger brother the castles of Berkhamsted and Tintagel, and to the
elder the constableship of the Tower, and the marriage of Roger, Earl of
March.


[#] The widows of Tresilian and Brembre, the two members of the
attainted group who alone were not Lollards, received by far the best
treatment of any.


"'Tis an ill wind blows nobody good," said Mistress Grenestede when this
last piece of news was published.

"Ah, my dear master! is it good it has blown you?" was the silent
response of Lawrence Madison in his inmost heart.

Whatever were Lawrence's doubts, none oppressed Roger.  He arrayed
himself for his bridal without a shadow of apprehension of any sort.

The King, the Queen, the royal Dukes and Duchesses, and half the
nobility, were bidden to the marriage of the heir of England, which took
place early in March, in the Royal chapel of the Tower.[#]  The
bridegroom was dressed in blue golden baldekyn, one of the richest silk
stuffs then manufactured, the cost of which when plain was about seven
guineas: but this was richly wrought with fleurs-de-lis in gold
embroidery, which had cost three pounds more. White frills of costly
lace encircled his neck and wrists, and closer sleeves of crimson velvet
protruded from the wider sleeves of the blue gown. His boots were of
crimson velvet, buttoned with pearls.  In his hand was a hat of black
velvet, over which swept a full plume of white ostrich feathers. From a
chain of massy gold about his neck depended the White Hart, in enamel
and gold, which was at once the badge of the King and that of the bride.


[#] The place is not on record; February or March, 1389, is the probable
date.


The Lady Alianora, who was given away by her royal uncle,--an uncle only
about five years older than his niece--was arrayed with the utmost care
and costliness that her wardrobe could afford.  She appeared in a long
robe of crimson velvet, embroidered with golden flowers in an elaborate
rambling pattern, and over it a cote-hardie, or close jacket without
sleeves, of the choicest miniver, cut low in the neck, as a bridal dress
then usually was: cuffs of gold filagree finished the sleeve at the
wrist, and a girdle formed of ten golden clasps fitted round the hips.
Down the front of the cote-hardie ran a row of gleaming
jewels--sapphires, rubies, diamonds, and emeralds--which flashed and
sparkled with every motion of the wearer.  A golden fillet adorned her
head, set with similar gems; and from under it flowed the golden glory
of her magnificent hair, which streamed almost to the ground.  This last
item was an essential part of the bride's costume at this date. Beneath
the crimson velvet robe, when she lifted it out of her way, could be
seen glimpses of a rich skirt of gold-coloured satin, and black velvet
shoes studded with gold.  The bride wore no gloves: they were not usual
except on some ceremonial occasions, and then only for royal persons, or
for the bird to perch upon in hawking.  The wedding-ring was set with a
ruby.

Around the principal actors stood a crowd of the English nobility, and
on its outskirts a motley assemblage of officials then deemed
necessary--seneschals, heralds, minstrels, trumpeters, and many others.

When the priest reached the words "With all my worldly goods I thee
endow," it was incumbent upon the bridegroom to put a sum of money on
the book, in gold and silver, which became the private possession of the
bride.  Roger laid down the princely sum of three marks, which Alianora
swept composedly into her pocket.  Pockets were comparative novelties,
having only existed for about forty years; and ladies, like gentlemen,
had one on each side.  Enormous bags they were, within which, had it so
pleased her, the bride could easily have disposed of her fillet or her
cote-hardie.

Immediately after the ceremony followed the mass,--a low mass, at which
the wedded pair alone communicated with the priest.  The bride was then
led between two married nobles to the banquet-hall, where the
wedding-feast was spread, and the bridegroom followed, led in like
manner.  Precedence even before royalty was given to them for that day.
They sat together in the place of honour, the middle of the table on the
dais, the King being on the right hand of the bride, and the Queen on
the left of the bridegroom.  Such plate as was included in the bridal
gifts--and plate was more frequently given than anything else--was used
at the feast. Stately gold and silver hanaps, or cups about the size of
a chalice, in all manner of diverse forms dictated by fashion or
fancy--swans, eagles, dragons, roses,--gold and silver ewers, often
matching the hanaps; dishes, plates, porringers, cups, saucers,
salt-cellars, spoons--all these had been poured before the feet of
Alianora, and all figured at her bridal festival.

This was above all others the era of elaborate cookery, and of
marvellous and unintelligible names bestowed upon it.  The guests were
offered Bouce Jane and Bardolf--both being of the nature of a fricasee;
Daryalys and Mon Amy, which may be classed under the head of custards;
Aqua Patys, which was garlic broth, and Raynecles, which somewhat
resembled croquets.  It is, however, very difficult to compare these
dishes with our own, since the former were far more elaborate, and
generally involved most extraordinary mixtures of incongruous
ingredients.  There were also oxen, pigs, and sheep, roasted whole; pies
of all descriptions, made of flesh, fowl, and fruit; smaller beasts and
birds of every kind, many of which are now deemed inedible, such as
hedgehogs, squirrels, swans, and herons; and lastly, two regal dishes at
the top and bottom of the high table, the boar's head and the peacock in
his pride--namely, with the tail fully spread.  In the midst of the
table, at every course, stood a different "subtlety"--now a castle of
silvered cardboard, attacked by painted wooden knights; now a bronze
mill turning its wheel through a stream of Gascon wine; now a lady
standing on a mossy bank, with her cavalier kneeling at her feet, while
his squire held his horse, ready for departure, behind them; finally, a
King seated on his throne, with his Court standing around.  This table
ornament might or might not be of edible materials; it was more
frequently the latter.

After this splendid feast, and when the basin of rose-water had been
carried round, the hall was cleared for dancing, commenced by a minuet
in which the wedded pair were partners.  How gentlemen contrived to
dance with those long gowns, like dressing-gowns, flapping about their
feet, may be left to themselves to explain.  They must have been more
awkward to manage than a woman's dress, being open in front, and
therefore much more likely to entangle the legs.  Swords were another
difficulty; and to fall over the sword in dancing was not an unknown
calamity.  The simple expedient of laying it aside for the occasion
appears not to have occurred to the wearers, and would, perhaps, have
been thought unknightly behaviour.

The bride, who of course was the observed of all observers, conducted
herself through the whole ceremony in a composed and self-possessed
manner, which the elder ladies thought extremely edifying, and pointed
out to their giddy or excitable daughters as a model of proper
behaviour.

To women of Alianora's type, the matrimonial ceremony is the great event
of life--the ceremony, rather than the fact.  And she was perfectly
satisfied, for she had obtained all she wanted.  She had longed for a
gown of blue cloth of gold, and she possessed it, and many equally
expensive and handsome.  She was now a matron, which meant that she was
emancipated from parental control, could go where she liked, and do what
she pleased. Before her hung the glittering prospect of a queenly crown,
with the adornment of a rich coronet while she waited for it.  There was
only one element in her jewelled world with which she would have been
quite ready to dispense, if she could have had the other items without
it, which was unhappily impossible. And that was--Roger.

"Happy is the bride the sun shines on!" said Mistress Grenestede, who
dealt largely in proverbs, "Look you, we could not have had a better
day, might we have ordered the same our own selves: nay, nor a jollier
wedding.  What think you, Master Madison?  Forsooth, methinks you be
somewhat unjocund.  You grudge not your Lord a fair and princely bride,
trow?"

"I grudge my Lord nothing that shall be for his good, nor for his
pleasure," was Lawrence's grave answer.  "He above wist that."

"Then, prithee, why be you not better accommodated?"[#]


[#] More at ease.


"By reason, Mistress, that I much question the good: and I do yet more
doubt the pleasure."

"Nay, now, heard you ever the like?" demanded Mistress Grenestede of any
body who chose to answer, as Lawrence walked quietly away.  "Yon lad is
either to presume more than him ought,[#] or elsewise can he see further
into a millstone than other folk."


[#] More suspicious than he should be.


Lawrence was not so far off that he failed to hear her, and he stopped
for a moment to reply.

"Any man may see through a millstone, Mistress mine, if he will but set
his eye on line with the hole."


About the close of 1393, the King resolved to make Roger Viceroy of
Ireland.  He was now twenty years of age--equivalent to twenty-five in
the present day--and His Majesty thought it desirable that he should try
his hand at that government of which so much might eventually be thrust
upon him.  He had been married for four years, and most people would
have thought him fully competent to take care, not only of himself, but
of Ireland.  But his wise friend and father-in-law, Kent, who seems to
have been much attached to him, was not easy to let him go alone.  He
resolved to accompany him in person: not only this, but he prepared a
petition to the King in Council, in Roger's name, containing the
following large stipulations, before Roger should take the lieutenancy
upon him.

First, he requested that notwithstanding his nonage, full livery should
be granted to the Earl of March of all his estates, in England, Wales,
or Ireland; and of all "lordships, castles, manors, towns, lands,
tenements, rents, services, franchises, fees, and advowsons, with all
other appurtenances and commodities, whether existing in fee, or
hereafter to return to the said heritage by reversion or remainder, or
by any other way whatever.  Item, all the revenues and profits of all
the lordships and lands, with all their appurtenances and commodities
whatever, belonging to our Lord the King in all the land of Ireland
during the nonage of the said Roger.  Item, two thousand marks in money
to be paid in hand. Item, that he have ... full power to charge his said
heritage" for one year, in order to provide money for the voyage.  Item,
that Roger should not be obliged to take the said lieutenancy upon him,
before attaining his majority.  Item, that the Earl of Kent should
accompany him, with sufficient attendance, specially indicating the Lord
Lovel, Sir John Stanley, Sir John Sandes, and Sir Ralph Cheyne.  Lastly,
that this should be done within a year from the nativity of St. John
next ensuing, whereupon Roger would assume the duties of Viceroy.  These
demands were very large; but that they were perfectly reasonable is
shown by the fact that not only did the King assent to them, but that
Arundel and his co-trustees gave a ready and formal consent.  The entire
estates of March, therefore, were at once resigned into Roger's keeping,
though he was yet some months short of his full age.  Arundel and his
colleagues had done their duty well by Roger in this matter. The
possessions handed over to him were in the best possible condition.  He
"found all his castles and houses in good repair, amply stored with rich
furniture, his lands stocked with cattle, and forty thousand marks in
the treasury."

The King intended to have set out for Ireland about the end of April.
But before he was able to leave Shene, where he was then residing, the
saddest loss of all his sad life fell upon him.  The "black death," that
dreadful plague which had scourged England in 1340 and in 1369, returned
to ravage it in 1394.  One of its first victims, about the 20th or 25th
of April, was the beloved Lollard Queen.

This is not the date usually given for her death but it is nearer the
truth than the accepted one. Froissart, who states that she died at
Whitsuntide (which that year was June 7), and who has been followed by
all other writers, contradicts himself by saying that the King's journey
was deferred for two months in consequence of the Queen's death, and
that he set out about the 24th of June.  In this case, she died about
the 24th of April: a date shown to be near the truth by an entry on the
Issue Roll, recording payment for the carriage of the waxen image to be
borne on the coffin at her burial, on the third of June.  There must
therefore have been time, before this, to manufacture the wax statue,
which assuredly never was commenced while the Queen was alive; nor only
this, but to convey it by water from London to Richmond, which the entry
informs us had been done.

It was not until after the tenth of August that Roger set forth on his
journey to Ireland.  His retinue consisted of (his own) March Herald,
two knights banneret, eight other knights, a hundred men-at-arms, 200
horsed archers, and 400 foot archers.  With him, inseparable as his
shadow, went Lawrence Madison.




                            *CHAPTER VIII.*

                           *MISCALCULATION.*

    "Keep them thy gifts for them that value gold
    Above their souls' redemption and hearts' love!
    What! shall I stain mine honour, lose my God,
    Do violence to mine heart, at such a price?
    This very bait the Devil fished withal
    For Christ our Master, urging Him to buy
    What was His own an hour too soon, and pay
    For the hour's tinsel glory, hope and peace.
    Go, buy the traitors that will sell their souls!
    From thy perfidious hand I draw mine own,
    Clean of its lucre and its perfidy."


An account of the state of affairs in Ireland, when Roger sailed from
Holyhead to Dublin--the fact which is supposed to underlie the
enigmatical assertion of the worthy Canon of Chimay, Sir John Froissart,
that the Lords sent to govern Ireland embarked from Lolighet, and landed
at Dimelin--would if in detail require a volume to itself, and would be
a mere list of names and battles, diversified by occasional murders.  A
short epitome of the facts is however requisite, in order to make clear
much that follows.  There were three parties at this time in Ireland,
whom the English styled the Wild Irish, or Irishry; the Rebellious
Irish; and the English.  The first were the unsubdued natives, who had
retired to the mountains, bogs, and forests; the second, who dwelt in
the territory known as the English pale, between the Irishry and the
sea, were the descendants of mixed marriages between the English and
Irish; they partially adopted the customs of both countries, and were
subject to the English or not as they found it convenient: more
frequently they did not find it so. Among these we find reckoned "the
Butyllers, Powers, Gerardyns [Fitzgeralds], Bermynghams, Daltons,
Barettes, and Dillons."  The last class, the English proper, consisted
of "a confused medley of soldiers, merchants, men of needy or desperate
fortunes, and those whom the English government had invested with
authority: they occupied the principal towns and cities and small tracts
around them, chiefly in Leinster, and on the eastern and southern
coasts."  The "rebellious English" were also termed English _by birth_,
while to the "obedient English" was restricted the title of English _by
blood_.

Since the death of Roger's father, Earl Edmund of March, matters had
gradually been going from bad to worse, until now the state of things
was little removed from anarchy.  "Sometimes the septs were destroying
each other; at other times they were making inroads upon the English
pale, or joining with the great settlers in their mutual ravages."  The
most unmanageable of all the Irish chieftains at this period was Arthur
MacMorogh, of Leinster, who with the Earl of Desmond wasted the whole
south of the country at intervals.  Lesser troublers to the English, but
still sufficiently vexatious, were the O'Brien in the east, and the
O'Neile in Ulster.  The chief helper of the government was the Earl of
Ormonde, head of the great family of Boteler.  Connaught was almost
entirely given up to the "wild Irish."

The appearance and tactics of King Richard restored order, and four
Kings of the "wild Irish" submitted themselves to him, rather "through
love and good-humour than by battle or force," and mainly through the
persuasions of the Earl of Ormonde. The four were, O'Neile, King of
Meath; Brian, King of Thomond; "Contruo, King of Chenour," which may
mean the O'Conor; and Arthur MacMorogh himself, King of Leinster, who
claimed to be the Ardriagh, or Lord Paramount over the whole island. At
Dublin, on the 25th of March, 1395, these four chieftains were knighted
by the King in St. Patrick's Cathedral, after mass, having "watched" the
previous night in the church.  It may be well to note in passing that
Froissart gravely informs us that St. John the Baptist was the founder
of the Cathedral.  To instruct these four potentates in English customs
in general, and in the ceremonies of the forthcoming solemnity in
particular, the King appointed a tutor in the person of an English
squire of uncertain name, called in different MSS. of Froissart and by
other writers, Henry Castide, Cristeed, Cristall, and Cristelle.  This
man had long been a captive among the "wild Irish," and had married an
Irish damsel.  His first care was to improve the chieftains' table
manners, which in his eyes were those of savages: the next, to induce
them to lay aside their Irish cloaks, and attire themselves in silken
robes trimmed with fur; the third, to make them use saddles and
stirrups, both which they were very unwilling to do.  They appear,
however, on this occasion, to have been in a most amiable and
accommodating temper.  What they least liked they submitted to
cheerfully, on being assured that it was the King's wish that while they
were his guests they should conform to English customs.  On one point,
however, they showed that they intended to listen to no instruction.
When the squire tried to investigate their religious faith, "they seemed
so displeased that he was forced to silence."

"We believe in God, Three in One," said the Irish Kings: "thus far there
is no difference between our creed and yours."

Their teacher would not quit the subject until he had ascertained one
point which was in his eyes of primary importance.  To what Pope did
they profess obedience?  Was their pontiff the successor of St. Peter
who reigned at Rome, or the wicked schismatic who had set himself up at
Avignon?  In fear and trembling he put the question.  He might have been
easy; for the fierce struggle between Pope and Anti-pope had not
penetrated the bogs of the Emerald Isle.  The Irish Kings at once
answered that their Pope was at Rome.

He then asked if they would like to be made knights.  They replied that
they were knights already, for every Irish prince was made a knight by
his royal father when he was seven years of age. The squire responded
rather contemptuously that the King of England would not be satisfied
with that kind of childish knighthood, but would create them knights in
church with solemn ceremonies.

Shortly before this solemnity, the Earl of Ormonde paid a visit to his
royal _proteges_.  He inquired if they were satisfied with Castide--a
question which they answered like gentlemen.

"Perfectly.  He has prudently and wisely taught us the manners and
usages of his country, for which we ought to be obliged, and do thank
him."

The Earl then gave them a full explanation of the honour about to be
done them, and the ceremonies which would attend it, laying stress on
the great value which they ought to set upon it.  The four Kings seem to
have behaved admirably.  They allowed themselves to be richly dressed,
of course in the English manner: and let us hope that it did not include
cracowes, those ridiculous boots which tapered to a point, and preceded
their wearer by several inches,--for these must have been woful
inflictions upon an Irish chieftain, accustomed either to wear no boots
at all, or to tie on simply "the dun deer's hide."  They dined at King
Richard's table, where, said Master Castide, "they were much stared at
by the Lords and those present--not indeed without reason; for they were
strange figures, and differently countenanced to the English or other
nations.  We are naturally inclined to gaze at anything strange,"
naively added the squire, "and it was certainly, Sir John, at that time,
a great novelty to see four Irish Kings."

Castide's opinion is worth record as to the reasons why the Irish
submitted themselves so readily.  He thought the "rebellious English"
were alarmed at the blockade of their coasts, which was so strict that
"neither provision nor merchandise could be landed": but he admitted
that the "wild Irish" cared nothing for this, since they lived by
hunting, and were strangers to commerce.  Their reason, he considered,
was the personal respect which they bore to King Richard, whom they
accounted to be a prudent and conscientious man, and whose reverence for
the memory of Edward the Confessor was shared by themselves,--a fact
undisturbed by any inconvenient knowledge that Richard, if not the Irish
Kings also, had at least as much sanctity about him as Edward the
Confessor.  How that most unamiable of men, whose cruelty as a husband
was only equalled by his irreverence as a son, ever came to be canonised
and honoured as Saint Edward, must be left as one of the many insoluble
enigmas which Rome propounds to the crushed hearts, smothered
intelligences, and stifled consciences of her votaries.  For any other
reason, Castide remitted it to the grace of God.  The Canon of Chimay,
whose exquisite naive simplicity at times cuts sharply as a knife, made
answer, with more wit than he was aware, that "the grace of God is good,
and of infinite value to those who can obtain it: but we see few lords
now-o'-days augment their territories otherwise than by force."

The campaign thus ended, Roger returned to England in company with his
royal cousin, and rejoined his family in London on May, 1395, much to
the satisfaction of both himself and Lawrence Madison, who greatly
preferred to follow his master out of battle rather than into it, though
he wisely kept to himself that sentiment, which would only have earned
him a character for cowardice.  On very few men had the idea then dawned
that any person could love peace for other reasons than laziness and
fear of being hurt.  The two characteristics of King Richard which his
uncle Gloucester specially detested and despised were his religious
opinions, and his dislike to war and tumult.  It might truly be said,
paradox though it be, that Gloucester was never at peace except when he
was at war.

During the twelve months following his return to London, Roger kept
himself exceedingly quiet.  It was the only safe thing he could do.  It
is said that an eminent man was asked how, being a resident in Paris, he
contrived to live through the Reign of Terror.  "I made myself of no
reputation, and kept silence," was the significant answer.  The Earl of
March followed the same plan.

The beginning of 1395 was characterised by a strong agitation against
the Lollard party, provoked by a very bold step on their part.  Sir John
Oldcastle, afterwards Lord Cobham, issued his "Book of Conclusions"--an
epitome of Lollard doctrines, as well as a damaging attack on the
opposite party--which was presented to Parliament by Lord Latimer and
Sir Richard Stury, and posted up on the doors of St. Paul's Cathedral
and the gates of Westminster Abbey.  The two Archbishops took alarm in
good earnest.  They were strongly opposed to the "new" doctrines--which
were not new, but as old as Christianity itself--and they rightly judged
that unless these views had been spreading considerably in secret, they
would scarcely have made this flourishing appearance in public.  King
Richard must be appealed to, and entreated to put down this unwelcome
manifestation with the strong arm of the law: and the astute prelates
well knew that only at one point, like Achilles, was Richard vulnerable
on the Lollard question.  The religious views were his own, and he would
listen to no diatribe against them. But the political aspirations of the
advanced Lollards he dreaded and disliked as much as the hierarchy.
Archbishop Courtenay trusted to no tongue less skilful than his own the
task of winning the King over.  He started for Ireland without delay,
taking with him Bishop Braybroke, a prelate whom the King liked and
respected.  Richard, the most open and unsuspicious of men, was no match
for one of the wiliest priests who ever wore a mitre.  Under his
dexterous hands he was induced to believe that the political aims of the
advanced section included his own deposition--the exact contrary was the
truth--and the beloved Queen, who had hitherto always guided his sceptre
on this point, was now beyond the fitful fever of earthly tumults.
"Never was there King of England who so easily believed what was told
him," says the chronicler Froissart, who knew Richard personally.

The King, thus influenced, departed from the course approved by his own
better judgment, and for one moment swerved from that kindly support
which he had always given hitherto to the Lollard party.  He called
before him the four most prominent Lollards then in his suite--Lord
Latimer, Sir John Montacute, Sir Lewis Clifford, and Sir Richard
Stury--and sharply rebuked them for their favour shown to traitors, with
a threat of expulsion from the household if they did not change their
political aspect.  Latimer, Clifford, and Stury, were terrified,
especially the last, who fell upon his knees and vowed that he would
never do it again.

All these were old men.  But the youngest of the group,--John Montacute,
who was but four-and-twenty--held his peace, and promised nothing.

Could King Richard have looked forward five short years, he would have
seen that one young man, who now refused to follow his King to evil,
alone of all the four giving his life for that King's sake.  The man who
would not deny his God for fear of his sovereign, was the one who was
ready to die for God and him.

It was during this short period of glamour thrown over King Richard by
the astute Archbishop that certain Lollards were imprisoned in Beaumaris
Castle, that some recanted, and that various edicts were issued, in the
strong language wherein Gloucester and Courtenay delighted, against
those who "sowed tares among the people."  The complete change of tone
in the royal mandates is very striking, between those periods when
Gloucester's influence paralysed the King, and the two short intervals
when Richard was left to himself.  Yet to this day Richard, not
Gloucester or Courtenay, is assailed with all the obloquy which is due
only to the two latter.  On this occasion Richard followed the
Archbishop's leading up to a certain point.  But when Courtenay pressed
the advantage which he had gained, and urged capital punishment for the
heretics, the King drew back.  The cards had been shown a little too
plainly.  A short term of imprisonment for obnoxious politics was
consonant with Richard's ideas of right and justice: but death as the
penalty of religious opinions he would not give. Was it likely, when the
religious opinions were to some extent his own?

Courtenay appeared to waive the matter.  Ostensibly, he deferred to the
King's judgment.  And Richard never suspected that the sentence of death
had merely been, by Courtenay and Gloucester, transferred to another
person, and that their resolve was that if he would not permit the
heretics to die, Richard must die himself.

It was during this period that Earl Roger kept quiet and silent,--so
quiet that we never hear a word about him for a whole twelvemonth,
though circumstantial evidence tends to show that he was in London all
the time.  His high position, and his known opinions, alike placed him
in danger.  The only safe thing to do was, so far as possible, to reduce
himself to a nonentity, and hope that Gloucester and his myrmidons would
forget him.

During the last two years death had been very busy in high places.  The
plague of 1394 had made three royal widowers--the Duke of Lancaster, the
King, and the Earl of Derby.  In the summer of 1396, Archbishop
Courtenay was also summoned to the judgment bar.  Removed from
Courtenay's influence, the King awoke from his dream, and determined to
initiate a new order of things.  He knew at last--all but too late--that
Gloucester and Arundel were among his worst enemies.  Had he seen it
with regard to one man more--his cousin Derby--the course of English
history would probably have been different.

There was another person awake also, with the important difference that
he had never been asleep. Gloucester was ready to act just as soon as
his royal nephew: sooner, in fact, for his plans were already matured,
while Richard's were only in process of formation.  The time was come
when that blow was to be struck which he had foreseen so long, for which
he had waited so patiently and paved the way so elaborately, and which
for so many years past, he had mentally destined Roger Mortimer to
strike. The edge of the tool must be felt, to see whether the metal were
sufficiently strong for the work to be done, and the point sufficiently
sharp.

The July sun streamed full into a large low chamber of a handsome house
on St. Paul's Wharf. The chamber was hung with dark blue silk relieved
by silver embroidery.  Velvet settles of the same colour stood at
intervals around the walls, and half-a-dozen curule chairs of ebony
inlaid with ivory, and furnished with blue silk cushions, were scattered
about the room.  On one of the velvet settles, with his head supported
by a cushion, lay the only occupant of this handsome chamber--a young
man of twenty-two years of age, fair-complexioned and very good-looking.
His eyes were closed, but he certainly was not asleep, for he drew long
sighs at intervals which were not long.  On a small table beside him a
large book lay open, bound in violet velvet, and clasped with gold.

A soft scratch at the door without announced a visitor, who was desired
to come in, without any change of position on the part of the occupant
of the settle.  A middle-aged man, clad in blue and gold livery, entered
accordingly.

"Please it your Lordship, Master Westcombe is here come from Fleshy,
from my Lord Duke of Gloucester, desiring speech of your Lordship."

The slight contraction of his Lordship's brow might indicate that he
could have borne to be deprived of the pleasure of an interview with Mr.
Westcombe.

"Good.  Bring him hither."

He rose from the settle, gave his long blue silk gown a slight shake,
and resting his hand on the book, awaited his visitor.

The visitor proved to be a squire in royal livery, with the badge of the
Duke of Gloucester--a golden swan--fastened to his left sleeve.  He made
a courtesy--for in those days the courtesy was the gentleman's
reverence--and then with many words and some flowery expletives informed
his very dear Lord that his gracious Lord the Duke lovingly prayed him
to speed with all haste to Fleshy, for he desired to speak with him
immediately.

Earl Roger's expression of face on this communication was much like that
of a man who is just on the point of swallowing a necessary but very
unpalatable dose of medicine.  He gave a rather short reply, to the
effect that he would start for Fleshy early the next morning: and having
dismissed Mr. Westcombe courteously but quickly, he made his way to
another room on the same floor of the house. Sounds of lively
conversation and laughter issued from this room as soon as the door was
opened. The Earl, in whose face the expression with which he had
received his uncle's behest had rather increased than disappeared from
it, made his way up the long narrow room, filled with brilliant company,
pausing now to greet one, and now another, till he reached a lady
attired in white and ruby satin, who sat at the further end in a curule
chair, surrounded by gentle men who appeared to be paying court to her.

"Pray, suffer me not to let your diversion," remarked the Earl, with the
faintest possible tone of satire under his polished accents: "I suppose
I may have leave to speak with her Ladyship among her other
servitors.--I came but to say, my Lady, that my fair uncle of Gloucester
hath sent unto me this evening, praying me to render visit unto him at
Fleshy, as early as may stand at mine ease.  I think, therefore, to set
forth with the morning light, and I shall maybe not have the pleasure to
see your Ladyship again ere my departing."

The voice of the Countess replied, "Then, my Lord, you will not be here
for the dance to-morrow? Truly, this is displeasant tidings!"  But what
her eyes said was,--"Really, what a convenient coincidence!  I am
delighted to hear it."

"I dare not flatter myself that your Ladyship will miss me," was Earl
Roger's answer, in the same slightly ironical tone.  Then he turned
round, kissed his hand to her, and made his way out of the room.

Just outside he met his children and their nurses, returning from the
garden.  They were four very pretty, attractive little children, the
eldest not quite seven years of age, and the youngest only two.  The
Earl stopped, and took up the eldest in his arms.

"God bless my Nannette!" he said.  "Has Nannette been in the garden?"

Little Anne nodded, and looked earnestly into her father's eyes.  The
expression of them distressed her. Children can read the expression of a
face long before they can read anything else.  She thought, in her child
language, that "somebody had hurt him;" she realised that he wanted
comforting and diversion of thought: and her idea of administering both
was to pat his cheek, and to hold up her doll for him to look at.

Somebody had indeed hurt him--somebody who was always hurting
him--somebody who cared not a straw whether he was hurt or not.  But who
that was must never be told, except to the two privileged persons who
had discovered it without telling, and whose sympathy was ready and
sure.

The Earl kissed his little girl and set her down; laid his hand on his
boy's head and blessed him. As he turned away, he said to a gentleman
usher who was in waiting,--"Has Dan Robesart returned home?"

"Not yet, my Lord."

"No matter.  Send Madison to me."  And the Earl went on to the room he
had first occupied. There he sat down by the window, and for a moment
yielded to his own sorrowful thoughts.

He was not usually a man to brood over his sorrows, nor to nurse
grievances.  His feelings were more of the sharp and short order, and
his disposition was not only cheerful, but playful.  But when he had
just received a fresh sting, the wound would smart and rankle for a
moment.  Otherwise, youth and natural good spirits commonly helped him
to bear his daily cross.  Just now it pressed hard. Those lovely blue
eyes--as lovely as they were unloving--had so plainly told him that
their owner would be glad to get rid of him, even for a few days. That
bright illusion of past days, when he had fancied differently, was over
long ago.  He had woke early from his sweet dream.  He knew that his
idol was not merely dethroned--it was broken. The Alianora whom he had
so passionately loved was a creature of his own imagination: and the
real being, to whom he was tied for life, was neither loveable nor
loving.

There was no jealousy mixed with these feelings of disappointed
loneliness.  It was not that he had any apprehension of her loving some
one else better than himself.  He said to himself bitterly that she had
not heart enough for that.  What she enjoyed in those ceaseless
flirtations in which she spent her life was just their very emptiness
and frivolity.  For anything like genuine attachment--anything which
involved strength and colour and warmth and reality--her nature was too
light.

Oh, when will women learn that a flirt is a woman who has deliberately
flung aside the very flower and glory of her womanhood?--who is
preparing for herself a middle age of misery, and an old age of contempt
and loneliness: to add to them, unless God's mercy interpose to save
her, an eternity of remorse.  No type of woman is so utterly despicable
as this.  "Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man
soweth, that shall he also reap."

Earl Roger was not a man to shut his eyes to anything which he did not
wish to see, nor to go on hoping against hope in the face of what he
knew to be facts.  His position was very much the same as that of
another near connection of royalty, just a hundred years before him.[#]
But Earl Edmund of Cornwall and Earl Roger of March were men of two very
different types.  The one had sunk under his burden; the other rose
superior to it.  Roger was not so utterly swallowed up in his
disappointment as his predecessor had been.  For him, his territorial
affairs, his children, politics, and other interests, came in to relieve
the weight.  Only now and then, as it was to-night, his heart sank low,
and felt a yearning want of that human sympathy which he never received
but from two persons--his family physician, Mr. Robesart, and his
body-squire, Lawrence Madison.


[#] The reader who desires to know more of this will find it in "Not For
Him."


He lifted his head now to bid the latter enter.

"Your Lordship is not at ease, I fear?" said the squire with an
intonation of genuine interest in his master.

He had grown into a taller and stronger-built man than Roger:
dark-haired, dark-eyed, with a pale grave face, a smile of considerable
sweetness, and a clear pleasant voice.

"Only the old story, lad," was the quiet answer. "Aye, and a little
further travail thereto.  My Lord of Gloucester, mine uncle, hath sent
for me.  We must needs be away toward Fleshy as early as the sun
to-morrow."

"At your Lordship's pleasure.  Shall it be to tarry?"

"I trow not.  Best, maybe, to be prepared for a two-three days.  But I
shall be here again in the even, an' I may."

Lawrence bowed, and withdrew from the chamber.

Half an hour later, Mr. Robesart entered it, and found the Earl bending
over the large Bible.

"I was told," said he, "that your Lordship had asked for me a short
space agone.  Metrusteth you be not indisposed?"

"Not here, good Father, I thank you," answered the Earl, touching his
head.  "Only here"--and he laid a hand upon his heart.  "Methought I
would fain hear somewhat of your counsel ere my departing, which shall
be right early on the morrow."  And he repeated the explanation given to
Lawrence.

"Your Lordship," responded the physician, "hath not, as methinks,
overmuch trust in my Lord Duke?"

"Fair fall he that hath that in any man!" returned Roger with a gesture
of contempt.  "In truth, Father, my belief in the Duke's discretion, not
to say loyalty, would go by the eye of a needle.  If he would but keep
his plots to himself and my fair cousin of Rutland, which 'joyeth so
much therein that I could not for compassion wish him thereout! Verily,
I am alway something afeard lest some day he essay to drag me in."

"Counts your Lordship that his Grace hath sent for you with that
intent?"

"I know not wherefore he hath so done, and that is the very truth."  And
the Earl passed his hand wearily over his forehead.

"It will be well that we both ask God for wisdom for your Lordship.  But
there is more than that troubling you, or I mistake."

"More than that?  Aye so.  Not more than custom is.  Father, see you yon
fly a-walking over the page of this book?  If I shall say, That fly is
in my way, and brush him thereout, roughly, so that he die--what is it?
To me, but a little matter of disease[#] whereof I have rid me.  But to
him it is the end of health, and life, and all things.  Ah! there be
many fly-crushers among us human creatures.  God help the crushed
flies!"


[#] Inconvenience.


"Does He not help them?"

"How wot I?  You must needs tell me what is help ere I can answer you.
You mind that part of the story of my Lord Saint John Baptist, when he
sent them twain to our Lord to ask at Him if He were He that should
come, or no?  There be will tell us that he sent them for their
teaching; it could not be for his own.  Methinks such have been in but
few deep places, where the floods overflowed them. Was it not that the
man's heart was wrung to behold the Christ, his own kinsman, pass him by
on the other side--heal and comfort and help all that came, and never
turn to him?  Ah, it is evil waiting with patience and faith, when
Christ passeth a man by."

"And you scarce twenty-three, my Lord!" said Mr. Robesart sadly, and not
so inconsequently as it seemed.

"After men's reckoning.  Be there any years in God's eternity?  A man,
methinks, may live a thousand years in one day, whether they be years of
happiness or of misery."  The Earl's head was lifted suddenly.  "Father,
tell me, what means He for me? It might have been so different!"  And
with the saddest of intonations, the young head sank again.

Mr. Robesart laid his hand on that of the Earl.

"He means,--'My son, give Me thine heart.'"

"I thought I had done so."

"Then he means,--My child, come nearer to Me. 'Each branch that beareth
fruit, He shall purge it, that it bear the more fruit.'"

The Earl made no reply, except to say after an interval,--"Father, I
would fain find you here when I return.  I hope that will be to-morrow
at even."

"I will await your Lordship," answered Mr. Robesart: and the interview
ended.

The journey to Fleshy was hot and dusty, though they arrived there
before the sun had reached the meridian. My Lord Duke kept his young
kinsman waiting for him some time, and when he came, took him into the
most secret recess of his own private room.

"Very dear Cousin," said he--and Roger felt sure from that moment that
he meant mischief--"I do earnestly desire to unbosom myself to thee of
all the secrets of mine heart.  I am well assured that I need not unfold
to thee the very numerous reasons which render our fair Lord King
Richard wholly unfit to govern this realm, as being neither worthy nor
capable to do so."

Roger contrived to hold his tongue, and kept his amazement as much out
of his eyes as he could.

"You are well aware," continued the Duke--people are apt to assume your
perfect agreement when they utter opinions with which you particularly
disagree--"you are well aware, very dear Cousin, that the King cares for
nothing but the pleasures of the table and the amusements of ladies."

What Gloucester meant by this sweeping statement[#] was that the King
disliked war, which his uncle regarded as the only occupation fit for a
prince: and preferred literature, music, conversation, and field sports,
which in the eyes of his uncle were sufficiently mean to be level to the
feminine intellect.


[#] These words from Gloucester are matter of history, and were used
more than once in substance at least.


"Now, very dear Cousin, it is much communed[#] that these things are so:
and hard is to know what shall be done in the matter, the rather since
the people are right heartily discontent, and action must needs be
taken."


[#] Talked about.


My Lord of Gloucester's language was usually as full of "the people" as
that of any modern Radical: and, also like some modern speakers, he was
greatly given to crediting the people with whatever desires he himself
might entertain.  Roger felt strongly inclined to inquire (with Lord
Melbourne), "Can't you let it alone?" but he held his peace, accounting
it the wisest plan to let Gloucester unwind his peroration.  Every time
that he found himself addressed as "very dear cousin," Roger's sensation
of distrust deepened.

"I do you to wit, very dear Cousin, that I am already joined by my Lord
of Arundel, your old friend and guardian,--his son Sir John, my Lord of
Warwick, and many other prelates and barons, all which be at one and
busy about this matter.  The King shall be deposed, and prisoned so long
as he shall live, in due state of a prince, and full provision allowed
for his maintenance.  We do desire to see you our King, being fully
satisfied that you shall be of very diverse liking and conditions from
him that is now such, and shall well content your nobles and people.
What say you?"

Not what he thought.  Had Roger spoken that out, the solitary word
"Scoundrel!" would have been sufficient to convey it.  But he held his
peace.  During a few seconds of silence his thoughts rapidly revolved
probabilities, possibilities, desirabilities.  Gloucester watched him
narrowly until at last Roger looked up and spoke.

"Fair Uncle, and my gracious Lord, these matters be of weighty import,
and ask grave meditation.  It would not be possible that with so little
time I should give you an answer touching a business so great."

Roger's manner was so cautious, if not cold, that Gloucester took the
alarm.

"Have a care, nevertheless, most sweet Cousin, and this I pray you right
heartily, that the matter get not abroad.  If it be published, and come
to the King's ears, ere the business be ripe----"

"Trust me, fair Uncle.  I will take due thought, and observe all
secrecy.  And now, if your Grace have said so much as it list you, I
pray you let me be on my way home, for I have urgent business in hand,
and it shall be late ere I win thither."

An hour afterwards, Roger and his suite set out from Fleshy.  As he
climbed the last slope whence the Castle could be seen, he drew bridle
for an instant, and looked back.

"Thank God that I have escaped from that hole with mine head on!" he
murmured, in so low a tone that he was unheard except by the safe ears
of Lawrence Madison.  "If my gracious Lord of Gloucester ever again set
eyes on me within those his walls, I grant him free leave to dub Roger
Mortimer a fool!  'Very dear Cousin,' forsooth! 'Most sweet Cousin!'
Methinks, the further I drew away from him, the dearer and sweeter I
became. We will see, most sweet and very dear Uncle, if the young cannot
outrun the old!--Lawrence!"

"My Lord?"

"We must be ready, thou and I, to set out for Ireland as to-morrow."

"For Ireland, my Lord!"

"Aye.  I shall never feel at ease till I have set the sea betwixt me and
those prating traitors.  Once at Carrickfergus or Trim Castle, and I may
snap my fingers at my very dear uncle and my most sweet cousins.  They
shall not be so foot-hot to fetch me from Ireland as from Paul's Wharf.
The rascal crew!--the vile traitors!  Pardoned over and over again as
some of them have been!--raised to honours and riches by the King they
are ready to betray!  Would I be their King?--the ungrateful, disloyal
adders! Nay, fair Uncle of Gloucester!  Roger Mortimer can lay down his
life if need be, but he can never sell his King and betray his
friend--never break his trust, nor be unfaithful to his troth!  '_Un
Dieu, un Roy_'--'_Fais ce que doy!_'  Come, let us hie on."

"Methinks," said Lawrence, a little hesitatingly, "her Ladyship shall
scantly be ready to obey so unlooked-for a summons."

"Her Ladyship--will do her pleasure."  There was a pause between the
words.  "It may be it shall not list her to follow me thus far.  If she
so think, she can 'bide at which of my castles she will."

Nothing more was said on the subject until they reached Thames Street,
when Lawrence was sent to give instant notice to the servants of their
master's sudden departure, and warn them to be ready for him to set out
at four o'clock the next morning, and the Earl himself went to convey
the intelligence to the Countess.

"Bid Dan Robesart await me in my chamber," he said to the gentleman
usher as he passed.




                             *CHAPTER IX.*

                       *ROGER FINDS HIS MISSION.*

    "And how can man die better
      Than facing fearful odds,
    For the ashes of his fathers
      And the temples of his gods?"
        --LORD MACAULAY.


Earl Roger found his Countess in the same room in which he had left her
when he went to Fleshy.  Hypocras and spices, which constituted the
"void," a light meal corresponding to afternoon tea, were being served
round as he entered. Roger made his way to the side of Alianora,
declined the hypocras--a light, sweet wine--and sat down by her while
she sipped it.

"You are early, my Lord," said the Countess, whose eyes were occupied in
watching an interchange of frothy banter between a knight and a lady at
a little distance.

"I had need, my Lady.  Will it meet with your wishes to follow me to
Ireland, whether urgent cause removeth me, and without delay?"

"Ireland!  What part of Ireland?"

"Kilkenny, at the first; afterward, maybe, to Trim."

"And what moveth your Lordship to go among those savages, who should
scantly wit if you ware red velvet or blue damask?"

"Those savages are my kinsfolk, under your Ladyship's leave.  Moreover,
savages commonly have better sight than civil[#] men."


[#] Civilised.


"Verily, your Lordship hath some sweet kinsfolk to wake your pride!"
said the Countess with a light laugh.

"Therein is your Ladyship not deceived," was the dry answer.  "I leave
behind me some most sweet ones.  Well, what saith your Ladyship to my
point?"

"What, _I_ go to Ireland?  Gramercy, your Lordship is pleasant!  Aye,
when I have cause to wear up mine old gowns and ugsome[#] head-gear,
then will I think of following you in that direction.  But till it so
happen, under your leave, I would as lief 'bide on Paul's Wharf or at
Ludlow."


[#] Ugly.


"As your Ladyship will."

"When go you?  Soon, is it?--this next week?"

"I set forth as four o'clock to-morrow morning."

"And you looked for me to go withal?  Verily, what unwitty[#] fantasies
have these men!  Why, one might scarce fold a borel[#] cloth in the
time.  What moveth you to be thus foot-hot,[#] forsooth?"


[#] Silly.

[#] A very common, coarse material.

[#] In hot haste.


"There is cause, Dame," said the Earl gravely.

"Then I bid your Lordship good even," said the Countess, laughing, "for
elsewise shall you ne'er have space to put on your hood.  I wish you a
joyous meeting with those your dear kinsfolk, and that they may not eat
you ere I behold you again!"

She held out her hand, and he touched his lips to it.

"May God bless my Lady!" he said very gravely.

Then he left her, and went upstairs, to say good-bye to his children.
As he slowly mounted, the thought occurred to him,--What does blessing
mean?  If God blessed Alianora, what would He do to her?  According to
the usual ideas of men, He would give her beauty, talent, wealth,
luxury, and happiness.  But was this what God meant by the word?  Had He
no better blessings than such as these?  Were not His sweetest fruits
wrapped often in unsightly husks--His rarest gems in crusts which
concealed their brilliance?  Might He not be blessing Roger himself by
means of his disappointments, and not blessing Alianora through all the
gifts He showered on her?  Was there not something in that Book which
Roger was beginning to know so well, and to apply instinctively to every
thing which happened to him, about one to whom God gave corn, and wine,
and oil, and silver, and gold, which she prepared for Baal?  If men
turned His blessings into means of sinning, was there no fear lest He
should turn them into curses?

Little Anne ran to meet her father as soon as she heard his step.  He
stooped and took her in his arms.

"Little Nan," he said rather sadly, "what wilt thou grow to be?"

"A lady," said she readily, with brightening eyes.

"There be two sorts of women, my little maid. There be heart-comforters,
and there be heart-breakers.  Which wilt thou be?"

The question was beyond her in details.  She replied to its scope, which
was all that she understood.

"I will be what God makes me."

"Amen," answered the Earl.  "Be what God makes thee,--not Satan, nor
thine own foolish fantasies. Farewell, my little one.  I am going a long
journey, my Nannette."

"Will you be back soon?"

"Nay, I think not.  Farewell, my darling--God go with thee and bless
thee!"

He kissed them all and gave them his blessing. Then he went back to his
own room, where he found Mr. Robesart awaiting him.

"Father, it behoveth me to set forth for Ireland with the dawn, and I
would vain have taken you withal.  Can you be ready?"

"A priest is always ready," was the reply.  "At what hour shall I wait
upon your Lordship?"

"At four of the clock I think to set out."

"You shall find me in attendance.  Can I serve your Lordship in any
other way?"

"Methinks not, save by taking that into your safe keeping," said the
Earl, touching the large Bible. "I would have it go withal, as well as
you.  Nought else, I thank you."

But before Mr. Robesart had quite reached the door, his young master's
voice arrested his steps.

"Father, tell me ere you go, what doth God when He blesseth us?"

"What do you, my Lord, when you bless your childre?"

"I do desire all good to hap unto them: but I may not ensure it."

"And He alway ensureth it.  I see none other difference.  God's blessing
is God's love.  Every gift of God is a loving thought of God's heart
toward His childre."

"But how, toward them that are not such?"

"'He maketh His sun to rise on the evil and on the good,'" replied Mr.
Robesart.  "His common, earthly blessings He gives to all alike."

"And what call you such gifts as beauty, learning, and riches?  Be they
blessings, or no?"

"All things that God has made are good.  They are blessings when they
leave His hand.  If we would have them abide blessings, we must give
them back to Him.  If we keep them to adorn ourselves withal, they
become curses to us.  God's first and greatest blessing is Himself.  Let
us keep Him in His right place--on the throne of the heart--and all else
will fall into his right place, as by the wave of a magician's wand."

"Things be sorely apt to get out of their places!" said the Earl with a
sigh.  "I thank you, Father."

"My Lord, when you find things out of their places, look and see if you
have not given leave to somewhat else to occupy His place.  God give you
a good even!"

A very small suite accompanied Earl Roger to Ireland; but it included
his two best friends, Mr. Robesart and Lawrence Madison.  His outside
friends were considerably puzzled to know why he should leave England at
such a particularly awkward moment as this, when the negotiations for
the King's marriage were in progress.  The Earl of Kent, his late
guardian--since Roger's majority he had ceased to be a practical one so
far as any personal control was concerned--was specially perplexed and
astonished at this step.  But he knew nothing of the interview at
Fleshy.

To all of them Roger gave a general and vague explanation, which had
reference to the necessary care of his Irish estates.  His own sole
fervent desire was to put himself where Gloucester could not find
him--to lose himself, as far as the conspirators were concerned.  It was
the only way that he could see just then to serve that God, and that
King, to both of whom in his early youth he had pledged his heart's
devotion.

Rarely has any journey been taken in more feverish haste than that of
Roger Earl of March to Ireland in the summer of 1396.  He felt as though
he were not safe for a day until he had put the breadth of St. George's
Channel between himself and his uncle Gloucester.  His journey from
London to Haverford was almost a flight.  His unsuspecting suite
complained bitterly of the long forced marches over the mountains of
South Wales which their unreasonable master obliged them to take. Two
days delay at Haverford, before the wind would serve, brought Roger's
patience to the verge of distraction.

"I _must_ go!" he said passionately to Mr. Robesart.

"My Lord," was the grave answer, "it ill suits the archer to wear the
uniform of the general.  There is no must but one, and it is meet but
for the lips of the Lord of all."

"Yet surely He knoweth my necessity?"

"Soothly: but I pray your Lordship to remember that what is _must_ with
you may be _must not_ with Him."

"I cannot rest till I be hence!"

"We shall rest in the life to come," quietly replied Mr. Robesart.  "In
the life that now is, we have but to be and do God's will."

"You take it calmly, Father!  But then, for you there is no such need.
'Tis easy gear to counsel a man to lie still whose veins burn with
fever, when your own pulse is as quiet as a mill-tarn."  And Roger
laughed, with a laugh which was not all mirth.

Mr. Robesart's answering smile was rather pathetic.

"Having lived through the fever, I may know your Lordship's feelings."

On the third day the wind changed, and they set sail from Haverford.
Three weeks--a very favourable passage--landed them at Wexford; and as
Roger set foot upon the shore of Ireland, he turned and looked across to
the invisible mountains of Wales.

"Fair fall thou, my native land!" he said half sarcastically.  "From
henceforth is this land of my fathers mine own land, and thou must serve
thee without me."

The autumn and winter of that year found him at Kilkenny, spending his
time in an unusual manner for a noble of the fourteenth century.  He
summoned Irish minstrels and chroniclers around him, and went deep into
Irish history.  Perhaps it was a natural result that Irish history went
deep into him.  He became an enthusiastic admirer of the character and
annals of the nation the blood of whose kings ran in his veins.  His own
natural impetuosity drove him along the groove which he had chosen, and
ere long one passionate aspiration took possession of his soul, next
after that "_Un Dieu, un Roy_" which had possessed and would possess it
for ever.  England and Ireland should be at peace, and he would be the
means of it.  They should live and love as sisters, happy and tranquil,
under one sceptre, having but one aim, and the glory of the one should
be the glory of the other. To this he would give himself as long as he
should live.  He would secure it--or die in the attempt.

All the Mortimers had entertained an affection for Ireland, and could
never forget their Irish blood. King Richard also had a liking for that
country, of which his uncle of Gloucester was pleased to speak very
scornfully.

"He is a fool who thinks of conquering Ireland," said Gloucester, in his
usual unwatered diction. "The Irish are a poor and wicked people, with
an impoverished country; and he who should conquer it one year would
lose it the next."

This affection of the young Earl for the Green Isle by no means
increased his popularity with his English retainers.  Saxon and Celt
have always mutually looked down upon each other.  The Irish saw in the
English intruding strangers, none the more welcome for being conquerors;
the English reckoned the Irish uncivilised barbarians with whom no
person of refinement could be satisfied to associate.  They were not
themselves so over-refined that they need have been particular: but the
half-educated man (still more woman) is usually more fastidious on the
score of vulgarity than the blue-blooded noble.  There were murmurs
among Roger's suit that he was too accessible to the masses, and that
his heart was rather Irish than English.

When the King discovered, somewhat to his surprise, that his chosen heir
had so unexpectedly disappeared from the scene on the plea of looking
after his Irish property, he sent him a commission of lieutenancy for
Ulster, Connaught, and Meath--a most convenient arrangement for Roger,
since it afforded him a full excuse for not returning to England until
the state of affairs should have changed.  His Majesty was not the only
person who was puzzled by Roger's proceedings.  But there was another
person who was not puzzled at all.  Of one point Roger might safely have
felt assured--that, however his sudden disappearance might surprise and
perplex others, his uncle Gloucester at least would not fail to
understand it.  But the fact that a particular material had proved
unsuitable for his purpose was not likely to ruin the designs of so
far-seeing and scheming a conspirator as Gloucester.  Having convinced
himself that his nephew of March was not the soft and malleable article
that he had supposed him, Gloucester merely cast the useless thing on
one side, and set his busy brain to work to evolve a fresh project.  It
proved a very different one from the last.  His new scheme involved a
partition of the kingdom into four parts, of which his brother of
Lancaster was to be bought off with one (a matter somewhat easier said
than done); York, who was plastic as putty in the hands of Gloucester,
was to have another; Arundel was to be rewarded with the third; and the
fourth fell to Gloucester himself.  March was left out altogether.

How long this sagacious disposition of political affairs would have
lasted, may be very reasonably questioned: certainly not, at the
furthest, beyond the second generation.  A quarter of England would
never have contented Derby, for whose ambitious soul the world was
scarcely wide enough, nor could Rutland have reigned an hour in his
division without plotting against the other three.

The end was near--the end of one phase of the political tumult.  On the
28th of July, Gloucester and his fellow conspirators met at Arundel, to
perfect their plot.  Just eight days later, in full Parliament, at
Westminster, that extremely "honourable man," my Lord of Rutland, humbly
presented a petition of impeachment against Gloucester, Arundel, and
Warwick.  Five days afterwards Gloucester was arrested and sent to
Calais; and on the 8th of September he died in the Castle of that town.
The King had borne with him, to use his own words, "as long as he had
been able"--and no other Sovereign, perhaps excepting Henry VI., would
have borne with him half so long.

It was asserted by the King's enemies, long afterwards, and is now
generally believed, that Gloucester was "murdered" by being smothered
between two feather beds.  Unfortunately for the assertion, this very
report was spread, with the view of aspersing the King, while Gloucester
was still alive.  The subsequent elaborate account, therefore, was
simply a more carefully revised version of the old slander. The truth is
that Gloucester was either privately executed, or that he died of
apoplexy before the execution took place.  Why a man under sentence of
death, approved as inevitable by his own brother, the just and humane
Lancaster, should not have suffered execution, must be left to those
modern writers of the "follow-my-leader" school, who persist in terming
the execution a murder.  How many times the penalty had been deserved it
would not be easy to reckon.

Things were not now, as previously, done by halves--except in one item,
and that spoiled the whole. The Earl of Arundel was beheaded on the 21st
of September.  The Archbishop, Norfolk, and Warwick, were banished for
life.  If one other execution had taken place, the rebellion would have
been crushed, and King Richard's life would have been safe.  It was
entirely his own fault that it did not.  Derby had been engaged in a
multitude of plots--more than any one knew except himself--he had
plotted the death of the King, and had drawn his sword upon him in the
Queen's presence: he had been twice, if not three times, condemned to
death by his own father.  The Duke of Bretagne had said to the King on
their last interview, "You will never be safe while Henry of Lancaster
lives."  Richard knew all this, but his heart failed him.  For all the
provocation received both as monarch and as man, that true and tender
heart refused to condemn the old playmate, and instead of it lifted him
to honour.  He fancied this step would ensure the love and fidelity of a
man who knew not what love and faithfulness were.  He laid this adder to
warm in his bosom, and like the adder that it was, it stung him to
death.

While these stirring events were passing in England, Earl Roger of March
maintained that distance and silence which he had evidently perceived to
be the only safe course for himself.  How far was he neglecting his
duties in so doing? is a question which may reasonably be asked.  The
date at which he returned to England seems to show that he was actuated,
not by a cowardly fear for his personal safety--a supposition
contradicted by every other action of his life--but by a fear of his
name being dragged into the contest on the wrong side, and without his
own consent.  As soon as he could feel sure that Gloucester had laid
aside the idea of making a tool of him, and before any appearance of
retribution had overtaken Gloucester, Roger returned to Usk.  The little
cloud which had overhung the Lollard party had been long dispersed, and
during the period of that shadow Roger had sought safety not in flight,
but in silence.

The Countess was still in London, and she made no attempt to join her
lord in Monmouthshire.  He felt so hopeless of her doing so, that he did
not even ask her.  But one other thing he did--he sent for his children.
Beyond his natural wish for their occasional company, was his strong
desire to rescue them from the contamination of the society into which,
so soon as they were old enough, their mother was likely to plunge them.
He was anxious to accomplish a project which had occurred to him, and
which he did not expect her to oppose--to obtain his old foster-mother,
Guenllian, to take the same position with respect to his children.
Their mother cared too little about them to care who was with them, so
long as it was some one who would take all responsibility off her
shoulders.  Guenllian, on her part, was ready enough to return to her
sometime nursling, whom she had always loved the best of all her
charges.  Roger was more easy when he had secured her.  With her came
Beatrice, who had always been her satellite since she entered service,
and was considered as an indispensable appendage.

The following Michaelmas brought a magnificent ceremony, in the creation
of some dozen new peers at Westminster.  The list was headed by the
traitor Derby and the treacherous Rutland, who were respectively created
Dukes of Hereford and Aumerle. But the heir presumptive of the Crown
kept away from both politics and pageants in his seclusion at Usk, and
never showed himself until the ensuing January, when he was summoned to
the Parliament at Shrewsbury, to take an oath which had been
administered to all the peers, and which March was the last of the peers
to take.  It was a particularly useless one, for a member of any party
could have taken it with a clear conscience.  It was sworn by the body
of the peers on the shrine of St. Edward, and by March alone upon the
cross of Canterbury (probably as being portable, which the shrine was
not): and it bound him who took it "to hold, sustain, and maintain well
and loyally, without fraud or evil intent, all statutes, etc., made in
this present Parliament, without ever going contrary thereto or to any
part of them, and never to revoke nor annul them, nor never to suffer
their repeal, living nor dying--saving to the King his royalty and
liberty, and the rights of the Crown."  The last item annulled all the
rest so far as the royalists were concerned; the whole was useless as
directed against the traitors.

Roger did not remain at Shrewsbury.  He followed the King and Parliament
to Bristol, and as soon as he was released from his parliamentary
duties, he came on to London.  He was there for a few weeks, until signs
appeared in the political world of another tumult.  It is popularly said
that when thieves fall out, honest men come by their own: and in this
instance the thieves, who were Hereford and Norfolk, fell out most
decidedly.  They appeared together before the King, each of them
bringing against the other a charge of that disloyalty of which both
were as guilty as any man could well be.  A rumour of disturbances in
Ireland afforded Roger a chance of getting out of the way, before either
of these most honourable men should drag him into their toils, or bring
charges against him which, however untrue, he might find it difficult to
refute.

Once more he offered to Alianora the choice of accompanying him.  They
had been separated for nearly two years, and had only met a few weeks
before.  But the Countess could not think of it.  In fact, she declared
herself quite astonished that her lord could be so unreasonable as to
ask for her company.  Her new dresses for Whitsuntide were in course of
preparation, and had cost her a month's reflection.  Did he suppose that
they could be finished in a day? or if they had been finished, how could
he imagine that she would be satisfied to waste their resplendency on a
handful of common knights and squires, or a horde of Irish barbarians?
Leave Town in the beginning of April!  It was perfectly preposterous,
impossible.  And she was quite sure he did not want her--which last was
said in a tone decidedly indicative of the companion fact that she did
not want him.

He did not want her as he had once done.  His wish for the company of
the real woman whom he had long seen her to be, was far less than it had
been erewhile for the society of the loved and loveable ideal which he
was now convinced that she was not.  Still the old love, though stifled,
repressed, and repulsed, was yet alive, and might have been blown into a
flame had Alianora cared to take the trouble. Roger sighed as he turned
away.

"Be it so, Dame," he answered, speaking more lightly than he felt.  "But
your Ladyship will scarce look for me to rest content in being utterly
bereft of the company of ladies.  I shall take Nannette withal from
Usk."

"Gramercy! to what end?" demanded Alianora, opening her handsome eyes in
astonishment.

A smile of rather bitter amusement played round the lips of the Earl.
"Choose your Ladyship the reason," said he, still lightly.  "You have no
grudge thereunto?"

"I?  Good lack, nay!  An' it like your Lordship to burden you with a
maid of nine years, you be welcome of very inwitte.[#]  I shall have the
lesser charge."


[#] Most heartily.


Her husband might reasonably have inquired what charge she had ever
taken of the children, or how it was to be lessened when they were
already out of her care: but he passed it by.

"Wenteline will ease you thereof," said he.  "Your Ladyship grudgeth
not, methinks, that she should bide hence with the childre?"

"Not I, forsooth!  Have with them whom you will," was the careless
answer.  "I love none of them so dear that I may not live without them."

Roger knew as well as Alianora that the pronoun included himself.  He
sent Anne into raptures, and Guenllian into much surprise, by an order
that they should be ready to accompany him.  His male friends were
inclined to be exceedingly merry over this odd notion of the Earl.  That
he should have taken even his heir, at that early age, would have seemed
to them amusing; but to choose a girl of nine for his companion struck
them as a preposterous absurdity.  Earl Roger paid no attention to them.
Extremely sensitive to the lightest censure from lips that he loved, he
was now perfectly callous alike to ridicule and to anger from others.

Of the four children, Anne was his special darling. She and her brother
Roger took after himself in character, while Edmund and Alianora were
their mother's children.  Least attractive of them was Edmund, in whose
disposition indolence and selfishness were already manifesting
themselves strongly. When the children were summoned in the morning,
Anne and Roger were always up in a moment, while Edmund had to be dug
out of bed amid a storm of grumbles.  All that Anne owed to her mother
was that graceful and gracious manner, which with the mother was merely
artificial polish, but in the daughter was ingrained as a part of her
character. The child's affection for her father was intense: she always
shrank from her mother.  The instinct of her true heart discerned the
utter hollowness of Alianora, and the two natures could never
amalgamate.

April had almost bloomed into May when the party reached Trim Castle,
where Roger meant to remain for a few weeks.




                              *CHAPTER X.*

                           *MARCUS CURTIUS.*

    "Yet thy true heart and loving faith,
    And agony of martyr death,
    God saw,--and He remembereth."
      --F. J. PALGRAVE.


"What think you on thus sadly, my son?" said Mr. Robesart to Lawrence
Madison, whom he found standing with folded arms, gazing out of an
embrasure as though he were not contemplating the landscape.

"I was thinking, Father," was the answer, in a low, dreamy tone,
"wherein success lieth."

"What fashion of success?"

Lawrence smiled, "I am beginning to learn that there be more fashions
thereof than one."

"It is good to learn it early," said the priest. "For man is apt to
think that alone success which hath a gloss and a glitter about it.  We
be too oft like childre, which would rather a brass counter that did
shine bravely, than a gold noble that was dull and covered with dirt.
But what be thy thoughts thereon, my son?"

"I thought, Father, that many men did destroy their own success by being
too eager to grasp thereat, afore God had it ready."

"Thou hast well spoken, Lawrence--'afore God had it ready.'  Hast thou
read certain words of Saint Stephen the martyr touching Moyses, that
great Prophet of God?  'He guessed that his brethren should understand
that God should give to them health by the hand of him: but they
understood not.'  How should they?  Nor was it they that were lacking.
It was Moyses that understood not--understood not that the day of
deliverance was not come by forty years--that forty years' keeping of
sheep in Midian must needs be first.  Yet God did mean to deliver them
by his hand; it was not undone, only latered.[#]  He did so when the
right time came--when He was ready, and when Moyses was ready, and when
Israel was ready."


[#] Deferred.


"It seemeth me," answered Lawrence, sighing, "that man lacketh much
training at our Lord's hand, ere he be fit for a deliverer."

"More than any can rightly judge, out-taken our Lord.  The fellowship of
Christ's work may well include the fellowship of Christ's sufferings.
Mark thou, a stone-breaker needs no training; a goldsmith must have
much.  The finer the tool shall be, the sharper must be the grinding of
it.  What is behind thy thoughts, Lawrence?"

"Methinks, Father, you wit my Lord's earnest desire to be he that should
peace Ireland with England?--and you know how foot-hot he flingeth
himself, soul and body, into all that cometh to his hand for to be
done?"

"I know," said Mr. Robesart, with a smile in which amusement and pity
had equal shares.

"I was marvelling if he were ready," said Lawrence in the same low
voice.  "I am something feared lest he may run ere he be sent."

"Men of his disposition are prone to make that blunder."

"That would not bring success."

"Not the brass counter of it, in very sooth: yet it might be a step on
the way to the gold.  It were more like to bring a lesson to himself
than success to his plan.  Yet even there, Lawrence, that is at times
the truest success which hath most the look of failure. It did not look
like success when the cross was reared on the hill of Calvary.  Yet that
night he was destroyed that had the power of death, and the gates of the
kingdom of Heaven were flung open to all believers."

Lawrence did not answer for a moment.  Then he said, in a lower tone
than ever,--"There be that seem as though they could not learn from the
past."

"Let us have a care we be not of them.  And for others let us pray."

"It is hard," was the reply with an unsteady voice, "to see a life flung
away and lost, for the which you would give your own and count it
nothing worth."

"That is not lost," was Mr. Robesart's answer, "which is given to God
and our neighbour.  The only lost lives are those that be cast away upon
Satan and ourselves.  He will not lose his life: another may."

Lawrence had no need to inquire if Mr. Robesart were thinking of the
Countess.

"And if it were as thou shouldst seem to fear," resumed the priest, "if
our young Lord should fling away all, even to earthly life, upon this
earnest burning desire that hath possessed him,--who are we to say him
nay?  This may be God's work for him. It were a good work, surely, if it
could be done."

"It were a good work to dry up a quicksand," answered Lawrence,
significantly: "yet if a man flung therein all the gold of his having,
it should be cast away, and the quicksand be no drier.  Father, it seems
to me a work that cannot be done, or that, if it were done, should cost
a thousand lives as fair as his, and take maybe a thousand years to do
it."

"Lawrence Madison," said Mr. Robesart, gravely, "thou and I had better
let the Lord's purposes alone, for the chances be an hundred to one that
we shall do them mischief.  It were unwisdom to stay the wheels of the
world lest they should crush a fly."

Lawrence gave a gesture of impatience, almost involuntary.

"My son," continued the priest, laying his hand on Lawrence's shoulder,
"childre be apt to make wrong reckonings.  Remember, He that driveth the
charette is the Father of us all.  He will not crush, nor 'noy one of
his childre without good cause.  And mind thou, that meaneth good cause
for him, no less than for the general matter.  If the Master of the
garden will pluck one of His flowers in the bud, which of His
weeding-lads shall say Him nay?  And if our Father see it well to call
His child to Him, somewhat sooner than the other childre would fain part
with him, is it ill for the child thus called, or is it well?"

"By how rough a road!"

"It will not matter when he hath reached Home. Yet is it so?  Dost thou
know which road should be the rougher--the short, sharp climb up the
steep rock, or the weary winding around it?  I would scarce presume to
say.  Forty years in the wilderness be apt to tire a man sorely.  Let it
rest, Lawrence; it is better.  Only pray for him.  He will give his life
for somewhat, either by the sharp climb or the weary desert way.  Pray
that he may give it for what God means it.  We shall meet and rest at
Home."

"God grant it be so!"

"And one other thing, Lawrence, I will say unto thee, of the which I
think thou hast need.  Be not too careful to spare pain to them thou
lovest.  It is not the best kind of love.  And too often--I would but
caution thee, my son, to keep out of the wiles of Satan--what it truly
signifieth is that we would fain spare ourselves the pain of seeing it.
Methinks thy danger should be on that side, wherefore have a care. God
loves us better than that.  Aye, and He only knows our hearts, as He
only knows those good works which He hath prepared for us to walk in.
'It sufficeth to each day his own evil.'  Pray as much as ever thou
wilt; only beware of giving commands to God.  And when thou hast prayed,
and canst do nothing, then is the time to stand still and see His
salvation.  Remember, for him that is God's child, nothing is verily ill
that God doth to him."

"Nay, but if it break his heart?"

"Hearts take more breaking than men think," said Mr. Robesart, quietly.
"And He healeth 'all that have need of healing.'  By times, when we
think we lack the plaster, we do in very deed want the probe."

Lawrence looked up suddenly, with pained eyes.

"The probe gives the most pain when a man shall struggle against it.
'Thy will, not mine,' is the most wholesome medicine for all our ills,
my son."

"It is a bitter one," said Lawrence, his lip slightly trembling.

"Aye, whiles we be swallowing of it.  But if thou wouldst make thy
physic specially bitter, the way is to look thereon a while aforehand,
and feed thy fantasy with the bitterness thereof, and swallow the same
grudgingly at last."

Lawrence smiled.

"Aye me!" said Mr. Robesart, sadly.  "For every time that we say to God
with our lips, '_Fiat voluntas tua_' how many times do we say to Him
with our hearts, '_Fiat voluntas mea!_'  Nay, at times we pass a step
further yet, and say, 'Do Thou my will!'  May God save thee and me from
that rank treason against our heavenly King!  We be all likely to fall
therein. And yet His will is for our best welfare--our sanctification
here, our bliss hereafter; and our will is but for present ease and
passing pleasure.  Lord, teach us to do Thy will!"

The same evening, a horn sounded without the gate, and the Earl of
Ormonde was announced in the hall of Trim Castle.  Roger, who was
playing chess with one of his knights, rose to meet his kinsman, a man
ten years older than himself.

"Fair fall your Lordship in your light battle to-night!" said Ormonde,
with a rather grim smile and a glance at the chess-board.  "If you be of
my mind, we shall find somewhat heavier work to-morrow."

"Truly, what mean you, fair Cousin?"

"The O'Brien is up, my Lord: and that means work for me--and for you, if
you will have with me."

"Have with you?  Aye, with all my heart!" returned the Viceroy, with a
flash in his eyes.  "The O'Brien! ungrateful traitor! was it for this
the King knighted him in Dublin Cathedral?  Howbeit, you and I shall
soon bring him to book, and without tumult, I would fain hope."

"Your Pandora hath her coffer a good size," answered Ormonde, with the
same grim smile.

"You think my hopes be over-great, trow?"

"A dram or so bigger than mine."

"I will never fight mine own kin, if I may away therewith," said Roger,
cheerfully.  "Let me but parley with the Irishry myself, and you shall
behold somewhat come thereof."

"Truly, of that doubt I nothing," said Ormonde in the same tone.  "But
whether that which comes thereof shall be to your gracious Lordship's
ease--well, I was not bred up for a prophet."

"Whither march we?"

"Down the Boyne and up the Blackwater.  The sept are gathered at
Kenles."[#]


[#] Now called Kells.


"How much is your following?"

"All the Botelers, and a good parcel more of the English pale.  We are
well enough for that."

"I will march to meet them with the dawn," said the Viceroy.  "Madison,
order all things in good readiness for early morrow.  Maybe I shall find
my work there."

It was said in a cheerful, almost exultant voice; and Roger quitted the
hall, leaving Lawrence very, very sad.

"Maybe he shall find his death there!" he said in a low mournful voice
to Mr. Robesart.

"Be it so, my son," answered the priest, though his own tones were not
without sorrow.  "Let him only find God's work; and then he shall find
also God's hire unto His servants.  He gives not grudgingly, Lawrence
Madison."

The armies met at Kenles, on the 20th of July 1398. When they were yet
at a short distance, the Earl of March suddenly sprang from his horse,
and bade Lawrence dismount also.

"Quick, and aid me!" said he, in his usual impulsive manner.  "I will
don the Irish habit, and meet them thus arrayed.  They will list me if I
come to them in their own habit, and speaking their own tongue.  Is not
the blood of their ancient kings mine own?  Lolly"--the old childish
epithet came back to his lips in this moment of haste and
excitement--"wherefore standest gazing thus moonstruck? Make haste and
help me."

"My Lord, I am sore afeared lest they hurt you."

"They hurt me!  Am I not one of them by blood? Have I not learned to be
one of them in language? Let me but don their habit, and I am of them in
all things.  Quick!  Cast thy fears and fantasies to the winds!  This is
no time for them."

While Roger spoke, he was hastily throwing aside his English dress, and
arraying himself in the Irish national costume--the tunic and braccae
which dated from Roman days, the loose hood, the plaid, the bare foot in
the stirrup, and the spear in the hand.  Thus accoutred, and commanding
his men to stand still until after the parley, he dashed up the slope to
meet the Irish leaders.

For an instant Roger's handsome face and lithe figure were seen at the
summit of the knoll, as he cried in Irish to the advancing host.

"God speed you, my brethren!  What are your demands?"

There was a moment's pause for consultation among the Irish leaders.
Then two appeared to separate from the rest, and to come forth towards
Roger.

At that moment came the sharp whirr of an arrow whizzing past, a wild
passionate cry, a sudden rush forward, and the next instant a prostrate
figure lay on the ground at the top of the slope, and over it stood
Lawrence Madison, sword in hand, guarding it alike from friend and foe.
Then a sudden word of command from the Irish chieftain, and down the
side of the slope charged the sept of the O'Briens, completely
overwhelming the English forces.

Let us draw a veil over the next scene.  The customs of the Irish septs
in war were very terrible. The enemy who fell into their hands alive
could rarely expect mercy: while he who met their vengeance dead was
sure of a form of wild revenge which makes the reader shudder.

Six hours later, the returned relics of the English army were reviewed,
and the roll called, in the courtyard of Trim Castle.  Ten disabled
archers were answered for by others: so were twenty-seven wounded or
captured spearmen.  So men spoke up for Lawrence Madison, rescued alive
almost by miracle, but brought home sorely wounded and insensible, and
delivered into the tender care of Guenllian, to be nursed back to life
if that might be.

But there was one name which won no answer of any kind, except the bare
bowed heads which greeted its sound, and let it pass by them in solemn
silence. And that was Roger Mortimer, Earl of Ulster and March, and Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland.

The drawbridge was in place at Trim Castle; the portcullis was lifted,
and the gates stood open.  In the hall was a great catafalque of black
and silver, where lighted tapers burned at the head and foot of the
bier.  And into that hall, now open to every comer, came men of all
kinds and classes, and of both rival nationalities--soldiers in uniform,
and squires of the neighbourhood, of the English pale, and bare-footed
Irish peasantry wrapped in their tartan cloaks, to gaze upon that still
white face which lay so calm and quiet now.  The words which could be
heard whispered were not all alike.  Some of the squires and the
soldiers said angrily, "He was too much for the Irish"--"He was no true
Englishman."  Others hushed them, with, "Nay, he was England's heir,"
or, "He meant well, poor young gentleman!"  But at last came one old man
wrapped in the national tartan, and bearing a harp upon his back, who
sat down, and played upon the instrument a wild, weird, sweet keen, in
the softest notes it would produce. And then, rising, he bound his harp
again upon his shoulders, and went up to the black-robed priest who
stood holding the sprinkler with the holy water, which each one who
pleased it took and sprinkled the corpse.  The old man took it from his
hand, and softly scattered the fresh drops on the calm figure lying
there.  While he did so he spoke in Irish.

"Sweet be thy sleep, son of the Kings of Erin! Light lie the earth upon
thy fair young face!  May He that reigneth in the heavens count thee
among the white-winged, and the dark spirits of evil flee away from thy
path to glory!  Sleep, son of Una the daughter of Cahil!  The winds,
whistling in thy soft hair, shall not awaken thee.  Depart on thy wings,
O blast of the north! for thou shalt not disturb his rest.  Long is the
night that cometh, but his eyes are heavy.  Draw over him the curtain of
peace, and let peace be his coverlet."

As his murmured words ended he caught the eyes of the priest.

"I was only blessing him, Father!" said the old man quietly.  "Didst
thou think the words in my lips were reproaches or curses?  A bard of
Roscommon curse the son of Cahil!  We could not do it, Father.  And he
loved us, and died for us.  They will not leave us his dust, methinks.
We would enshrine it at Tara where holy Patrick preached, or on the Rock
of Cashel with the dust of his royal fathers.  Ah, it is not likely.
They do not trust us. And maybe, at times, we have not deserved the
trust. But we would not have hurt _him_."

"Yet you killed him!" said Mr. Robesart in a choked voice.

"_We?_" was the significant answer, in a pathetic tone.  "God be Judge
between us.  You will know one day,--not, perchance, till the great doom
shall be.  Father!"--the old man, who had moved a little away, suddenly
stopped, and fixed his eyes on Mr. Robesart.  "There will be some wrong
things to be set right, when that shall be."

"There will," was the answer in the same tone.

"Aye," pursued the aged bard, dreamily.  "Some false things to be made
true, and crooked things to be made straight, and justice to be done by
the great Judge that day.  It will be a long day, that--the longest
earth shall know.  It may well take a thousand years."  He turned to the
corpse.  "Sleep till the morning come, golden-haired love of Erin! We
shall all be there, every one, the accuser and the accused, the
oppressor and the oppressed, the murderer and the slain.  There will be
some of us who would be glad to change.  Peace be on thee, and God
forgive us all!"

And the old bard, with the harp bound upon his back, went slowly out of
the hall: and Mr. Robesart, looking after him, murmured, "_Pax tecum!_"

In the upper chambers of Trim Castle, the scenes were nearly as sad as
in the hall beneath.  In the private rooms of the ladies' tower, the
dead father's darling had wept herself to sleep, when exhausted nature
could bear no more grief for the moment: and in an upper chamber of the
adjoining tower, Lawrence Madison lay in fever and delirium.  Between
the two Guenllian came and went, with light steps and heavy heart: and
Beatrice sat by the velvet bed, watching for the child to wake, and
longing to comfort her.

There were two reasons why Guenllian kept Beatrice out of the sick
chamber, but neither of them was the one which would occur to a modern
nurse.  Our fathers, at that time, had little fear of contagion, for
they scarcely realised its existence: when an infectious disease broke
out, they immediately thought the wells had been poisoned--which perhaps
they had, though not by deliberate malice, as was then imagined.  One of
Guenllian's motives was a desire to keep the young girl from hearing
poor Lawrence's perpetual repetition of the dreadful scene just enacted
at Kenles--that was one of the two topics on which his fevered thoughts
ran endlessly: and the other--motive and topic alike--was that Lawrence
in his delirium had told Guenllian a secret, which she wanted time to
consider whether it would be well to share with Beatrice.  Guenllian had
entertained some suspicion of the truth already, but she knew now with
certainty that Lawrence loved Beatrice, and that he felt certain she did
not love him.  On the latter point Guenllian was entirely ignorant, for
if Beatrice had any secret feelings of this kind, she confided them to
no one.  The former was inclined to think that any partiality which
Beatrice might feel for Lawrence was only the sisterly kindness which
had always existed between them, and if that were so, she was very sorry
for Lawrence.  Guenllian knew him well enough to be aware that his love,
once given, would be given for ever, and that there could be no second
time for him. But it was only now and then that Beatrice's name came
into the passionate flood of words which were poured forth from the
unguarded lips of the sufferer. Nearly all night through he was at
Kenles, going over, over, over that awful scene, but--Guenllian
noticed--never coming quite to the end.  When he reached the most
terrible point--just before the death of his master--he always gave a
sob and a low cry as if in pain, and turned back again to the beginning.
This peculiarity, however, had not struck her as any thing remarkable,
until the second day, when in giving a minute account of the patient,
she mentioned it among other items to the physician.

"Aye so?" asked Mr. Robesart significantly. "Methinks, Mistress
Guenllian, that hath a meaning. I would fain be here the next time that
it happeth."

"That may you with little trouble, good Father, since I count it happeth
every hour at the furthest."

Mr. Robesart sat down and waited.  He had no need to wait long.  Before
the hour was over, poor Lawrence was once more pouring out his fervid
and dreadful tale, as though he were relating it to a listener, broken
constantly by disjointed words, yet ever coming back to the one subject.

"Then he rade to the top of the mount--primroses grow there--no, not
primroses--what call you them?--he rade up, in his Irish
habit--habit--Mistress Wenteline, can you amend this rent in mine habit?
The Irish have torn it--he called to them in the Irish tongue--nay, I
cannot tell you; I wis not the Irish--they be wild folk.  They talk
alway; they talked then.  And two of them came riding forward at
after--Master Byterre, look to your saddle-girth; methinks there is
somewhat awry--my Lord bent to his saddle-bow when he answered them.
Then one of them laid his spear in rest--rest!  Oh for rest!  Mine head
burneth--'I will give you rest'--aye, only He can give it--but methought
the man were not hostile, he seemed as though he held forth his hand--O
wala, wala wa!  Help, my God!"

And with this cry, not sharply and loudly delivered, but in a low voice
of intense anguish, poor Lawrence sank back upon his pillow, and a cold
perspiration broke out over his face.

"Lo' you, right this doth he alway!" whispered Guenllian.

Mr. Robesart shook his head.  He laid his soft, cool, quieting hand upon
the patient's brow.

"My son Lawrence, dost thou hear me?"

A lucid interval seemed to occur, for Lawrence looked up into his old
friend's face, with calm weak eyes.

"I see thou dost.  What came then to pass?  Try to tell me."

"When, Father?" answered the faint voice.  He had evidently no
recollection of what had just happened.

"When the Irish leader came up to thy Lord with his spear in rest, and
held forth his hand, or seemed as though he should do it."

A look of unutterable pain came into the sick man's eyes, and his tongue
appeared to refuse its office.

"Tell me, my son," urged Mr. Robesart with gentle firmness.  "Was it
then the Irish shot him?"

Lawrence tried to lift himself, and looked round uneasily.  Mr. Robesart
helped him into a more elevated position, and with a look to Guenllian
sent her behind the curtain.

"Under _benedicite_, if I must!" whispered the patient.

"Be it so," answered the priest, and signed to Guenllian to quit the
chamber.  "Now, my son, here be no ears save mine--and His that knoweth
all things.  Speak on."

"Father!" continued the low but fervent tone, "the Irish never shot him.
That shot came _from our own side_."

"Never!" broke from the amazed priest.  "Lawrence, my son, calm thee!
Thou art speaking----"

"I am speaking the heavy truth," answered the sufferer.  "Nay Father, I
am in good wit now, whatso I may have been.  I tell you again, the Irish
did it not.  It was his own men that slew him."

"Christ pardon him that did it!"

"I will say Amen so soon as I can," answered Lawrence Madison with a
sob.  "That is not yet."

The priest did not reprove him.  Perhaps he was too shocked to say
anything: or perhaps he felt that in a case like this, nature must have
its way at first, and even grace could hardly overcome it in the opening
bitterness of love's agony.

Guenllian had felt much afraid of Mr. Robesart's making Lawrence thus
speak out the point which in his delirium he seemed unable to utter,
like a nervous horse refusing to pass a special object.  But the event
proved the physician's judgment right.  From the hour that the burden
was shared with another, the patient began to amend.

Who was it that slew Roger Mortimer, and why? God knoweth, and men never
knew.  The chroniclers plainly enough assert the fact of his death; but
they content themselves with the vaguest possible hints at the further
facts--that his own men slew him, and that they did it out of jealousy
on account of what they deemed his Irish proclivities.  Just enough to
make us guess it they suggest: they were evidently afraid to say more.

The old bard had spoken truly, for the dust of Roger Mortimer was not
left to repose in Ireland. Amid solemn pomp and glittering funeral
gloom, the coffin of the heir of England was borne over St. George's
Channel to his ancestral home at Wigmore. There they laid him with the
elder Mortimers, and not, like his father, with his Montacute ancestors,
at Bisham.  There, by the side of the valiant and wise Edmund Mortimer
and his royally descended Margaret, who may be termed the founders of
the house, by the first Earl of darkened memory, by the young and royal
mother whom he could barely remember, sleeps Roger Mortimer, heir
presumptive of England, first and last Lollard of the House of March.

England has forgotten him long ago, her own chosen heir to whom her
faith was sworn, and from whose lips, time after time, the cup of
success seemed snatched, just as he was about to drink the sweet wine.
But should Ireland utterly forget that scion of her ancient kings, the
young, warm-hearted, gallant Prince who, prudently of imprudently, gave
his life for her, and did not achieve the end in the hope of which he
gave it?




                             *CHAPTER XI.*

                             *HOME TO USK.*

    "We buried him where he was wont to pray,
      By the calm lake,--even here,--at eventide;
    We reared this cross in token where he lay,
      For on the cross, he said, his Lord had died;
    Now hath he surely reached, o'er mount and wave,
      That flowery land whose green turf hides no grave."
        --FELICIA HEMANS.


If any further item of failure could have come into the life of Roger
Mortimer, it would have been conveyed by a royal letter, dated at
Westminster just one week after his death, and, being addressed to
himself, before the news of the calamity at Kenles had reached the King.
In this letter, Roger Earl of Ulster and March, Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, is told that "as, by the advice of our Council, we have
constituted our beloved nephew Thomas Duke of Surrey our Lieutenant in
our said land from the first day of September next, for one year, we
command that you shall not hinder the said Duke from the execution of
his office, and we also exonerate you from the charge aforesaid, from
the coming of the said Duke."[#]


[#] Close Roll, 22 Ric. II., Part 1.


Roger was superseded--why, there is no information. It does not
necessarily mean, by any means, that the King was displeased with him,
or desired to revoke his policy.  It may even have been at his own
desire, but there remains no evidence of this.  It is more probable that
his royal cousin wished to have him nearer, and considered that the
presence of his heir presumptive would be of service to himself in that
thorny and difficult path which it had been the lot of Richard of
Bordeaux to tread from his early youth.  And now all that remained of
Roger Mortimer was coming home indeed, but to another home and a longer
rest than those which his royal cousin had designed for him.  His crown
was no longer a future possibility: it had come.  He should never see
evil any more.

It has been left on record that King Richard's grief and indignation at
the news of Roger's death were very deep and true.  It was indeed, apart
from the personal regard which he entertained for his young cousin, one
of the saddest calamities which could have happened for himself.  His
heir presumptive, instead of being a man who loved and honoured him, was
now his most implacable enemy--that Henry of Bolingbroke who hated him
worse than any other. For according to the old law of England, Roger's
reign would have been an interlude, and his claim, without some further
distinct disposition of the Crown, could scarcely devolve upon his
children.  Before the funeral procession set forth, there was an arrival
at Trim Castle.  The Lord Bardolf arrived from England, accompanied by
his mother, the Lady Agnes Mortimer, wife of that Sir Thomas Mortimer
who had played a part in Roger's early life.  He had chosen to cast in
his lot with Gloucester and the Lords Appellants, and he was now a
fugitive in hiding.[#]


[#] The Irish Government was charged to search for him in September,
1397, as he was supposed to be in that country; and he was executed in
England, before May 27th, 1399. (Close Roll, 21 Ric. II., Part 1; Patent
Roll, 23 ib.)


The Lady Agnes Mortimer, who came to conduct the little Lady Anne back
to her English friends, while her son attended to the more public
necessities of the case, was an elderly woman of girlish character. She
was by birth a Poynings, and sister-in-law of that Lollard Lady Poynings
who was the daughter of a Princess of Lancaster, and who had been
ejected from King Richard's household by the Lords Appellants. But Lady
Agnes was no Lollard, as she showed a few years later by making painful
pilgrimage to Cologne and Rome for the good of her soul.  She came
forward now to meet Guenllian, answering her deliberate and modest
reverence with a shower of rapid words.

"Mistress Wenteline Bevan, is it not so?  Not Bevan?  'Ap Evan'!
Gramercy, what matter?  Ap Evan is Bevan, and Bevan is Ap Evan--'tis all
one. I pray you, Mistress Wenteline, carry me whither I may dry me, for
my skirts be all sore bemired this rainy day.  Good lack, but it witteth
how to rain in this country, by my troth!  And how doth your little
Lady, trow?  Verily, poor child, she must have been moped well-nigh to
death, with all this doole about her.  Young things love gleesomeness,
and should have it.  Is she yet abed?"

Lady Agnes paused a second for the answer, and Guenllian managed to
glide in--"No, Madam.  Truly I think the child hath too much sorrowed
for her father to take any grief at the doole."

"Ah, well, we will soon have that amended," said Lady Agnes cheerfully.
"I will have the maid away at once, and not await for aught but the bare
needful: we can amend all when we come to Usk, where my Lady her mother
now abideth."

The Countess had always expressed so much dislike to Usk that it rather
surprised Guenllian to hear that she was there.  Lady Agnes answered her
look.

"Ah, my Lady loveth not doole, no more than other folk.  She hath held
fair court at Usk, trust me, with a merry lot of knights and dames: and
in especial--mark you, Mistress Wenteline--_in especial_--my good Lord
Charlton of Powys.  Marry, but when the news came, she _was_ aggrieved!"

Guenllian was glad to hear it.  The thought had lain heavy at her heart,
that Alianora would not sorrow.  Yet to think of her "holding fair
court" with gay company, while that terrible scene was enacting at
Kenles, went sorely against her.

"She might well," continued the garrulous lady. "Gramercy, but I would
have done the like in the same case!  'Twas but two days--nay, methinks,
but one--sithence all her Michaelmas gowns were home from the tailor,
new fashioned and right fair--and now but to think of putting all away
for a lot of dreary doole!  Dear heart, but it were enough to aggrieve
one!  If there had not been at hand my Lord Charlton to divert her
withal, methinks she should well-nigh have gone distraught!  We shall
hear of a wedding there, Mistress Wenteline, by my troth, so soon as
this weary, dreary doole be but got o'er."

Guenllian's tongue required some hard discipline to keep it quiet.
Could _he_ hear it through his coffin-lid,--that still sleeper in the
hall beneath?  Would he not almost stir upon his satin pillow, if this
tale reached him of the utter apathy and heartlessness of the woman to
whom he had given his heart's best love, and to whom the news of his
loss brought bitter regret--for the deferred wearing of her Michaelmas
wardrobe?  Guenllian severely schooled her heart down, and then said--as
calmly as was in her warm Welsh nature--and as soon as a hiatus occurred
in Lady Agnes's persistent rattle--

"Would it like your Ladyship to tell me what manner of man is this Lord
Charlton?  Shall he be one that should deal gently with the childre, or
no?"

For Guenllian's heart yearned over her darlings, and especially over
Anne.

"Eh, good lack!" laughed Lady Agnes, "he shall neither make nor mell
with them.  My Lord Charlton is not he that should befool him a-laking
with childre. 'Tis the mother he loveth, not them.  And in good sooth,
he is scantly the man for one of her high estate: but--there! you wit,
Mistress Wenteline, love is a leveller."

"Love?" said Guenllian inquiringly to her own heart--not to Lady Agnes.
Ay, she knew, better than her companion could tell her, of what material
Alianora was made.  She was likely enough to

      "Crawl to the next shrub or bramble vile,
    Though from the cedar's stately arm she fell."

"And look you," pursued Lady Agnes, breaking in upon Guenllian's
sorrowful thoughts, "truly it hath been a great trouble unto my Lady,
the coming down.  She looked to be one day Queen of England, and should
have been, had my sometime Lord (whom God pardon) been more wary and
witful.  Do but think, to aventure himself afore his army in an Irish
habit--was it not thus he did?  Any man with his wits in his head should
have wist he might as well have writ his death-warrant.  And now all
that lost! Dear, dear, what a misaventure!  Verily, I do think my Lady
of March sore to pity, I warrant you.  To lose a crown, and spoil an
whole wardrobe, all of a blow--well, as to the losing her baron, the
world holdeth more than one man--" Lady Agnes had found it so--"but in
very deed it should sorrowfully grudge me to be in like case."

Guenllian made no answer.  She only threw open the door of the Lady
Anne's apartments, and motioned to the new disposer of the child's
destiny to enter. If she thought that both the Countess and the Lady
Agnes Mortimer mistook their pearls for pebbles, and their pebbles for
pearls, she gave no hint of doing so.


The funeral procession set forth, and the lonely and sorrowful child who
had been one of his dearest treasures, followed the coffin of the dead
father.  Lady Agnes Mortimer had taken Anne's future into her own hands,
and being Guenllian's nominal superior, the latter was bound to obey.
She was about to deliver the child into the yet more nominal care of the
Countess, to be plunged, when she grew a little older, into all those
pomps and vanities of this wicked world which her father had foreseen
and feared for her.  So sorrowfully reckoned Guenllian ap Evan: but the
God of Roger Mortimer reckoned very differently.  The lot He had
prepared for Anne was far away from pomp and vanity,--a long, eventless,
monotonous imprisonment in Windsor Castle, with her sister and
brothers,--the bitter disappointment of an attempted and almost
successful rescue, for the lot of Roger Mortimer seemed to pursue his
children--an imprisonment straiter and sadder than before, until that
one of them whom the usurper had really cause to fear, Roger's bright
little namesake, his own true son, fervent and energetic like himself,
died in his weary prison; till a greater King than Henry of Bolingbroke
undrew the bolts, and set the prisoner free.  Then the other three were
allowed to come forth.  The King was not afraid of Edmund,--dreamy,
indolent, ease-loving Edmund--nor of Alianora, who shared his character.
He gave to Edmund, to ensure his safe keeping, a wife of a different
type from himself, a daughter of the Romish House of Stafford, and a
grand-daughter of Gloucester.  Alianora was handed over to the care of
the heir of Courtenay, ever a Lancastrian House.  The most wary and
cautious men sometimes blunder. And surely it was in a moment of blunder
that that wariest and coldest-hearted of English kings and statesmen
permitted Anne Mortimer,--the heir of Duke Lionel of Clarence if her
brother should die issueless, as he did--to wed the loyal and
true-hearted Richard of Conisborough, a Prince of the Blood, in whose
eyes Richard of Bordeaux, whose godson he was, was the King, and Henry
of Bolingbroke a usurper.  Richard of Conisborough was the one love of
Anne Mortimer's true heart.  Every fibre of that sterling
character--silent, shy, undemonstrative, but deep and loyal to the
heart's core,--wound itself around him by whose side she dwelt in a
dream of bliss for three short years, and then God called her away from
the evil to come.  He lies--murdered, or rather martyred--in the
precincts of "God's House" at Southampton, she in the Abbey Church of
King's Langley.  They have met in the Garden of God.  And if a text were
to be engraven on the tomb of Anne Mortimer, it might well be this,--"I
will be a God to thee, and to thy seed after thee."

She was the mother of all our kings.  When one grand climacteric of
years had rolled round from the death of Roger Mortimer at Kenles, the
Lancastrian episode was over, and the grandson of Anne Mortimer sat upon
the throne of England.  The cup of success, dashed so frequently from
Roger, came to his children's lips at last.  But the one point in which
success would have been dearest to his heart has never come.  Is it yet
in reserve for some descendant of his blood?--or shall the rival sister
nations only see eye to eye, when He shall come who is the Desire of all
nations--when the Lord shall bring again Zion? One event happened, of a
different character, before Lord Bardolf and Lady Mortimer set forth,
which greatly astonished every body in Trim Castle, and the person most
concerned more than any other.

Lawrence Madison was slowly creeping back to ordinary life, and was now
able to sit up most of the day, propped with pillows; and with some
difficulty, and a helping arm, to walk the length of the chamber.  Lord
Bardolf had shown a particular wish to see him, and to hear the story of
the Earl's death from his lips, and had pressed Mr. Robesart to allow
the prudence of his doing so before the physician was quite ready to
admit it.  The latter, however, was overruled by his superior, and Lord
Bardolf had his wish.  The tale was told, at what cost to Lawrence he
best knew.

"And now," said Lord Bardolf, when he paused, exhausted, and Guenllian
held a cup of wine to his white weary lips, "methinks, Master Madison,
you have scantly yet told all.  We heard of a young squire that, in the
thickest of the fight, stood o'er his Lord's body, and well-nigh gave
his own life that the foe should not touch the same.  Was it thus, pray
you, or no?"

There was a moment's flash of fiery light in the weak sunken eyes.

"What looked you for?" said Lawrence Madison. "Had he loved me, and
freed me, and grown with me, child and boy and man, and set me, so far
as meetness might, as his very self, and should I reckon my poor
worthless life as aught beside his?  Had a thousand lives been mine, I
would have given them for his life: and when nought but his dust was
left to give them for, they were at his service for that!"

Lord Bardolf evidently liked the spirit of the reply.

"So heard the King's grace," said he.  "And it liked him to issue a
command to me, which I must obey ere I go hence.  Can you rise and stand
a moment, Master Madison?"

Mr. Robesart stepped forward and lent his aid.

"Can you kneel?" said Lord Bardolf.

Lawrence, with some difficulty, contrived to do so. What was going to be
done to him he did not realise. He was simply obeying, through his
messenger, the command of his King.  He was the most astonished person
in that chamber, when he felt the light touch of the accolade upon his
shoulder, and heard Lord Bardolf say authoritatively,--

"Rise up, Sir Lawrence Madison!"

"Well, verily, this passeth!" said Guenllian, an hour later, to her
subordinate Beatrice, who was busy packing the few absolute necessaries
which were to go with the little Lady Anne.  "Beattie, heardest the
news?  Lawrence is made a knight!"

Guenllian received no answer except a slight sound which she failed to
comprehend.  She looked round, and saw that Beatrice was in tears.

"Beattie, doth aught ail thee, mine heart?"

"Oh, nothing--not--Mistress Wenteline, would you have my Lady's furred
mantle, or no?"

"Fur mantle! in August!" exclaimed Guenllian. "Why Beattie, where be thy
wits, dear maid?  The gear shall all be sent after my little Lady, long
ere she lack her furred mantle."

"Oh! aye," said Beatrice confusedly.  "I only thought--and I have not
yet put up her Ladyship's head-gear."

Guenllian looked after her as Beatrice hastily ran upstairs, with a soft
laugh such as had never come to her lips since the death of the Earl.

"Aye, I conceive you, Mistress Beattie!" said she. "You 'only thought'
that Sir Lawrence Madison had climbed up above Blumond's Beattie, and
was not like to reach forth an hand to help her to a seat at his side.
Well, we shall see what we shall see. But if Lolly be he that shall
forget the old friends in the hovel for the new at the castle, then is
Guenllian ap Evan no prophetess."

The packing was all done, and the preparations made for the long journey
to Wigmore Abbey.  It had been arranged that the ladies should go no
further than Usk, for the Countess had intimated that her deep
despondency would not permit her to attend the funeral.  Her heart was
so nearly broken that another ounce-weight of grief would complete the
catastrophe.  Lady Agnes repeated the statement to Guenllian with grave
lips, but with a twinkle of fun in her eyes which sufficiently indicated
that the real character and private intentions of this disconsolate
widow were no secret to her.  To Lady Agnes this was pure amusement: to
Guenllian it resulted in a mixture of contempt and sorrow.  Lord Bardolf
of course, would attend the funeral, having now resigned all official
duties to the new Viceroy: and Lawrence Madison had intimated that no
power short of a royal command should keep him from it. He would follow
the friend and master whom he had loved so dearly, to the last step
where man can go with man.  His new honours had rendered Lawrence his
own master, free to take service where he would, or to refrain from it
at his pleasure: and to sink into the idle attitude of a hanger on the
train of the Lady Alianora was far from Lawrence's conception either of
happiness or duty.

He had now recovered his health in all senses except that physical
strength was still lacking.  Even a short walk, or a slight exertion,
fatigued him considerably.  How the coming journey was to be borne he
hardly knew.  But he said to himself that he would go through with it:
and in very many cases, where a man _will_ do a thing, he finds that he
can.

It was the evening before the journey, and in Lawrence's chamber he and
Mr. Robesart sat in the oriel window enjoying the quiet of the summer
evening.  The preceding events had drawn very closely together these two
friends, who alone of all the male members of the household had much in
common with each other.

"Lawrence," said Mr. Robesart--he had attempted to address the new
knight by his title, and had been instantly entreated never to do so
again--"Lawrence, what think you to make of your life, now that it lieth
in your own hands to make or mar it as you will?"

"If it lay in mine hands, Father, it should surely be to mar," said
Lawrence with much feeling.  "I am thankful it is in God's hands, to
whom I have given it, and He shall make thereof whatsoever He will."

"But you must needs have desires and wishes thereunto, my son."

"Aye, I have so," and a slight sigh accompanied the words.  "Whether
they shall ever behold their fulfilment I think greatly to doubt."

"Think you to abide with my Lady Countess?"

"Not so, if our Lord be served[#] otherwise."


[#] If it be His will.


"Then what mean you?  To enter other service, or to go to the wars, or
what so?"

"So far as mine own liking goeth, methinks, neither."

"I have alway counted you a man of peace, Lawrence," said Mr. Robesart,
with a smile which betrayed rather more amusement than was indicated by
his words.

"Aye so, to mine own pleasure," was the reply. "But they which best love
peace be not alway suffered to pursue it."

"And I had thought that, by your good-will, some quiet home far away
from strife, amid the green fields and the calm old hills, should have
been that which should have served you, my son."

"Ah, if it had been possible!"  And another sigh followed the wish.

"There be times, howbeit, when man may mistake his vocation," said Mr.
Robesart in a musing tone. "I am something feared that is thus with one
friend of ours--I fear it much."

"Whom point you at?" asked Lawrence, but not in any tone of particular
interest.

"Our friend Beatrice, that hath been speaking with me of her desire to
enter the cloister."

The "Beatrice!" which answered the communication, was in a very
different tone from the last, and ended in a gasp.

"Aye so," replied Mr. Robesart, calmly, paying no apparent attention to
the tone, and bestowing all his ostensible regard upon the planet Venus,
which he was reconnoitring through an impromptu telescope made of his
right hand.  "I am greatly to doubt if the maid have any true vocation,
and be not rather inclined unto the veil by some other reason thereto
provoking her.  Howbeit, each knoweth best his own mind.  But we were
speaking of thyself."

Mr. Robesart might try to lead the conversation back to the previous
subject, but Lawrence's interest in himself and his own future seemed
suddenly extinguished.  He answered all further queries in a short,
dreamy manner which showed that his thoughts had been borne elsewhere,
and were likely to remain there.  Whereby, though he was not aware of
it, he confirmed certain impressions on the priest's mind, which had
been formed into distinct convictions by a hint from Guenllian.  All
that Mr. Robesart could learn from what followed was that Lawrence was
possessed of considerable savings, which he meant, on his approaching
return to Usk, to devote to the comfort of his own relatives.

"What other use have I for it?" he asked sadly, and with a faint return
of his former interest to his tone.  "They are poor, and need it: and I
never needed it, nor wist what to do withal.  My Lord furnished me with
food and raiment, and what other needs hath a man?  I never spent penny
of my wage, save by nows and thens in a gift to some friend, and in the
writing of the holy Evangel that I bear ever about me.  I shall part the
same betwixt my mother and sisters, which shall wot far better than I
how to lay it out to profit."

"'If any man hath not cure of his own, he hath denied the faith,'"
quoted Mr. Robesart.  "Yet bethink thee, my son, that very charity
biddeth not that a man part with every penny of his having, nor for the
needs of his kinsfolk in the present, empoverish his own future."

"The Lord will have a care of my future.  I lack but a cake and a cruse
of water, and He can send them by His angels when my need asketh them of
Him."

"Verily: a man may reasonably pack his own needs in small compass.  But
dost thou mean to remain single all thy life, Lawrence?  My Lady Madison
may scarce be as content as thou with the cruse and the cake, and in all
cases, two lack more provision than one."

Mr. Robesart had dropped almost unconsciously into the familiar _thou_,
always used to the little Lawrence of old.  His hearer liked it far
better than the ceremonious _you_, which he had taken up since Lawrence
became a man.

"I think that is not in my future," was the low-voiced answer.

"Be not too sure," said the priest.  "Some of our Father's best gifts
are they which we count too good to look for.  Yet soothly, Lawrence, I
would not wish thee a wife like--like some women be."

Lawrence leaned forward with a glow in his eyes, and spoke in a whisper.

"Wala wa!  Father, it lieth sore and heavy at mine heart that the
friends _he_ had to mourn him have been only the men and women of his
meynie.  The one whom he loved better than all the world hath not shed
one true tear for his loss!"

"My son!" said Mr. Robesart tenderly,--with a tenderness which was not
all for Lawrence,--"he hath seen the Face of God, and he is satisfied
with it."

"We loved him dear enough, at least," said Lawrence in a choked voice.

"Lawrence, canst thou not forgive her?--and that man that shot the
arrow, hast thou forgiven him? Dost thou know who it was?"

"I am right thankful to answer No to that last.  I saw not from what bow
the cursed shaft came.  But to think that I may be speaking to that man
as a friend, _not_ knowing----"

Lawrence left his sentence unfinished.

"Maybe it were meant for another," said Mr. Robesart quietly.  "But if
no--mind thou, my son, how God dealeth with thee and me, whose sins slew
the Son of His love, and He knoweth it."

They set out for Usk the next day, taking the same route which Roger had
traversed in life only four months before.  His coffin was borne upon a
bier drawn by six horses, through the green valleys of Kildare and
Carlow and Wexford, and at Wexford Haven was transferred to a boat, the
Chanty, which bore it across in the calm August sunlight to Haverford.
Two days' journey took them to Caermarthen, where the travellers were
housed in the Castle, and the corpse in the Church of St. Peter, watched
all night by monks and four squires, and sprinkled frequently with holy
water.  Three days more took them to Merthyr Tydvil, a fourth to
Pontypool, and on the afternoon of the fifth, which was the first of
September, they marched in slow and solemn procession into Usk.

Before entering the town a fresh arrangement of the procession was made.
First came the body of archers, carrying their bows unstrung in sign of
mourning; then two knights of the household of the deceased Earl, the
one bearing his pennon, the other his helmet with its crest.  Then came
his war-horse, led by a squire bare-headed, and caparisoned with all its
ceremonial trappings--the saddle-cloth of blue velvet, broidered with
silver ostrich-feathers (gold ones were peculiar to the monarch), a
saddle-cloth which covered the horse from ears to hoofs, leaving only an
outlet for the nose and the eyes--the bridle being of gilded leather,
and the stirrup of gilt copper. After the horse walked Mr. Robesart, in
full canonicals, bearing aloft a silver cross.  Then came the bier,
borne by ten spearmen specially selected from the corps--men whose
qualifications for the office were good character and much physical
strength.  Immediately following, clad in white, then the colour of
deepest mourning, came the little Lady Anne, on a white horse--truly the
chief mourner for that father who had been her best friend in all the
world.  Her horse was led by a bare-headed squire.  A little behind her,
on the right, rode Lord Bardolf, and on the left the Lady Agnes.  The
remainder of the household, which included Guenllian, Beatrice, and
Lawrence, rode after, and the company of spearmen closed the funeral
procession.

Thus they bore him dead into the Castle of Usk, which he had entered
living, an infant gift from God, on that very morning, twenty-five years
before.

A trumpeter had been sent forward to announce the coming of the
procession; and when they crossed the drawbridge, and filed slowly in
beneath the portcullis into the court-yard, they were met by a group of
black monks from the neighbouring Benedictine Abbey, the foremost
swinging a censer, and two others sprinkling holy water.  The bier was
set down immediately under the portcullis, and there it rested while the
_De Profundis_ was chanted, in presence of the garrison and of many
members of the household.  The entire procession was meantime arrested.

With an irrepressible sob, Guenllian whispered to Lawrence, "'They that
bare him stood still.'  Here is the city, and there is the bier: but
where is He that can say, 'Arise'?"

Lawrence answered by a quotation from the same book.  "'I am again
rising and life; ... he that believeth in Me shall not die withouten
end.  Believest thou this?'"

"It is hard to believe where man seeth not."

"Therefore the more 'Blessed is she which hath believed.'  'Nyl ye fere:
only believe.'"

"Believe _what_?" said Beatrice, with a dreary sigh, suppressed when
half drawn.

"Believe nothing, Mistress Beatrice," replied Lawrence with a soft
intonation which Guenllian had noticed to come into his voice only when
he spoke to Beatrice.  "'Believe in God, and believe in Me.'  It is not
_what_ we must believe; it is _whom_.  And whom is far easier than what.
To believe a thing or a doctrine taketh the head only; but to believe a
man, and that the Man that died for you, this methinks taketh the heart
belike.  Trust and love be right near akin.  And hearts be soft, while
heads be hard to deal withal. Matters be apt to steal into the heart ere
you shall wit it, which should take many a weary hour to beat into the
head."

"Neither come they so easy out when they be once lodged therein," added
Guenllian.

"You speak soothly, Mistress Wenteline," answered Lawrence.

But now the procession moved on again, and they with it.  Into the great
hall of the Castle they slowly filed, and there found a most effective
dramatic scene prepared to meet them.

The Countess Alianora sat on the dais, robed in pure white, the earliest
garb of widowhood, which covered so much of the face that only the
features were left visible in the midst.  But she had chosen to hide
everything by an embroidered handkerchief, in which her eyes were
concealed.  There she sat, the image of inconsolable woe and utter
desolation, while Consolation, in the person of the Lord Charlton of
Powys leaned over her chair and tried to gain a hearing. Terrible sobs
were rending her breast, and she seemed quite unable to speak.  When at
last she managed to rise and approach the coffin,--leaning on the arm of
Lord Powys, which appeared absolutely necessary for her support,--she
had scarcely taken the sprinkler from the hand of her chaplain when she
dropped it and sank down in a faint.  Of course Lord Powys caught her:
could he as a knight or a person of any humanity have permitted a lady
to drop to the floor?  But Guenllian was so misguided as to allow
herself to see that her mistress took care in fainting not to entangle
herself in her train, and that she dropped the sprinkler in such a
position that it should not damage her new velvet.

"She hath swooned right away!" exclaimed Beatrice in a pitying tone.
She did not see through the stained glass of Alianora's beautiful and
becoming attitudes.

"It is not ill played," was Guenllian's answer, in a rather constrained
tone.

That evening, when Guenllian and Beatrice attended the _coucher_ of the
afflicted widow, it fell to the lot of the latter to remove the used
handkerchief from the pocket of her lady's dress, and place it in the
buck-basket which contained the articles ready for the wash.

"My Lady must have some whither another sudary," observed she to
Guenllian.  "This is full dry, and she wept sore."

"Lay it in the basket, Beattie," was Guenllian's quiet reply.  "I
misdoubt if thou shalt find any other."




                             *CHAPTER XII.*

                          *LAWRENCE'S REWARD.*

    "Walking together o'er the restless earth
    With faces set to the eternal hills."
      --REV. HORATIUS BONAR.


Lawrence Madison had time given him to recover, for it was November
before the funeral cortege left Usk for Wigmore. Earl Roger was found to
have died intestate.  It was no wonder, for how could he have
anticipated that his life would end as or when it had done?  This fact
left all the details of his burial, usually so carefully provided for in
the will of the deceased, to the decision of the survivors.  The
Countess, when appealed to, replied that her unspeakable affliction
could not concern itself with matters of that kind; she would be obliged
to Lord Bardolf to see that all was done properly, and to leave her
alone with her life-long sorrow.  Having said which, she called for a
backgammon board, and was soon smilingly interested in a game with my
Lord Powys.

Lord Powys, however, perceived that notwithstanding the distraction of
backgammon, something was really annoying the lady of his heart: and
after a sufficient administration of flattery and coaxing, he succeeded
in inducing her to confess what it was. She was seriously distressed at
the discovery that her husband had left no will, for what that meant was
that her only claim on his property was a third share in the estate.
Had he attended properly to his conjugal duties, he ought to have made a
much better provision for her.  Now, when her eldest son came of age,
and his wardship ceased, two-thirds of the estate would go to him, and
she would be left in a position which it pleased her to regard as
equivalent to destitution.  Considering that this lamentable descent
from affluence to poverty would leave her Ladyship with a small balance
of about a hundred and fifty thousand pounds, according to the value of
money at the present day, it may be supposed that there was a slight
twinkle in the eyes of Lord Powys while he condoled in a grave voice
with the calamitous widow.  He thought her still quite sufficiently
golden to be worth the trouble of wooing, and she knew it.  He was
moreover aware that a very large casket of jewels lay at her disposal,
and that dexterous management might squeeze a further grant out of the
Crown.  Alianora was troubled by no fear of losing Lord Powys, and had
she been so, would readily have comforted herself with anybody else who
possessed good looks, gentlemanly manners, and a flattering tongue.  But
before this little arrangement with Lord Powys could come to pass, a
licence was required from the Crown, and this in Alianora's case would
be an awkward and delicate business.  The King might not
approve--probably would not approve--of the widow of his heir
presumptive throwing herself away on an obscure Welsh baron.  And
Alianora was determined to marry Lord Powys, who suited her taste much
better than Roger had done.  He was not a handsomer man, but he was
good-looking, and he possessed a tongue of that silvery description
which, to use the Irishman's expression, "would wile a bird off a tree."
His tastes accorded with hers; he knew how to please her--an art in
which Roger, with all his desire to do it, had been much less of an
adept--he was an exquisite hand at that airy small-talk which Alianora
loved better than she loved her children, and his supply of flattery
equalled the demand, which implies that it was deep and extensive
indeed.  Alianora, therefore, set what she called her heart--namely, an
obstinate unreasoning will--upon Edward Charlton, and was determined to
marry him, obstacles or no obstacles.  In order to do this, a licence to
marry whom she would must be procured from the Crown,--no hint being
given of whom it was to be: and this could not in decency be asked for
until some months had elapsed after Roger's death.  She obtained it,
however, before twelve months were over: and having done so, she
instantly gave her hand to Lord Powys in the Castle chapel, to the
annoyance of all her own relations, and the decided displeasure of the
King.  That did not matter to her: once secure of her prize, she could
snap her fingers at them all.

She had, in fact, though it may be doubted if King Richard knew it, done
the one thing which her licence bound her not to do, and married one of
the King's enemies.  Lord Powys was an adherent of Henry of Lancaster,
and one of the bitterest anti-Lollards in the kingdom.[#]  They both
knew that they could reasonably expect no extraordinary favours at the
hands of the reigning King, and they contrived to bear existence on that
poor pittance of a hundred and fifty thousand pounds, until, only four
months after the granting of the licence, which was one of the last acts
of King Richard, Henry of Lancaster, Earl of Derby, unseated his cousin
and occupied his throne. He might be expected to have friendly
intentions towards Powys and Alianora.  She accordingly, in due time and
form, represented to the new King "the charge she was at in maintenance
of her two daughters," Anne and Alianora; "the devastation of all her
dowry in Wales, and the spoil of her late husband's lands by the Welsh,"
and prayed for relief from the Crown.  Henry answered her
characteristically, and in a manner which arouses an idea that his clear
cold eyes saw through her dramatic craft. He granted her, to the value
of a hundred guineas per annum, all annuities, forfeitures, and
reversions which Earl Roger had assigned during his life:--a clever mode
of making provision in name, with very little solid advantage to accrue.
It was not for long that Alianora survived this episode.  She died at
the birth of Joyce Charlton, the second child of her second marriage,
leaving her elder children in prison, and going to her own place--the
place she was fit for, and the place she had chosen.


[#] It is doubtful if he were not also to some extent an adherent of
Gloucester, for in the previous November he had suffered eleven days
imprisonment in the Tower, evidently on some such suspicion.  (Close
Roll, 21 Ric. II., Part 1.)


But this is an anticipation, and we must return to that November morning
on which the funeral procession quitted Usk for Wigmore.

The bier was placed on a charette, and covered with a pall of black
cloth, surmounted by the waxen image then always carried outside the
coffin, the face of which was a mask taken from that of the corpse
beneath. Two horses drew the charette until about a mile from Wigmore,
when four more were added in order to form a more imposing spectacle.
Lord Bardolf rode behind the coffin, on the right hand of the young
Earl, who was chief mourner, and whose horse was led, at the leader's
special request, by Sir Lawrence Madison.  It was usual to depute a
squire to this work: and it was paying the highest honour in his power
to the dead and the living, that Lawrence should demean himself to do
it.

The little Earl, seven years old, behaved extremely well, as was
admitted and admired by everybody. He really behaved so well, because he
felt so little. The true son of Alianora, it was not in his nature to
love any creature but Edmund Mortimer, nor even for his own ultimate
benefit was he ready to take much trouble.  He took the loss of a father
at seven years of age, as he afterwards took the loss of a crown at
fourteen, with the most philosophical placidity.

At the door of the Abbey Church of St. James at Wigmore, the Benedictine
Abbot and his canons met the coffin of the Lord of the Marches of Wales.
Over the coffin was a pall of cloth of gold, edged with blue, the
colours of the house of Mortimer.  It was borne by six squires on each
side, but once more Sir Lawrence Madison stepped forward, and took the
place of the foremost squire.  His hand should be among those which
performed the last offices to the brother of his love,--"More than his
brothers were to him."

When the bier was set down before the high altar, twenty-five poor men
clad in white, according to the number of the years of the dead, came
forward to receive the thick wax tapers which they were to hold during
the service, standing about the coffin.

Then came the solemn mass, accompanied as it always is, by that grandest
of all funeral hymns which, like the inspired hymnal of King David,
seems to be inimitable in translated metre:--

    "Recordare, Jesu pie,
    Quod sum causa taae viae;
    Ne me perdas ilia die!

    "Quaerens me sedisti lassus,
    Redemisti crucem passus;
    Tantus labor non sit cassus."


When the coffin had been lowered into the vault,--to which again, the
last office, Lawrence lent his hand--the mourners slowly filed out of
the church, each as he passed the vault receiving the sprinkler from the
hand of a priest in attendance, and sprinkling the coffin with holy
water.  They returned to Usk not as they had come, in ceremonial
procession, but in a quiet and orderly group.


Considerable time elapsed, and much investigation was necessary, before
Lawrence could discover what had become of the relatives whom he had
left in the hut at the foot of the castle, eighteen years before. The
parents of Beatrice (his old friends Blumond and Philippa) were dead;
and having been an only child, she had no near relatives whose
assistance could be lent in the matter.  For a long while, all that he
could ascertain with any certainty was that the present inhabitants of
the hut knew nothing of the late ones, and that an old woman, the only
person left of those who had dwelt there in Lawrence's childhood, could
tell him that his mother was dead, two of his sisters married and gone,
and that his father and his brother Simon had been removed to some other
estate of their feudal owner--"down yonder," said she, with a nod of her
head towards the north, which might take in a large tract of country.
What had befallen the younger brother and sister she appeared to have no
idea.  All to whom Lawrence applied gave him an answer, half awe-struck,
half kindly, excepting those whose brains and hearts seemed dulled by
hard usage.  Most promised to bear the matter in mind, and to make such
inquiries as they had opportunity.

Lawrence had never realised the immensity of the change in himself,
until he attempted thus to resume the old familiar relations with that
stratum of society into which he was born.  Through constant association
with educated gentlemen, he had become one of them in thought and
feeling; but he was never aware how thoroughly, until he tried to be
once more that which he had ceased to be.  His first thought was that
the people of Usk had changed--they were more cold-hearted, and less
homely and pleasant, than they had been in his boyhood.  He discovered
in time that the alteration was not in them, but in himself, and that
all they were guilty of was the unavoidable and intuitive recognition
that he belonged to the group of masters, and no more to that of serfs.
But the discovery was not perfected until one evening, when a dirty,
slatternly woman of about thirty years of age presented herself at the
porter's lodge of Usk Castle, and demanded in a whining tone to see one
Lawrence Madison.

"'Lawrence Madison,' forsooth!" returned the scandalised porter.  "Is it
thus thou wouldst speak of one of the most gallant knights in England?
Mend thy ways, woman, and say Sir Lawrence, and then maybe I can find
the time to answer thee."

"Eh, lo' you now!" exclaimed the woman, resting a dirty hand against the
stone wall.  "Is't so fine as that, trow?  Well, Master Porter, or Sir
Porter, or my Lord Porter, as it shall like your Bigness, I would see
_Sir_ Lawrence Madison, if it should like you demean you to go and tell
him so much, and him to come hither and behold his sister."

"His what?" inquired the porter in an indescribable tone, reviewing the
querist in a style which was scarcely flattering.

"His sister," coolly returned the unabashed young woman.  "His father's
daughter, and his mother's belike, byname Emmot, and wife unto Will
Sumpterman, that keepeth my Lord Le Despenser his baggage mules, and
hath trapesed many a weary mile to speak with my said worshipful knight.
Canst carry so much, thinkest?"

The disgusted porter turned away without deigning a reply; but his wife,
who had overheard the colloquy, came forward and in politic wise invited
Emmot to enter the lodge.  There Lawrence found her when the porter
returned with him.  His first idea had been one of great pleasure.  But
when he saw the dirty, untidy, miserable-looking creature who called him
Brother, a mixed feeling of compassion and disgust took its place.

To him she was another woman, and was very far from braving him as she
had done the porter.

"Give you good den, Sir Lawrence," said she, louting low: "Metrusteth
you shall not have forgat your sister Emmot, that is your own flesh and
blood, and right ill off, with eight childre that have scarce a rag to
their backs, nor an handful of meal to put in their mouths, I do ensure
you.  We have heard you be come back a knight, worshipful Sir, with a
fortune in broad gold pieces, and sure you would never forget your own
flesh and blood.  Mariot hath but five childre, and her man was better
off than mine; and Joan hath but two.  So you shall see, sweet Sir, I
cast no doubt, that 'tis I have the most need of your bountifulness,
good Sir Lawrence."

Lawrence's awakened pity was rapidly passing into unspeakable disgust.
He had come home prepared to divide his savings among these relatives,
as being his own flesh and blood: but he was not prepared to find them
throwing themselves upon him like a pack of wolves, intent upon nothing
but the horrible emulation which of them could bite the largest piece
out of him, and each utterly unconcerned whether the rest got any thing
at all.  It cost him something to say "Sister" to this wretched
creature--not because she was poor,--Lawrence would never have felt
that--but because she was vulgar and slovenly, disgusting alike in mind
and body.  He controlled himself, however, and passing by the too
evident spirit of her speech, asked what she could tell him of the other
members of the family. Emmot's communicativeness cooled manifestly.  She
professed that she knew nothing of the others, and Lawrence had to
remind her what she had just said. After a little fencing she admitted
that she knew where nearly all of them were.  Mariot was living about
two miles from Usk, and her husband had been a miner; he was dead, and
she made a living by plaiting straw.  One of her sons was quite old
enough to work--a fact on which Emmot laid great stress; her husband had
been a freeman, and none of the family were serfs except herself, which
was an enormous advantage: and Joan's husband was a serf, so that she
and her family were kept at their master's cost, and needed nothing
whatever,--another enormous advantage; and she had only two children.
And once more the eight children of the illogical Emmot were paraded
rhetorically before Lawrence.

He gave her a handsome donation, over which she grumbled sorely, and he
turned away sick at heart.

Lawrence's next work was to visit his father, who lived a day's journey
away, with his son Simon and his family.  Nicholas showed some interest
in his youngest son, and some slight affection for him; and he did not
ask for money--an omission fully made up by Simon's wife.  Simon himself
proved the least changed of any of the family.  Grim and surly as far
back as Lawrence could recollect him, he was grim and surly still.
Lawrence left another donation here, and coming back, went a little out
of his way to call upon his sister Joan.

If this lady had fewer children than her sister, she supplied the gap by
a larger quantity of grumbling. When he left her--having had hard work
to get away--Lawrence really wondered if she could have been more
abusive had he refused her a penny.  It was with a sensation of utter
disgust with the whole concern that he went to pay his last visit, to
his sister Mariot.

He found a trim, neat little cottage by the roadside, where a clean,
smiling lad was cutting up a log of wood, and a tidy, pleasant-looking
girl was sewing in the little porch.  And when Lawrence had made known
his wishes, and the girl had called "Mother!" to someone in the inner
room--the cottage only held two--the woman who came forward in answer
had a clean rosy face, and smooth black hair neatly braided.

"Mariot, dost thou mind thy youngest brother?"

"Lolly!  Eh, my little lad, is it thou?"

She laid both hands on his shoulders and turned him round to the light.

"My dear lad!  My own little Lolly!  Mind thee? aye, that do I,
forsooth.  And thou art come back to Usk?--is it to 'bide there?  And
how goes it with thee, lad? art wed? and hast done well? Tell me all
about thee, Lolly."

It was an entirely different welcome from any of the rest.  The news
that Lawrence was a knight, and had returned possessed of a sum which in
her eyes was great riches, did not seem to strike Mariot in any light
but that of being glad for him.  And when he offered her the same sum
which he had given to the rest, and they had received so murmuringly, to
his surprise she refused it.

"Nay, lad, I'll not take thy gold," said Mariot. "I want for nought, God
be thanked, and my childre be good childre; and Jack hath so much as he
can do, and Alice yonder can make a pretty penny in the straw plaiting,
and Maud comes on well with her sewing.  Surely it were ill done, even
had I need, that thy brethren and sisters should strip thee of every
penny!  Little Lolly, I guess I was pretty nigh the only one that loved
thee as a babe, and now, thanks be to God, since I knew how He loved me
I have learned to love better.  Go thy ways, lad, and see to thine own
well-doing, and keep thy bits of savings in thy pocket.  I am every whit
as much beholden to thee as if thou hadst given me a thousand marks.
But bethink thee somewhat of thine own future: for when folk think not
of their own selves--of the which sort there be main few, by my
troth--other folk must think for them.  Thou shalt wish to wed one of
these days, an' thou dost not now: and how shall that be compassed with
never a plack in thy pocket?  Go thy ways, and get thee a good wife and
a pleasant home--the which shall do me a much more pleasure than to have
the spending of thy gold.  Choose her by a true heart, and not by a fair
face, and ask our Lord to help thee in the choosing, and then thou shalt
do well.  And now and anon, when thou hast an hour or twain to spare,
come down hither and drink thy four-hours with us, and give me to wit of
thy welfare--that shall pleasure me full greatly.  My Lady Madison,
trow, shall be too fine to sup her four-hours with a miner's widow; but
I would like to see thee by nows and thens."

"She will not be my wife an' she so be," said Lawrence: "but truly,
Mariot, I look for no such, and it should better serve that thou wouldst
leave me help thee."

"Go to!" said Mariot with a knowing smile.  "How many a time, thinkest,
have I heard that saying from folks at whose wedding I have danced
within the next twelvemonth?  Thine eyes be tell-tales, Lolly.  An' thou
be heart-free, mine eyes be no true men."

"Thou sayest sooth," was Lawrence's answer, in rather a sorrowful tone.
"But one heart is not enough for a wedding, my sister.  More than one
swallow goeth to make a summer."

"Dear heart, two swallows were plenty for that summer," replied Mariot,
laughing.  "Hast asked her, lad?" she added somewhat drily.

Lawrence confessed the negative.

"Art awaiting till she ask thee?" demanded Mariot with an amused look.

"Scarce that, methinks.  Nay, Mariot, she hath thought of the veil.  Who
am I, that I should set me in rivalry with God?"

"Go to!" returned Mariot, with a strong good sense which was not common
in her era.  "Veils be for broken hearts and worn-down widows, and
unchilded mothers--for women which have smoothed down the green turf
over their hearts' best love. They be not for young maids, fresh and
bright, with life opening afore them.  Never think it!"

"Yet we should give God the best," said Lawrence sadly.

"Give Him what He asketh of thee, Lolly.  Methinks that is not often the
making a man's life desolate. But is the cloister the only way to give
to God? Didst learn that from the Word, or out of thine own heart?  He
that trusteth his own heart is a fool."

"Why, Mariot, art not giving me counsel to trust mine own heart in this
matter?"

"Never a whit.  I counsel thee to trust God's providence, and let Him
choose for thee.  If He have not meant this maid for thee, have no fear
she shall say yea to thine asking.  Do the thing that did King Ezekias,
my dear lad--spread it before the Lord, and ask Him to lead her in
accordance with His will.  Then speak, and fear not.  How wist thou that
in her mind the choice lieth not betwixt the cloister and thee,--and if
thy tongue be dumb, she must needs choose the other.  She'll not ask
thee, I reckon."

"She loveth me not at all," said Lawrence.

"I'd make sure," was Mariot's quiet conclusion. "There be some nuts be
all o'er prickles o' the outside, which be good enough when thou hast
stripped off the bur."


"Mistress Wenteline," said Lawrence, the next morning, "will you do me
so much favour as tell me if Mistress Beatrice hath yet purpose to be a
nun?"

"I believe," answered Guenllian, "she hath purpose to be veiled with the
White Ladies of Limbroke, if it may be, this next month."  But as
Lawrence passed on, she said to herself, "Unless you can persuade her
out of it!"

A few hours later, when the dusk had come, as Lawrence crossed the
ante-chamber, into which the moon was shining brightly, he saw a dark
figure standing in the recess of the window, and went up to it.  His
heart, rather than his eyes, told him who it was.

"Is it you, Mistress Beatrice?"

"It is I, Sir Lawrence."

The old playmates had become excessively ceremonious to each other.  The
brotherly sort of intercourse, resumed on their meeting at Trim, had
been quite dropped, and they were as distantly civil as if they had made
acquaintance only a few days before.

"You can scarce see much hence, methinketh."

"It is fair enough," said Beatrice, absently; adding after a moment,
"fair enough for one who shall soon behold nought beyond convent walls."

"Are you well avised thereabout, Mistress Beatrice?"

"I think so much," she answered, gravely.

"Thus said Father Robesart.  Yet he seemed, something doubtful if you
have well judged therein, as methought.  It were grave matter to blunder
over, Mistress Beatrice.  There is no coming forth, howsoe'er one may
desire it."

"No," she said--and said no more.

Lawrence took another step, and dropped a little of his ceremoniousness
to do it.

"Beatrice, dear old friend, is this for your happiness? Not one other
word will I speak if you ensure me thereof."

"Happiness is not the only thing," she said in a constrained voice.

"Not so, maybe, for you to think on: yet methinks you might allow for
your friends to concern them touching the same."

Beatrice made no reply.

"Are you well assured that our Lord calls you to that life, dear
Beatrice?  Might it not be better for you, no less than for other, that
you should make happy some home and heart, rather than bury yourself in
the cloister?  Think well of it, ere you cast die that can never be
recalled."

"I have thought of it," said Beatrice in rather a hard tone.  "I am not
wanted otherwhere.  Why should I not be a nun?"

"Because you were never meant for one.  Because it is not the right life
for you, for whom life is but just opening.  Because----"

Beatrice interrupted him.  "Life opening!  Your pardon, Sir Lawrence.
Life has closed for me."

"You think so much now," he answered, gently. "This time next year, will
you so think?  Not wanted! Would you come where you were?  I could tell
you of one who wanteth you more than words can tell,--to whom the world
will be black gloom if you go forth of it.  But let that pass.  I meant
not to speak--Beattie, old friend, old playmate, sister if I may call
you so, leave me plead with you this once, ere you bury your youth and
hope where neither hope nor gladness can enter more.  I know you too
well, Beattie!  You would be miserable in the cloister.  Why not make
some other life happy, and your own joined thereto?"

He listened earnestly for her answer.  One more negative, and he would
let her alone, to go her own way, though his way would be darkness and
loneliness thenceforward.  Lawrence's love was very unselfish. If
Beatrice had loved some one who was not himself, he would have given her
every penny he possessed for her fortune, had he thought that the want
of fortune barred her from happiness.  But he did not think that she
loved any one, and himself least of all.  Only he could not bear the
thought of the cloister for Blumond's Beattie, and he thought he knew
her well enough to be sure that it would be misery in the latter end.

"I will," said Beatrice in a low voice, keeping her face in shadow.  "I
will, if----"

"If what, dear Beattie?"

"If it may be yours, Lawrence."




                         *HISTORICAL APPENDIX.*


                           MORTIMER OF MARCH.


Roger Mortimer, third Earl of March, eldest and only surviving son of
Edmund second Earl and Elizabeth de Badlesmere was born in 1328, and
stood eighth on the list of original Knights of the Garter: died at
Rouvray, in Burgundy, Feb. 26th, 1360; buried at Wigmore.  Married

PHILIPPA, daughter of William de Montacute, first Earl of Salisbury, and
Katherine Grandison; for whom Earl Roger's marriage was granted to her
father, 1336: died Jan. 5th, 1382; buried at Bisham.

Issue:--

1. Roger, died young.

2. Alice, affianced in 1354 to Edmund, son of Richard Earl of Arundel,
and then under thirteen years of age; died before marriage.

3. EDMUND, 4th Earl, born at Langenith, Feb. 1st, 1352; affianced 1354
to Alice, daughter of Richard Earl of Arundel (marriage broken off);
received into fraternity, Canterbury Cathedral, July 7th, 1379; died at
Cork, from cold taken in fording the Lee, Dec. 27th, 1381; buried at
Bisham.  Married

PHILIPPA, only child of Lionel Duke of Clarence (son of Edward III.) and
his first wife Elizabeth de Burgh: born at Eltham Palace, Aug. 16th,
1355; married in the Queen's Chapel, probably at Reading, 1359,
apparently before Feb. 15th, and certainly before July 16th: died
shortly before Jan. 7th, 1378; buried at Wigmore.

4. John, died young.

Issue of Edmund 4th Earl:--

1. Elizabeth, born at Usk, Feb. 12th, 1371; married (1) before May 1st,
1380, Henry Lord Percy, surnamed Hotspur (2) after Oct. 8th, 1403,
Thomas Lord Camoys; living 1417; Inq. Post Mortem, 5 Hen. V.: buried at
Trotton with second husband.  Left issue by both marriages.

2. ROGER, 5th Earl; born at Usk, Sept. 1st, 1373; affianced 1385 to
(probably Alice) daughter of Richard 12th Earl of Arundel (marriage
broken off at the request of Princess of Wales): Viceroy of Ireland 20
to 22 Ric. II.: killed in skirmish, Kenles, Ireland, "adventuring
himself before his army in an Irish habit," July 20th, 1398; buried at
Wigmore.  Declared heir of the Crown in Parliament, 9 Ric. II.  Married

ALIANORA, eldest daughter of Thomas de Holand, Earl of Kent, and Alesia
de Arundel: born 1370-2, married after Oct. 7th, 1388, when Earl Roger's
marriage was granted to her father (re-married, licence dat. June 19th,
1399, Edward de Charlton, Lord Powys): died Oct. 23rd, 1405; buried at
Wigmore.

3. Philippa, born at Ludlow, Nov. 21st, 1375: married (1) John Hastings,
3rd and last Earl of Pembroke, after Sept. 24th, 1383 (2) pardon dat.
Nov. 10, 1391, for fine of 500 marks, Richard, 12th Earl of Arundel, (3)
after Sept. 1397, John, Lord St. John of Basing: died Sept. 24th, 1401
(Inq. P. Mort.), Sept. 26th, 1400 (Registry of Lewes): buried at
Boxgrove.  Left issue by last marriage only.

Edmund, born at Ludlow, Nov. 1377: fled into Wales after battle of
Shrewsbury, 1403; Inq. 16 Hen. VI. 24.  Married

Katherine, daughter of Owain Glyndwr and Margaret Hanmer, married 1402;
died prisoner, London, about Nov. 1413; buried there in St. Swithin's
Church.  Issue doubtful, but comprising a son and two daughters at
least.

Issue of Roger 5th Earl:--ANNE, born Dec. 27th, 1388 (Dugdale, doubtless
a mistake for 1389): married after Jan. 9th, 1407, Richard of York, Earl
of Cambridge; died about Sept. 1410; buried probably in Abbey Church,
King's Langley.

2. Edmund, 6th and last Earl, born in New Forest, Nov. 6th, 1391; died
at Trim Castle, Jan. 19th, 1425; buried at Stoke Clare.  Married (but
left no issue),

Anne, daughter of Edmund Earl of Stafford and Princess Anne of
Gloucester: married about 1413-1415; (remarried, 1429, John de Holand,
Duke of Exeter); died Sept. 20th or 24th, 1432; buried in Church of St.
Katherine, Tower, with second husband.

3. Roger, born at Nethewode, Mar. 24th, 1393; died prisoner in Windsor
Castle, after Aug. 26th, 1404, and probably after 1405; buried at Stoke
Priory.




           *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *




                       *Stories of English Life.*

                          *BY EMILY S. HOLT.*


    A.D. 597

    I. Imogen:
    A TALE OF THE EARLY BRITISH CHURCH.


    A.D. 1066

    II. Behind the Veil:
    A STORY OF THE NORMAN CONQUEST.


    A.D. 1159

    III. One Snowy Night;
    OR, LONG AGO AT OXFORD.


    A.D. 1189

    IV. Lady Sybil's Choice:
    A TALE OF THE CRUSADES.


    A.D. 1214

    V. Earl Hubert's Daughter;
    OR, THE POLISHING OF THE PEARL.


    A.D. 1325

    VI. In all Time of our Tribulation:
    THE STORY OF PIERS GAVESTONE.


    A.D. 1350

    VII. The White Lady of Hazelwood:
    THE WARRIOR COUNTESS OF MONTFORT.


    A.D. 1352

    VIII. Countess Maud;
    OR, THE CHANGES OF THE WORLD.


    A.D. 1360

    IX. In Convent Walls:
    THE STORY OF THE DESPENSERS.


    A.D. 1377

    X. John De Wycliffe,
    AND WHAT HE DID FOR ENGLAND.


    A.D. 1384

    XI. The Lord Mayor:
    A TALK OF LONDON IN 1384.


    A.D. 1390

    XII. Under One Sceptre:
    THE STORY OF THE LORD OF THE MARCHES


    A.D. 1400

    XIII. The White Rose of Langley;
    OR, THE STORY OF CONSTANCE LE DESPENSER.


    A.D. 1400

    XIV. Mistress Margery:
    A TALE OF THE LOLLARDS.


    A.D. 1400

    XV. Margery's Son;
    OR, UNTIL HE FIND IT.


    A.D. 1470

    XVI. Red and White;
    OR, THE WARS OF THE ROSES.


    A.D. 1480

    XVII. The Tangled Web:
    A TALE OF THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY.


    A.D. 1515

    XVIII. The Harvest of Yesterday:
    A TALE OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.


    A.D. 1530

    XIX. Lettice Eden;
    OR, THE LAMPS OF EARTH AND THE LIGHTS OF HEAVEN.


    A.D. 1535

    XX. Isoult Barry of Wynscote:
    A TALE OF TUDOR TIMES.


    A.D. 1544

    XXI. Through the Storm;
    OR, THE LORD'S PRISONERS.


    A.D. 1555

    XXII. Robin Tremayne:
    A TALE OF THE MARIAN PERSECUTION.


    A.D. 1556

    XXIII. All's Well;
    OR, ALICE'S VICTORY.


    A.D. 1556

    XXIV. The King's Daughters.
    HOW TWO GIRLS KEPT THE FAITH.


    A.D. 1569

    XXV. Sister Rose;
    OR, THE EVE OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW.


    A.D. 1579

    XXVI. Joyce Morrell's Harvest:
    A STORY OF THE REIGN OF ELIZABETH.


    A.D. 1588

    XXVII. Clare Avery:
    A STORY OF THE SPANISH ARMADA.


    A.D. 1605

    XXVIII. It Might Have Been:
    THE STORY OF GUNPOWDER PLOT.


    A.D. 1635

    XXIX. Minster Lovel:
    A STORY OF THE DAYS OF LAUD.


    A.D. 1662

    XXX. Wearyholme;
    A STORY OF THE RESTORATION.


    A.D. 1712

    XXXI. The Maiden's Lodge;
    OR, THE DAYS OF QUEEN ANNE.


    A.D. 1745

    XXXII. Out in the Forty-five;
    OR, DUNCAN KEITH'S VOW.


    A.D. 1750

    XXXIII. Ashcliffe Hall:
    A TALE OF THE LAST CENTURY.


    XXXIV.  A.D. 1556

            For the Master's Sake;
            OR, THE DAYS OF QUEEN MARY.


            A.D. 1345

            The Well in the Desert.
            AN OLD LEGEND.


    XXXV.   A.D. 1559

            All for the Best;
            OR, BERNARD GILPIN'S MOTTO.


            A.D. 1560

            At the Grene Griffin:
            A TALE OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.


    XXXVI.  A.D. 1270

            Our Little Lady;
            OR, SIX HUNDRED YEARS AGO

            A.D. 1652

            Gold that Glitters;
            OR, THE MISTAKES OF JENNY LAVENDER.


    XXXVII.  A.D. 1290

             A Forgotten Hero:
             THE STORY OF ROGER DE MORTIMER.

             A.D. 1266

             Princess Adelaide:
             A STORY OF THE SIEGE OF KENILWORTH.


    XXXVIII.  1ST CENTURY.

              The Slave Girl of Pompeii.


              2ND CENTURY.

              The Way of the Cross.
              TALES OF THE EARLY CHURCH


    A.D. 870 to 1580

    XXXIX. Lights in the Darkness:
    BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES.


    A.D. 1873

    XL. Verena.
    SAFE PATHS AND SLIPPERY BYE-WAYS.
    A Story of To-day.



                     *      *      *      *      *



                        SPLENDID BOOKS FOR BOYS.

                         By DR. GORDON STABLES.

'TWIXT DAYDAWN AND LIGHT.  A Tale of the Times of Alfred the Great.

FOR HONOUR NOT HONOURS.  The Story of Gordon of Khartoum.

FOR CROSS OR CRESCENT.  A Tale of Richard the Lion-hearted.

ON TO THE RESCUE.  A Tale of the Indian Mutiny.

HEARTS OF OAK.  A Story of Nelson and the Navy,

SHOULDER TO SHOULDER.  A Story of the Stirring Times of Old.

EXILES OF FORTUNE.  The Story of a Far North Land.

TWO SAILOR LADS.  Their Stirring Adventures on Sea and Land.

FOR ENGLAND, HOME, AND BEAUTY.  A Tale of Battle and the Breeze.

IN SEARCH OF FORTUNE.  A Tale of the Old Land and the New.

FACING FEARFUL ODDS.  A Tale of Flood and Field.

IN THE DASHING DAYS OF OLD; or, The World-wide Adventures of Willie
Grant.



                     *      *      *      *      *



                      STORIES BY E. EVERETT-GREEN.

ARNOLD INGLEHURST.  A Story of the Fen Country.

EUSTACE MARCHMONT.  A Friend of the People.

HER HUSBAND'S HOME; or, The Durleys of Linley Castle.

THE YOUNG RECRUIT; or, A Soldier's Son.

PAT, THE LIGHTHOUSE BOY.

MARJORIE AND MURIEL; or, Two London Homes.

HIS MOTHER'S BOOK.

LITTLE FREDDIE; or, Friends in Need.

BERTIE CLIFTON; or, Paul's Little Schoolfellow.

FRIENDS OR FOES?  A Story for Boys and Girls.

RUTH'S LITTLE LADY.

OUR WINNIE; or, When the Swallows Go.

SHADOWLAND; or, What Lindis Accomplished.



                     *      *      *      *      *



                     GIFT BOOKS BY POPULAR AUTHORS.

HALF A DOZEN BOYS.  |  HALF A DOZEN GIRLS.

Memoirs of a Happy Naughty Childhood.

A LIFE ON THE OCEAN WAVE; or, The Cruise of the good ship "Boreas."  By
Dr. GORDON STABLES, R.N.

EVERYBODY'S BUSINESS.  A Story by AGNES GIBERNE.

FROGGY'S LITTLE BROTHER.  A Story of the East End. By BRENDA.  New
Illustrated Edition.  Square.

LITTLE COUSINS; or, Georgia's Visit to Lotty.  By BRENDA. With
Illustrations by T. PYM.  Square.

VICTORIA BESS; or, The Ups and Downs of a Doll's Life. By BRENDA.  With
Illustrations by T. PYM.  Square.

LITTLE QUEENIE.  A Story of Child-life Sixty Years Ago. By Mrs.
MARSHALL.

DEAN'S COURT; or, Lady-bird and her Friends.  By Mrs. MARSHALL.

BLUEBELL.  A Story of Child-life Nowadays.  By Mrs. MARSHALL.

LILIAN'S HOPE.  A Story for Girls.  By CATHARINE SHAW.



                     *      *      *      *      *



                     GIFT BOOKS BY POPULAR AUTHORS.

THE ECHO-MAID, AND OTHER STORIES.  By ALICIA ASPINWALL.

SHORT STORIES FOR SHORT PEOPLE.  By ALICIA ASPINWALL.

SAHIB AND SEPOY; or, Saving an Empire.  By LUCY TAYLOR, Author of "Our
Fritz," etc.

'TWIXT DAYDAWN AND LIGHT.  A Tale of the Times of Alfred the Great.  By
Dr. GORDON STABLES.

BRITAIN'S QUEEN.  The Story of her Reign.  By THOMAS PAUL.

ONE SNOWY NIGHT; or, Long Ago at Oxford.  By E. S. HOLT.

ARNOLD INGLEHURST.  A Story of the Fen Country.  By EVELYN
EVERETT-GREEN.



                     *      *      *      *      *



                       STORIES BY EMMA MARSHALL.

A TRUE GENTLEWOMAN.  The Story of Dame Margaret Hoby.

THE END CROWNS ALL.  A Story of Life.

BISHOP'S CRANWORTH; or, Rosamond's Lamp.

LITTLE QUEENIE.  A Story of Child-life Sixty Years Ago.

DEAN'S COURT; or, Lady-bird and her Friends.

BLUEBELL.  A Story of Child-life Nowadays.

LITTLE MISS JOY.

HURLY-BURLY; or, After a Storm comes a Calm.

CURLEY'S CRYSTAL; or, A Light Heart Lives Long.

ROBERT'S RACE; or, More Haste Less Speed.

PETER'S PROMISES; or, Look before you Leap.

CLEMENT AND GEORGIE; or, Manners makyth Man.

A LITTLE CURIOSITY.  With Illustrations.



                     *      *      *      *      *



                       STORIES BY AGNES GIBERNE,

                 Author of "Sun, Moon, and Stars," &c.

NIGEL BROWNING, our Father's Ward.

EVERYBODY'S BUSINESS.  A Tale.

OLD COMRADES

LIFE-TANGLES; or, The Journal of Rhoda Frith.

LIFE IN A NUTSHELL: A Story.

IDA'S SECRET; or, The Towers of Ickledale.

WON AT LAST; or, Mrs. Briscoe's Nephews.

THE EARLS OF THE VILLAGE.

THE OLD HOUSE IN THE CITY; or, Not Forsaken.

FLOSS SILVERTHORN; or, The Master's Little Handmaid.

MADGE HARDWICKE; or, The Mists of the Valley.

WILL FOSTER OF THE FERRY.

TOO DEARLY BOUGHT.

MISS PRIMROSE.



                     *      *      *      *      *



                       STORIES BY CATHARINE SHAW,

AT LAST; or, Cuthbert Wins.

ALICK'S HERO.

ONLY A COUSIN.

THE GABLED FARM; or, Young Workers for the King.

IN THE SUNLIGHT AND OUT OF IT.  A Year of my Life-story.

NELLIE ARUNDEL.  A Tale of Home-life.

"MOTHER MEG"; or, The Story of Dickie's Attic.



                     *      *      *      *      *



                         SOMETHING FOR SUNDAY.

                      SELECTED BY CATHARINE SHAW.

1st.  OUTLINE TEXTS FOR PAINTING.
2nd.  HAPPY HOURS WITH THE BIBLE.
3rd.  ECHOES FROM THE BIBLE.
4th.  ALPHABET TEXTS for PRICKING or PAINTING.
5th.  MESSAGES FROM HEAVEN.
6th.  GLEAMS OF GLORY FROM THE GOSPELS.
7th.  A LARGE THOUGHT IN A LARGE WORD.
8th.  SCRIPTURE FEAR NOTS.
9th.  "ALL THINGS ARE YOURS."
10th.  TEXTS FOR THE CHILDREN.
llth.  CONSIDER THE LILIES.



                     *      *      *      *      *



                        STORIES BY L. T. MEADE,

                      Author of "Scamp and I," &c.

DOROTHY'S STORY; or, Great St. Benedict's.

A KNIGHT OF TO-DAY.  A Tale.

BEL-MARJORY.  A Tale.

SCAMP AND I.  A Story of City Byeways.

THE CHILDREN'S KINGDOM; or, The Story of a Great Endeavour.

WATER GIPSIES.  A Tale.

DAVID'S LITTLE LAD.

DOT AND HER TREASURES.  With Illustrations.

OUTCAST ROBIN; or, Your Brother and Mine.

WHITE LILIES, AND OTHER TALES.

LETTIE'S LAST HOME.

THOSE BOYS.  A Story for all Little Fellows.



                     *      *      *      *      *



                       STORIES BY GRACE STEBBING.

NEVER GIVE IN.  The Story of Gustavus Adolphus.

A REAL HERO.  A Story of the Conquest of Mexico.

IN ALL OUR DOINGS.  A Story for Boys.

GRAHAM'S VICTORY.  A Tale of the Covenanters.

WINNING AN EMPIRE; or, The Story of Clive.

SILVERDALE RECTORY; or, The Golden Links.

BRAVE GEORDIE.  The Story of an English Boy.

BEATING THE RECORD.  A Story of the Life and Times of George Stephenson.



                     *      *      *      *      *



                    Picture Stories for Young People

DEEDS OF DARING.  STORIES OF TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE.

CONFLICT AND CONQUEST, AND OTHER STORIES BY SYDNEY WATSON.

PRETTY PICTURES FOR LITTLE PETS.

OUR DARLINGS STORY BOOK.

ALL PLAY.  By ISMAY THORN.

ANIMAL LAND.  STORIES AND ANECDOTES.

BIRDS AND BEASTS.

FULL OF FUN.

STARLIGHT STORIES.

PETS AND PLAYMATES.

FUN AND FROLIC.



                     *      *      *      *      *



                    REV. W. HAY AITKEN'S NEW VOLUME.

             THE ROMANCE OF CHRISTIAN WORK AND EXPERIENCE.

                   By REV. W. HAY M. H. AITKEN, M.A.

                 WITH PHOTOGRAVURE PORTRAIT OF AUTHOR.

Contents.

1.--Spiritual Facts Stranger than Fiction.
2.--Great Results from Small Causes.
3.--Strange Calls and Prompt Answers.
4.--Spontaneous Confession and Restitution.
5.--The Surrender of the Affections.
6.--The Bringing Down of the Mountains.
7.--Remarkable Conversions.
8.--A Great Salvation for Great Sinners.
9.--Deliverance for the Captives.
10.--Just In Time.
11.--The Last Call Unheeded.
12.--Standing up for Jesus.
13.--"Wisdom in the Scorn of Consequence."
14.--God's Messengers.
15.--The Bow Drawn at a Venture.
16.--"After Many Days."
17.--Noteworthy Answers to Prayer.
18.--Special Providences.
19.--The Last Enemy.



         LONDON: JOHN F. SHAW & CO., 48, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C.






*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNDER ONE SCEPTRE ***




A Word from Project Gutenberg


We will update this book if we find any errors.

This book can be found under: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/44464

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works to protect the
Project Gutenberg(tm) concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything
for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may
use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative
works, reports, performances and research. They may be modified and
printed and given away - you may do practically _anything_ with public
domain eBooks.  Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.



The Full Project Gutenberg License


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg(tm) mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg(tm) License available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1. General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic works


*1.A.* By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works in your possession. If
you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

*1.B.* "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things
that you can do with most Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works even
without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph
1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic
works. See paragraph 1.E below.

*1.C.* The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of
Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works. Nearly all the individual works
in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you
from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg(tm) mission of promoting free access to electronic
works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg(tm) works in compliance with
the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg(tm) name
associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this
agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full
Project Gutenberg(tm) License when you share it without charge with
others.


*1.D.* The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg(tm) work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

*1.E.* Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

*1.E.1.* The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg(tm) License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg(tm) work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org

*1.E.2.* If an individual Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic work is
derived from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating
that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can
be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying
any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a
work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on
the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs
1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

*1.E.3.* If an individual Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic work is
posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and
distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and
any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg(tm) License for all works posted
with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of
this work.

*1.E.4.* Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project
Gutenberg(tm) License terms from this work, or any files containing a
part of this work or any other work associated with Project
Gutenberg(tm).

*1.E.5.* Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg(tm) License.

*1.E.6.* You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg(tm) work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg(tm) web site
(http://www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or
expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a
means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include
the full Project Gutenberg(tm) License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

*1.E.7.* Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg(tm) works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.8.* You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works
provided that

  - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
    the use of Project Gutenberg(tm) works calculated using the method
    you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
    to the owner of the Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark, but he has
    agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
    within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
    legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
    payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
    Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation."

  - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
    you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
    does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg(tm)
    License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
    copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
    all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg(tm)
    works.

  - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
    any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
    electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
    receipt of the work.

  - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
    distribution of Project Gutenberg(tm) works.


*1.E.9.* If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark. Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3. below.

*1.F.*

*1.F.1.* Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg(tm) collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works, and the
medium on which they may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but
not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription
errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a
defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

*1.F.2.* LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg(tm) trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees.
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY,
BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN
PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND
ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR
ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES
EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

*1.F.3.* LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

*1.F.4.* Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

*1.F.5.* Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

*1.F.6.* INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg(tm)
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg(tm) work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg(tm)


Project Gutenberg(tm) is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg(tm)'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg(tm) collection will remain
freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and
permanent future for Project Gutenberg(tm) and future generations. To
learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and
how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org .


Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is
64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf . Contributions to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the
full extent permitted by U.S.  federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page
at http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation


Project Gutenberg(tm) depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where
we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways
including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate,
please visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic
works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg(tm)
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg(tm) eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg(tm) eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless
a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks
in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

    http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg(tm),
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
