The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Last Entry, by William Clark Russell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Last Entry

Author: William Clark Russell

Release Date: December 30, 2013 [EBook #44546]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAST ENTRY ***




Produced by Martin Pettit and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)






THE LAST ENTRY




NOVELS, ETC., BY W. CLARK RUSSELL.


Crown 8vo., cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each; post 8vo., illustrated boards,
2s. each; cloth limp, 2s. 6d. each.


ROUND THE GALLEY FIRE.
IN THE MIDDLE WATCH.
ON THE FO'K'SLE HEAD.
A VOYAGE TO THE CAPE.
A BOOK FOR THE HAMMOCK.
THE MYSTERY OF THE 'OCEAN STAR.'
THE ROMANCE OF JENNY HARLOWE.
AN OCEAN TRAGEDY.
MY SHIPMATE LOUISE.
ALONE ON A WIDE WIDE SEA.
THE GOOD SHIP 'MOHOCK.'
THE PHANTOM DEATH.
IS HE THE MAN?
THE CONVICT SHIP.
HEART OF OAK.
THE TALE OF THE TEN.
THE LAST ENTRY.


LONDON: CHATTO & WINDUS, 111 ST. MARTIN'S LANE, W.C.




OPINIONS OF THE PRESS

ON

THE LAST ENTRY


'"The Last Entry" is a rattling good salt-water yarn, told in the
author's usual breezy, exhilarating style.'--_Daily Mail._


'In this new novel Mr. Russell has cleverly thrown its events into the
year 1837, and there are one or two ingenious passages which add to the
Diamond Jubilee interest which that date suggests.... "The Last Entry"
is as certain of general popularity as any of Mr. Russell's former tales
of the marvels of the sea.'--_Glasgow Herald._


'We do not think it possible for anyone to dip into this novel without
desiring to finish it, and it adds another to the long list of successes
of our best sea author.'--_Librarian._


'In addition to mutiny and murder, "The Last Entry" contains many of
those good things which have made Mr. Russell's pages a joy to so many
lovers of the sea during the last twenty years.... "The Last Entry" is a
welcome addition to Mr. Clark Russell's library.'--_Speaker._


'The writer is as realistic and picturesque as usual in his vivid
descriptions of the stagnant life on board the homeward-bound
Indiaman.'--_Times._


'It is full of pleasant vigour.... As is always the case in Mr. Clark
Russell's books, the elements are treated with the pen of an
artist.'--_Standard._


'We expected plenty of go, of fresh and vigorous description of
sea-faring life, coupled with a story which would not be wanting in
interest. All this we have here.'--_Tablet._




THE LAST ENTRY

BY
W. CLARK RUSSELL

AUTHOR OF
'THE WRECK OF THE "GROSVENOR,"' 'MY SHIPMATE LOUISE,'
'THE TALE OF THE TEN,' ETC.

[Illustration: Decoration]

A NEW EDITION

LONDON
CHATTO & WINDUS
1899




CONTENTS

CHAPTER                         PAGE
   I. MR. AND MISS VANDERHOLT      1

  II. DOWN RIVER                  28

 III. 'ALONG OF BILL'             53

  IV. CAPTAIN MARY LIND           82

   V. ON THE EVE                 119

  VI. THE MURDERS                141

 VII. CAPTAIN PARRY              169

VIII. IN SEARCH                  196

  IX. THE DISCOVERY              224




THE LAST ENTRY




CHAPTER I.

MR. AND MISS VANDERHOLT.


This story belongs to the year 1837, and was regarded by the generations
of that and a succeeding time as the most miraculous of all the recorded
deliverances from death at sea.

It may be told thus:

Mr. Montagu Vanderholt sat at breakfast with his daughter Violet one
morning in September. Vanderholt's house was one of a fine terrace close
to Hyde Park. He was a rich man, a retired Cape merchant, and his life
had been as chequered as Trelawney's, with nothing of romance and
nothing of imagination in it. He was the son of honest parents, of Dutch
extraction, and had run away to sea when about twelve years old.

Nothing under the serious heavens was harsher, more charged with misery,
suffering, dirt, and wretchedness, than seafaring in the days when young
Vanderholt, with an idiot's cunning, fled to it from his father's
comfortable little home. He got a ship, was three years absent, and on
his return found both his father and mother dead. He went again to sea,
and, fortunately for him, was shipwrecked in the neighbourhood of
Simon's Bay. The survivors made their way to Cape Town, and presently
young Vanderholt got a job, and afterwards a position. He then became a
master, until, after some eight or ten years of heroic perseverance,
attended by much good luck, behold Mr. Vanderholt full-blown into a
colonial merchant prince. How much he was worth when he made up his mind
to settle in England, after the death of his wife, and when he had
disposed of his affairs so as to leave himself as free a man as ever he
had been when he was a common Jack Swab, really signifies nothing. It is
certain he had plenty, and plenty is enough, even for a merchant prince
of Dutch extraction.

Besides Violet, he had two sons, who will not make an appearance on this
little brief stage. They are dismissed, therefore, with this brief
reference--that both were in the army, and both, at the time of this
tale, in India.

Violet was Vanderholt's only daughter, and he loved her exceedingly. She
was not beautiful, but she was fair to see, with a pretty figure, and an
arch, gay smile. You saw the Dutch blood in her eyes, as you saw it in
her father's, whose orbs of vision, indeed, were ridiculously
small--scarcely visible in their bed of socket and lash. An English
mother had come to Violet's help in this matter. Taking her from top to
toe, with her surprising quantity of brown hair, soft complexion, good
mouth, teeth, and figure, Violet Vanderholt was undoubtedly a fine girl.

The room in which they were breakfasting was imposingly furnished. The
pictures were many and fine. One in particular took the eye, and
detained it. It was hung over the sideboard, which glittered with plate;
it represented a schooner, bowed by a sudden blast, coming at you. The
white brine, shredded by the shrieking stroke of the squall, hissed
shrilly from the cut-water. The life and spirit of the reality was in
that fine canvas. The sailors seemed to run as you watched, the gaffs to
droop with the handling of their gear. She came rushing in a smother of
spume right at you, and, before delight could arise, you had felt a
pleasurable shock of surprise that was almost alarm. Such is the effect
produced by Cooper's bull as, with bowed head and eyes of fire, and
horns of death, it looks to be bounding with the velocity of a
locomotive out of the frame.

Mr. Vanderholt and his daughter conversed for some time on matters of no
concern to us who are to follow their fortunes. Presently, after helping
himself to his second bloater--for his wealth had neither lessened his
appetite nor influenced his choice of dishes: he clung, with true Dutch
courage, to solid sausage; he loved new bread, smoking hot; he was
wedded to all the several kinds of cured fish, and often drank a pint of
beer, instead of coffee or tea, at his morning meal--he took his second
herring, and, whilst his gray beard wagged to the movement of his jaws,
an expression of pensiveness entered his face as he fastened his gaze
upon the picture of the rushing schooner.

'How beautifully she is painted!' said he. 'It is the greatest of the
arts. How with the pen could you make that vessel show as the brush
has?'

'It could only be done by suggestion,' said Miss Vanderholt, looking up
sideways at the picture. 'It is the hint that submits the pen-and-ink
sketch.'

'So that, if a man has never seen a schooner, you might hint and suggest
all your life, and the death-bed of that man would still find his mind a
blank as to a schooner?'

'True,' said his daughter.

'I am going to tell you what I have made up my mind to do.'

'Yes, and there she is,' interrupted the girl, with a sweep of her hand
at the picture. 'And pretty wet they are; and a fine handsome sea is
going to run presently, till the yacht shall swoop into the cataracts
like a wreck--veiled--strained! She is too small.'

'You consider one hundred and eighty tons too small? What would Columbus
have thought of you? Do you know that Mynheer Vanderdecken is battling
with the storms of the Cape of Good Hope at this very hour in something
under one hundred and eighty tons?'

'But I really don't think, father, that you need such an extensive
change.'

'My doctors are of my opinion. I require nothing less than three months
of the sea-breeze, and all the climates that I can pack into that time.'

'And George?' said Miss Vanderholt, her voice a little coloured by
vexation. 'He may arrive home and find us absent, and there will be
nobody in the world to tell him where we are--whether we are alive or
dead, and when we may be expected back.'

'George won't be home till June next.' said Mr. Vanderholt. 'There is
no chance of it. Meanwhile, I mean to escape the winter by heading
direct for the Equator and back.'

'I'm afraid it is likely that George will not be able to arrive in
England before the end of June,' exclaimed Miss Vanderholt. 'But if he
should return sooner, it would drive me mad to hear that he had come and
found me absent.'

'We shall be back by February,' said Mr. Vanderholt, in that sort of
voice which makes you feel that the man who speaks is used to having his
way.

'Shall you take any friends with you?'

'Not even a dog,' answered Mr. Vanderholt.

'Then it will be dull!' exclaimed his daughter. 'Nothing but sea and sky
and novels. Why not ask Mr. Allan Kinnaird? He is a very amusing man.'

'I do not agree with you. Kinnaird is amusing for about half an hour.
Kinnaird and I never could get on at sea, locked up together as we
should be. He is always objecting to what I say, and he listens to my
jokes merely with the intention of enlarging upon their points so as to
defraud me of the laugh.'

'Will you carry a doctor?'

'I have thought over that. No; we will ship a medicine chest instead,
and a book treating of every disease under the sun. We do not go to sea
to be ill. A doctor will be in the way. He will be neither with us nor
of us. He might begin to bore you with his attentions, and you would
only think of him as a man who believes that he is under an obligation
to be agreeable.'

'But the _Mowbray_ has not been afloat for two or three years,' said
Miss Vanderholt.

'She has been well looked after. I have always liked the boat, and would
not sell her, though I have not used her of late,' said Mr. Vanderholt,
leaning back in his chair to contemplate to advantage the beautiful
picture over the sideboard. 'She is French built, and about twenty years
old. The French are better ship-builders than the English--infinitely
more choice in their lines and curves, and so scientific that you seldom
hear of a disaster in their experiments. Look at that vessel as she
rushes at you. How perfect is her entry! How insinuating the swell of
her bow, running into a beautiful roundness and plumpness of sides
instead of the up-and-down walls which the British yachtsman, who loves
to admire his yacht from the shore, conceives to be the one element
which gives a vessel stability! The more they narrow, the more they
blunder. You must have stability if you want seaworthiness. And in all
the years that I was at sea I never knew a crank ship a fast ship.'

It was easily seen by the expression of Miss Vanderholt's face that she
was thinking of George. Finding her father had ceased to speak, she
exclaimed:

'Who will be the captain?'

'I shall ask my friend Fairbanks to recommend a man to me. He, of all
the shipowners that I am acquainted with, is certain to know of a good
man.'

'Will he belong to the Royal Navy?'

'No.'

'Then, he will not be a gentleman?'

Vanderholt looked at her intently. His face relaxed. He combed down his
beard, and said:

'He will be a sailor; and if he is a sailor, he will be a man. Combine
these two things, and you produce an illustration of human existence
beyond the achievement of the most illustrious lineage and the most
ancient college.'

Miss Vanderholt was used to her father's views, and continued her
breakfast with a distant, listening air, which promised no further
expression of opinion upon this proposed voyage to the Equator. A
stranger listening at that table to Vanderholt would have guessed that
he was a man of hot temper, a Dutchman at root in his views and
prejudices, not a man, perhaps, of many friends, spite of his wealth. He
fixed his little eyes upon his daughter, and, after gazing at her for
some time, with a look of anxiety, he said:

'You know, Vi, I should not care to go without you.'

'No, father; nor should I wish to be left alone at home.'

'You will be happy in the old _Mowbray_. We will lay in a stock of good
things. We will make a fine holiday jaunt of it. Perhaps I shall be able
to show you some of the wonders of the deep. We will teach our crew to
sing litanies to break the spell of that demon the waterspout. We will
hook on to a whale, and thunder through it with foam to the figure-head,
with the velocity of the meteoric storm. We shall be at liberty to shift
our course as often as we please, and settle some marine problem for
good and all; not the sea-serpent--no. Who would defraud the newspapers
of that joke? But I am strongly of opinion that there is a distinct
difference between the dugong and the mermaid. The old idiots of the
fifteenth century no doubt confounded them; and the mermaid, shocked by
the hideous misrepresentation--for think of comparing some golden-haired
angel of an English girl with a New Zealand native woman, frightful with
the hues of her sky, and horrible with devices of the needle!--I say the
disgusted mermaid may have sunk into the ooze, resolved never again to
give man a sight of her face. Best of all, Vi, the voyage will do me
good, will do you good, and delightfully shorten the time of your
waiting for George.'

'It is the only feeling I have in the matter,' answered the young lady.

And now, having breakfasted, they arose and quitted the table.

Miss Violet Vanderholt, being acquainted with her father's character,
and knowing that he rarely changed his mind, went to her room, where in
peace she occupied a full hour in writing a long letter to George.

And who was George? One had but to peep over the girl's shoulder to
discover. 'My own darling George,' she began; and this sort of thing is
commonly accepted as the language of love. Captain George Parry was an
officer in the Honourable East India Company's service. When he was last
at home he had met Miss Violet, haunted her closely, and exhibited
himself in a variety of ways as deeply in love with her. Wonderful to
relate, Mr. Montagu Vanderholt took a fancy to the young man, and when
Ensign Parry called to ask his leave to consider himself engaged, he
was astounded by the cheerful 'Certainly, with pleasure, if you are both
satisfied,' which greeted him. A few questions and answers followed. Mr.
Vanderholt knew very little about the army, though he had two sons in
it. How long would Ensign Parry have to wait for his promotion? How long
was the engagement going to last? For his part, he did not like long
engagements: they made people ill. Many girls were hurried to their
graves by procrastination--that thief of sleep, the ice-cold 'lubbar
fiend' that bestrides women's hearts and keeps them shivering.

The interview terminated to the satisfaction of both gentlemen. In due
time, Ensign Parry returned to India, and now, as Captain Parry, he was
expected home in June; but in one or two of his letters to Violet he had
expressed a hope that he would be able to get home by an earlier date.
It had been settled that they should be married soon after his arrival
in England. And this was the posture of affairs as regarded Captain
Parry and Miss Vanderholt. The young lady, seating herself, dipped her
pen and wrote.

She wrote fast, and often with a flushed cheek when she underlined, or
doubly underlined, a word or a sentence. Her letter consisted mainly of
endearing expressions, such as, when read aloud in court after a couple
have quarrelled, excite merriment. She informed her sweetheart in this
letter that her father had made up his mind to go on a cruise for his
health as far as the Equator, in the old _Mowbray_. She was going with
him alone. George would know where she was, therefore, until her return
to England, which could not be delayed beyond February. She dared not
hope that George would arrive before the _Mowbray_ reached England. If
this should happen, then he might, perhaps, never receive this very
letter which she was writing. To provide against this, she said that
before she sailed she would write a second letter, and leave it with the
housekeeper.

On the afternoon of this same day Mr. Vanderholt entered his carriage
and drove into the City. He alighted at the offices of a firm of
shipowners in Fenchurch Street, and was immediately confronted by the
very person he had called to see. They shook hands.

'I want ten minutes with you, Fairbanks.'

'As long as you please, Mr. Vanderholt. Always happy to be of service to
you.'

It was plain that Mr. Vanderholt was not a skipper or a mate in search
of a situation on board one of the ships owned by this firm. They walked
through an office full of scribbling clerks; the walls were decorated
with pictures of ships in full sail, and odd configurations on glazed
yellow cloth, signifying cabin accommodation--first, second, and 'tween
decks. They reached a small back-room, and when Mr. Fairbanks closed the
door they were private.

Mr. Vanderholt was rendered a little uneasy by Mr. Fairbanks' look of
expectation, and began somewhat in a hurry, lest his friend's
anticipation should grow.

'It is a very trifling matter I have called to see you about, Fairbanks.
It concerns a skipper for my boat, the _Mowbray_. For some time past I
have been out of sorts, and have resolved to get clear of England during
the winter. I have a fine boat laid up in the Thames. She is 180 tons,
and I calculate, counting the cook and the fellow for the cabin, that a
skipper, a mate, and eight hands will suffice me. Do you know of a good
skipper?'

Mr. Fairbanks brought his fingers together in an attitude of prayer, and
said he thought that by dint of inquiry he might be able to find one.

'What pay?' said he.

'Ten pounds a month,' answered Mr. Vanderholt. 'I want a good man.'

'Do you take any company with you?'

'Only my daughter.'

'Then,' said Mr. Fairbanks, 'the skipper must not drink, and must not
swear. He must be a man of cleanly appearance, of considerable
experience, and able to hold his own in conversation.'

'So,' said Mr. Vanderholt.

'I believe,' said Mr. Fairbanks, 'that I know the man for you. He had
charge of a ship of ours, the _Sandyfoot_. It was but yesterday I
nodded to him outside these offices. If you take him you will carry a
romance in pilot-cloth to sea with you. This fellow--you will not
believe what I am going to tell you after you see him--was in love with
a girl. He broke with her in a quarrel, and went to sea, and by a
homeward ship wrote to ask her forgiveness and keep her heart whole for
him, as he would shortly return. He was swept overboard in a storm,
picked up floating on a buoy by a three-masted schooner, and carried to
China. On his arrival home, he found his sweetheart had gone out of her
mind. She recovered by degrees, under his influence, and they were to be
married. They proceeded together to church, and at the altar she went
mad again. Of course, the parson refused to officiate, and a few weeks
later the poor thing died.'

'What is the name of our friend?' inquired Mr. Vanderholt, who had
listened without much interest to this romantic story.

'Thomas Glew.'

'Originally a nickname, meant to stick,' said Mr. Vanderholt dryly.
'Send him to me. You will oblige me by doing so.'

'I'll endeavour to find him this afternoon, and you shall see him
to-morrow,' answered the other. 'And you really enjoy the prospect of a
cruise to the Equator and home?'

'Would I go if I did not?'

'But is not such sailing like running to and fro between wickets when
there's nobody bowling?' said Mr. Fairbanks, placing a decanter of old
Madeira and a box of cigars on the table.

Mr. Vanderholt brimmed a deep-hearted wineglass, and lighted a cigar,
saying betwixt the puffs:

'If there is no good in the pursuit of health, you are right.'

'Well,' said Mr. Fairbanks, 'for my part I never could contemplate a
voyage of any sort without associating it with a port and business.'

'Thank the North Star,' said the gentleman of Dutch extraction, 'with me
that time has passed!'

'But to think of the Equator as a port of call!' exclaimed Mr.
Fairbanks; and they both began to laugh.

The term 'port of call' set them conversing about trade, how matters
went in the City. Mr. Vanderholt talked fluently on all affairs
connected with shipping. After enjoying his cigar and his chat, he
re-entered his carriage, and was driven away.

Next morning, at about eleven o'clock, he was in his study, writing some
letters. His daughter sat with him, reading a newspaper. A man-servant
opened the door, and said that a seafaring gentleman was in the 'all,
and had called by request. On a silver salver lay Mr. Fairbanks' card,
and Mr. Vanderholt, after glancing at the card, told the footman to show
Captain Glew in.

There entered soon, with a quick, resolved, quarter-deck stride, a short
but powerfully-built man, shell-backed by ocean duties, with a face that
might have been cast in light bronze, that might have served as a ship's
figure-head in that metal, so roasted had it been in its day, so hard
set was it, as though fresh from the pickle of the harness-cask. The
flesh of the countenance had that sort of tension which does not admit
of much, or perhaps any, play of emotion. The man might expel a laugh
from his throat, but was he physically equal to a smile? He held a round
hat, and was soberly attired in blue cloth. He looked swiftly and
lightly around him, but seemed unmoved by the splendour of the
apartment. He sent a keen, gray, seawardly glance at Miss Vanderholt,
and fastened his gaze with an expression of attention upon her father.

Miss Vanderholt viewed him with curiosity and disappointment.

'Captain Glew?' said Mr. Vanderholt.

'That's my name, sir,' answered the captain, in a voice as decisive as
his walk and air. 'I was asked to call upon you by Mr. Fairbanks.'

'Right. Sit down. I had a good many years of it myself, but did not
reach the quarter-deck,' said Mr. Vanderholt. 'My end was plumb with the
fore-top.'

The captain seated himself, but did not smile, nor did he look as if he
wanted to.

'Many years at sea, Captain Glew?'

'Thirty, sir.'

'Did you run away, as I did, from home?'

'No. I was put apprentice by my father, who had charge of a Bethel, and
was a man of education.'

'Did Mr. Fairbanks explain what I wanted to see you about?'

'Yes, sir. I believe you'll find me a suitable man. I confess I'd like
the job. I know the _Mowbray_.'

Mr. Vanderholt's face lighted up.

'I was off her in a wherry not above a fortnight ago, and we stopped to
admire her. I never saw prettier lines.' Here he raised his eyes to the
picture over the sideboard, as though observing it for the first time,
but his face discovered no marks of enthusiasm or admiration whilst he
let his sight rest for a moment on that square of splendid,
spirit-moving canvas. 'My uncle was a shipbuilder,' he continued, 'and I
have some knowledge of that trade. The finest examples of seaworthy
craft are, in my opinion, the Baltimore clippers--some of them, at all
events. The _Mowbray_ might be the queen of that fleet, sir.'

Mr. Vanderholt glanced at his daughter, as if he should say, 'This is
our man.' He then rang the bell. A footman quickly appeared.

'Wine,' said Mr. Vanderholt.

'Not for me, if you please,' said Captain Glew, lifting his hand, and
bowing with a motion that made his refusal emphatic.

'What will you take?' said Mr. Vanderholt.

'Nothing whatever, I thank you, sir.'

'Are you a teetotaler?' said Mr. Vanderholt, signing to the footman to
be gone.

'No, sir. I am one of those men who drink only when they are thirsty,
and as I am seldom thirsty it follows that I drink little.'

'Do you know anything about fore and aft seamanship?'

_Now_ Captain Glew smiled, but the expression was like a passing spasm.

'I do, sir. I have held command in several types of ships in my time.
Seven years ago I had charge for three voyages of a fruiter from the
Thames to the Western Islands.'

'That will do,' said Mr. Vanderholt, with an appreciative flourish of
his hand, and a laugh of satisfaction.

'Five years ago, being in distress for a position, and having a wife and
two children to maintain, I took command of a three-masted schooner to
the Brazils, where I left her and returned in charge of a little barque.
I then got a berth in Mr. Fairbanks' employ----'

He was proceeding, but Mr. Vanderholt had heard enough.

'I am quite satisfied,' said he. 'Now let us settle the matter straight
off. That is my way of going to work. I'm not for easing away
handsomely; I'm for letting go with a run. We shall want a mate, and we
shall want a crew. Can I trust you to see to this business?'

'You can, sir.'

'Let the crew be blue-water men. I shall want real sailors aboard the
_Mowbray_.'

'There's nothing like them, sir.'

'The craft lies dismantled, as you know. I leave the whole work of her
being made ready for sea to you. Employ your own labour. Call upon me
as the work proceeds. I shall make you several visits from time to time,
for I am a man of leisure.'

'Does the young lady go with us, sir?'

'Yes.'

'You'll wish her cabin specially fitted?'

'I will see to that myself, Captain Glew.'

'Right, sir. And the voyage, I understand, is to be a cruise in the
North Atlantic?'

'It is to be a run to the Equator and home.'

'It seems such an odd place to steer for,' said Miss Vanderholt,
breaking the silence for the first time.

'It's as determinable as a rock, anyhow!' exclaimed Mr. Vanderholt. 'I
want to be able to report a wonder when we return.' Here his Dutch
countenance put on the air of good-humoured cunning with which he
usually prefaced a joke. 'There is about a quarter of a mile of
Equatorial water which possesses a remarkable property. Sink an object
in it, and you draw it up gilt. If we strike this wonderful patch of
sea, we will gild the _Mowbray_ from waterway to truck; boats,
ground-tackle--everything--shall be resplendent, and we shall be the
marvel of London as we sail up the Thames.'

Miss Vanderholt watched Captain Glew, to see how he relished this sort
of thing.

The skipper exclaimed austerely:

'It's a tract of water written of in books for the marines. It's not to
be found at sea, sir.'

'We must strike it, man, so that we may return covered with glory.'

'Patch got any colour, sir?'

'I believe it is a blood-red. A man I once sailed with claimed to have
sighted it. He was in the foretop-mast crosstrees, and saw the patch off
the bow, and hailed the deck, but he squinted damnably. You can't keep a
true course for anything when you squint. The captain missed the patch.
No other man saw it; and the sailor, who was a Dane, was, or is, the
only man in the world who has ever seen that miraculous bit of
Equatorial water.'

He looked at his daughter, clearly enjoying his own imagination; and
Captain Glew uttered a hollow laugh, and stood up.

'I will visit the vessel to-morrow, sir, and report. I will bring my
papers along with me----'

'No need,' interrupted Mr. Vanderholt; 'Mr. Fairbanks' introduction is
enough.'

The man made a nautical bow to the father and daughter, and was going,
when he suddenly stopped to say:

'Are you particular as to the nationalities of the men, sir?'

'English and Dutchmen, in such proportions as may please you,' said Mr.
Vanderholt; 'but never a Dago, Captain Glew. I was once stabbed by a
Dago.'

'And a Dago would have stabbed me if I hadn't killed him,' said the
captain. 'We'll ship no Dagos, sir.'

He made another nautical bow, and departed.

'I like him,' said Mr. Vanderholt, turning in his chair so as to resume
his letter-writing; 'but I guess the crew will find him a taut hand.'

'What is a taut hand?' inquired his daughter.

'A man who breeds mutinies,' he answered.

He looked thoughtful for a few moments, as though visited by some tragic
memories; then, taking up his pen, he went on writing his letters.




CHAPTER II.

DOWN RIVER.


On the morning of November 21, 1837, the schooner _Mowbray_ lay at
anchor abreast of Greenwich. In the fresh westerly wind you found the
sun-white sparkle of winter. Buildings, ships, wharves, the further
bends of the Reach, stood out with the sharpness and delicacy of ivory
work. The movements of the drapery of bunting, the swelling and
breathing of passing canvas, were beautiful to see under the hard, blue
sky, with its frost-work of gleaming cloud high over Plaistow Level.

The schooner looked exceedingly handsome as she floated at her cable,
with the ripples of the blown stream twisting in slender lines of light
from the cut-water. These lines flashed in her glossy sides as they
trembled past, and her coppered hull was beautified by other lustres
than the light of day, as she sat motionless, courting the eye to the
tall heights of the delicate mastheads, each of them star-crowned with a
shining gilt truck.

She was handsomer than a yacht, because she lacked the summer precision
and fine-weather finish of that sort of craft. The nautical eye does not
love fine feathers. The _Mowbray_ was a sea-going boat. She had beam for
stability, a height of side which promised a dry ship, a spring of bow
smack-like with its promise of domination. Her copper shone; she was
sheathed to the bends; she carried little or no finery about her decks,
but the scantling of everything--the companion, the skylights, the
sailors' deck-house, nay, even the caboose forward--might have been that
of a ten-gun brig.

The hour was about half-past eleven. A number of seamen, apparelled with
some regard to uniformity of attire, lounged in the bows, staring
Greenwich way, or at the familiar scene of docks the other side of the
river. They looked a rough company of the genuine merchant-sailor
type--raggedly hairy, defiant in stare, in fold of arm, resolved in
their several postures. They wore round hats and jackets, and the
bell-ended, blue-cloth trousers of the Jacks of that day.

On the quarter-deck walked Captain Glew and the mate who had signed
articles for the run, Mr. Tweed. This was a short, hearty, plump man.
His grog-blossomed, jovial face suggested a suppressed boisterousness of
spirits; you felt that in him lay the voice for the back-parlour of the
Free and Easy. The owner of the vessel and party were expected on board
shortly, and Tweed had clothed himself with care, in a short, round
jacket, with a corner of red silk handkerchief carelessly straying from
one side-pocket. His trousers rippled as he walked, and the rest of him
consisted of a check shirt and pumps.

'I think he ought to be pleased,' said Captain Glew, coming to a stand
at the binnacle, and throwing a look over the little ship and then up
aloft; 'nothing handsomer sails out of the Thames this year.'

'She is sweet enough for a pennon,' said Tweed. 'I wish she was mine.
I'd like to go a-pirating in a vessel of this sort. No, I wouldn't,
either; I'd go a-slaving. A hundred and eighty tons. I reckon you could
stow away six hundred blacks in her 'tween decks.'

'I sometimes wish I'd been born a hundred years sooner,' said Captain
Glew. 'I would have been a pirate; the ocean was thick with booty, and
you got an estate with very little risk. The dogs came to the gibbet
because they never would be satisfied.'

'Piracy gave a sailor a good chance,' said the mate, with a groggy look
at the hands lounging forward.

'Here am I grateful for this L30 job,' growled the captain. 'The wife
and young uns may now eat and drink for three months, and for three
months the thought of to-morrow morning shan't keep me awake. Holy
Jemmy! But it's on the quarter-deck where the hearts of stone are
wanted. To those fellows forward the getting a ship's as easy as an
oath. Do you or I get ships as easily as we swear?'

'No, not by all that I'm worth!' answered Tweed. 'Captain, I have
followed the sea for twenty years, and I'll tell you how it stands with
me now: in my cabin you'll find a sea-chest; it's painted green--green
it should be; it's the colour of my life. In that sea-chest is all that
I own in the world, saving a matter of a few pounds stowed away ashore.
Twenty years of the sea, and nothing but a bloomed green sea-chest to
show for it!' exclaimed Tweed, with so much blood in his face that his
grog-blossoms made him look as if he had burst into a dangerous rash.

Thus these worthies discoursed, as they walked the quarter-deck,
awaiting the arrival of Mr. Vanderholt and party. They had been
shipmates in prior times, were in some fashion connected, had frequently
of late met ashore, and had grown intimate during the time occupied by
the refitting of the _Mowbray_. We are not to confound the discipline of
this little schooner with that of a great Indiaman. Men who had
commanded fruiters were not commonly distant to their mates when they
afterwards handled small vessels.

Forward the seamen growled in talk indistinguishable to the
quarter-deck walkers.

'What sort of boss is th' ole man going to turn out?' exclaimed one of
the seamen, staring aft. 'I don't like his looks. But when once I've
signed a vessel's articles I'm for outweathering the skipper, if he was
the devil himself. He'll get no change out of Joseph Dabb, and it's
extraordinary, bullies, that Joseph Dabb should be my name.'

'If there's no eddication in the fok'sle of this vessel, fired if there
oughtn't to be enough aft to enable all hands to spell the word "lush,"'
said a dark, heavy-browed man, gazing with a deep and surly smile at the
plump figure of Tweed, as he walked, rolling about like a butterbox in a
seaway, alongside the captain. 'I never see a face in all my time more
beautifully decorated. How many pints go to one of them blossoms? We
shall be hearing of him singing "We're all a-noddin'" in some middle
watch, when there's onusual need for a bright look-out.'

'I was spliced three weeks ago,' exclaimed a red-headed seaman. 'I'm
a-missing of Sally, my joys. I feel gallus like going home again.'

He eyed the land about the West India Docks, and extended his arms,
amidst a rumble of laughter and much spitting of yellow froth over the
bows.

'I don't expect to see my old 'oman again,' exclaimed a seaman, standing
upright with his arms folded. 'If she don't die, she'll make tracks,
and, foreseeing of that, I sold off my household furniture yesterday.'

'Ain't ye left her nothing to sit upon?' said the red-headed seaman.

'Yes; a carpenter's knee. D'ye think I'm to be hubbled?' he cried,
letting fall his arms, and turning fiercely upon the red-headed man. 'I
wondered to find her at home last voyage. She'd have found me a true
man. Bruised if I like ship's carpenters, anyhow. I never yet knew a
ship's carpenter yer could trust as a man.'

'Stow that!' exclaimed a seaman, leaning over the rail, and merely
turning his head to speak.

'_You're_ no ship's carpenter,' was the answer. 'This ain't no ship.
Present company's always excepted, too, in polite society;' and he
began to step the deck with temper.

'Where's this vessel bound to?' said another man.

'I signed for a cruise,' answered someone.

'Something was said about the Equator,' exclaimed another.

'The Equator's no coast,' said the red-headed man.

'The covey that owns this here craft,' exclaimed the carpenter, who was
also the boatswain, 'is a Dutchman. He ain't a Dutchman only--he's a
feenansure. Now, I've heard tell that when a Dutchman makes more money
than his mind's capable of weighing the idea of, his intellects go
wrong. Did ye ever hear of the prices they paid for toolips? I'm the son
of a sweep, lads, if some of 'em didn't pay as much as a L100 in good
money for a durned stalk not worth a cabbage! They was all rich men as
bought them bulbs, and they was all mad; and you lay your last
farden's-worth of silver spoons if this here scheme of a voyage to the
Equator ain't the caper of a blooming Dutchman who's made so much money
that his brains have given under the weight of the idea of his fortune!'

Just then a large white boat was seen to be approaching the _Mowbray_
from the direction of Greenwich, and in a few minutes she was
alongside--a boat full of ladies and gentlemen; and Captain Glew stood
at the open gangway, cap in hand. The party consisted of Mr. and Miss
Vanderholt and a few friends who had accompanied them to Greenwich to
see them off. Vanderholt shook hands with his captain, nodded to the
mate, and cast a look of approval in the direction of the forecastle. He
seemed in high spirits. His eyes smiled deep in their little sockets,
and the fresh and friendly wind blew his beard into twenty expressions
of kindly laughter. He was rigged out for the sea. No Minories slop-shop
could have furnished him with a salter aspect. The seamen on the
forecastle eyed him, and murmured one to another. They seemed to
recognise their own vocation in the man, yet viewed him doubtfully, as
dogs watch with suspicion the dog in Punch and Judy.

His daughter was handsomely draped in velvet and fur, and wore a
turban-shaped hat that was as good for the deck as for her looks. In a
minute there was a little crowd of well-dressed gentlemen and ladies
standing on the quarter-deck, gazing around them and aloft, with Mr.
Vanderholt laughing with the wind in his beard, and Miss Vi gazing
somewhat pensively at the full scene of the schooner.

It was the right sort of morning for a start for the ocean. The brisk
breeze covered the surface of the river with sliding shapes, coming and
going. A large Indiaman, newly arrived, with the rust of four months of
brine draining down her chain-plate bolts, her sheathing green as grass,
with a quivering of weeds here and there, lay off the Docks opposite.
Her house-flag blew stately from the lofty masthead; stately and proud,
too, she floated, tall and square. She seemed alive, and conscious of
victory. The lights of her cabin windows shook through the ripples in
long darts of silver. A chorus of thirty stormy throats swept down the
wind, and there came out of that inspiriting windlass-song of sailors
who had brought their lofty ship home the whole spirit of the ocean
into this living, brimming picture of river.

Mr. Vanderholt's friends walked about the decks of the _Mowbray_,
praising the schooner highly.

'He goes alone with his daughter,' said one gentleman to another, 'and
touches nowhere. I do not envy her.'

'Don't you remember,' said the other, 'what the German said? "I don't
see der use of being seek onless you makes your friends seek mit you."'

They both laughed.

Mr. Vanderholt led the whole party into the cabin, where they found the
table clothed for a cold lunch. A steward stood in a corner, waiting for
the hour to strike when he should summon the company by a bell. Some
baskets of champagne were beside him. It was a roomy cabin, with plenty
of accommodation for eight or nine people to sit at table; brightly
lighted, handsomely upholstered, painted and gilded as charmingly as a
drawing-room. Some little berths aft had been knocked into two, and
Violet was very well pleased with the size and comfort of her sea
bedroom. She would swing in a cot; the furniture provided her with many
more conveniences than she would get ashore in a friend's house.

Mr. Vanderholt's cabin was plainly equipped. He was going to sea as a
sailor; he was bent upon reviving old memories; and his guests laughed
when he pointed to a sea-chest, which he said contained nearly the whole
of his kit, which chest had also been the one he had used in the last
voyage he made as a sailor.

'Do you see those ragged marks?' said he, stooping to run his finger
along the edge of the chest, whilst he looked up into the face of a
fashionably-dressed lady. 'They were caused by my cutting up plug
tobacco. I would not have them filled in. On this chest I have sat and
blown strong Cavendish tobacco-smoke into an atmosphere composed almost
entirely of carbonic acid gas; I have watched the blue ring burning
round the flame of the lamp, and smoked on.'

'Would you be a sailor again?' asked the fashionably-dressed lady.

'Not for a million on _these_ terms,' answered Mr. Vanderholt, bringing
his fist down, in a sudden passion of recollection, upon the lid of his
chest.

Presently the little bell rang, and they seated themselves. The
champagne fizzed, knives and forks rattled on plates, the one steward
ran about. Mr. Vanderholt was in high spirits; he drank to his daughter
amongst others; no more cordial or hospitable gentleman ever sat at the
head of a cabin table.

'The hardest part of a sailor's life,' said a pretty young woman, with
black eyes, and a handsome white feather coiled round a large hat, 'must
be saying good-bye to the girls, as I think they call them,' exposing a
row of milk-white teeth. 'They are absent for months and years; how can
you expect constancy?'

'Ha!' exclaimed Mr. Vanderholt. 'But a man may be faithful, even though
he should be as much cut off from his girl as if he was buried. Don't
you remember what your Richard Steele says? I quote from memory: "The
poor fellow who lost his arm last siege will tell you that he feels the
fingers that are buried in Flanders ache every cold morning at
Chelsea."'

'I do not see the application,' said one of the gentlemen.

'It is perfectly plain,' said Violet, flushing.

'Vanderholt,' exclaimed one of the guests, 'tell me what has become of
that old sailor who used to take a month in making a pair of clews for
the captain's cot, or a fancy pair of beckets for the mate's
camphor-wood chest.'

'He belonged to the days of leisure,' answered Mr. Vanderholt. 'It is
all for speed now, cracking on, carrying away, four months to Bombay,
when in my time six months was looked upon as a good voyage.'

Captain Glew, at the invitation of Mr. Vanderholt, sat at the foot of
the table.

'The lady,' said he, with an inclination of his head in the direction of
the person referred to, 'was speaking just now of constancy amongst
sailors. I remember some years ago being aboard a ship in a collision.
The other vessel received us, and it turned out that the first seaman
who sprang into the ship was the husband of the wife of the captain.'

'Lor', what a complication!' said somebody.

'The seaman who sprang was supposed to be dead?' said Mr. Vanderholt.

Captain Glew looked at him without smiling. His face, however, was not
wanting in a certain arch expression.

'Sailors undergo very many more perils than are written down, or than
the world wots of,' said a gentleman. 'I once met a travelling show.
Part of it was a man in a cage. Nothing in this or the under world could
be more frightful to see than that man. And what had happened to him? He
had slept on a bale of cloves, and the cloves, by drawing all the
moisture out of him, had left him a skeleton, with a heart beating under
a loose coat of parchment.'

'Poor thing!' said a lady. 'And are cloves so drying? Really! How could
the poor creature while away the time in a cage?'

'By showing the crowd how to make clove-hitches, I expect,' said
Vanderholt.

Captain Glew rose, and, bowing to the company, went to his cabin, which
was a cupboard forward annexed to the pantry. Opposite was the mate's.
He reappeared in a minute or two, said something to Mr. Vanderholt, and
passed on deck.

'I wonder you do not touch at Madeira,' said a gentleman.

'I touch at the Line only.'

'Oh, but Miss Vanderholt,' exclaimed the gentleman, 'if you have not
seen Madeira, you should compel your father to stop at the island,


    '"Where the virgins are soft as the roses they twine,
    And all, save the spirit of man, is divine."'


'I know nothing about the virgins of that island,' said a gentleman;
'but the men who visit your ship, and the men who salute you when you
get ashore, are poisonously hideous. They cling like toads to a bed of
glorious growths. The spirit of man is not divine at Madeira.'

'I touch nowhere,' said Mr. Vanderholt. 'When our forefoot cuts the zero
of the chart, we shift helm for the homeward run.'

He glanced at a clock in the skylight, made a movement, and
simultaneously all stood up, and, standing, they drank a final glass of
champagne to the safety of the voyage, to Vanderholt's health, to the
return of the charming Violet Vanderholt; then, conducted by the owner
of the schooner, the guests went on deck, and in a few minutes took
their leave.

There was much hand-shaking--all the usual assurances of friendship
agitated by leave-taking. Nevertheless, when the company were in their
boat, going ashore, one of the gentlemen exclaimed:

'I think Vanderholt must be a selfish old cuckoo to carry away his
daughter to the ocean, with no other company but his own grumbling self
and Captain Glew.'

'I would not be sailing to the Equator in that schooner for a thousand
pounds!' said a lady. 'I should have to be run away with to do such a
thing;' and she leered sweetly at a gentleman opposite her.

'They are flourishing their handkerchiefs to us,' cried someone.

All stood up in the boat to wave back.

'For Gord's sake, sit down, ladies and gents! You'll be capsizing of
us!' bawled the one-eyed bow oar.

On board the schooner they were getting under weigh. The name of the
boatswain--he was also the carpenter--who had shipped to act as second
mate whenever his services in this capacity should be required, was
Jones. No man blew the boatswain's silver pipe more sweetly. He had sent
his lark-like carol to the mastheads, and afar on either hand the
streaming river that pure music of the sea thrilled, whilst their guests
were making their way ashore.

The _Mowbray_ was a small ship, but her deep-water men dealt with her as
though she had been a thousand-ton Indiaman. The hearties, in their
round jackets, sprang, as an echo of the boatswain's roaring cry, to the
windlass handles, and in a moment a voice, broken by years of drink and
by hailing the deck from immense heights, broke into that most
melancholy chorus, 'Across the Plains of Mexico.'

The cherry-faced mate, Tweed, standing in the bows, soon reported the
cable up and down; then sail was made. The eager little ship herself
broke her anchor out of the London mud, and to the impulse of her
mounting standing jib, staysail, and gaff foresail, was, with a
clipper's restlessness of spirit in the whole length of her, swiftly
turning her head down-stream, whilst a few hands sang 'Old Stormy, he is
dead and gone' at the little windlass, lifting the anchor to the
cathead.

Before the length of Blackwall Reach had been measured, the schooner was
clothed, her seamen coiling down, some attending the sheets--everything
quiet and comfortable. The captain stood beside the tiller, conning the
little vessel. He was qualified as a pilot for the Thames, and boasted
that he could smell his way up and down in the dark--and truly perhaps
the nose, in some parts of this noble river, would be as good as the
lead, or a buoy, to tell a man where he was. Glew caught the eye of Mr.
Vanderholt, who, approaching him, said:

'I am very well pleased. You have chosen well. This is a good company of
seamen.'

Captain Glew touched his cap, and continued to watch the schooner. She
was square-rigged forward, carried topsail, top-gallant-sail, and royal;
but there was no good in humbugging with this sort of canvas in a
serpentine river that shifts your course for you every two miles by
three or four points.

Miss Vanderholt stood at the rail viewing the moving picture round
about, with a very pensive face. Her eyes often went to a large vessel
at anchor ahead. That full-rigged ship made her think of George. In much
such a ship, no doubt, George would return. When? In all probability
before her own arrival; and how maddening that would be! For, oddly
enough, though it was a long time since they had parted, Miss Violet
Vanderholt was quite as much in love with Captain George Parry as ever
she was on that day when she and her father saw him off in the East
India Docks, when she cried, and he hugged her, and when they had spent
half an hour up in a corner all alone in talk as impassioned as ever
passed between two lovers.

This must convince us that there was something Dutch and solid in the
girl's character, for she had had many opportunities to recollect
herself and transfer her affection. Though Vanderholt's wealth was not
of a size to lead to newspaper paragraphs and to editorial
exaggerations, it was, in a quiet way, known and talked about, and
people passing his house would look up and nod at it, and say:

'A rich old cock lives there.'

However, Miss Vi's meditations were presently to be interrupted by a
scene not very unfamiliar in the River Thames. The wind was west, and it
blew a fresh breeze. The ripples rushing to the whipping carried a
little edging of foam. Whatever was under canvas, unless it was a barge,
or something running in a mile or two of straight water, leaned in
shafts of light. You caught the glance of copper sheathing, the sunshine
showered in a rainbow glow upon flashes of brackish foam bursting
without the life of brine from shearing bows and gliding sides. The
smoke ashore blew away quickly, and the heavens remained a beautiful
blue, and the sky over the Plaistow Flats shone like the inside of an
oyster-shell with the prismatic hues of a setting of motionless,
finely-linked clouds.

Just as the _Mowbray_ passed down Bugsby's Reach, opening the long tract
of the Woolwich waters beyond, two collier brigs reaching up the river
swept into each other with crackling jibbooms. The schooner's road was
blocked; her helm was shifted swift as the swallow curves in flight, and
then followed a pause which enabled Miss Vanderholt to gain some little
insight into the ways of the deep, and the behaviour and speech of those
who go down to it for two or three pounds a month.

The two brigs came together with a crash that might have been heard at
London Bridge. They butted bow to bow, then, swinging to, locked
themselves helplessly broadside to broadside, and began to float
shorewards, with sails and heavy pieces of timber falling from aloft,
and men, two or three of them wearing tall hats, and shawls round their
throats, rushing about the decks in agonies of pantomime. It was a
saying that there was no better school than the North Country Geordie
for seamanship. Certainly there was no school in which a man learnt more
quickly to swear. The _Mowbray_ floated close past, and all could be
seen. Nothing is more helpless in this world than two ships thus yoked,
steering each other ashore, with an occasional drag, or jerk, or butt,
that brings a ton of top-hamper crashing about the ears of the profane
on deck.

'Let go your tawps'l brace, you blooming old fool! Don't you see it's
foul of my mainyard-arm?'

'What in flames are you keeping your jib hoisted for? You're paying her
right into me!'

'Jumped if we shan't both go ashore if yer don't starboard yer 'ellum.
Why don't you let go yer anchor, you rooting hogs?'

'Yes, and tear my smothered bows out because a crew of dairymen don't
know how to steer their ship!'

Then, in the midst of this--crash!--off short like a carrot would snap a
yard, or down, torn bodily out by its roots, would fall a gaff, amidst
yells of:

'You gutter-sots! You're all drunk this holy day! Suffocate yer, you
scabs! Let go yer taws'l halliards! Don't you see they're binding the
wessels together by my yard that's gone in the slings?'

But the _Mowbray_ was now on her course; the distance between her and
the embracing brigs was fast widening, and articulate oaths had faded
into a chorus of indistinguishable shouts. The vessels were doomed. They
both drifted ashore abreast of Woolwich, and next day a paper described
a fight that was bloody with knives between the two crews, and reported
the death of a foolhardy waterman who tried to make peace, clearly with
an eye to salvage.

'This,' said Mr. Vanderholt, as the _Mowbray_, rounding into Galleon's
Reach, put the brigs out of sight, 'is a sample of the poetry of the
sea, Vi. But very few poets have dealt with subjects of this sort. They
write of the splendours of the sunset and moon-rise at sea, and such
things. Yet, if I were a poet, I would rather choose a subject in those
two brigs in the Thames in a collision, going ashore, full of curses,
than in all the stars which shine upon the ocean.'

At five o'clock the _Mowbray_ let go her anchor off Gravesend.




CHAPTER III.

'ALONG OF BILL.'


It was dark when the _Mowbray_ brought up. The Gravesend lights trembled
windily, and there was a dance of lanterns as of fireflies upon the
breast of the stream. Mr. Vanderholt had no intention of going ashore.
He had ordered Captain Glew to bring up off Gravesend to avoid the risks
of the navigation of the river in a dark night. It is not customary for
the skippers of yachts to dine with their owners, but Mr. Vanderholt,
who was a seaman at heart, who disliked forms and ceremonies, having
made up his mind on the matter, had, after speaking a few words to his
daughter, walked up to Captain Glew and expressed a wish that he would
eat with them at their table. Glew touched his cap without any
expression of surprise or emotion of gratitude. He appeared to receive
the courtesy as a command, to accept it as he would an order to get the
vessel under weigh or shorten sail.

At six o'clock the cabin bell was rung to call them to dinner. Mr.
Vanderholt and Captain Glew arrived from the deck, Miss Vanderholt from
her cabin. The interior was a pretty little picture of hospitality; two
handsome lamps shone purely and brightly. The burnished swing-trays
reflected the beams of the lamps. The light glanced dart-like in
polished bulkhead and mirror, and shone on silver and damask, and fruit
and crystal. The steward appeared with a dish of fish.

'I think you have a pretty good cook in this vessel,' said Vanderholt,
examining the fish, as he helped his daughter.

'He served his time in liners, and has done a deal of cooking at sea in
his day.'

'I hope he will take some trouble to please the men,' said Mr.
Vanderholt. 'It is always bad food for the forecastle, but a bad cook
makes bad bad indeed.'

'What do the men get to eat?' asked the young lady.

'The usual ship-going fare, miss,' answered Glew: 'pork, junk,
pease-soup, biscuit, and the like.'

'Who keeps the log of this ship?' said Mr. Vanderholt.

'I shall,' said the captain.

'What is a log?' inquired Miss Vanderholt.

'A book, my dear, in which the chief mate of a ship enters daily her
situation, the state of the weather, and such observations as he is
capable of making.'

'They are not many, or of a poetical order,' said Glew, with his faint
taut smile. 'The nearest romantic stroke that I can recollect was this
entry: "A dreadful day. At noon precisely the ship blew up, and nobody
was left but William Gibson."'

'I suspect, captain,' said Mr. Vanderholt, 'that you will have met with
some romantic traverses in your time?'

'I don't recall any,' answered the captain.

'Why, to put one instance as delicately as I can,' said Mr. Vanderholt,
filling a silver tankard till it foamed over with India pale ale; 'that
extraordinary affair of some early love.' Miss Vi looked extremely
confused, and gazed with entreaty at her father. 'The remarkable story,
I mean,' continued Vanderholt, bringing out his mouth and nose covered
with froth, 'that Mr. Fairbanks told me.'

'And what might the story be, sir?' said Captain Glew, looking blankly.

Miss Vanderholt continued to gaze with entreaty, whilst her father
repeated the story. Captain Glew drained his wine-glass, and uttered a
dismal laugh, in which his face bore no part.

'Why,' said he, 'that yarn's told of old Jim Dyson, old Captain Dyson,
who was found dead in his bed three years ago at the sign of the Sot's
Hole, down Limehouse way.'

Miss Vanderholt burst out laughing.

'I wonder Mr. Fairbanks should tell that yarn of me,' continued Captain
Glew. 'If my wife gets to hear of it--and there's trouble enough in
married life without lies----'

'So the bubbles break as quickly as they are blown,' said Mr.
Vanderholt. 'But I confess I never would have thought it of you, Captain
Glew.'

After dinner the father and daughter patrolled the deck, warmly wrapped.
Mr. Vanderholt smoked an immense pipe that curled from an amber tip at
his lips into a richly-bronzed and glowing bowl in his hand. It was
early night. The wind was gone, the stream of tide softly shaled along
the bends of the schooner in the note of surf washing on shingle heard
at a distance. How dismal, flat and gaunt looked the treeless Tilbury
shore in that sad light! The very stars shining over it seemed to
tremble with the spirit of mud and cold desolation. Shadowy shapes of
ships went by, sometimes to a sound of music, as of concertinas and the
like; tall phantasmal shapes, lifting spires as delicate as needles to
the stars, loomed anear and afar. In the main, silence lay upon that
river, with its burden of living freights.

The crew loafed about the schooner's deck forward, and the grumble of
their voices came aft, along with the scent of tobacco-smoke. They
slept in a deck-house, with three windows of a side, and spikes of light
shot from those windows, occasionally glancing on the figure of a
passing man, and falling in streams of radiance upon the bulwarks.
Besides this deck-house, the schooner owned a small forecastle,
containing three or four bunks.

'I don't know how it may be with you, Vi,' said Mr. Vanderholt, pressing
his daughter's arm affectionately against his side, 'but I give you my
word I feel better already.'

'That's a good thing,' exclaimed the young lady. 'I wish George were
with us.'

'George is not two men. He can't be in India and here at the same time.'

'He ought to be here, by my side,' said Miss Vanderholt. 'Oh, how
delicious the voyage would then be! I should not object to your sailing
round the world.'

'Make the youngster give up the army. He's got means of his own, and
_you'll_ be pretty well off, I hope,' said Mr. Vanderholt. 'If you go
out to India I shall be alone, and you'll die of some distemper,
engendered by what is there called "a station." No good in titular
dignity. The land teems with captains and colonels; and a time may come
when a man will be respected because he is not a major-general. It would
be different if George was in the Dutch army.'

He was proceeding, when he suddenly stopped, catching a noise of oars on
the bow, and suddenly a long, sharp-stemmed boat, apparently a police
boat, shot out of the gloom, and a powerful voice hailed:

'Schooner ahoy!'

'Hallo!' answered Captain Glew, who was leaning over the side, at a
respectful distance from the father and daughter, furtively smoking a
cheroot.

'I want to come aboard of you.'

In a minute the boat was alongside, and a couple of men sprang over the
rail.

'What vessel's this?' said one of the men, who, like his companion, wore
a tall, glazed hat, and was swathed to the throat in overcoat and
shawls.

'The _Mowbray_, privately owned. What's your business?' said Captain
Glew.

'We're Bow Street officers. We're searching the shipping for a man
named Simmons. D'ye want to see our warrant?'

'What's he charged with?' said Mr. Vanderholt, coming with his daughter
on his arm from the other side of the deck.

'Murder!' was the answer.

Miss Vanderholt screamed. Her father said instantly:

'Search my ship by all means. I hope the man may not be on board of us.
If he is, I do not sail. Captain Glew, render these two officers every
assistance.'

The _Mowbray_ was a small vessel, and the search did not take long. The
hatches were lifted, the hold explored by lantern-light, the deck-house
was rummaged, the whole ship's company was mustered and severally
examined. It was strange to see those seamen standing in a line, with
the runners in their glazed hats flashing the light of their lanterns
over their rough, bearded, weather-blackened faces. They had assented
very easily to this mustering and examination, for the man was wanted
for murder, and the very name will subdue the roughest, and silence
those curses of the forecastle with which the two Bow Street fellows
were the sort of people to have been handsomely assailed by this crew,
had they bothered the men with a smaller errand.

They searched the cabins, and, lastly, they entered the little
forecastle in which no man had as yet slept. A hole of a seabedroom was
this. You could scarcely stand upright in it. The two men descended the
short ladder, and Captain Glew stood atop waiting. The bullies of Bow
Street swung their lamps carefully. Suddenly one of them, delivering a
low gasp, said: 'Catch hold of this light, Tom.' He dropped on his
knees, and grabbed at a leg, the foot of which dimly showed under one of
the bunks. He hauled with a will, and out came the body of a man or boy,
shrieking like a woman in a fit.

'Don't 'urt me! for God's sake, don't 'urt me, gemmen! I meant no 'arm.
It was all along of Bill.'

'Is that a woman you've got down there?' sung out Captain Glew.

'Nothing else, by the holy poker!' answered one of the officers, in a
voice that trembled with the temper of disappointment.

'Yes, I'm a girl, gemmen. It was all along of Bill. Put me ashore, and I
promise never to offend again,' cried the unfortunate little woman,
sobbing grievously.

Yet, bedraggled as she was, of a raw, uncouth, mixed look, with her
trousers and sailor's jacket, and plentiful black hair loosened by
dragging, she showed as a saucy, handsome wench, and the spirit of the
devil was in her black eyes when she looked at the Bow Street men.

They all went on deck.

'Thunder of heaven!' cried Mr. Vanderholt, in a voice of horror. 'The
murderer is on board our ship! They have got him. So,' he cried in a
voice deep with resolution, 'our voyage ends. To-morrow we return home.'

'It's a woman, sir,' said Captain Glew.

'A woman!' shouted Mr. Vanderholt. He quitted his daughter, and strode
straight up to the group as they came along, and, putting his face close
into the woman's, he exclaimed: 'What are you doing aboard my vessel?'

'It's all along of Bill!' cried the girl. 'I never meant no 'arm, and I
can't tell yer what I done it for.'

'Father,' said Miss Vanderholt, approaching the group, and taking a view
of the girl by the sheen that floated round about the lighted skylight,
'don't you think it's just possible that this person who's been in
hiding for some time may be a little bit hungry and thirsty? Ask her
into the cabin. She will tell us her story.'

'Oh, lady, you is kind!' exclaimed the girl, extending both hands
towards Miss Violet, and again beginning to cry bitterly.

'This way, then,' said Mr. Vanderholt.

The Bow Street gentlemen descended with the rest. Whether they imagined
a scent of crime in this female stowaway, or whether they distinguished
a scent of drink in the cabin atmosphere, cannot, after all these years,
be settled with any degree of certainty. They seated themselves, and Mr.
Vanderholt offered them drink, and they drank, eyeing the girl with very
knowing looks, whilst she told her story in a high, strained voice.

'What are ye?' began Captain Glew.

'I'm barmaid at the One Bell in Cable Street, nigh the London Docks.'

Here she paused, and looked at Miss Violet. The blood was red in her
cheeks, and her eyes were wild and wet with tears. Her aspect, in the
clear light of the lamp, was extraordinary. She seemed half a gipsy. Her
beauty was coarse and masculine; her hair, black as streaming ink, lay
upon her back in a wonderful quantity.

'It was all along of Bill,' she went on.

'Who's this bloomed Bill you've been talking about since you was lugged
out of it?' said one of the officers.

'The young man I keeps company with,' she answered. 'We fell out because
of a sailor man that's aboard this vessel. Fred Maul his name is, and it
'ud have been good for me this blessed night had they strangled him in
the hour of his coming into this blistered world. Why,' she cried,
turning upon Miss Violet, who shrank a little from the gathering
ferocity of the woman, 'this beast of a Maul comes and 'angs about me,
and Bill, he falls jealous. Bill and me 'ad a row over this 'ere Maul.
He says to me: "I know the ship he's signed for; yer'd better foller
him." "By God!" cries I, mad with feeling that _he_ oughtn't to have
said it, "say that again, and I'll do it." He says it again.' Here the
unfortunate woman raised her voice till the little cabin rang; but
though the gentlemen of Bow Street shouted, and though Captain Glew and
Mr. Vanderholt sought, with a hundred gestures, to subdue her voice,
nothing could soften the hysteric, piercing note. 'He s'ys it ag'in, I
s'y, and, going away, the unfeeling devil comes back arter ten minutes,
and chucks a bundle on to the counter, and says, with a low sneer:
"There's your kit. Now go and foller Bill."'

'And so here y'are,' said one of the officers. 'A tidy lot, I allow, for
a select hevening party. When I saw her boot, fired if I didn't think it
was a man.'

The girl bit upon a sandwich, and glared fiercely at the officers while
she chewed. Miss Violet, with the merciful heart of her sex, fetched
some hairpins from her cabin, and gave them to the girl, who, with a
curtsey, and a smile of shame and thanks, turned to a strip of mirror
and swiftly coiled her hair upon her head.

'Go and fetch the young lady's hat,' said Mr. Vanderholt to the steward.

The Bow Street gentlemen, having drunk their glasses of cold brandy and
water, got up, saying they must be off.

'Yer'll put me ashore, won't yer?' asked the girl.

'Ay, they'll put you ashore,' said Mr. Vanderholt, slipping a sovereign
into the hand of one of them; 'and here's for a knot of gay ribbons for
you, miss,' said he, laughing at the figure of the woman, 'when you're
clear of this spree, and in petticoats again.'

She thrust the sovereign into her breeches pocket, muttering 'Thank you,
sir,' whilst she scowled at the two officers.

'Come along, miss, if you're coming; for we're off,' said one of the
men.

The young woman followed them, gazing about her as she went as though
she had only just discovered that she was in a very richly-furnished
cabin, and in the presence of a gentleman and a very finely-dressed,
handsome young lady. She wore an expression that was like asking 'Where
am I? How did I get here? What's it about?' And then, pausing an instant
at the foot of the companion-steps, to look at Miss Violet, and say, 'It
was all along of Bill; but he'll get it 'ot when I meet him,' she went
up the ladder in the wake of Captain Glew.

'Let them get clear of the schooner,' said Mr. Vanderholt, casting
himself upon a sofa. 'They're not what you would call pickings from the
sweetest of the social orders.'

'What did she intend?'

'She couldn't have told you. When women of that sort go mad with
jealousy, "stand by," as Jack says. She'd have had Maul's life, perhaps,
before we were out of the Channel.'

He was interrupted by a great commotion on deck--loud cries of men,
mingled with the yells of a woman.

'Stop here, Violet!' cried Mr. Vanderholt; and he rushed up the steps.

The deck-house door was open. The light of the lantern streamed freely
into the air, and illuminated a considerable area of plank, in the midst
of which a fight was apparently going on, for it was thence the uproar
proceeded. Mr. Vanderholt ran forward, and saw the girl tearing with
outstretched claws at one of the men as though she would rend him in
pieces. His trouble was to get away. He butted and dodged behind his
elbow, shouting: 'S'elp me Bob, Polly, it worn't no fault o' mine'! And
then she would shriek out: 'Yer drove me to it! It was along o' you, and
not Bill, you sink----' And here she would nearly tear his ear off; and
then she got at his hair, whilst the man, never offering to hit her,
danced in the light, shouting with pain, and swearing that he had had
nothing to do with it.

'Stop it!' roared Captain Glew. 'Is a gentleman's yacht to be disgraced
by a stowaway spitfire? Help her into the boat, Mr. Officers;' and
plunging, they bore the girl out of her entangled embrace of Maul, and
in a few minutes they were over the side, and gone.

The crew followed Maul into the deck-house, and a grunt of laughter went
along with them.

'What have you been a-doing to her?' says one.

'Where's my 'at?' said Maul.

'What do it feel like, Frederick?' sung out a sailor named Legg. 'As if
you was married?'

'Never mind _her_. I'm a-thinking of what I've left behind me, my joys,'
exclaimed a seaman.

'I'm durned mighty glad I sold off all my furniture,' said the
deep-throated Jack who had on an early occasion made a statement on this
subject.

Father and daughter sat in the cabin till half-past ten. Miss Violet was
then sleepy, and went to bed. When she left her berth in the morning the
schooner was under weigh, storming through Sea Reach, with half a gale
of wind astern of her, and a thunderstorm of hell's own hue lancing the
land beyond Canvey Island with lightning that fell in showers of fiery
bayonets. It was a majestic, sublime, terrible storm. The girl, standing
in the companion-way, was fascinated. The sun peeped at a corner of this
purple-black bank of vapour, off which rags of tempest, gilded by his
radiance, were blowing sheer across the wind, whilst for miles the edge
of the electric mass was a line of glorious light. It was as though a
bed of fire lay on top, with the molten stuff darting in flames through
the swollen belly; and the thunder roared in rattling broadsides.

The noble, dangerous scene of sky, however, was soon far astern; and the
schooner sped on, carving out a grass-green comber with her chisel-like
stem, and leaving the tail of a comet blowing in froth behind her. And
now did nothing noticeable happen for some days. They met with heavy
weather in the Channel. The wind darkened with snow, and the _Mowbray_,
under small canvas, ratched, panting over the crazy, choppy sea behind
the Goodwins for a board that should open her a free run down the
English coast. Miss Violet was rather sea-sick. Strange to say, her
father was rather sea-sick, too.

'This motion,' he growled to Captain Glew, whilst he grasped a decanter
of brandy by the neck, 'is not an honest heave. I am a good sailor in
seas where the head and the stomach swing together, but when the stomach
leaps at the head, and the head darts back from the stomach, leaving a
sensation of brains in one's very toes, I give up.'

And so saying, he swallowed a glass of brandy, and lay down.

It was now that Miss Vi felt the want of a maid, or, at all events, of a
stewardess to attend upon her. But Vanderholt had been dogged and Dutch
in this matter when they had talked about the voyage at home. He would
have no women, he said; they would be going forward among the men, and
breeding trouble. Was it not good for Violet that she should learn to
help herself? Could not she do her own hair? Then let her cut it off; it
would be growing whilst they were away. These trifles illustrated Mr.
Vanderholt's eccentricities as a rich man, and Violet's submissiveness
as an only daughter.

However, the fine girl was not so ill but that she could manage for
herself. Her nausea had left her, whilst her father still lay grunting,
incapable of smoking, and gray as his beard. She waited upon him, and
stood upright with ease upon a bounding deck by his side, holding on to
nothing but her own hands. He rolled a languid eye of admiration over
her.

'I did not bargain for this,' said he, 'or, as God is my witness, we
would have joined the hooker at Plymouth.'

'Where are we now?'

'In the Chops, where the Channel always shows its teeth,' answered Mr.
Vanderholt, with an ashy grin of nausea.

Vanderholt need not have been ashamed. Nelson, whilst rolling in the
Downs, wrote with pathetic irritability to his Emma of his incessant
sickness. A man has stepped ashore after a voyage to Australia. Would
not you suppose him seasoned? Yet, on crossing the Channel in one of the
small steamers, he was more violently sick than the most prostrate of
the Frenchmen who lay in cloaks, with tureens by their sides, helpless
about the decks.

'There is the Bay of Biscay to come,' said Miss Violet, with a lurking
hope that, if her father's sickness continued, he would order Captain
Glew to steer for home again.

'Yes, it is not far off, and I hope it may blow a hurricane when we get
there, for then I shall be all right. I like a tall sea. Man and boy, I
never could stand these rugged little Channel tumblers. Call for the
steward, my dear. I want some tea.'

The old gentleman was not very accurate in his description of the state
of the ocean, nevertheless. A large and liberal sea was running
steadfast, in charging hills of green, which crumbled into foam. The
torn scud flew fast. Every hollow was the wide and seething valley of
Atlantic waters; and as the hull of the schooner sank into the trough,
you might catch in the noise of expiring spray, in the explosion of
coloured bubbles, winking like stars in beds of froth, a sound of
martial music.

The _Mowbray_ was making splendid weather of it. The wind was right
abeam. She took the seas in steady lifts and falls. Regularly as the
beat of a pulse, the hull would disappear. She seemed a foundered craft,
till, in a minute, up she'd soar, with marble-hard breasts of canvas,
leaping like some creation or possession of the deep to the height of a
surge, bursting the flickering green peak into smoke, which blew away in
rainbows whenever the sun rolled out of some solemn-sailing cloud under
which the scud was scattering like smoke.

It was half-past eleven o'clock in the morning. Captain Glew, coming
below for his sextant, looked in on Mr. Vanderholt, and exchanged a few
sentences with him touching affairs aboard. The schooner had been
liberally provisioned with fresh meat and loaves of bread for the
forecastle use, and, so far, the men had sat down to a fresh mess every
day. But carcasses and quarters, ribs and heads, and rumps must, unless
they are pickled, soon take a character to call 'avast,' even to a
sailor's appetite. Indeed, all the fresh meat was gone. It had been
eaten up.

It was the dinner-hour aboard the _Mowbray_--at sea, before the mast,
everybody used to sit down and eat his dinner by the sun, at the same
time, no matter in what ocean he floated--and three or four men were
gathered about the door of the little caboose, waiting to carry the kids
into the deck-house.

A hairy, tattooed lump of a man, named Simon Toole, after snuffling a
bit, exclaimed:

'If it's to be pay-soup, maties, at the rate of this smell, then I'll
tell yer a story it reminds me of. Micky M'Carthy was able seaman on
board a brigantine. She foundered in mid-ocean. They'd just time to
chuck something to eat and drink into her, and there they was, afloat
under a broiling sun. By-'n-by, wan of thim, feeling thirsty, goes for a
drink, and what d'ye think they found they had shipped for water, which
was all the drink, by gob, they had? Casther-oil, bullies! It was
Micky's doing. He had mustook breakers of oil for breakers of water, and
then, all hands feeling thirsty, they nearly kilt him.'

'Lads,' said a man named Dabb, 'now there's no fresh beef left, I'm
a-going to feel hungry.'

'That's nater,' exclaimed Toole; 'knock, and there ain't no room. It's
always t'other ways about in this world. What couldn't I sit down and
ate? Everything, bedad, but the stuff they're going to give me.'

'The capt'n looks plump,' said Dabb darkly, looking aft at Captain Glew,
who stood with a sextant upon the quarter. 'He's fed so well that I'm
gorged if he's left any room for a smile in his face.'

'I knew a skipper,' said the cook, lounging half out of the galley-door,
and plunging into the conversation a little irrelevantly, 'who used to
talk to his ship and his masts as if they was alive. He'd look up at his
maintaws'l, and say: "D'ye think you could stand it if I shook a single
reef out of yer? Why, then, all right"; and then he'd bawl out the order
to the men. Next he'd step back right aft, paying no heed to the fellow
at the wheel, and looking aloft, would say to his mizzen taws'l, "I
think a reef can come out of you, too. Does the mast feel equal to the
strain, d'ye think? Why, then, my lads, jump aloft, and shake a reef
out of the mizzen taws'l." He was a queer dawg,' continued the
cook--'fat as a slug, and as long in seeing a thing as a balloon's in
falling.'

Seeing the captain looking, he slunk back to his coppers.

Presently the pea-soup and pork were ready, the kids were filled, and
the hands went to dinner. They sat on sea-chests, the kids were upon the
deck, and the sailors plunged their sheath-knives into the pale, fat
lumps of meat, and took what they wanted, a few using tin dishes, and
some ship's biscuit, as trenchers.

'Blast me!' after a grim silence, presently exclaims James Jones, who
had shipped as boatswain and carpenter, 'if I don't think the Dutchman
has sneaked us aboard on the cheap. This here's no food for a man.'

He held aloft a morsel of pork, and squinted up at it.

'Yer taste'll grow,' said a sailor, with a sullen laugh. 'The flavour of
roast beef ain't out of your mouth yet, Jim.'

'He'll be a mean cuss,' said the boatswain, continuing to squint
dangerously at the piece of pork, 'if it's to be no better than this.'

'Here's the yarn of the meanest thing that ever was read of in books,'
said a seaman named Mike Scott. 'A man once said to me: "When I was a
boy, I stood at my father's gate, with a kitten on my shoulder. A man on
horseback stops and says: 'I likes to see little boys kind to animals.
Here's a farden for ye, sonny.'" And with that he gives him a button,
and then rides off. Who was it, d'ye think? Why, the Dook o'
Vellington.'

'Not a vord agin the Dook. He's my godfather,' said a man.

'I'm a-going to complain of this meat,' said the boatswain, starting up.

Retaining the piece on the end of his knife, he stepped out of the
house, and walked aft.

Captain Glew saw him coming, yet did not look towards him. On the
contrary, he began to take sights. Yet, as though he carried a slip of
looking-glass in the side of his nose, he saw the man approaching, and
he did not want to see that the boatswain held, on a level with his
face, a piece of meat at the end of his knife, to guess that his errand
was thunder-charged with the old-fashioned forecastle growl. The
captain's face was incapable of any play of expression. It was hard
beyond the holding of any further meaning the man's spirit or heart
could put into it. But his eyes could look all the abominations of a
tyrannical soul; and when he perceived the boatswain approaching, his
right eye gazed with a devilish malice at the sun through the little
telescope attached to his sextant.

Many minutes passed before he heeded the man, who had drawn close and
stood waiting to be noticed. A huddle of heads, all looking in one
direction, with but one leg exposed, as though the crew had been changed
into one of those many-headed giants you read of in fairy tales,
embellished the deck-house door. The red-faced mate stood near the helm.
Presently, the captain, with his eye still gummed to his sextant, seemed
to see the man.

'What d'yer want, Jones?'

'I'd like yer to taste this piece of meat, sir. It isn't fit food for
men.'

Captain Glew slowly let his sextant sink from his eye, and exclaimed:

'Jones, I shipped you for a respectable, quiet sailor. This is a
gentleman's yacht. Don't disturb our quiet by anything in the South
Spainer or Cape Horn way.'

'Yacht or no yacht, cap'n, this is strong meat, killed diseased; the
sorter stuff, if consumed, to lay the whole ship's company low with the
sickness the beast died of. Smell of it.'

He offered the knife, with the pork on it, to the captain.

'The fault is in the cooking,' said the captain; 'it always is; it
always will be. Go and growl to Allan.'

'Is the rest of the pork to be like this?' said Jones, taking the dollop
off the point of his knife, and seeming to weigh it in the palm of his
gigantic, tar-stained hand.

'Go forward and finish your dinner, Jones, and leave me to get an
observation,' said Captain Glew, with a very forbidding glance.

He applied his sextant once more to his eye, walking a little way aft.

The boatswain stood looking from him to the piece of pork, and from the
piece of pork to him; then saying, 'There goes my dinner,' he jerked the
pale, rather bluish lump over the side, and rolled forward.




CHAPTER IV.

CAPTAIN MARY LIND.


Next day they broached a cask of beef for the forecastle. The meat
proved fairly sweet, and that and a kidful of currant-dumplings kept the
men quiet. But on the following day the bad pork was served out again.
Captain Glew refused to hear the boatswain on the subject, and those of
the men who could not swallow the meat made shift for a meal with
pea-soup and ship's biscuit.

Not a word of this trouble, which Captain Glew must have known was
charged with one of the deadliest of all ocean menaces, reached Mr.
Vanderholt.

'I'll not have him worried,' said Glew to the mate. 'If you sent them a
Mansion House tuck-out, the fiends would growl, tell you it wasn't
Galapagos turtle, and that they'd hooked better salmon out of cans. I'm
responsible for the stores. I knew what I was about when I ordered them.
Surely you know Humph Lyons, the ships' chandler in Dock Street,
Limehouse? He's shipped for me before, and he's likewise shipped for my
owners, and I've never heard a murmur against him.'

'Was that the Lyons an action was brought against for selling condemned
Admiralty stores as good food for merchant sailors?' said Mr. Tweed,
with a grin.

'It was his brother,' said Captain Glew. 'A man can't be responsible for
his relations.'

'As to relations,' said Mr. Tweed, 'a man may try his darned hardest to
be all that's right, and in conformity with the law and piety, and still
find himself adrift at the end. I remember a skipper saying to me: "It's
all very well to say, 'Honour thy father and thy mother,' but I knew a
man who all his life did his fired best to honour his father, and when
his mother lay dying she told him, with the tears running over her
cheeks, that the man he'd been a-honouring all his life had never been
his father at all!"'

Here the groggy little man set up so loud a laugh that Captain Glew
walked away, and the conversation came to an end.

The days passed. The _Mowbray_ broke the seas of the Bay clothed to her
royal yard. Blue sky was over her, and sunshine bright as that of the
English June lighted up the rolling ocean. By this time Mr. Vanderholt
was perfectly recovered, and had ceased to apologize to Captain Glew for
being sea-sick. He smoked his long pipe. He stalked the deck arm-in-arm
with his daughter. He repeatedly asked her and Captain Glew how they
thought he was looking; and Captain Glew swore that in all his life he
had never seen any gentleman pick up so surprisingly fast.

'I'm quite sure,' the captain said, 'Miss Vanderholt will agree with me,
sir, when I say that you're looking ten years younger this same day than
at the hour of your starting.'

Miss Violet smiled, and Vanderholt stroked his beard, and grinned till
his eyes faded into little wrinkles.

One fine hot morning, when the _Mowbray_ was far to the southward of the
Madeira parallels, Mr. Vanderholt and his daughter came on deck from the
breakfast-table, and seated themselves under the shelter of a short
awning. The young lady held a novel. Mr. Vanderholt smoked his immense
and richly-coloured pipe. Captain Glew passed them in short to-and-fro
look-out excursions; and forward the little ship carried a busy face,
with seamen at work on the hundred jobs which, fair or foul, a vessel
exacts from her crew at sea. A soft wind blew. The sky was capacious
with the clarity of the horizon, and wondrous lofty with light cloud,
resembling froth that dries in curls upon a beach.

A ship was in sight on the starboard quarter, going away north-west,
under square yards. Her spires trembled in the moist, rich distance, as
though they were rays of starlight, twisting, burning, dying. She had
been too far off to signal, nor did Mr. Vanderholt seem particularly
anxious that the safety and whereabouts of his little ship should be
reported at home.

'Who is troubling his head about us, do you think?' he had said to his
daughter on one occasion when this question of reporting had arisen
between him and Glew. 'I am not insured. No man in the city is concerned
for me. And of our friends, how many are thinking of us?'

And he held up two fingers with a satirical smile, as though he should
say, 'D'ye think two are thinking of us?'

'If George returns before we do,' Miss Vi had said in reply, 'I should
like him to know that all was well with us down to the date on which we
were last heard of.'

'We'll signal steam,' had been old Vanderholt's answer. 'Anything blown
along by canvas will not arrive at home very much earlier than we
shall.'

Now, on this morning--this fine hot morning--they sat together in very
comfortable deck-chairs, one trying to read a novel, the other finding
his tobacco delicious in the open air. Presently, directing her eyes at
some men who sat at work stitching upon a sail near the galley, Miss
Vanderholt said:

'How could any man be a sailor! How could you have survived such a
horrible life! See how hard those men are kept at work all day; and at
night they have to watch, wet or dry, for four hours at a time.'

'Ay; and the colder it is, and the damper it is, and the more abominable
in a general way the whole precious weather is, the harder they have to
watch,' answered Vanderholt.

'Have sailors no amusements?' inquired his daughter.

'How do sailors amuse themselves, Glew?' called Mr. Vanderholt.

And the man, arresting his look-out walk, stood up before father and
daughter.

'By growling, sir,' answered Glew.

Miss Vanderholt did not like the expression that entered Captain Glew's
eyes when he made that answer.

'A happy, well-disciplined crew are the jolliest company of men in the
world,' said Mr. Vanderholt. 'They have plenty to eat, no rent to pay,
dollars for the girls at the end of the voyage, and they behold the
wonders of the world at the cost of the ship-owner--poor fellow! For
diversions, think--they dance in the dog-watch, they sing songs and tell
stories, they play at cards, they fight----'

'A little, sir,' said Captain Glew.

'We made a sport of fighting in our time,' said Vanderholt. 'We'd take
two men, and nail them face to face on a sea-chest, with long spikes
driven through the stern of their trousers. It was good sport.'

He opened his mouth to let out a cloud, smiling at some forecastle
recollections, which perhaps caused him to regret that his daughter was
present, for he found Glew a good listener.

'Sailors take some pleasure in cards,' said Captain Glew. 'I remember,
when I was second-mate of a ship, having occasion to go forward. It was
night, a dead calm; a frightful thunderstorm was about us; the lightning
was hissing like snakes all over everything that was metal aloft, and
every crash of thunder was like the splitting of the heavens by God's
own hand in wrath. I took a peep down the forecastle, and in the midst
of this tremendous commotion, which was fit to subdue the heart of the
stoutest, sat four sailors at a chest, playing at cards, a lighted
candle in a bottle in the midst of them, all so intent on the game that
they heard and saw nothing.'

'Sail-ho!' at this moment sang out a fellow aloft, on the little
top-gallant yard.

'Where away?' shouted Glew, with the sharp of his hand to his mouth.

'Right ahead, sir!' cried down the seaman, in a sort of chant.

'If she's going to England you shall make our number, Glew--for George's
sake,' said Mr. Vanderholt, looking at his daughter.

Just then the boatswain hailed the sailor on the top-gallant yard, and
gave him some directions.

'That Jones is a fine-looking man,' said Mr. Vanderholt; 'such as he
should never want a ship. What's his nation?'

'London, sir.'

'A mighty nation!' exclaimed Miss Violet.

'Which does not believe in a God,' said Vanderholt, 'though it worships
a Madonna called Our Lady of Threadneedle Street.'

'There's many a pilgrim always bound to that shrine,' said Captain Glew,
trying to smile.

'I am of Dutch extraction,' continued Mr. Vanderholt; 'but never dropped
the letter H, nor found the V's and W's difficult. I have
out-generationed that trouble of the foreigner. But why is it that the
Cockney should drop his H? You speak of London. Think of the number of
H's which are dropped in it every day!'

'George once made a pun,' exclaimed Miss Vanderholt. 'We were talking of
a certain young lady, and I said: "Do you observe that she drops her
H's?" "Her sister does worse," he answered. "Address her and she drops
her eyes."'

Captain Glew again tried to smile. Mr. Vanderholt, expelling a great
cloud of smoke, burst in:

'Yes; and I'll tell you what those girls' father once said to me at an
evening party. He took me aside, and said: "Did you ever 'ear of that
fine riddle in rhyme supposed to have been written by Lord Byron,
though it's attributed to a lady? I'll tell it you," and my friend, with
a grave face, began:


     '"'Twas whispered in 'eaven; 'twas muttered in 'ell'"--


and so he went on to the end. "Well," says he, "what is it?" "I give it
up," says I. "The letter H," says he.'

'Did you ever see a funeral at sea, father?' inquired Miss Vanderholt,
watching the ship ahead, that was growing larger and whiter.

'Scores, my blessing; much too many. We shipped a heavy cargo at Bombay,
and amongst it was cholera. I can still hear, in that dead calm of
twelve days, the recurrent, sullen plunge of the shotted corpse.'

'The worst of being buried is, that you don't know what they're saying
about you,' said Captain Glew. 'That's true, whether ashore or whether
at sea. As the corpse goes along in the car, it might like to know what
sort of a following it had, how the people who'd been thought friends
had turned out. Yet, I dare say,' he went on, 'that if a man could get
up and listen a bit, and take a look round, he'd be glad to sneak
back.'

'Yes; if he had to hear his will read in a room full of relations,' said
Miss Violet.

'I have often thought this,' said Mr. Vanderholt: 'that a man who is a
genius and famous should provide by his will for a quiet funeral; for,
by doing so, he guards against the risk of neglect.'

This was a touch above Glew. Mr. Vanderholt rose, and went to the rail
to knock out the ashes of his pipe into the sea. Miss Violet began to
read, and the captain fell to walking the deck.

The ship ahead grew rapidly. It was first like the half of the crescent
moon leaning and shining, then it swelled into cotton-white canvas and a
green hull. But the sun ate up the wind at noon. The vessels were then
two miles apart, and it was not until about three in the afternoon that
they were wafted by cat's-paws within speaking distance. She was a
little barque, dingy with long travel. Her copper was green. Her
figure-head was a romantic imagination. It represented a nymph, with her
black hair fairly concealing her shape, extending her arms in a posture
of ecstasy at a large gilt star that was fixed within a foot or two of
her hands. Her canvas shone like satin, and at her mizzen-peak end
languidly swung the Stripes and Stars, a very large flag, looking
brand-new. A number of men, some of them coloured, lay over the
forecastle-rail, indolently watching the _Mowbray_. The barque had a
little poop, and upon it, with one foot resting on a hen-coop and one
hand grasping a backstay, stood the most extraordinary figure Mr.
Vanderholt had ever beheld.

It resembled a man dressed in what, in former ages, were known as
petticoat-breeches. Their plenty made them look like a frock. Inspecting
this figure through a binocular glass, Mr. Vanderholt perceived that the
rest of its garb consisted of a white shirt, a silk handkerchief, tied
in a sailor's knot under a wide turned-down collar, a braided jacket,
blue, and a cap with a naval peak, much after the pattern that is worn
by yachting men.

A short, square man stood at the wheel, that blazed in a brass circle to
the sun, and beside him stood another man, remarkable for nothing but a
long goatlike beard, and a blue cap, tasselled, pointed, and
overhanging, such as mutinous smacksmen wear in Italian opera.

'A queer ship's company!' exclaimed Mr. Vanderholt to Glew. 'In all your
going a-fishing did you ever see the like of such a sailor-man as that
chap yonder in the trousers?'

Captain Glew's reply was arrested by a hail from the little barque.

'Ho!' shrilled the strange figure in breeches. 'The schooner ahoy! What
schooner are you?'

'The _Mowbray_, of London, on a cruise. What ship are you?'

'The _Wife's Hope_, from Calcutta to New York! Eighty days out! Jute and
linseed! We're short of sugar: can you loan me some?'

All this was delivered in the voice of a bantam-cock, delirious with
continuous triumphant clarioning.

'The _Wife's Hope_,' said Mr. Vanderholt, turning to his daughter.
'Here's some Yankee notion.'

'If that figure's not a woman,' answered Violet, 'it does not speak
with the voice of a man.'

After a brief consultation with Mr. Vanderholt, Captain Glew shouted:

'I think we can let you have some sugar--a cask of moist, and some lump,
to help you along to the next ship. We'll carry it aboard for you.'

The figure in breeches flourished its hand in a gesture of delight, and
then began to walk the short poop with superior stately strides,
constantly directing glances at the yacht. The _Mowbray_ carried three
good boats, and the boat amidships was the long-boat; this was promptly
got over the side. They broke out a cask of moist sugar and a case of
lump; and a crew having entered her, Mr. and Miss Vanderholt were
steered by Mr. Tweed to the _Wife's Hope_ over the glazed heave of the
deep-blue afternoon swell.

Very hot it was. The sunshine tingled in the water, and the trembling
fire rose roasting to the face.

'Do you think we shall be welcome, father?' said Miss Vanderholt, a
little nervously.

'We are here to see the wonders of the deep,' answered Mr. Vanderholt,
'whether they welcome us or not; and yonder figure seems to me to be one
of the greatest wonders in the world.'

'It is a woman, sir,' said Mr. Tweed.

'A female ship-master,' exclaimed Mr. Vanderholt. 'The _Wife's Hope_! It
should be the _Husband's Despair_.'

Miss Violet was gazing at the receding shape of the _Mowbray_. The
schooner lightly leaned with the swell, darting glances of flame as she
swayed. Tender, blue fingers of shadow, like an outstretched hand in
front of the sun, overran her sails, and the swing of her canvas was a
miracle of milk-white light and violet shade against the hot liquid blue
of the afternoon sky.

'A vessel like that is like a horse,' said Violet: 'you want to pat her
side, to whisper encouraging words to her, to thank her for the noble,
sweeping pace she has carried you at. How little she looks, and how
lonely!'

They were fast approaching the barque. The petticoat-trousered figure,
seeing that company was coming, had ordered a ladder to be thrown over
the side, and she--for a woman it was--stood in the open gangway to
receive the visitors.

'Have you brought what we asked you for?' she cried, the strain in her
voice lifting it to a shriek.

Tweed answered with one of those tumbling gesticulations--a peculiar
drunken, rounding fall of the arm and dropping of the head--which with
sailors stand for 'yes.'

'Jump aloft, a hand,' screamed the lady skipper, 'and make fast a whip
to the yard-arm! I'll want that sugar carefully hoisted!'

The boat drove alongside, and Mr. and Miss Vanderholt ascended the short
ladder. Now that they stood close, they found that by no possibility
could her garb make a man of the captain, with her large fine eyes and
delicate features, though sunburnt to deformity. She was a tall woman,
with a lofty, commanding air, which was not to be neutralized by
anything diverting in the suggestions of her apparel. She looked hard at
Miss Violet, and ran her eyes over her dress; her sex spoke in that,
spite of her cropped head and abundant breeks.

'I have brought a cask of moist sugar, and a case of broken lump,' said
Mr. Vanderholt, lifting his hat; 'and, madam, if you are in command of
this vessel, it gives me a very singular satisfaction to make your
acquaintance.'

'Don't call me "madam," I beg, sir!' exclaimed the other, showing a
white set of teeth in a cordial smile, full of spirit. 'I am Captain
Lind.'

'Captain Lind, then,' said Mr. Vanderholt, again lifting his hat, whilst
his eyes disappeared in a grin full of wrinkles.

'You are the owner of that yacht, I reckon?' said Captain Lind; and Miss
Vanderholt noticed the American accent in the skipper's speech.

'Ay, captain, that's my yacht, and this is my daughter,' answered
Vanderholt, continuing to grin with all his might, whilst he looked
first at Captain Lind, and then aloft, and then along the decks.

'What do I owe you for that sugar?' said Captain Lind.

'Our visit fully discharges your obligations, captain. There is enough,
maybe, to keep you sweet till you get more.'

'Well, I thank you,' said the lady skipper; 'and when I have seen that
cask safely inboards, we'll go into the cabin and drink a cup of tea.'

Mr. Vanderholt pulled out his watch, then, hailing Glew, said that he
and Miss Vanderholt would remain another half-hour on board the barque.

'Don't let the vessels slide far apart, Glew!' he roared. 'Tweed, whilst
we're below keep a bright look-out on the weather.'

The mate of the _Mowbray_ touched his cap.

Miss Vanderholt stared with amazement at Captain Lind. A woman in charge
of a ship! A woman qualified to handle the complicated machinery of the
gear and sails of a barque of no mean tonnage, as tonnage then went! Did
the men obey her? Wasn't she afraid of her sailors? And Miss Violet
turned to inspect the seamen who were getting the sugar aboard in the
gangway, whilst others lay on the rail lazily staring at the _Mowbray_
from the forecastle-head. A rough lot they looked--rougher even than the
_Mowbray's_ crew, by virtue, no doubt, of their apparel, which was
showing very much like the end of a long voyage. They carried
sheath-knives on their hips, straw hats or Scotch caps on their heads;
their naked breasts disclosed the wool upon them through rents in the
flying wide dungaree shirt. And a woman had command of these fellows,
had held them obedient, and brought them and the ship in safety to that
part of the ocean in which the _Mowbray_ had encountered them! Who had
ever heard of such a thing? It was a fact worth going to sea to realize.
'How George will laugh and doubt when I tell him!' Miss Vanderholt
thought, as she looked with wonder, deepening ever, at the amazing
figure built up of petticoat-trousers and blue jacket, very plentifully
braided.

When the sugar was on board, Captain Lind, calling to the man in the
opera-cap, said:

'See that cask safely stowed. This is a chance that mightn't happen
again 'twixt here and New York; and I tell you, mister,' said she,
turning to Mr. Vanderholt, 'that I have missed the sugar in my cup of
tea. I have a sweet tooth. Who is that gent?' she continued, looking at
Mr. Tweed.

'He is the mate of my schooner,' answered Mr. Vanderholt.

'Then, see here, Mr. Prunes,' she cried, with a womanly yell that
broadened Tweed's mouth from ear to ear; 'whilst we're at tea below,
you'll see that this gentleman has some refreshment. He can ask for what
he likes, and if we've got it, he can have it. Send the boy aft, Mr.
Prunes.'

All this was addressed to the tasselled seaman who was apparently the
mate of the ship.

Captain Lind then conducted Mr. Vanderholt and his daughter below into
the cabin--a little interior, rude in comparison with the _Mowbray's_
cabin, yet comfortable and breezy with the panting of the heel of a
windsail, as the swing of the barque swelled the mouth of the tube
aloft. There were two little cabins aft, and two little cabins forward,
and a little square table amidships. A small black boy arrived.

'Bring tea and biscuit, and tell Mr. Prunes to give you some lump sugar.
Don't eat none. Now spring! Hurrah!'

The lad, with a grin, leapt up the ladder, and the soles of his naked
feet glimmered like bars of yellow soap as he disappeared.

'I never heard before of a lady taking command of a ship,' said Mr.
Vanderholt.

Captain Lind pulled her cap off, and disclosed a head of rich brown
hair, cut short, and divided in the middle.

'Well,' she answered, stretching forth her hand as an invitation to Miss
Violet to seat herself, 'I'm not what is called in your country a lady.
I'm just a plain Amurrican woman. Of course you've never heard of such a
thing as a woman in charge of a ship. Are you an Englishman, sir?'

'Why, yes. My name is foreign--Vanderholt; but I am an Englishman.'

'Names don't signify now in the nationalities of folks,' exclaimed
Captain Lind, smiling at Miss Violet. 'Look at Amurrica. They're coming
fast, and when they settle they call themselves Amurricans. I can tell
you, sir, there are very few Amurricans in Amurrica. Who's the Amurrican
of to-day? Is he Mr. O'Brien, or is he Herr Von Dunks?'

'You asked me if I was an Englishman,' said Mr. Vanderholt, who was
greatly entertained by the singular figure this strange, fine, original
woman presented, as she sat at table, talking, and waiting for a cup of
tea.

'Yes; because if you're an Englishman you'll be a century astern of us
in Amurrica. We had to show you the road in nearly everything of
consequence. We gave you steam,' said the lady, coolly making way for
the negro boy, who just then arrived with tea--a japanned tray with an
old silver teapot upon it and a bowl of broken lump sugar.

The captain instantly put one of these lumps into her mouth, and
continued to talk and suck while she poured out the milkless tea, and
shoved a plate of white biscuit towards Miss Vanderholt.

'We gave you steam, sir, and electricity. We taught you ship-building;
for, until the Amurricans began to build, shapeliness and speed weren't
known to the world. We offer you the double topsail. You'll take twenty
years to consider it,' she said, leaning back in her chair with a sneer,
while she lifted her saucer and teacup and began to sip in a ladylike
way.

'I had no idea that we were so much in your debt,' said Mr. Vanderholt.
'But I tell you what: if you can induce the ladies of Great Britain to
study navigation, and take charge of ships, after the example you are
setting, there are a great many husbands who will be everlastingly
obliged to you for indicating a new source of income for the family, and
a sure chance for peace at home.'

'You don't reckon, p'r'aps, that we Amurricans gave you electricity?'
said the lady skipper, who seemed to find something suspicious in Mr.
Vanderholt's answer. 'Who flew the kite? Who brought fire from the skies
so that a man might know what to do with it?'

Vanderholt, holding his countenance behind his beard, respectfully
bowed and sipped at his cup.

'Are there other female captains like yourself in your country?' asked
Miss Vanderholt.

'Two,' she answered; 'there may be more. I'm a third, certainly. Stop
till I spin the yarn. My father was a sea-captain, and when I was a girl
carried me with him on several voyages. My husband was the master of a
ship, and I always went to sea with him, and could discharge his duties
as well as he, and sometimes better. He died, and left me a childless
widow. But I was not poor. What with my father, and my husband, and here
and there a legacy, I had got to own a few thousand dollars, which I
didn't quite know what to do with, for I couldn't get value enough out
of the money to live upon.'

Mr. Vanderholt pricked up his ears. Any reference to dollars and
interest engaged him. He listened, and forgot he was at sea.

'Till one day,' continued Captain Lind, 'being at New York--I wasn't
then living in that city--I happened to pick up the _New York Hatchet_,
and, after reading it a bit, came across this passage----'

She left the table and entered an after-berth. Mr. Vanderholt exchanged
looks with his daughter. Captain Lind returned, holding an old
newspaper. She seated herself, and, popping another lump of sugar into
her mouth, sucked, with a grave face, whilst she opened the paper. Then,
when the sugar was gone, she read aloud:

'"Mrs. Sarah Davis, of New York, has just brilliantly passed her
examination for a certificate as shipmaster and pilot, and, on receiving
her certificate, will, it is announced, take the command of the yacht
_Emerald_. This lady is, it is said, not the first of her sex who has
been in command of a vessel. Mrs. Mary Miller, of New Orleans, obtained
a master's certificate a few years ago, and is now captain of the
full-rigged merchant-ship _Saline_."

'When I read this, an idea came into my head, and I wasn't long in
making up my mind. There's no obligation in my country to take out a
master's certificate, any more than there is in yourn; but I was
determined to let 'm know I was fit to command a ship, and I presented
myself, and received some handsome compliments on a quality of all-round
knowledge sights in excess of what the average captain carries to the
ocean with him. This is my third voyage in the _Wife's Hope_.'

'Why the _Wife's Hope_?' exclaimed Mr. Vanderholt. 'You told me you were
a widow.'

'I named her the _Wife's Hope_,' answered Captain Lind, 'that she might
encourage married women cussed with drinking, loafing, idling, gambling,
worthless husbands, to direct their attention to a noble pursuit which
would carry them leagues clear of the troubles of home, put money in
their pockets, enable them to see the world and life, and help them,'
said she, putting another lump of sugar into her mouth, 'to acquire that
spirit of independence without which woman must always be meaner than
the plantation slave, and her case a gone sight more hopeless.'

This little speech was delivered with some dignity. Mr. Vanderholt was
impressed, and ran his eyes over her figure, and looked at her face with
a countenance of earnest respect. The sugar in her mouth did not impair
the stateliness of her manner and utterance.

'It would be more respectable and quiet than a divorce,' the captain
went on. 'You'd find no bad husband going to sea with his wife. The cuss
wouldn't have the liver for it.'

'The star of your figure-head,' said Miss Violet, 'I suppose, is the art
of seamanship, and the figure stretching her hand towards it symbolizes
woman rapturously greeting a new calling?'

'You've hit it down to the heels,' answered Captain Lind. 'It was my
notion. Quite a pome, ain't it? Were you pleased with it as you came
along?'

'We were delighted,' said Mr. Vanderholt. 'I said to my daughter, or, if
I did not say it, it was in my mind to speak it, "There is in that
barque a strong original genius." America should distinguish you,
captain.'

The captain bowed and smiled, and pushed the sugar-bowl away, that she
might not be tempted by its contents.

'Aren't you afraid of your sailors?' asked Miss Vanderholt.

'Afraid!' echoed the captain, bridling. 'What is there in sailors to be
afraid of? I have revolvers, and I know how to load and shoot, and I
should no more hesitate to send a ball through a mutinous seaman's nut
than put one of them lumps into my mouth. Don't you ever be afraid of
any man, miss. Why man bosses woman's jest a question of muscle. My crew
soon learnt the art of jumping to the music of my voice. I'm a little
shrill--don't reckon that I sink my sex in these clothes--and it may be
that sailors, being accustomed mainly to voices deep with drink and
hollow with vice, run the more nimbly for being called to in their
mother's tender notes. Will you have a cigar, sir?'

And, without awaiting Mr. Vanderholt's reply, she entered a cabin, and,
after a short absence, returned with a box of cigars, a couple of loaded
revolvers, and two long, dangerous knives.

'They need no better discipline whenever it comes to it,' said she,
helping herself to another lump of sugar. 'Take a cigar, sir?'

Meanwhile, on deck the mate of the _Mowbray_ conversed with the mate of
the _Wife's Hope_. Mr. Tweed had asked for no other refreshment than a
glass of rum and cold water. He stood sucking a pipe in the gangway,
ready for the appearance of Mr. Vanderholt and his daughter on deck, and
beside him was Mr. Prunes. The first dog-watch had begun; it had seemed,
however, to Mr. Tweed that it was all dog-watch with the crew of the
_Wife's Hope_; they only appeared to lounge a little more now that one
of them had struck eight times on the forecastle bell. The sun was still
high, but his splendour was deepening, and the lights which sparkled
about the decks of the barque and in her sides were rich; she floated in
the silence upon the dark-blue sea, with the whole lazy spirit of the
hour in the sleepy droop of her canvas and the indolent roll of her
hull.

'That's a fine schooner of yourn,' said Mr. Prunes to Mr. Tweed. 'It's
like having the Wight aboard to see her. Bound to the Equator, eh? And
what are you going to load there?'

He pulled his long goatee, with a laugh that struck a shudder through
his cap.

'This seems a pretty comfortable old barkey,' said Tweed, slowly looking
round him. 'Eighty days in finding your way here? Well, yer might have
done worse,' he added, with a look aloft. 'Doomed if I could keep my
face when I saw your skipper! It isn't that all that's becoming in a
female don't unite in her; it's her sex that makes me laugh.'

'I shall be blamed glad when the voyage is ended,' said Prunes, pulling
off his cap, and wiping his forehead with it; and now Mr. Tweed was not
a little astonished to remark that this seaman wore his hair in a net.
'I signed more for a lark than for a berth. They told me that the
_Wife's Hope_ was in want of a chief mate. She was in Calcutta, and I
hadn't been long out of 'orspital. I knew she was commanded by a woman,
and reckoned upon being treated as captain, in fact, though _she_ might
call herself the old man. Never was a chap more mistaken. If she hasn't
held her own as master of this vessel from the moment the pilot left us,
I'll swallow that pipe.'

'D'ye tell me she understands all about the manoeuvring of a ship?' said
Tweed.

'There's no man out of the Thames or Mersey who's got a trick above her,
blow high, blow low, bet all you're a-going to take up!' exclaimed
Prunes. 'See her put this craft about! It's yachting for nice
discernment. I never knew any master keep his weather-eye lifting as
this female do. She can smell what's coming along. She's reefed down
when the sky's been blue as it is, all hands have been growling and
laughing at her, and a quarter of an hour later the barque's been on her
beam-ends, and the sea just one yell o' froth!'

'Doomed if it 'ud be a believable thing, if it couldn't be seen,' said
Tweed. 'What made t'other mate leave the ship?'

'The same as'll make me glad to get to New York,' answered Mr. Prunes,
putting on his cap, and caressing the tassel, whilst his eyes met in a
squint of earnestness in the grog-flowered countenance of Mr. Tweed. He
paused, and seemed to reflect.

'What is it?' said Mr. Tweed.

Mr. Prunes began to nod at him, and then said in a low, confidential
voice, and a glance aft at the companion-hatch:

'She's in want of that sort of mate which ashore they calls a husband.'

'Ha!' said Mr. Tweed; 'and it drove the other chap out of a good berth?'

'Well, there was a many quarrels, I believe, afore they got to Calcutta.
Thinking that I might stand the better with her, seeing that I'm
middling young, and that the sea hasn't robbed me of all that I owe to
my mother, who was the handsomest woman in Shadwell, I kept dark about
my 'ome, and to this bloomed hour she don't know that I've got a wife
and three young uns awaiting my return in the little house I left 'em in
at Stepney.'

'I'd up and tell her the truth, if I were you,' said Tweed.

A gleam of cunning twinkled in Mr. Prunes's eyes.

'I've been pretty comfortable for eighty days,' said he, 'under an
error. There's no call now to correct it, seeing that the end of the
voyage isn't fur off.'

Whilst he spoke, Captain Lind and Mr. and Miss Vanderholt were coming on
deck. The captain sang out in a shrill, bantam-like voice, that caused
Prunes to glance somewhat sheepishly at Tweed:

'The lady and gentleman are going aboard their schooner! See their boat
all ready!'

Then, springing on to the rail with wonderful activity, she hailed the
_Mowbray_, and asked Captain Glew for his latitude and longitude. This
she received, and entered upon a piece of paper with a face of triumph.
Then, turning to Mr. Vanderholt, she exclaimed:

'See here, sir! A mile out, and the error may be his.'

'I am lost in admiration, I assure you,' said Vanderholt. 'I would
rather have met this barque than the _Flying Dutchman_. It will be far
more interesting to me to talk about than an apparition. It is really,
captain, an extraordinary departure! I wish you prosperity, I am sure,
ma'am.'

He bowed low. The captain of the _Wife's Hope_ then shook hands
cordially with Miss Vanderholt. Tweed got into the boat, and the party
returned to the _Mowbray_. Just before sunset a breeze came right along
the red, shortening shaft of glory, as though it blew out of the sun.
Both vessels immediately trimmed for their respective courses, and in an
hour's time the _Wife's Hope_ had vanished in the starlit dusk of the
evening.




CHAPTER V.

ON THE EVE.


It was five days later, and in that time the _Mowbray_ had drawn four
hundred miles closer to the Equator, still leaving a wide expanse of
water to be measured. The weather had been of a constant tropic beauty.
The heave of the Atlantic swell had the wide and solemn indolence of the
South Pacific fold.

Mr. Vanderholt's face was crimson with the sea. He certainly looked
extremely well; so, too, did his daughter. The sun had caught her, spite
of a diligent use of her parasol and swift flights from his scorching
eye to the shelter of the awning. It had delicately spangled the fair
flesh of her face with some golden freckles, which somehow gave an
archness to her looks, and a whiter flash to her teeth, when the play
of her lips exposed them.

This fifth day following the meeting with the _Wife's Hope_ had glowed
through a cloudless splendour of sky into a glorious sunset, and a
promise of cool heavens, full of rich stars, with the Southern Cross--


     'Memorial reverenced by a thousand storms'--


low down over the jib-boom end.

Mr. Vanderholt came on deck when the sun was gone, though all the west
was swimming in the fast waning crimson. A number of stars sparkled in
the east. Mr. Vanderholt looked at them with delight, for they reminded
him of the twinkling of the sky in windy summer trees.

A pleasant air of wind was blowing. Now that the sun was gone, the
breeze seemed to fan over the bulwark-rail with the fragrance of a land
of flowers. It was a sweetness that made you think of the Arabian gale
of the poet, but the African land was leagues and leagues distant, and
that sweet breath, therefore, was old Ocean's own.

The schooner, with every stitch upon her, saving the foretopmast
studding-sail, to the setting of which Mr. Vanderholt had an objection,
glided through the gathering dusk to the music of broken waters. Miss
Vanderholt sat in the cabin, under the lamp. She was reading, and
appeared to be interested. Mr. Vanderholt filled his pipe from a pouch
whose size corresponded with the bowl it was to feed, and whilst he did
this he looked about him.

Glew stood between him and the lingering scarlet, and his body, black as
indigo, rose and fell. What was the matter? It seemed to Mr. Vanderholt
that an unnatural stillness was in the little vessel. He still preserved
the forecastle faculties, and carried the eye, whilst he could bend the
ear, of a sailor. Eight bells had been struck. The second dog-watch was
therefore over. The watch below would, or would not, have gone to bed.

All this Mr. Vanderholt knew; but so bright, flushed, and sweet a night,
after the roasting and blinding glories of the day, might well prove a
temptation to the hands whose turn it was to take rest till midnight to
linger to converse and suck out yet another pipe of tobacco.

But the silence forward was so deep that Vanderholt, hearkening with his
forefinger pressed upon his bowl of unlighted tobacco, thought it
ominous. At intervals somebody away in the bows would speak. The voice
was a growl, and it would be answered by a growl, and it seemed to the
owner of the _Mowbray_ that, whoever it might be that broke the silence
in his little ship, made utterance with the throat of a sleeping
mastiff.

Mr. Vanderholt lighted his pipe, seated himself, and called to Captain
Glew, who immediately crossed the deck.

'The men seem very quiet, Glew.'

'And a good job too, sir. This is a yacht, and we've got a lady aboard.'

'Ay, ay, man, that's so. But, yacht or no yacht, lady or no lady, surely
I'm the last man to be opposed to a little harmless dog-watch jollity
whenever my sailors have a mind to it.'

The man at the helm was not far off, and Vanderholt spoke low.

'They're a crew that want keeping under,' said Captain Glew. 'They're
not used to pleasure-sailing of this sort. I singled them out myself,
and had good hopes of them, and there's no fault to be found with them
as seamen. This light cruising job is fast spoiling them. They need the
heavy work of a full-rigged ship.'

'If they find the job an easy one, then I suppose they're satisfied?'
said Mr. Vanderholt.

'I'm very much afraid that there's no kind treatment, and no easy job
under the sun, that's going to satisfy an English sailor,' said Captain
Glew.

'You're hard upon the calling, Glew. You're talking to a man who has had
to work hard and fare hard.'

'Sir, if you'd been in command, you'd know that I speak the truth.'

'Aren't you rather a taut hand, Glew? Not that I object to a strict
discipline on board ship; but there is a manner of talking to
sailors.... I've heard of a captain who never would address a sailor if
he could help it, but if he had anything to give him he'd put it down
upon the deck and kick it at him.'

'And I've heard of sailors, sir, who've scuttled their ship, broken the
captain's heart by ruining the voyage, and made a widow of his wife by
sending him adrift in an open boat. I've had charge of seamen, and I
know their natures, and I'm sorry that you should think I'm a taut hand,
sir.'

'Understand me,' said Vanderholt soothingly: 'you are, perhaps, a taut
hand, but I do not say unnecessarily taut. Frankly, I do not think the
men love you.'

'What's a sailor's love like?' said Captain Glew.

Here Miss Vanderholt came on deck. Captain Glew placed a chair for her
beside her father.

'What a heavenly sweet and silent night!' exclaimed the young lady. 'Is
that a ship on fire down there?'

'It's the moon rising, miss,' exclaimed Captain Glew.

Her upper limb floated blood-red on the sea-line like a glowing ember.
She sailed up, large, swollen, stately, the face rusty, as though the
luminary had been a mighty casting in the African sands, and was now
sent aloft red-hot by some thrust of giant shoulders. At her coming the
wind freshened in a damp gust, the schooner strained, and the sound
arose of water broken quickly into froth.

'Glew and I have been talking about the men, Vi,' said Mr. Vanderholt,
after contemplating for a few minutes the hot lunar dawn.

'They don't look a very happy crew,' answered Miss Vanderholt; 'but heat
will make people sullen. The sailors have to work in the sun, and, after
all, there is very little money for them to receive apiece when they
reach home.'

Vanderholt laughed, and said:

'Quite as much as they shall get out of my pocket. Four pounds and five
pounds a month, Vi. Why, I've been signing on, when a fine young man,
for two pounds five, and glad to get it.'

'Are the crew dissatisfied?' inquired Miss Violet.

'Well, I don't mind owning to you, Mr. Vanderholt,' said the captain,
'that they've been trying to make a trouble about the stores. But I
wouldn't allow it.'

He stopped short, with a vibratory note in his voice, as though a piece
of catgut had been twanged.

'The stores ought to be good,' said Mr. Vanderholt. 'The cheque that was
made payable to Mr. Lyons was a liberal one.'

'Do they grumble at one thing more than another?' said Miss Vanderholt.

'Oh, first it's the pork, then it's the beef; they'll work their way
right through till they come to the pickles,' said Glew, with a short,
nervous laugh.

'This is the first time I've heard that the men are dissatisfied,'
exclaimed Mr. Vanderholt.

'What is the good of worrying you with fo'c's'le troubles, sir? You're
on a cruise for your health, and the worries of the ship should be mine,
not yours.'

'It is well meant, Glew,' said Vanderholt, a little uneasily. 'They are
a rough body of men, mind. I was long fed on pork and beef, and my
palate has memory enough to distinguish, I think. Tell Allan to-morrow
to cook samples of both kinds, and I will lunch off them.'

This being said, Mr. Vanderholt smoked for awhile in silence. The
question of pork and beef and sailors' grievances is uninteresting at
all times, and peculiarly uninviting on a fine moonlight night. The
subject was dropped. Captain Glew moved off, and father and daughter sat
alone in the moonlight.

The atmosphere was now misty with the silver of the satellite; she was
nearly a full moon, and rained her glory most abundantly. She made a
fairy vision of the _Mowbray_, etherealizing her into a fabric of white
vapour and fountain-like lines as she leaned, purring at her cutwater,
from the delicate wind.

'I don't think Glew treats the men well,' said Miss Vanderholt, turning
her knuckles to the moon to see the diamonds in her rings sparkle. 'He
is restrained when I'm on deck; I judge him by the demeanour of the
crew.'

'They are not yachtsmen; they are not fresh-watermen. I, too, have eyes
in my head, and I'll not condemn Glew off-hand for being what the
Americans call a "hard case,"' answered Mr. Vanderholt. 'They are rough
fellows, got out of low sailors' boarding-houses. I know the breed--the
right sort of men for a jaunt of this kind--and I'm very well satisfied
with them. But they have the look of growlers, and the man Jones, who
should be the most trustworthy of the lot, has the very best genius for
putting on a surly, dangerous face, and posturing in the mutineer style
when hotly called to of any sea-dog that I can recall. So, Vi, I'm not
for interfering with the duties of the captain.'

He smoked, and his little eyes dwelt upon the face of the beautiful
moon.

'If the sea,' said he musingly, 'were a silver shield it could not flash
more brightly. How mysterious does the moon make the world of waters!
They speak of the awe bred of darkness--the awe, the uncertainty--yes, I
have known it; but how much more must this lighted ocean stir one's
spiritual pulses than if it were a bed of darkness!'

'You are certainly better,' said Miss Violet; 'you are seldom poetical
at home.'

'No man who has been to sea can help being a poet,' said the old
gentleman complacently, smoothing his beard. 'He beholds many strange
appearances; he dreams strangely. Mysterious fancies thicken upon the
drowsy vision of his lonely midnight look-out, and with him _then_ it is
as the great poet sublimely sings:


     '"But shapes that come not at an earthly call,
       Will not depart when mortal voices bid;
       Lords of the visionary eye, whose lid,
     Once raised, remains aghast, and will not fall."'


He relighted his pipe, and smiled at the moon, and seemed very well
pleased with the acuteness of his memory.

'Those are noble lines,' said the girl.

'They are Wordsworth's. Ach! What delight that man has given me.'

'How much pleasanter it is,' said Miss Violet, 'on a glorious night like
this to talk of poetry, and the visionary shapes of the sea, than of
sailors' beef and pork!'

'You would not think so if you had been stuck here for ten days on a
raft.'

'Well,' exclaimed the girl, heaving a sigh, 'the Equator is not very far
off now, and then we shall turn and go home.'

'I hope that our forefoot will cut the Line by the 25th,' answered Mr.
Vanderholt. 'We shall be home in February, brown, and in the best of
spirits.'

'And George will have started--will be coming.'

They talked for a little while about this gentleman. It was ten o'clock
before they quitted the deck. A man struck four bells on the forecastle.
Immediately a figure arose from the deep shadow cast by the deck-house
on the planks, and went aft to relieve the helm. Captain Glew stood on
the yacht's quarter, and was as visible in the moonshine as though the
bright dawn had broken. There was a muttering about the course at the
helm, and then the man who had been relieved took a step or two forward,
looking at the captain.

'What are you staring at?' said Glew.

The man, continuing to walk but slowly, persisted in staring, so that
his head revolved.

'What are you staring at?' repeated Glew, in a soft but threatening
voice.

The skylight and companion-way were wide open; he had no wish that his
note of temper should penetrate.

'Mayn't a man use his eyesight aboard this bloody ship?' said the
seaman, coming to a halt.

'Go forward!' exclaimed the captain, stiffening himself at the rail.

The man seemed to hesitate, then went slowly towards the forecastle,
audibly muttering. This man's name was Joseph Dabb.

When he was close to the deck-house, a sailor, who was squatting in the
shadow of it, exclaimed gruffly:

'What was he a-saying of?'

'Asked me what I was a-staring at because I was looking at him.'

'S'elp me, all angels!' exclaimed the squatting figure, after spitting
right across the deck, 'if I don't feel sometimes like cutting the
scab's heart out of him! We're not men in _his_ sight. We're muck. He
thinks of us as muck, and he talks of us as muck. He speaks to us as if
we was muck, and it's muck he's shipped aboard this vessel for us muck
to eat.'

He stood up, and the whites of his eyes glistened in the reflected
moonlight that whitened off the edges of the stay-foresail, as he turned
his gaze aft, where the figure of the captain walked. A man came out of
the deck-house and joined the company. Immediately after, a fourth man
approached from the forecastle, and stood listening.

'They've been a-yarning about us half my trick,' said Dabb. 'The captain
said this pleasuring was a-spoiling of us.'

All four united in a low, dismal laugh, which would have been a loud,
defiant, mirthless roar but for the sleepers in the deck-house, hard by
which they were talking. Sleep is counted a sacred thing at sea.

'Ay,' exclaimed one of the men, who proved to be Mike Scott, 'you lay a
man's going to be spoilt by the pleasuring that's to be done under
_him_. What was said, Joe?'

'That blarsted Dutchman talks in his beard. That and his pipe smothered
up his voice. I couldn't hear him. T'other was more clear. He spoke of
sailors as had scuttled their ships, as had broke the cap'n's heart by
ruinating his voyage, and made a widder of his wife by sending him
adrift. T'other speaks, and then the cap'n says, "What's a sailor's love
like?"'

Silence followed.

'What do he mean by "a sailor's love"?' exclaimed the third man, Maul.
'Is it a belaying-pin or a handspike? You'll find he's a-trying to
excite a disgust against us sailors in the mind of that old Dutchman, so
that he may make a difficulty about paying us at the end of the voyage.'

''Ow d'ye know,' said Dabb, 'that it ain't the Dutchman who's put the
skipper up to ill-treating of us, reckoning upon sailing into the Thames
with some of us in irons? D'ye mean to say----'

'Whisper, you crow!'

'D'ye mean to say,' continued the man, lowering his voice, 'that the
stores were shipped without the Dutchman knowing of their character?
I'm a-beginning to smell blue hell in this business.'

All this while the moon shone sweetly and piercingly. A divine peace was
upon the sea, and the light noises of the wind were as fresh as dew on
grass, with the sound as of the plashing of many fountains. In the cabin
they talked of poetry--and one of the sailors forward was for cutting
the captain's heart out!

The little royal and top-gallant sail were half aback; the luffs of the
jibs were trembling.

'Trim sail!' shouted Captain Glew; and he continued to bawl as he walked
slowly forwards: 'Brace forward the topsail-yard! Ease away the weather
braces! Get a drag on your jib-sheets!' And it was clear, by the manner
in which he delivered these orders to the men, that he had been watching
and thinking of them all the time they had been talking about him.

All was quiet after this. The moon rolled down into the sea, the shadow
of the earth slipped off the eastern horizon, and the schooner floated
into another tropical morning, wide and high with cloudless splendour.
Nothing was in sight.

The date was December 15, 1837.

At half-past eleven, the steward, a man named Gordon, who had been
shipped for cabin duty, but who had sailed on many occasions as an able
seaman, so that his sympathies were wholly with the forecastle, went to
the harness-cask, and, unlocking it, picked over some pieces of meat,
brine-whitened, and carried two cubes of the flesh forward to the cook.

'What's this for?' says Allan. 'Here's stink enough. The pork's measly
bad to-day!'

'Samples for the cabin table,' said the steward, Gordon, dabbing the
flabby offal down on the dresser.

'Ho!' says the cook. 'They'd best be cooked separate, I suppose. The
stench'll break the young lady's heart if they're boiled in them
coppers.'

'Cook 'em as you like. That's your business,' said Gordon. 'It's for one
o'clock.'

'Who's going to eat 'em?'

'How big's a man's windpipe?' asked Gordon. The cook eyed him. 'Would
about that lump,' said Gordon, snatching up a knife and slightly scoring
a corner off one of the pieces, 'fit a man's windpipe?'

'Ah! would it?' muttered the cook. 'And if you'll let me guess whose
pipe it is you're a-thinking of, I wouldn't mind telling you that I'm
game--s'elp me God!--to ram it down with this--a clean job!'

And seizing a long, black, sharp-ended poker, he flourished it at
Gordon's mouth, poising it as though he meant to do for the steward.

Gordon rounded out of the little caboose with a laugh.

Mr. Tweed walked the weather side of the quarter-deck; his sextant lay
upon the skylight cover. The seaman named Legg was at the helm. His
figure, airily clad in duck and calico and wide straw hat, stood out
like a painted figure of marble, as it slightly rose and slightly fell
against the hot pale-blue sky in the north.

Miss Vanderholt was seated in a deck-chair under the awning, beside a
quarter-boat. A book lay upon her lap, but her hands were clasped upon
it, and her eyes were bent upon the sea. She viewed it listlessly. The
monotony of that eternal girdle was growing shocking. It seemed to bind
up her very soul. She thought to herself: 'They speak of the freedom of
the sea. But doesn't its sense of freedom come only when motion is
swift, when the roar of the white water is strong, and when one's home
is not very far off?'

It was the men's dinner-hour. Miss Violet had often, during the warm
weather, from her comfortable quarter-deck chair, observed a couple of
men a little before noon stagger with sweating faces out of the galley,
bearing in their hands a sort of wooden washing-tub, which sent up a
great deal of steam. This she knew was the crew's dinner.

She had sometimes wondered how they ate: whether they spread a
table-cloth; whether they planted a cruet-stand in their midst, and
placed knives and forks on either hand, for the hearts to cut and come
again. Who carved? She supposed that the boatswain took the head of the
table.

She had never felt so curious, however, in this matter as to ask
questions, and as, moreover, she had not caught so much as a glimpse of
the interior of the crew's dwelling-house, she had figured into
conviction a comfortable little sea-parlour in which the men dined just
as she and Glew and the mate and her father dined.

'After all,' she mused, keeping her hands clasped upon her open book,
with her eyes fastened upon the sailors' house, 'it is the monotony of
the sea that repels. It must have its good side. Plenty to eat and
drink, and, as father says, most of the wonders of the world--islands,
harbours, inland scenes of beauty--to be visited at the cost of others.'

Whilst she thus moralized, she beheld a head with a very savage and
malicious look upon its face in the deck-house door. The figure of the
man was exposed to the waist, and two great hands grasped for support
each side of the opening. It was the head of the boatswain of the
schooner, James Jones, carpenter and second mate--but as second mate he
had never been called upon to serve. He was uncovered, and his hair was
wild. His expression was devilish. Though at some distance from the
man, the young lady could clearly distinguish a look of fury upon the
seaman's face, as though he had just slain a shipmate, and was in the
act of leaping on deck.

He stood in the doorway, and continued to stare aft. Miss Vanderholt
glanced uneasily at the skylight. She waited for her father and Captain
Glew to appear. The captain was bound to arrive in a minute or two, for
already Mr. Tweed, who had glanced at the boatswain without appearing to
see anything unusual in the man's fixed, half-in and half-out posture,
and dark, endevilled face, had picked up his sextant, and was ogling the
sun.

Mr. Vanderholt was the first of the two to come on deck. His daughter
called to him softly, and said:

'Father, did you ever see, in all your life, such a wicked expression as
that man wears?'

'What man?' exclaimed Mr. Vanderholt, lancing his teeth with a silver
toothpick, and gazing along the decks with an expression of bland
benevolence.

'That man there, in the door of the galley,' said the girl. 'He's been
standing like that for the last three or four minutes, hatless, looking
aft, with that face of fury, as if they'd tied him in the doorway and
were goading him.'

'I certainly see a man lounging in the doorway,' said Mr. Vanderholt,
who was a little short-sighted. 'Does he look angry?'

He spoke somewhat uneasily, and turned his head to see if the captain
was on deck. Glew at that moment rose through the hatch, armed with his
sextant. Vanderholt went up to him, and said:

'There is a man leaning in the door of the caboose--now I look again I
see it is the boatswain--whose face my daughter tells me is formidable
with temper. I do not clearly see all that way off. I hope it will mean
no fresh trouble about the stores. Let them know I have ordered pieces
of the pork and beef to be boiled for our mid-day meal.'

Whilst he was speaking, Glew's eyes were fixed upon the boatswain, who,
at the moment that Vanderholt ceased, withdrew. Glew's attitude was
immediately and insensibly charged with malice and danger, with
passions quickly growing and contending, by the odd, crouching air he
carried, whilst he had watched the boatswain and listened to his
employer.

'That Jones,' he said, 'is the right sort of forecastle scoundrel to
breed a mutiny, and if he troubles me to-day we must have him out of it,
Mr. Vanderholt, in the approved old method. Mr. Tweed, can you lay your
hands readily upon a set of irons for that fellow?'

The mate answered:

'The carpenter has charge of the irons, sir, and the carpenter is,
unfortunately, the boatswain himself.'

'Go forward,' said Captain Glew, 'and ask the man to give you a set of
irons.'

'Stop!' exclaimed Mr. Vanderholt, glancing at the helmsman, whose eyes
were upon Glew, and who was clearly a listener. 'We must have no talk of
irons in this vessel, until something has been done to warrant their
introduction.'

'If there should come a difficulty,' was the captain's answer, 'we may
find it impossible to get forward so as to procure the irons. I like to
be beforehand.'

'I'll not have it!' said Mr. Vanderholt, with warmth.

Captain Glew simply said, 'Ay, ay, sir,' and turned his face to the sun,
with his sextant lifted.

Now it was that the boatswain reappeared, still without his hat, his
head very shaggy, his shirt-sleeves rolled above his elbows, disclosing
the muscles of a carthorse. He sprang, in a single bound, through the
door of the deck-house, grasping his mess-kid. The seaman Dabb followed;
he, too, grasped a mess-kid. Then the rest of the crew appeared--Gordon,
Allan, Toole, Scott, Maul.

'Now, bullies, are we ready?' exclaimed Jones, in a voice of thunder;
and he put the kid upon the deck. Dabb did likewise.

'Hurrah for a hot male of mate for the cabin!' shouted Simon Toole.

The boatswain and Dabb, each man in his boots, kicked. They kicked at
the kids with all their might, and the wooden vessels rushed aft to the
very feet of Captain Glew and Vanderholt, scattering their precious
contents of pork and pea-soup over the smooth planks. Never was an
uglier affront offered to the master of a ship. Never had mutinous
insolence been carried to a greater height. Captain Glew turned white as
milk, but not with fear. Well for him had he felt fear. Mr. Vanderholt
was ashy pale. He called to his daughter to go below. She sprang up,
but, instead of going below, went and stood right aft, beside the
helmsman, to whom she said:

'What do those men want?'

'Their rights!' he answered, with a diabolical leer.

The frightened girl made a quick step to the companion-hatch, and stood
beside the cover; she was afraid to go below.




CHAPTER VI.

THE MURDERS.


'What's the meaning of this atrocious conduct, men?' shouted Mr.
Vanderholt. 'I am sorry if anything's wrong with you. I am an old
sailor----'

He was interrupted by Captain Glew roaring out: 'Tweed, help me to put
that scoundrel in irons!' And he rushed forward, Tweed following.

'Oh, my God!' cried Mr. Vanderholt; 'stay your hands, men! This is my
ship! I am master here! I'll see your wrongs righted!'

'There'll be murder!' shrieked Miss Vanderholt.

'Go below, for Christ's sake!' roared the distracted man; and, catching
hold of his daughter's arm, he dragged her down the steps into the
cabin.

'No man in this ship puts me in irons,' said the boatswain, showing his
teeth, as he squared up at Captain Glew, with his immensely thick arms
covered with hair, arrows and crucifixes. 'I've been wanting the killing
of you this many a day, you rat! and, as you men hear me, by the living
Lord, I'll kill him if he lays a finger upon me!'

For a few minutes Captain Glew paused, waiting for Mr. Tweed, who had
disappeared. He stood one man to seven; his nostrils were dilated; his
eyes were on fire; his skin was a ghastly white; and his fingers worked
like those of one who plays a piano. His breath flew from him in sharp,
quite audible hissings. He was the incarnation of wrath fiendish above
anything human, and in that pause those of the men who met his gaze
seemed to quail.

Mr. Vanderholt came running from the companion-hatch. His right hand was
in the pocket of his coat.

'What is it, men?' he bawled. 'I am an old sailor, and was a man at sea
when you were boys. Is your pork bad? Is the rest of your food bad?'

'Go and gut yourself!' roared Dabb. 'If that cuckoo had the victualling
of this ship, you had the paying of him; and was there ever a Dutchman
that didn't know good food from bad by the price of it?'

He was proceeding. Gordon, standing alongside, clipped the dog over the
back of his neck, and silenced him.

Mr. Vanderholt swayed speechless on the slightly heaving deck of his
vessel. He was petrified. He stared at the insolent villain; he couldn't
credit his senses.

Indeed, it was shocking that that fine old gentleman, with his full gray
beard, his dignified bearing, his knowledge of life and letters, his
years, his great fortune, should be thus addressed by a brute of the
sea, a scab, a wen of the ocean, who ashore, in liquor, was, of course,
the swaggering, yelping terror of women and little children.

Mr. Tweed came along from the forecastle, grasping an iron bar with
rings upon it The moment the men saw him, three or four--Scott, Toole,
Allan, and another--flung themselves upon him. The irons were sent
whizzing overboard, the man himself was felled to the deck. He rose in a
minute, breathless and mad.

'But you _shall_ come aft. Help me, Tweed!' And the captain, crying this
out in a voice frightful to hear with its tension of passion, flung
himself upon the boatswain.

'The man who moves--the man who interferes with the captain, I'll
shoot!' shouted Vanderholt, pulling out a revolver, a six-barrelled
engine of those days, from his pocket, and taking aim at the crew.

Tweed had sprung upon the boatswain, and now three madmen were
wrestling. A fourth rushed in; he was Simon Toole. He yelled like a
savage as he leapt upon the heaving and writhing group.

'Stand back, or I'll shoot you!' shouted Mr. Vanderholt. 'I have six
men's lives here.'

He saw Toole seize Captain Glew by the throat, and taking aim at the
man, he pulled the trigger. The flash, the report, was followed by a
dying groan, and Tweed, with both hands lifted and clenched, fell, shot
through the head.

At this moment an iron belaying-pin[1] struck Mr. Vanderholt across the
face. It was Maul who hurled it. He flung it with the rage and meaning
of murder, standing not a couple of fathoms away from the unhappy
gentleman, who dropped like a running man when he falls dead from heart
disease.

'You murderous curs!' groaned Captain Glew, falling upon one knee with
his hand to his side.

For a little while they stood raging; their shouts were hoarse and
insane. Legg bawled to them from the helm, and they answered him. You
would have thought that they were breeding some fresh hellish scene of
bloodshed amongst themselves, so flushed, wild, clamorous was the mob of
them, every man trying to drown the other's voice.

'It was his doing!' said Jones, pointing to the figure of the dying
captain. 'I never wanted it!'

'Anyhow, we're not responsible for _him_,' said Allan, nodding at the
body of the mate. 'Who floored the Dutchman?'

'I did!' yelled Maul.

'He's a killed man,' said Scott, stooping to look at him.

'Water,' whispered Captain Glew.

Toole's eyes were on the captain at the instant, and the ruffian saw the
man's lips move.

'He's spakin'!' he exclaimed, with a face of sudden horror, backing two
or three steps.

Dabb put his ear to the dying man's mouth.

'He asks for water,' said the seaman; and he sprang to the scuttle-butt
and filled a pannikin which stood handily by the side of the dipper,
and, lifting Captain Glew's head, he poured some of the cool drink into
his mouth.

'Drag me out of the sun,' muttered the captain.

'Mike, len's a hand,' called Dabb; and quite gently these two seamen,
who were just now devils, carried the captain aft into the shelter of
the awning, where they left him to lie and expire, with the Union Jack
rolled up as a pillow.

'I never wanted it! I never wanted it!' suddenly broke out the
boatswain, in a deep groaning voice. 'This is a swinging matter. What's
to be done? It's damnation to our souls. Why couldn't ye have let the
old Dutchman be?'

'His pistol was full cock on you, Jim, when I let fly,' answered Maul.
'He's only stunned. Hasn't a man a right to fight for his life? Look at
them barrels!' he added, pointing to the revolver.

'Here comes his daughter,' exclaimed Gordon.

Miss Vanderholt was standing in the companion-way. She wore a straw hat,
and her eyes, under the shadow of the brim and under the fluff of hair
about her brow, looked twice their usual size--strained, unwinking,
blind, with sudden, dreadful amazement, but brilliant as light also with
horror and terror.

She came out of the hatch slowly. Legg, at the helm, with a note of
commiseration, said:

'He's only been knocked down. He shouldn't have got messing about with
firearms amongst a mob of angry men.'

She did not hear him, or, if she did, she did not heed him.

She went straight to her father, making a low wailing or moaning noise
as she walked. The boatswain exclaimed:

'No harm was intended to him, miss. 'Twas him that shot Mr. Tweed.'

She stooped, moaning, but so as to be scarcely audible, and looked
closely into her father's face. He lay on his back, staring with white
eyes, half-closed, at the sky. He had fallen as though shot through the
heart. A great, livid weal, dreadful to see, blackened and lifted his
brow. A little blood that had trickled from one ear lay glazed close
beside the gray hair of his whiskers.

'Is he dead?' she asked, looking round at the men, and speaking in a
voice sunk with fear.

'Let's carry him aft to his cabin. It's not right the young lady should
see him lying there,' said Gordon.

Thereupon, Gordon, Allan, and Jones picked the body up and bore him aft,
followed by Miss Vanderholt, who often staggered as she walked. They got
him into a cabin, and put him down upon a sofa.

'An ugly job!' said one of the seamen.

'Who did it?' the girl asked.

The men made no answer.

'Oh, father!' she cried, trembling violently; then, dropping upon her
knees beside him, she began to free his throat. 'He may only be
stunned,' she said. 'What is to be done? Shall I bathe his face?'

'If he's only stunned, I allow he'll come to all right, if he's left
alone,' said Gordon.

'You'll please to recollect this,' said one of the men: 'he comes
rushing along, with a pistol to shoot us with, and the motive was to
strike the revolver out of his hand before he could send a second shot.
It was him that killed the mate;' and the speaker wheeled on his naked
feet, and went to the companion ladder. He was almost immediately
followed by the others.

The girl was alone with her dead father. But was he dead? He looked so.
Yet the lifeless looks of one in a swoon or in a fit may easily pass as
marks of death. She ran to his cabin, and fetched a bowl, into which she
splashed cold water from a decanter, and for a quarter of an hour she
ceaselessly bathed his face and head. He never stirred. Not the least
sigh escaped him. She could not find his pulse, though she sought for
it, with trembling fingers, about his wrists. His hands were growing
cold, and they lay very dead and heavy in hers, and still she thought,
still she hoped, she prayed.

'It may be the same as a fit, or a swoon. He has been stunned. If I sit
here patiently, I may see signs of life, and he will come to.'

But, if he should be dead? What would they do with the schooner? What
would they do with her? Terrors shook her; they wrenched her heart, and
she wrung her hands in agony.

If her father was dead, and she quite understood that Captain Glew and
Mr. Tweed were dead, though she but vaguely understood that her father
had shot the mate, and that Captain Glew had been assassinated--if he
was dead, she was alone in the schooner with eight seamen, who had made
outlaws and reckless criminals of themselves by the murders done that
morning.

Meanwhile, on deck, the men were quieting down. Their rude, unreasoning
passions were paling. Consternation was beginning to work in them. They
had gone fearfully and tragically far beyond the unformed wrathful
fancies which were in them when they kicked the mess-kids aft, and when
the Irishman howled at the sight.

The mate lay dead, with a dark purple hole in his forehead, upon the
deck, abreast of the little square of main hatch. Aft, with his head
pillowed on the rolled-up ensign, was the corpse of the captain. These
were sights, coupled with the thought of the dead man below, to drive
the keenest power of realization of what had happened that day into the
mind of an idiot, and there was no idiot in that schooner.

Legg had been relieved at the wheel by Scott.

The _Mowbray_, all this while, was sailing a dead south course for the
Equator--her queer destination--royally clothed; her white breasts of
canvas were swelled with the blue gushing of the wind; her jibs yearned
at their sheets as they rose and sank in a play of soft shadow, with the
airy rise and the seething stoop of the bows.

'There's too much gone and happened this all-fired day,' said Allan,
folding his naked, burnt arms on his breast, and leaning against the
side of his little caboose whilst he eyed askew the body of the mate.
'What's to be done?'

The men came and stood about him.

'It was like forcing of a man's hand,' exclaimed the boatswain. 'I was
never in a mess of this sort afore. But, curse catch me, if an angel
could have stood him--an angel from the skies!' he shouted, lifting up
his two great hands, with a wild melodramatic gesture, to the heavens.
'I couldn't tell you why, but there was hate of us as sailor-men in the
very turn of the rooter's body as he walked the deck. There's but one
remedy for the likes of him, but it's hard upon sailors;' and he smeared
the sweat off his brow, which had taken a scowl dark as thunder.

'I saw that there bleeding old Dutchman a-covering of you, Jim,' said
Maul, pointing to the revolver which yet lay upon the deck. 'There was
no mistaking the meaning in his face. I'd pulled out the pin ready for
whatever was to come along, and, say what yer will, yer owe me your
life.'

'What's to be done?' said the cook. 'All this here moralizing ain't
going to help us. Are them bodies to be left to lie there till they
turn?'

'Don't be in such a smothering hurry!' exclaimed Legg. 'How are ye to
know they're gone home? 'Ere's Bill for chucking of two warm bodies
overboard. Feel their pulses, or try their breath with a piece of glass,
or, maybe, you'll be murdering of them over again.'

'Don't talk of murdering!' said the boatswain savagely. 'That man there
was killed by Mr. Vanderholt.'

'Where are we sailing to?' says Gordon.

'Why!' exclaimed Dabb, sending a pair of drink-stained eyes slowly
travelling over the little ship, 'I'm dumped, mates, if there's e'er a
navigator in the vessel!'

At this juncture Toole and Jones stepped to the body of the mate, and
carried him to the side of the captain, whose form they bent over. The
boatswain went down upon his knees, and looked with a face of hate and
horror at the countenance of the dead man. This was a picture to
handsomely symbolize one large, old, red tradition of the Merchant
Service. Are there any Glews left? So long as they remain in command, so
long will they prove the solvers of the so-called mysteries of the
ocean--the abandoned ship, the boat-load of men whose statements differ,
the stranded body with the wound in its throat.

'These men are dead,' says the boatswain, standing up. 'No use in
letting 'em lie here to shock the female, should she come on deck. Get
'em covered up, and we'll bury 'em this afternoon.'

Toole fetched a small tarpaulin, and hid the bodies.

'How's the Dutchman getting on, I wonder?' said the boatswain.

He went to the open skylight, and looked down. He saw the figure of Mr.
Vanderholt lying stiff in death on a sofa locker; his daughter sat
beside him, inclined forwards, resting her chin on her hands, herself,
whilst the boatswain watched, as stirless as the dead.

The seaman stepped back, and walked forward slowly. The sailors, Scott
excepted, were gathered about the deck-house door, holding a council
upon their condition and prospects. There was the hurry of nerve in
their speech, and again one or another would look ahead, or on either
bow. The boatswain, shoving in amongst them, said in his deep voice:

'I'm for getting something to eat. I want my dinner.'

'And I'm for getting something to drink,' said Toole.

The boatswain picked up Mr. Vanderholt's revolver, and, whilst he
examined it, before pocketing it, he said:

'There's no chance of my bossing you, lads. I'll never do more than
advise you. But let me give you this counsel: of course there'll be
drink for the cabin somewhere aft. We're entitled to our allowance of
rum, anyhow, and if we add a bottle or two of the cabin stuff to that
allowance, who's a-going to miss it? That's not counsel, you say--no,
but _this_ is: don't none of you go and get drunk. I vow to God the
first man that falls insensible I'll chuck overboard. We're murderers
and pirates--d'ye know that?' he roared, with a ferocious look at the
men--a look that might have convinced shrewder perceptions than those
about him that he was going mad--'and we're to take care, if we don't
want to swing, that we're not found out. Can ye guess what swinging's
like? Many's the time I've thought of it--of the gray, wet morning, and
their coming in to fetch you to be hanged, and their making your arms
fast astern, with a parson walking in front reading about death; then
the standing upon the trap-door, and the crowds of faces--my God!--all
looking at you, and, worst of all, the awful feeling that a man must
have when the cap's drawed down, and he stands awaiting!'

'There's no call to keep on, Jim,' said Dabb; 'we don't want to be
hanged, and we don't mean to do it. And who's a-going to fall down dead
drunk, and act the beast, as you says, a-seeing how it stands with us?'

'Let's get something to eat,' said the boatswain. 'Jim,' said he,
turning to Gordon, 'you know the ropes aft. Bring something for'ard from
the Dutchman's pantry fit for the men to sit down to.'

'Am I to bring any drink?' says Gordon.

'What have they got down there?' asked Maul.

'There's some cases of bottled ale.'

'Bring eight bottles for'ards,' said the boatswain. 'Joe, go you along
and lend him a hand.'

Gordon and Dabb walked aft, and disappeared down the companion-hatch.
The others trudged about their deck-house door, passing and repassing
each other in short look-out walks, their heads sunk, their backs bowed,
and their hands plunged deep in their breeches pockets.

After some time, Gordon and the other arrived with their arms full of
bottles of beer and preserved meats, and delicate cabin eatables out of
the pantry. It was broiling hot. Mike Scott at the helm bawled to them
to bring him a bottle. He swilled the foaming draught down out of a
pannikin in a sort of dance of ecstasy.

'What's the young woman a-doing of?' asked the boatswain, following
Gordon into the deck-house.

'She was sitting by her father's body when we entered. She jumps up as
if she'd been stabbed, and says in a little shriek: "What do you men
want?" I answered in the kindest voice I've got: "We're not here to hurt
you, miss. The men are hungry, and want food, and I've come to fetch 'em
some--food and a little beer. What can I get for you, miss?" says I.
"This is the luncheon-hour. Let me spread the table for you." She shook,
and held out her hands as though shoving me away. How could she sit down
and eat with him lying there? Indeed, it went against me to name it,
Jim. It was flung cruelly hard. I never see such a forehead as the poor
old bloke's got.'

'By the vart of me oath, then,' exclaimed Toole--for now all hands had
swarmed into the deck-house--'Maul took aim at the pistol, and never
meant to kill him!'

They were hungry and thirsty, a rough, red-handed mob of seamen. They
sat down upon their chests, and ate and drank, one taking a plateful of
food to the helmsman, and whilst they dined they discoursed upon what
was to be done.

Occasionally the boatswain would step out and look around. The wind was
slack, the fiery eye of heaven was eating it up, and the sea waved in
dull shades of satin and silver in winding dyes of faint violet and
glassy brightness, as though a current ran; it sheeted with colours
faint with tropic heat into the now visionary distance where sea and sky
were blent.

'What are we to do with this vessel, and how are we to manage for
ourselves?' said the boatswain, who sat on a chest with a tin of
preserved meat between his knees. 'That's the question.'

'Ain't this moist stuff veal and 'am?' Whatever it is, it's blooming
nice,' said a sailor.

'Joe, knock the 'ead off this 'ere bottle for me; you've got the knack.'

'Isn't there no port to which we could carry this craft and dispose of
her, and then disperse?' said Allan, the cook. 'She might go for a song,
for me. We only want our wages.'

'Where's the port without a fired consul?' said Maul. 'I'll tell ye what
'd happen: they'd ask questions, a file of soldiers 'ud come aboard, us
men 'ud be marched off into a fortress, and lie in cells fourteen or
twenty foot under the sea. There our beards would grow, our bones would
wear out our shirts, and all the music ye'd get, mates, would be the
clank of chains.'

'No port for me!' said Toole. 'I'm for kaping on the say, and being
found in a situation of disthress.'

'We must agree to one yarn, and stick to it. What about the lady?' said
Dabb.

'Do she know what's happened?' said Maul. 'How it came about, I mean?
Then she couldn't say nothing agin our yarn.'

'Tell'e what, my lads,' said the boatswain, looking thoughtfully around
him, 'I'm not at all sure that the right tack don't lie in our up and
telling the truth, explaining how we was exasperated, and proving that
the deaths was accidental.'

'You're a-going to prove nothing accidental out of that bloke's knife,'
said Dabb, with a dry, uncomfortable laugh, nodding at Toole.

'As good an accident as Maul's murtherous belaying-pin, and be damned to
ye!' exclaimed the Irishman. 'Brothers, I'm thinking Joe there would
have me be the only hanged man of this company. Is that because I'm a
furriner?'

His eyes, fiercely squinting, met in Dabb's hot face. The seamen began
to cut up tobacco, and then they lurched to the galley to light their
pipes. The boatswain, pipe in mouth, stood in the waist, looking round
him and aloft.

The little ship lay nearly becalmed. The sails swayed idly, fanning
sweet draughts athwartships. The boatswain walked to the binnacle, and
said, after looking at the card:

'There's no call now, Mike, to keep her heading for the Equator. I'm
for giving my stern to this here boiling.'

'What's settled?' said Scott.

'Nothing.'

'I don't see,' said the man irritably, 'how anything's to be settled in
this here roasting heat, and them two bodies side by side there. Him in
the cabin's alone enough to take the curl out of a man's spirit. To
think of him, with half a fathom of death, blue as ink, across his brow,
and himself a-walking these very decks but just a little while gone!
Three! It's too many!'

'One was the Dutchman's job,' answered the boatswain. 'But see here! Are
ye afraid?'

'Afraid o' what?'

'Well, only that you're talking as if the ghosts of them bodies had
jockeyed the yard-arms of your mind, and was close reefing your
intellect.'

'I don't like dead bodies,' said Scott; 'and of all the dead bodies
a-going,' he added, with a countenance of gloomy ferocity, 'the least I
like is murdered bodies. Why don't ye get 'em cleared out overboard,
Jim, and sweeten the little hooker? Do human blood smell? Something that
my nose never tasted afore came along not long since in a breath o'
wind.'

The boatswain went to the tarpaulin, pulled it aside, and examined the
two dead faces.

'Dead they are,' said he, with a shiver of sick disgust.

He walked forward, and presently a few of the men came to the tarpaulin,
carrying hammocks, twine, sinkers for the clews. They made despatch.
Captain Glew, blind with death, threatened them as malevolently as in
life, with his upper lip lifted and stiffened, exposing a snarling grin
of fangs. The other poor wretch lay composed; the grog-blossoms had
faded. His cheek was as pale as moonlight, and the expression was a
smile.

Before stitching up the bodies, they emptied the pockets. Captain Glew
had a silver watch and chain, a leather pocket-book, a silver-mounted,
wooden pipe, a bunch of keys, and other odds and ends. The mate
likewise owned a watch and a hair chain, tipped with gold--a woman's
gift, no doubt.

'These things shall be put into their cabins,' said the boatswain. 'He's
left a widow and young uns.'

'Are we going to bury 'em in their clothes?' said Toole.

'Holes and all,' answered Legg, with a significant glance at the
sheath-knife on the Irishman's hip.

In a few minutes the two bodies made their last plunge, amidst the
silence of the seamen, some of whom, nevertheless, continued to smoke,
and the bubbles which flashed to the surface were as lasting a memorial
of the dead twain's resting-place as any gravestone which could have
been erected ashore for dogs to smell at.

A light air from the south-west was coming along, over the burnished
heave, in a delicate blue film, with feelers and crawlers of the draught
tarnishing the water in front of the breeze-line in catspaws.

'Shall we stick this vessel's head north?' said the boatswain, and now
all hands came together in the gangway close beside the bulwark-rail,
whence the bodies had sped; there was to be a discussion over every
suggestion.

'If we go north, where's it to carry us to?' said Gordon.

'Out of this heat, anyhow,' answered the boatswain.

'We ought to make up our minds,' said the cook, with an uneasy look at
the sea. 'We're just that sort of craft which is sure to excite notice.
"Hallo," they sings out, "a yacht all this way down here!" and they
comes sheering alongside to hail and take a look.'

'I'm not for going any further to the s'uth'ard,' said the boatswain
doggedly.

After a great deal of talk, during which the galley was repeatedly
visited for pipe-lights, they agreed to head the vessel north, if for no
other reason than that of temperature. So the helm was put hard up, and
the little vessel wore. When the ropes had been coiled down and the
decks cleared, the boatswain called Gordon and Scott, who by this hour
was relieved at the helm. These two men seemed the most respectable of
the clan, perhaps the fittest for the mission the boatswain had now in
his mind.

'Mates,' said he, dropping his words between hard sucks at an inch of
sooty pipe, 'there's a difficulty in the cabin that's got to be made an
end of. The Dutchman must be buried. Now, the three of us had better go
below, with sail-cloth and twine, and stitch him up to the satisfaction
of his daughter. I'd give this hand,' said he, holding up a paw as big
as a boxing-glove, 'if he hadn't been killed. He had meant to get his
dinner off our junk and pork to-day. It was the captain kept him in
ignorance of our condition.'

'He'd have shot as many of us as there was balls in his pistol,' said
Scott.

'You're right,' said the boatswain, as though he found something to
rally him in that thought. 'Let's get what's wanted, my lads, and make
an end.'

The dead man was alone when they entered the cabin. The ghastly hue of
the blow that had killed him was fading. One hand lay upon his beard,
and he seemed in thought.

'Quick, now,' says the boatswain, 'whilst the lady's out of sight.'

They emptied his pockets, putting everything they found upon the table,
then quickly fell to swathing and stitching. In the midst of this work
Gordon violently started, and cried out, muttering, 'Lor', how she took
me!' Miss Vanderholt stood near him. She was painfully white, and her
eyes were swollen almost to concealment. Yet anyone capable of
interpreting human expression must have found a subtle token of
resolution in her features, shadowy marks of firmness, as though the
countenance was struggling to take its presentment from the spirit. This
might be visible sooner to the eye of sympathy than to the vision of the
head.

'Are you going to bury him?' she exclaimed, in a low, trembling voice.

'Yes, miss,' said the boatswain, rearing himself, and backing and
looking at her.

'Is there no one who can read a prayer from the service over him?' said
the girl.

The men looked at one another, shaking their heads, and then the
boatswain said:

'Tell 'e what, lads: we'll stitch the poor gentleman up ready, and
leave him a-bit, whilst the lady says a prayer by his side. It'll do him
more good than any prayer that's a-going to come from us, whether we
reads it, or whether we imagines it.'

Miss Vanderholt took a step to her father and kissed him, then, weeping
silently, went to the foremost end of the cabin, and stood waiting.

FOOTNOTE:

[1] A belaying-pin is a bar of wood or metal. It fits in a rail, and is
used for making a rope fast to. When of wood it is heavy enough, when of
metal deadly as a weapon or a missile.




CHAPTER VII.

CAPTAIN PARRY.


On the night of December 20, in the same year of the mutiny of the
_Mowbray_, a large full-rigged ship, homeward bound, was, to the north
of the Equator, stealing silently through the dusk. The hour was about
half-past nine. The moon rode high and shone gloriously, and the edge of
the plain of ocean came in two sweeps of ebony to the clasp of splendour
under the satellite. The ship lifted a cloud of sail to the stars. The
night-wind was lightly breathing, and every cloth was asleep, stirless
as alabaster mouldings, curving from each yard-arm, and climbing with
the whiteness of the moon into three spires.

This ship was the _Alfred_, but not the famous Thames East Indiaman of
that name. She was about sixteen hundred tons, with an abundant crew, a
captain and four mates. She was carrying a valuable cargo and a number
of passengers from India to London, and once only had she halted--at
Simon's Bay, where she put a lieutenant of Marines and fifteen men
ashore, and then proceeded, after filling her fresh-water casks. She was
a flush-decked ship, and when you stood at the wheel your eye ran along
a spacious length of deck, rounding with the exquisite art of the
shipwright into flaring bows which sank into the true clipper lines,
high above the keen and coppered forefoot.

A number of ladies and gentlemen sat and moved about the decks. The
awnings were furled, and the moonshine glistened upon these people, and
sparkled in the jewellery of the ladies, and silvered the whiskers of
the gentlemen. On the weather side of the long quarter-deck walked the
commander of the ship, Captain Barrington. A lady's hand was tucked
under his arm, and he frequently looked to windward whilst he talked. To
leeward paced the mate, and a little distance forward, in the deep
shadows of the main-rigging, stood a group of midshipmen.

Right aft, upon the taffrail, sat three gentlemen. One smoked a pipe,
the others cheroots. Captain Barrington permitted his guests--as he,
with facetious politeness, called his passengers--to smoke upon the
quarter-deck after five bells in the first watch. A considerable surface
of grating stretched betwixt these three gentlemen and the wheel. The
wheel was something forward of the grating, and the helmsman, therefore,
absorbed in the business of keeping the ship to her course, could hear
little more than the rumble of the tones of the gentlemen who conversed
on the taffrail.

'I say, Parry,' said one of the gentlemen, who was, indeed, no less a
personage than the surgeon of the ship, casting his eyes up at the moon,
and tasting his tobacco, with slow enjoyment, in the discharge of each
little cloud of it; 'did it ever occur to you to consider that all the
great processes of this world--that all creation, in short, is based on
circles?'

'Why do you address yourself to me?' said Captain Parry. 'What do I
know about circles?'

'Behold yonder moon,' continued the doctor, pointing with the stem of
his pipe to the luminary, beautiful with her greenish tinge, so
sparklingly and brilliantly edged, too, so marvellously clear-cut, that
you might then realize, if you never did before, the miracle of her
self-poised flight through the domain of violet ether. 'She is a
circle,' said the doctor. 'So is the sun. So are the stars. The flight
of our system through space, if not a circle, is nearly so--enough to
justify my theory that, when the Great Hand launched Creation, the
design was one of circles.'

'Oh, blow that!' said one of the gentlemen. 'Parry, hand us a cheroot.'

'Whatever brings God closer to us is good,' said the doctor. 'This
theory of construction proves the existence of a genius like to man's in
the Great Spirit, and we can be in sympathy with it.'

'The breeze seems scanting,' said Captain Parry. 'If this voyage goes on
lasting, I shall be like the sailor who, when he was washed ashore on a
desert island in his shirt, complained that he certainly did feel the
want of a few necessaries.'

'A man going home to be married ought not to be becalmed,' said the
doctor.

'How do you like the idea of being married, Parry?' said the third
gentleman, who was one Lieutenant Piercy.

Captain Parry viewed the beautiful moon in silence.

'Until I got married myself,' said the Doctor, 'I used to express
marriage by what I consider an excellent image. A man marrying is like
unto a ship that grounds on a bar and beats over, where she lies unable
to get out; so other ships passing behold her riding, royal yards
across, and the bar thick under the bows.'

Captain Parry continued to view the moon.

'A man for comfort,' said Piercy, 'should marry a roomy woman. You know
what I mean--a woman who'll give him plenty of geographical and
intellectual room to move in. He's still contained in her, d'ye see,
still in sympathy, still sacramentally one, yet he's got plenty of
room,' he drawled. 'I remember some idiots who berthed a number of
horses on board ship, and allowed no room for the toss of their heads.
It's room that a chap wants in marriage.'

'Isn't that something white ahead there?' said Parry, pointing into the
starry visionary distance, right over the bow.

The others seemed to look.

'Something white should be a ghost,' said Piercy. 'I wonder if ghosts
walk the sea as they do churchyards?'

'The most terrifying ghost that, to my mind, ever appeared,' said the
doctor, 'must have been the spirit of the Prince of Saxony. He came in
complete steel, suddenly, upon his unhappy relative, who had idly
pronounced his name, never dreaming to see him, and said: "Karl, Karl,
was wollst du mit mich?" Is it the German that makes this question
awful?'

'The worst of all ghosts,' said Captain Parry, who had been straining
his eyes at the elusive gleam ahead, 'are the phantasies of the sick
eye.'

'Right,' said the doctor.

'When I was ill some years ago in India, I had been reading Boswell's
"Life of Johnson," and every night at a certain hour a miniature figure
of Dr. Johnson would sit upon the mantelpiece and play the spinet. I
knew the old cock hadn't a note of music in his soul. His head wagged
like a simmering cauliflower. I was in a mortal funk whilst he played,
but was too weak to throw anything at him. When the vision first
appeared, I thought it might have been a large bottle. The mantelpiece
was cleared, and still old Sam came and played upon the spinet for five
nights running.'

'The most inconvenient of all ghosts is the living ghost,' said
Lieutenant Piercy. 'An Irish sergeant told me that, before he left
Ireland, he lent an uncle five pounds. On returning, after fourteen
years, he called upon his uncle, and asked him for the money. "Och,
shure," said the man, "haven't I spent the double of it in masses for
yez?"'

'Talking of ghosts,' said the doctor, 'what do you say, gentlemen, to
this psychological touch? A young man--call him Brown--after years of
deliberation, seriously considers that he has been born into the wrong
family. He is wholly out of sympathy with his relations. He is superior
to them. He loves music, the fine arts, literature, and so on. His
sisters are vulgar, his father a cad. The young man, feeling convinced
that a serious mistake has happened, goes forth to search for his own
family. He finds them at last, a cultivated circle of people, and they
all seem to know that he belongs to them. Strangely enough, young Brown
meets in this family with one of the sons, a young fellow of his own
age--call him Jones. Jones laments to Brown that he is entirely out of
sympathy with his family. They are superior to him. He likes vulgar
songs, the diverting company of ostlers and billiard-markers. He objects
to young ladies. He prefers shop-girls. The point is clear,' said the
doctor. 'These young men were born into the wrong families. Brown hinted
to Jones that he would meet with the right parties at the Browns', and
Jones was received by the Browns with that instinctive perception of his
claims as a member of the family which had characterized the meeting
between Brown and the Jones's.'

'Brown is a snob and Jones an ass,' said Parry.

Here the chief officer came right aft, and looked into the binnacle. As
the cheeks are sucked in, so the sails hollowed to the sudden emptiness
of the atmosphere along with the slight floating roll of the whole
fabric. A low thunder fore and aft broke from the masts.

'I'm sick of that noise!' exclaimed Lieutenant Piercy. 'The cockroaches
dance to it. The kitchen offal that the cook threw overboard yesterday
delights in it, and dwells alongside, a loving listener. I say, Mr.
Mulready,' he called to the mate, 'when are you going to give us a whole
gale over the taffrail--something that shall come roaring down upon the
ship in a cloudless thunder of wind?'

'Ha, sir, when?' answered the mate, a dry man.

Captain Parry, with a slight yawn, stood up, stretched his arms, stepped
across the grating, and sprang upon the deck, then stood looking over
the bulwark-rail at the distant icy gleam on the bow.

'The heat seems to have baked the life out of Parry,' said Lieutenant
Piercy, 'or is it that his spirits sink as he approaches home, knowing
what lies before him?'

'A man should feel himself a poor creature,' exclaimed the doctor, 'when
he understands that a fit of despondency, a mood of unspeakable
depression, reaching even unto tears, may be caused, not by the
affections--oh no!--but by a little piece of celery, or half a pickled
walnut.'

'I am thirsty,' said Piercy; 'come below, doctor, and have a drink.'

Four bells were struck. The ladies disappeared. Five bells--then most of
the gentlemen vanished. Six bells, and now the ship seemed clothed in
sleep and silence. At intervals faint catspaws stirred, none of which
were neglected by the mate of the watch, who, regardless of the
smothered curses of the seamen, hoarsely roared orders for the braces to
be manned. Thus, stealthily, the ship floated through the midnight sea,
flooded with moonshine.

Then came the dawn, the resurrection of the day, trailing its ghastly
shroud across the face of the eastern sky. The watch of the mate came
round again at eight bells--four o'clock--and when the day broke it
found him on deck, standing at the rail, and peering ahead.

'Bring me the glass,' said he to a midshipman.

Some three points on the bow of the ship lay a schooner. She had all
cloths showing, saving her little top-gallant sail and royal. She was
certainly not under command, and yet she did not seem derelict. Mr.
Mulready levelled the ship's glass. What was she?

Scarcely a yacht, yet of yacht-like finish and delicacy. The faint
breeze trembled in her moon-white canvas. She lay head to wind, and the
long pulse of ocean swell, in lifting and sinking her, exposed her
sheathing in flashes, and submitted to the eye of Mr. Mulready the
handsomest sea-going model he had ever looked at.

'Something wrong there,' thought he, carefully covering her with his
glass, and intently examining her for any signs of life, for smoke in
the caboose chimney, for a head peering in sickness over the bulwark
rail.

About a mile and a half separated the two vessels, and it had taken the
_Alfred_ nearly the whole night long to measure the space betwixt the
gleam over the bows and the spot of waters whence it had first been
sighted by Captain Parry.

The chief mate could do nothing without the captain; but, whilst the
crew were washing down the decks, often pausing for a breath or two in
their scrubbing to glance at the graceful, helpless, lonely fabric that
was now drawing abeam, Captain Barrington stepped through the
companion-hatch. His sight immediately went to the schooner.

'What vessel have we there?' he exclaimed, and he picked up the
telescope that lay upon the skylight. 'She is abandoned, sir,' said he
to his chief mate.

'She looks too beautiful for ill-luck,' answered the mate. 'The man who
moulded her knew his art.'

'What's she doing all this way down here?' said Captain Barrington,
talking with the telescope at his eye. 'She's a gentleman's
pleasure-boat. Has she been sacked, and her crew and pleasure-party
murdered? Brace the foretopsail aback. I'll send a boat aboard.'

The ship came to a stand, with a lazy sigh of the light breeze in her
canvas, the yards of the fore creaking on parrel and truss as they came
round to the drag of hauling sailors. A boat was manned, lowered, and
despatched in charge of the third officer, an intelligent young
gentleman of the name of Blundell.

'Thoroughly overhaul her,' the captain had said. 'If she is derelict,
bring away the log-book and papers.'

And as the boat swept towards the schooner the skipper turned to Mr.
Mulready and exclaimed:

'If she be abandoned, I'll put a crew aboard, and we'll sail home
together. There is value in that little ship, sir, and she is too
handsome a craft to be allowed to wash about down here.'

Some of the male passengers arrived for their customary bath in the
head. Do not believe the bath-room of the metal palace of this day
comparable as a luxury to the old head-pump.

You stripped, you sprang on to a grating betwixt the head-boards, and an
ordinary seaman went to work. The gushing blue brine sank to your
marrow. It gushed in cold sweetness through and through you. You gazed
down, and saw the clear blue profound out of which the sparkling coil
that hissed over your body was being drawn. It was the one delight of
the tropics, the one joy that haply sometimes checked the profanities in
the passengers' mouths when they came on deck and found the ship
motionless.

One of the first to come on deck to taste the sweetness of the head-pump
was Captain Parry. The instant he rose through the hatch his eye caught
sight of the schooner. He stood awhile staring; someone coming up behind
him forced him to move out of the hatch. He stepped out, still with his
eyes glued to the schooner, and advancing, that his vision might clear
the quarter-boat, he again came to a stand, staring.

He was a tall, well-built young man, about eight-and-twenty years of
age, close-shaven and dark, and there was something Roman and heroic in
the cast of his countenance. He was airily clothed for the bath, and
watched the schooner with a towel or two dangling in his grasp.

By this time the boat had reached the side of the apparently abandoned
vessel, and the third officer might with the naked eye easily have been
seen to spring aboard, followed by a seaman. He stood awhile taking a
view of the decks, then disappeared.

'Captain Barrington,' exclaimed Captain Parry, wheeling suddenly upon
the skipper of the ship as he approached him, 'is anything known of that
vessel?'

'I have just sent a boat to board her,' answered the captain.

'Will you allow me to use that glass?'

He took the telescope from the captain's hands, and resting the tubes on
the bulwark rail, gazed thirstily. There was something of
astonishment--indeed, of amazement--in his face when he turned to
Captain Barrington.

'I don't think I can be mistaken,' he exclaimed in a low voice, talking
to the captain, but looking at the schooner. 'It is the same
figure-head, exactly the same rig, the same size, so far as the eye can
measure her at this distance. She has a deck-house for her sailors, and
her paintwork is the same. It will be extraordinary!'

He fetched his breath in a half-gasp.

'Do you know that vessel, d'ye say, Captain Parry?' asked old
Barrington, looking with curiosity and interest at the fine young
fellow.

'I would swear that she is the _Mowbray_,' answered Captain Parry,
picking up the glass afresh, and continuing to talk. 'She was purchased
by Mr. Vanderholt, who made a yacht of her, and, when I was last in
England, I went a short cruise in her along with Mr. Vanderholt and his
daughter, the lady to whom--to whom---- Good God! the longer I look, the
more I am satisfied. No name is painted on her; you will find her name
in the boats. What, under heaven, brings her here, lying abandoned?
Yes, oh yes! I'd pick her out if she were in a fleet of five hundred
sail.'

'It may be as you say,' exclaimed Captain Barrington. 'It is a very
remarkable meeting. But we can be sure of nothing until the third
officer returns.'

A few passengers, attracted by this conversation, had drawn close. You
heard murmurs of excitement. A voyage at sea, in the old days of tacks
and sheets, was a tedious affair, in spite of flirtation, cards, the
simple diversions of the dance on the quarter-deck, the heaving of the
quoit, the bets on the run. Even a floating bottle was a something to
cause a stir. It broke the dull continuity of the day. A sail was a
Godsend. And here now, after many weeks of tedious ocean travel, here
now had suddenly uprisen, all at once, coming down a-beam out of the
darkness of the midnight, so to speak, an ocean mystery that would be
fraught with an inexpressible significance if Captain Parry's conjecture
proved accurate.

To this gentleman, for whom the head pump had magically ceased to have
existence, the time of waiting and suspense was frantically long.
Lieutenant Piercy came and stood beside him.

'But, supposing it is the _Mowbray_,' said the young officer: 'her
presence in this sea needn't concern your friends. The vessel may have
been sold. They may have been carrying her to some distant port. If it
is fever, the dead will be found; if mutiny----' Here Lieutenant Piercy
stopped, puzzled.

'I don't think Vanderholt would sell her,' exclaimed Parry. 'He was
proud merely of her possession, though he did not often go afloat. How
amazing to see her lying there! Of course it is the _Mowbray_,' he
exclaimed, again levelling the glass. 'She used to carry a long-boat,
and that's gone. If her people have left her, they went away in it.'

'She's certainly abandoned,' said Piercy, 'or something living would
have shown itself by this time.'

'Why the deuce doesn't that fellow Blundell return?' muttered Parry, in
an agony of impatience.

But, even as he spoke, the figure of the mate might have been observed
to drop over the schooner's side into the boat. The oars swept the
brine into steam. The boat hissed alongside, and the third mate stepped
on board. All the people of the saloon or cabin had by this time heard
the news; they knew that an abandoned schooner, which was an ocean
mystery, lay close by, and they had made great haste to dress
themselves, insomuch that a large number of them were on deck. They
elbowed round the third mate, and the commander, and Captain Parry, to
hear the ship's officer's report.

'She is the _Mowbray_, sir, of, and from, London. I can't find any
papers. Here's her log-book, sir. The last entry is in a female hand.
The vessel was apparently on a pleasure cruise.'

'Let me look at that book,' said Captain Parry.

He turned the pages till he came to the last entry, then began to read,
now and then swaying himself, then making a step in recoil. All saw by
his face and his motions, by his strange gestures, by the wild looks he
would sometimes cast from the page to the schooner, that what he read
was carrying the bitterness of death to his heart. Meanwhile the
captain was questioning the third officer.

'There's nothing alive on board?'

'Nothing, sir. I searched everywhere.'

'No dead bodies?'

'None, sir.'

'Did you discover nothing to enable us to make a guess at what's become
of her people?'

'Everything is in its place, sir. The log-book was left conspicuously
open on the table of the cabin, that had, doubtless, been occupied by
the captain.'

'Will you kindly accompany me below, Captain Barrington?' said Captain
Parry, who was so extremely agitated and distressed that he could barely
utter the words.

The passengers made room. Every face bore marks of pity and
astonishment. They had heard that the last entry was in a female hand,
and they had also heard--indeed, they could see--that yonder schooner
was abandoned.

Captain Parry followed the commander of the ship down the
companion-steps into a bright, handsomely-furnished saloon; thence they
passed into an after-cabin, the door of which Captain Barrington shut. A
large, old-fashioned stern window provided a spacious view of the sea.
The light came off the water in a cloud of splendour, and glowed and
throbbed upon the nautical brass instruments upon the table, and
sparkled in a glazed framed likeness of Mrs. Barrington.

'The entry here,' exclaimed Captain Parry, trembling with excitement,
and the twenty contending passions within him, 'is in the handwriting of
the young lady to whom I am--to whom I was--to whom I am to be married
on my arrival in England. She is Miss Violet Vanderholt. You perceive,'
he said, pointing with a shaking forefinger, 'that she writes her name.
The story she tells is of a diabolical mutiny. It took place on December
15. This entry is dated the 18th; to-day is the 20th. The _Mowbray_ has,
therefore, been abandoned two days only, perhaps not a day, for though
this last entry is dated the 18th, the crew need not necessarily have
abandoned the schooner till yesterday, or even this morning.'

'It is certain,' said Captain Barrington, 'that the hands, together with
the young lady, were on board the schooner on the 18th.'

'Quite certain, sir; but here is her story. Pray read it aloud to me; I
did not fully master it.'

Captain Parry, with a shaking hand, gave the log-book to his companion.
It was of the usual form of log-book, with a good wide space for
'Remarks' on the right-hand side of each page. Captain Barrington, a
white-haired man of fifty-five, with scarlet cheeks, glanced over a few
of the earlier entries. He saw that the log had been kept down to
December 14, afterwards the entry was in a female hand, strong, sure,
but somewhat small:

'I have ascertained that none of the men can read. I am writing an
account of what has befallen us, hoping, since the men talk of leaving
her and taking me with them, that this yacht may be met with, and this
log-book discovered. I heartily pray any into whose hands this book may
fall that he will publish my narrative to the world, so that my father's
fate and my own may be made known to Captain George Parry, H.E.I.C.'s
Service, to whom I am engaged to be married.'

The commander looked at Parry with brows arched by astonishment and
sailorly concern. The officer brought his hands together in a convulsive
gesture, and turned his eyes with a look of despair upon the sea, framed
in the window.

'My father was Mr. Montagu Vanderholt, a well-known Cape merchant. We
resided at ---- Terrace, Hyde Park, London. I, Violet Vanderholt, am his
only daughter. He thought that a sea-trip would do him good. He asked me
to accompany him. I was his only companion, and we set sail from the
Thames, November 1, in this year. The master was Captain Glew. He
treated the crew harshly, and excited their hate, though he was cautious
in his behaviour when I was on deck, so that I never could say he spoke
to a man barbarously. But the dreadful tragedy of this voyage was
occasioned by the bad food supplied to the sailors. This was undoubtedly
Captain Glew's fault. He had been commissioned to victual the vessel,
and was responsible for her stores, and I fear he knew that what he
bought was not wholesome for men to eat, though the charges my poor
father was at should have given the men the very best quality of food.
They complained to Glew, but not to my father. Captain Glew never hinted
that the men were murmuring, and the mutiny was sprung upon us with
dreadful suddenness. The captain and the mate seized the boatswain, and
a man stabbed the captain in the side, and mortally wounded him. My
father dragged me below, and, rushing into his cabin for a pistol,
returned on deck to cow the men with the weapon. They did not heed him,
and he fired, and, as I have since been told, and must believe, shot the
mate, Mr. Tweed, accidentally through the head. Mr. Vanderholt was
killed by an iron bar, flung with murderous violence. They afterwards
feigned that this bar was thrown with the intention of dashing the
pistol from my father's hand. This is all that I have to relate.

'I am writing this at ten o'clock on the morning of the 18th. I cannot
imagine what the men intend. I asked the boatswain, who has treated me
with great civility throughout, to tell me what they mean to do. This
very morning I repeated the question. He answered he could not say. The
men were undecided. Some were for going away in the boat, and taking
their chance of being picked up, and some for remaining in the vessel. I
gathered from his manner that these were few. What are they to do with
the schooner if they stick to her? They might, indeed, wreck her off
some island where they could represent themselves as shipwrecked men. I
know that they regard me as a witness against them, and that my life is
in great danger, and the merciful God alone knows what is to become of
me. It is nearly----'

Here the entry ended.

The commander of the ship looked at Captain Parry.

'The hand of Providence is in this,' said the scarlet-faced man, very
soberly and seriously.

'They cannot be far off!' exclaimed Captain Parry, stepping to the stern
window with an air of distraction, and staring out at the sea.

'It is a clock-calm,' said the commander, 'and if anything which moves
by canvas has received the crew, we may presume that she lies as
helpless as we, not far distant.'

'But what excuse could they make,' said Captain Parry, 'to be
transferred from so staunch a little ship as the _Mowbray_?'

'They might say that they were without a navigator.'

'Wouldn't another vessel put a navigator on board so fine a craft and
send her home, sooner than leave her to go to pieces? In that case we
should not have found her here.'

'There's nothing to be done at sea, sir, by arguing and speculating,'
said Captain Barrington, still preserving his very serious manner, as
though, indeed, he had found something to awe him in the circumstance
of a girl writing, so to speak, in the heart of the Atlantic, with
particular reference to her lover, and that lover reading her words
there. 'It is as likely as not,' he continued, 'that they have gone away
in the long-boat. It is clear, from the narrative, that the majority
were in favour of that measure. These are quiet waters, and the men have
reason to hope that they will be picked up soon, in which case they can
tell their own story.'

'But Miss Vanderholt?' exclaimed Captain Parry. 'She can bear witness
against them. What will they do with her?'

'Ha!' exclaimed the commander, fetching a deep breath. 'It is certain,
anyhow, that she is not in the schooner.'




CHAPTER VIII.

IN SEARCH.


In the year of this story Old Leisure was still going to sea. He
flourished as pleasantly upon the ocean as amidst the hens and
dunghills, the milkmaids and dairies, of the Poyser farmyard. He brought
his main-topsail to the mast without reluctance when there was anything
to be seen or talked to; he went on board the stranger, and dined with
him; invited the stranger in return; then leisurely proceeded. There was
no prompt despatch, to speak of, no urgency. The wind was the prevailing
condition of the immense distances which the wooden keel traversed. Old
Leisure kept his eye to windward, and hauled out his bowlines; but it
was a time of ambling, of dozing, and of whistling for winds until too
much came.

Only in such a time as this now dealt with could we conceive a large,
full-rigged ship, homeward bound from India, full of impatient hearts,
hove-to, with a derelict schooner within easy hail, and the commander
taking plenty of time to reason about her with a gentleman who was
infinitely concerned in her unexpected, astounding apparition and
log-book narrative.

'The thought of Miss Vanderholt being at the mercy of a crew of mutinous
ruffians is unbearable!' exclaimed Captain Parry. 'What is to be done?
Advise me, in the name of God, captain! You know--you know--I have told
you she was to be my wife. You are an old sailor. For God's sake,
counsel me!'

'If I could be sure that they had made off in their boat, and were still
afloat in her,' answered the captain, 'I should know how to advise you.
But if they have been received on board a ship, then I don't see what
can be done. For in what direction may that ship be heading? Enough if
your young lady should be safe, sir. Supposing her to be on board a
ship, I have no doubt of your hearing good news of her, in course of
time, after your arrival in England.'

He opened the cabin-door, and called to one of the stewards.

'My compliments to the chief officer, and ask him to come to me.'

Mr. Mulready quickly presented himself.

'We have some notion,' said Captain Barrington, addressing his mate,
whilst he laid his hand upon the log of the _Mowbray_, 'that the crew of
the schooner may have left her in their boat, taking the young lady with
them. Send a couple of hands--don't trouble the young gentlemen,' said
he, with a supercilious smile, vanishing almost as it appeared upon his
firm lips, 'but a couple of sharp hands to the royal mastheads. Give one
of them this glass.' He handed Mr. Mulready a binocular. 'Let the other
take the ship's telescope aloft. I want the sea carefully swept. Make
them understand that they must creep in their search to the very verge,
for how far off is a boat visible? But they might sight the gleam of her
lugsail.'

Mr. Mulready took the glasses, and went swiftly out.

Captain Parry stood at the open window, listening to what was passing,
straining his sight also with consuming passions of dread, blind desire,
helpless wrath, at the star-blue line of the sea that swept the
brilliance of the heavens within little more than a league. The captain
of the ship went to a locker, and took out a chart of the Atlantic. He
spread it, and called to Captain Parry.

The officer turned, and eagerly stepped to the chart. He saw zigzag
prickings or lines upon the white sheet, as though somebody had been
trying to represent flashes of lightning. Each line terminated in a
little dotted circle. These were the 'runs.' But, then, these were also
the Doldrums, and the motive power of that ship, the _Alfred_, lay in
the breeze that, in the Doldrums, blows in the delicate catspaw that
scarcely has power to run a shiver into the glazed breast.

'This was our situation at noon yesterday,' said the commander, putting
his finger upon the northernmost little circle. 'There is no land for
leagues, as you may observe.'

'What are those rocks?' observed Captain Parry, peering.

'St. Paul's Island--a horrible hornet's nest of black fangs, entirely
out of the boat's reach. I am not sure that I ever heard of a boat
effecting a landing. Anyone cast ashore there must perish. There is
nothing to eat or drink. It is the desolation of hell!' added the
commander, with a note of religious fervour in his speech; 'and a
dreadful surf like a nightmare of storm raves day and night round those
rocks.'

'What is to be done?' said Captain Parry, lifting himself erect from the
chart. 'If they are in a boat they cannot be far distant. They have not
long left the schooner, but every stroke of the oar carries them further
away, and renders the search more hopeless.'

'The search?' exclaimed the commander, in a note of inquiry and
surprise.

'I don't mean in this ship, of course,' said the officer, speaking with
agitation and very quickly. 'A clipper schooner lies close at hand. If
you will lend me a navigator and a few hands, we will sweep the sea,
taking this mark,' he continued, putting his finger upon the chart, 'as
our base, and hunting with masthead look-outs, and fierce fires burning
by night, in circles whose circumference or diameter I should leave to
the judgment of the mate in charge.'

The commander began to slowly pace his cabin. Once he paused, and gazed
with a face of earnest gravity at the sea that came brimming to the
counter in a sheet of winding lines, the light swathes of the tropic
calm, the oily gleam, the trouble of some stream of current twinkling in
diamonds.

Captain Parry eyed him with anxiety. He dreaded a discussion that might
kill the hope that had suddenly been born in him. A tap on the door
caused the commander to start.

Mr. Mulready entered.

'The masthead men have been working hard with their glasses, sir, and
report nothing in sight.'

'How is the schooner?'

'Forlorn, but safe, sir.'

'Take a boat and go aboard, and make a further thorough examination of
her, and overhaul her stores--all as smartly as may be, sir. This
gentleman has an idea, and I don't know but that it might prove
practicable,' said the commander. And, as Mr. Mulready left the cabin,
the captain of the ship turned to Parry, and asked him to follow him on
deck.

On the commander emerging, the third mate approached and touched his
cap, and exclaimed:

'When I said there was no living thing aboard that schooner, sir, I
should have reported a small coop full of cocks and hens, all alive, and
very hungry and thirsty. I fed them with some rice I found in the
galley, and poured a quantity of water into their trough.'

He saluted, and marched off.

'In the face of Miss Vanderholt's last entry,' said the captain to
Parry, 'we don't want live cocks and hens to tell us that that vessel
has been recently abandoned.'

She lay softly lifting upon the light swell, a beautiful, helpless
fabric. The shudders which ran through her canvas were like the
distress of something living. She had slewed somewhat, bringing her
jibbooms to bear upon the ship. In the blind, hopeless way of abandoned
craft, she was posture-making for help.

The excitement aboard the _Alfred_ was very great indeed. The
mastheading of the men, the pictures of their little bodies high in the
heavens, sweeping the deep with binocular and telescope, had immensely
stimulated the passions of curiosity and wonder.

What did the captain expect the sailors to see upon that vast girdle of
brine, that rolled flawless to the glorious stroke of the sun? It was
known that the young lady who had been on board the schooner was
betrothed to Captain Parry. Could romance be carried beyond this? The
ladies fluttered in talk, the gentlemen growled.

'I'm keeping a diary,' said a major, with great, dyed, well-curled
whiskers, to the surgeon of the ship, 'of this voyage home, as I did of
the voyage out, and I shall probably publish it, sir. But this incident
will not be credited. Sages in their day have believed in ghosts, and
laughed to scorn a report of earthquakes.'

'I do not see why this incident should not be believed,' said the
doctor.

'It is too probable--for the sea, sir. If you want a sea-fact to be
accepted, state that which a sailor will know to be impossible.'

'Parry looks as haggard as if he had been up for a week of nights,' said
the doctor.

Many eyes were fixed upon him as he stood beside the master of the ship,
viewing the schooner and talking. The ship forward was a gem of an ocean
piece, with the smoke of her galley-chimney going straight up, the
sailors--it was their breakfast-time--lounging in the cool of the shade
of the jibs, with hook-pots and biscuits, and pipes of tobacco: and the
great foresail, white as milk, floated motionless from its long yard.

Some soldiers in white clothes were seated upon the booms, in the wake
of the draught which would stir from that vast square of sail when the
weak swell of the sea put a faint pulse of life into it. The sky was
sublimely lofty, with the light-blue brilliance of the tropic zone; not
a cloud to depress it to the sight, and all the air was gone.

Captain Barrington and Captain Parry stood together at the mizzen
shrouds, looking at the schooner, conversing, and waiting for the return
of the mate. The passengers very respectfully gave them a wide berth.

'No,' says Captain Barrington presently; 'I shall have no objection,
sir. I am to be influenced by humanity in this business. My owners
cannot and will not object,' he added, as if thinking aloud. 'We shall
be saving a valuable yacht. Mr. Blundell is a very efficient young
officer, quite experienced enough to take charge, and he will receive
certain instructions from me, sir, for we must define the area of sea to
be searched, and the time to be taken.'

He looked at the schooner thoughtfully.

'She is under two hundred tons,' said he. 'Mr. Blundell and four men and
a boy should suffice; I can spare no more.'

'I am no sailor, but I can pull and haul,' said Captain Parry. 'I can
do a man's bit. What time would you limit us to?'

'I should wish to be a little elastic. There's no wind here to depend
upon,' answered the commander. 'I will see Mr. Blundell in my cabin
after breakfast, and explain my ideas.'

Presently the breakfast-bell rang. The captain and the passengers went
below. Captain Parry asked that a biscuit and a cup of tea should be
brought to him on deck. He gazed round upon the spacious sea, and the
tranquillity of it soothed and calmed his inward, hidden, fuming
impatience.

He knew that the stagnation that held the _Alfred_ motionless would keep
the boat so, unless the men rowed, which was not very conceivable, for
sailors do not commonly row when the distance they have to traverse runs
into hundreds of miles. If they had been taken aboard a ship, she, too,
must be lying becalmed.

Yet one black dread ever haunted Captain Parry's fancies. He was going
to seek the boat. Had Miss Vanderholt accompanied the men? Would they
carry with them a living witness to their piracy and murders? Had not
she been murdered before the schooner was abandoned?

It was ten o'clock when the mate returned from the _Mowbray_. All this
while the sea remained satin-smooth. The sun, soaring high, burnt
fiercely; the paint bubbled in blisters, the pitch ran in soft-soap, and
the whole light of the schooner's canvas poured under her in quivering
sheets of quicksilver.

Mr. Mulready was dark with dirt and sweat, and looked like a man who has
passed a week in stowing a ship's hold. Captain Parry stood in the
gangway to receive him, and the mate's immediate inquiry was for the
commander. He was closeted with Mr. Blundell.

'What news can you give me?' said the military officer, grasping the
dry-minded mate by the arm, and looking beseechingly into his face.

'There's just plenty of stores and fresh water,' answered Mr. Mulready,
'enough to last a small crew six months. Her after-hold is rich in the
eating line. There are about two dozen cocks and hens.'

'I don't mean _that_!' exclaimed Parry wildly. 'Did you find no hint of
the fate of the young lady?'

'My answer must be,' answered the mate, with a certain formal,
sympathetic gravity, 'that nothing is alive on yonder vessel saving a
few cocks and hens.'

The captain made his appearance, followed by Mr. Blundell.

'I have arranged with the third officer,' said he, walking straight up
to Captain Parry and the mate, 'that he shall take charge of the yacht
and search for the boat. There can be no hurry whilst this clock-calm
lasts. Still, I dare say you'll be glad to go on board.'

'I'm mad to go on board!' answered Captain Parry.

'Get your luggage together, then, sir. Mr. Blundell will provide the
schooner with a couple of pistols out of the arms' chest, and the
necessary ammunition. If you fall in with the boat, remember they are
eight seamen, rendered desperate by murder. You will be but seven. The
possibility is faint, the chance is the smallest,' the captain muttered
in a dying voice.

'I thank you for your foresight,' said Parry; and he went hastily to his
cabin to pack up.

The mate told Captain Barrington that there were plenty of rockets and
portfires aboard the schooner. A fireball by night might bring the boat
to the yacht. He then produced a piece of paper, and gave the commander
an idea of the quantity of stores in the little vessel.

'They'll want nothing from us, then,' said Captain Barrington. 'However,
since the mutiny appears to have been owing to the rottenness of the
food, sling a couple of casks of our beef into the boat.'

It was eleven o'clock when all was ready for Captain Parry to go on
board the _Mowbray_. Four men and a boy had volunteered as a crew, and
when the boat was freighted she lay deep alongside with seamen's chests,
luggage, casks of beef, and human beings. The passengers made a tender
farewell of this singular, most romantic leave-taking in mid-ocean.
They pressed forward to shake Captain Parry by the hand. Some hoped that
the blessing of God would attend his search. More than one lady raised a
handkerchief to her eyes. As the boat shoved off, a hearty cheer broke
from the whole length of the vessel. The boat reached the side of the
_Mowbray_, and all that was to be received on board was hoisted up.

Captain Parry breathed deep, and wore a wildness in his looks, whilst he
stood for a few minutes gazing round about him. Of course, he remembered
the little ship perfectly well--the delightful cruise he had taken in
her, with Violet and her father, a little while before he returned to
India. He looked, and began to realize the brutal scene as the girl had
sketched it in that last entry. It was hard to think of his immensely
wealthy friend Mr. Vanderholt meeting a mean, base end at the hands of a
brutal Ratcliffe sailor. What had they done with Violet? The little ship
seemed to smell of human blood. The airy graces of her heights, the
beauty of all that was choice and finished betwixt her rails, seemed to
have departed. Wherever murder stalks, the spirit of horror, attended
by the ghost of neglect and decay, follows. They break the windows of
the house. They command the spiders to build. The dirty little building
in which the body was found is going to pieces. The alley up which the
body was dragged is of a sickly green, with a growth of unwholesome
grass.

It was so with this yacht--this beautiful fabric, the _Mowbray_. The
wizardry of murder had changed her to the sight of Parry. He cursed her
with all his heart as the cause of the destruction of his sweetheart and
Mr. Vanderholt, and, wondering what the devil had brought her so far
from home, whether it might be possible that father and daughter had
been sailing to India to meet him, that they might return together in
the same vessel, he put his hand upon the fire-hot companion-hood, and
descended the ladder.

He searched, as the two mates had searched, and, of course, found more
than they. He beheld in a cabin memorials of his sweetheart--her
dresses, her hats, a veil, and a pair of gloves lay in her cot. One
glove was still bulked with the impress of her hand, as though she had
but just now drawn it off in a hurry, and cast it down. He peered
narrowly. The cabin was a charming little boudoir. He witnessed no
suggestions of violence; nothing appeared to have been disturbed. He
sought for marks of blood, then thought to himself, 'If she is murdered,
they did not kill her with a knife--they drowned her.'

He stayed for half an hour in this cabin, then entered the adjoining
berth, which had been Mr. Vanderholt's. He found nothing to help him
here. The old gentleman had been eccentric. He had believed he loved the
life of the forecastle,--God help him!--and he had illustrated his idle
imagination of fondness by causing his berth to be rendered as
uncomfortable as possible.

Parry was disturbed in his investigations of this berth by a bustle in
the cabin. He looked out, and saw a couple of sailors coming down with
his luggage.

'Tumble those traps in here,' said he. 'Are we moving?'

'It is a fact, sir,' said one of the men, who was a Swede. 'A little
gentle vindt has begun to blow, and der _Alfred_ is going home.'

'Home? I do not quite understand,' exclaimed Captain Parry.

He said no more, however, to the men, and went on deck to look about
him.

An air of heaven, blowing out of the boundless blue, with not a cloud in
the sky to show you where it came from, was wrinkling the wide waters
into a thrilling azure, and under the sun the glory was blinding.

They had trimmed sail on the schooner--a trifling matter; a hand was at
the helm; Mr. Blundell stood beside him, looking into the little
binnacle. On the bow was the _Alfred_, with her foretop-sail full, every
cloth stirless, so soft was the cradling of that sea. Her yards were
braced forwards, and she seemed to lean; she floated upright in silent
majesty, nevertheless, her trucks plumb with the zenith, and, as she
gained way, her short scope of wake sparkled like a shoal of herrings
under her counter.

Mr. Blundell was a stout, hearty young sailor, about two-and-twenty
years of age. He had that sort of face which is often met at sea under
both flags--perfectly hairless, fleshy, permanently tinctured by the
roasting fires and the drying-in gales and frosts of ocean-travel. He
was looking at the compass of the schooner when Captain Parry
approached. Perhaps he sought for a hint or two in gear that did not
lead like a ship's, and canvas that was not shaped for square-yards. At
a motion from Captain Parry, he drew away from the helmsman.

'I am at a loss,' said the captain, looking at the ship under the
shelter of his hand. 'Is the _Alfred_ going home?'

'Certainly, sir,' answered Mr. Blundell. 'We've dipped our farewell.
We're now on our own hook.'

'Then, I mistook. I supposed when Captain Barrington talked of limiting
us to time that he intended we should return to him here,' said Captain
Parry.

The young mate smiled.

'His notion in limiting us to time,' said he, 'was that we should not
run the quest into a hopeless job. There should be a limit.'

'Of course, a reasonable limit,' said Parry. 'What is it?'

'It has been left to my judgment, sir; and I am willing to be governed
by you.'

'Thanks, Blundell!'

Captain Parry, pronouncing this sentence with warmth and emotion,
stepped to the binnacle and looked at the card.

'You are holding the schooner north-west,' said he. 'You have a reason?'

'We must head her on one course or another,' answered Blundell. 'I
propose, with your leave, to carry out Captain Barrington's ideas. He
has sketched me a circular course. I'll compass it off on the chart
below presently, and you shall form your own opinion. Loose the square
canvas, my lads!' he sang out, abruptly breaking from Captain Parry.

The captain lent a hand to pull and haul; he dragged to the music of the
salt-throats at the sheets and halliards. The breeze freshened in a
steady gushing. The ocean was a miracle of laughing light. Already you
heard the snore of foam at the cutwater, and the stealthy hiss of its
passage aft.

The _Alfred_ was growing small and square in the blue distance. She was
feeling the breeze now, and her pale and shapely shadow leaned as she
headed, with an occasional dim flash from her wet, black side, into the
far northern recess.

Captain Parry went below, and returned on deck with the binocular which
he had observed in Mr. Vanderholt's cabin. The main rigging of the
_Mowbray_ was rattled down to the height of the lower masthead. The
captain got into the shrouds, and made his way to the crosstrees.
Higher, being no sailor, he durst not crawl. With one hand he grasped a
topmast shroud that was sweating tar; with the other he lifted the
glasses, and searched the sea till his eyes swelled and throbbed in
their sockets. When he descended he said to the mate:

'I have wondered why the men should have left the schooner afloat. Don't
they usually scuttle vessels in affairs of this sort?'

'I heard the captain and the second officer talk this matter over,' said
Mr. Blundell. 'The second mate thought that the villains knew what they
were about when they left the schooner floating. She would be met with,
and boarded. They'd find nothing to give them an idea of what had
happened. So she'd be carried away to a port as a mystery, and that
would be giving the men a better chance than had they scuttled her.'

'Why?'

'Always one of the men who've been concerned in bloody businesses of
this sort finds his way to a hospital. He lies alongside another man and
gabbles. The second mate seemed to think that if one of the men of this
yacht turned up at a hospital and gabbled, less would be made of what he
said if the schooner had been towed into port as a mystery than had she
been sunk. For my part,' added Mr. Blundell, 'I believe they left her
afloat because they couldn't find the heart to sink her. She is a
beauty,' he murmured; and he whistled as he looked aloft and around.

'I take the second mate's view,' said Captain Parry.

He now made the tour of the schooner. He went forward and looked into
the men's deck-house, then dropped into the little forecastle and peered
round him. When he regained the deck, he saw a seaman climbing the
fore-rigging, with a binocular glass slung over his shoulder. He watched
him till the man had reached the royal yard, over which he threw his
leg, with his back against the sun-bright mast. The seaman began to
sweep the sea slowly and critically.

'Good God!' thought Captain Parry, with a sudden heart-leap, 'if the
boat is afloat, or has not been picked up, we ought to fall in with
her.'

The noise of the breeze was in his ears, a glad sense of motion came to
him from the quick salt seething alongside. His heart leapt up; but in a
minute all was dark again within him, with the horrible dread that
Violet had been murdered by the men before they quitted the schooner.

The large, comfortable long-boat had been lifted out of its chocks, and
was gone. Captain Parry noticed, however, that two good boats hung in
the davits on either hand. He was impatient to learn the directions
given by Captain Barrington, but Mr. Blundell was busy with the little
ship's affairs just then. He had to appoint a cook, and see to the
dinner; he had to arrange for a masthead look-out that should be brief
under that broiling eye of day. They were few, and it taxed his genius
as a sailor to make the most of them.

At last he found some time to spare. A sailor was left to trudge a
look-out; one at the helm made two, one on the royal yard made three.
The cook was the fourth, and the 'boy' was left to stand-by. Captain
Parry followed the mate into the cabin, and, whilst Blundell went into
his berth for the chart of the Atlantic, the captain stood looking about
him and thinking. She had sat there, or there, he thought, at table. It
was so recent, the very fragrance of her might be found in the
atmosphere. How often had her feet trodden those steps? He saw her, in
imagination, reading; she pored upon some volume, under that golden
globe, with her hair illuminated; he thought of her agony of heart when
she rushed on deck at the sound of firearms, and saw her father, the
captain, and mate lying dead, and knew that she was alone with a crew of
murderers.

'This is how Captain Barrington hopes we'll work it, sir,' said
Blundell, coming out of Captain Glew's berth, and putting a chart upon
the table.

He also produced a pair of compasses and a nautical instrument for
measuring distances. He pulled a paper, covered with calculations, from
his pocket, and placed it by his side.

'This will be it, I think, sir,' said Blundell, sticking a leg of the
compass into the chart; 'where the point of this leg is we were when we
parted company with the _Alfred_. We allow the boat a start of
thirty-six hours, remembering always that our weather will have been
hers.'

'Quite so!' exclaimed Captain Parry, devouring every word.

'I am now heading,' continued the mate, with a glance at the paper, 'to
arrive at this point.' Here he put the pencil end of the compasses upon
the chart. 'When we arrive there, our navigation will be this.'

He now, with great care, and constant references to the paper of
figures, together with a frequent use of the nautical instruments for
measuring distances, described a number of circles. These circles lay
one within another, and when completed they might be likened to a
cone-shaped spring, or to a corkscrew looked at vertically.

'You will perceive, Captain Parry,' said the mate, 'that the distance
between each circle is the same. How far can a man see from the
schooner's royal yard? Well, Captain Barrington would not allow that he
should be able to see so small an object as a boat, even with a good
telescope, at a greater distance than thirteen miles. Thirteen miles to
port and thirteen to starboard. Each circle, therefore, is twenty-six
miles wide.'

'If the boat is afloat,' exclaimed Captain Parry, viewing the discs with
admiration full of hope, 'she must positively be within one of these
circles?'

'Unless she has taken a breeze and blown clear, or means to come running
into the inner whilst we're steering our dead best for the outer
circles.'

'What chance do we stand?'

'Frankly, sir, the smallest chance that ever was found at sea,'
answered the young mate, rolling up his chart.

'The horrible consideration with me,' said Captain Parry, 'is that the
young lady may not be in the boat.'

Mr. Blundell looked slowly round the cabin, but made no answer.

'What do you think?' exclaimed Parry. 'If we fall in with the boat shall
we find Miss Vanderholt in her?'

The mate mused, toyed a bit with the chart, rolling and unrolling it,
then said:

'From what I overheard the mate say about the entry the young lady made
in the log-book, I should argue that the men had been using her civilly
from the time of the mutiny. That's in her favour, sir.'

Parry eyed him intently. All the shrewdness in Blundell's brain was
working in his face, sharpening his gaze and pinching lips and nose into
a lifted look of eagerness whilst he talked.

'There seems to have been no trouble aboard this vessel,' he continued,
'until the mutiny took place. That should signify that the men, taking
them all round, were steady as sailors go. No doubt they'd got something
in the Nova Scotia way in their captain. He appears to have been one of
those captains who, after draining the blood out of men's veins, runs
gunpowder in, then applies the fuse. Everybody's aghast at the bloody
business, but it's one man's doing.'

'You believe that they would not use violence towards Miss Vanderholt?'

'Until I knew, I could never persuade myself that they'd make away with
her. They are men. I dare say they were demons whilst they fought, and
thought of the cause of their fighting. I'll not believe that, as
English seamen, they'd kill the poor lady.'

'She's a living witness against them.'

'They'll have heaped oath upon oath upon her, sir. Likely as not they'll
put her aboard something passing, themselves going away and waiting for
the next ship.'

'God grant it!' exclaimed Captain Parry. 'It's the first bit of hope
that's come to me since we fell in with the schooner.'




CHAPTER IX.

THE DISCOVERY.


The wind that evening freshened out of the north-west glare of sunset.
The sky thickened, and some small wings of scud flew south-east, bronzed
by the western splendour dimming fast. The sea ran in a cloudy green,
but without weight, in the light tropic surge.

At sundown Mr. Blundell hailed the royal yard, and the answer, hoarse in
tone as a seagull's scream, was:

'Nothing in sight, sir.'

The mate ordered the man to come down on deck, and half an hour later,
when darkness was on the face of the deep, and the last red scar had
died out of the starless sky, the _Mowbray_ was slopping softly through
the creaming waters, under her mainsail and standing jib.

It was like being hove-to; but she had way, and when Captain Parry
looked over the taffrail, he saw the cold, green lights of the sea
revolving and sliding off in the short spread of yeast the nimble
clipper carried with her.

It drew down a night ghastly with the pallor of the hidden moon. At
about nine o'clock they burnt a flare; the crimson flames rose
quivering, and the smoke drove, black as a thunder-cloud, betwixt the
masts to leeward. The little ship stood out against the night
fire-tinctured.

She looked, with her glowing yellow masts and fiery shrouds, to be built
of flame. The night came in walls of blackness to this wild and
beautiful vision, and the noise of the sea, and the sense of the
infinity of the deep, that was running and seething out of sight, filled
the glowing picture with an entrancing spirit of mystery. You would have
said that she owed her life and light to the sea-gods.

Both Parry and the mate, whilst this flare was burning, repeatedly
directed their night-glasses at the ocean, and, even whilst it burnt, a
man came aft to the call of the mate and sent up a couple of rockets.
The fireballs hissed, burst, and vanished in spangles, darting a lustre
as of lightning across a little space of sky.

The flare crackled, leapt up, smouldered, and was extinguished by a
bucket of water.

A couple of lanterns--bright globular glasses--were lighted, and hung up
in the main rigging, one on each side. This brought the hour to about a
quarter past ten. The sea was again searched, its ghastly face had
stolen out, and the heads of the breaking billows under that thick and
pallid sky were like flashes of guns in mist.

'If the lady isn't in this circle, Captain Parry,' said Mr. Blundell
cheerfully, 'let's hope we'll find her in the next. If the boat's within
ten miles of us they'll have seen our flare and those fireballs.'

'But we are moving through the sea,' said Captain Parry. 'If we make
them a head wind, and continue to sail, how are they to fetch us?'

'The schooner's only just under command, sir. If I heave to the drift
will put me out. With your kind leave I'll go below and get a glass of
grog.'

They both went into the cabin, leaving a man to look out. They were
waited upon by the 'boy,' who was, indeed, a young man of about
eight-and-twenty, with a face full of sallow fluff, and an old man's
look in his eyes and in the contraction of his brows, as though he had
been born in the workhouse and knew life.

But at sea there were but three ratings, and if you don't sign articles
as an able or ordinary seaman, then, if you were eighty years old, and
could scarcely creep over the ship's side with your cargo of scythe and
hour-glass, you'd still be called a boy.

The mate and Captain Parry sat for a little in the cabin, sipping cold
brandy and water.

'Should the men in the boat see our flares and rockets,' said the
captain, 'what will they think of them?'

'They'll approach us to take a look.'

'But if they make out that we are the schooner of their piracy and
murders, will they come on board?'

'She's an open boat, sir, and you have to consider how men will be
driven by exposure. Anyhow,' said Mr. Blundell, 'if we can only coax her
this side the horizon, we may easily keep her in sight till we've worn
them out.'

'I have been thinking of these red-hot skies, too. Will Miss Vanderholt
be able to survive the exposure of even a day and a night?' And Captain
Parry swayed in his chair with the grief of the thought.

'Well,' said the mate, with the note of a stout heart in his voice,
'only a sailor is able to tell a man what ladies really can go through.
Low-class females, emigrants and the like, cave in quickly; they are the
shriekers. They cannot bear terror, and it kills them on rafts and in
boats. But your thoroughbred lady is always the one that I've seen,
heard of, and read of, who has shown a lion's heart and the coldness of
a stone head in shipwreck. If Miss Vanderholt be in the boat, you'll
find that she'll have suffered less than the men.'

A faint smile stirred the lips of Captain Parry; but he grew quickly
grave again, with the distress of his imaginations. At that moment a
hoarse cry in the skylight made them spring to their feet.

'There's a big ship a-bearing down upon us!'

The mate rushed up the steps, followed by Captain Parry. The ghostly
sheen of the moon still clouded as with steam the thickness of the
night, and the scene of heaven and sea was mystical with elusive
distance, with the soft near flash of the surge, and the windy chaos of
the horizon.

On the bow, not half a mile distant, was a large pale shape. The
night-glass made her white-hulled, with canvas to her trucks. The
schooner was thrown into the wind. It was clearly the intention of the
stranger to speak the _Mowbray_. Through the small scattering hiss of
the sea on either hand you might have heard the low, constant thunder of
the bow-wave of the ship as she washed through the brine, making a light
for herself with her sides and white heights, but showing no lights. On
a sudden the human silence was broken by a short, gruff command, weak
with distance. The sound might then be heard of yards being swung; ropes
crowed in blocks, parrels creaked on masts, and in a few minutes a large
white ship, with the fires of the sea dripping at her cutwater, lay
abreast of the schooner, all way choked out of her by the backed
topsail.

'Schooner ahoy!'

'Hallo!' shouted Mr. Blundell, sending his voice far into the darkness
over the ship's rail, whence the hail had proceeded.

'What's wrong with you that you are sending up rockets and burning
flares?'

'We are in search of a boat. Have you met with a boat containing eight
men and a lady?'

A short silence ensued.

'What schooner are you?'

'The _Mowbray_, of, and now for, the Thames, when we recover the boat.
What ship are you?'

'The _Georgina Wilde_, Liverpool to Melbourne. I expect your people have
been rescued. We passed a schooner's long-boat yesterday morning, and I
read your name, the _Mowbray_, in her stern sheets.'

'If that's the case,' exclaimed Mr. Blundell quickly to Captain Parry,
'there'll be no good left in this circle job.'

'Has he no more information to give us?' said Captain Parry, with a
hopeless stare at the tall, pale shadow, upon whose decks nothing was
visible in that thickness save a dull, Will-o'-the-wisp-like glimmer
where the binnacle stand stood.

The schooner was hailed again.

'Hallo!' answered Blundell.

'We sighted a derelict yesterday at noon. She was within a mile or two
of the long-boat. Looked like a small brig, timber-laden.'

'How would she bear from us now?' bawled the mate.

It was plain, from the stillness that followed, that the man with the
powerful hoarse voice had walked to his compass-stand to consider the
required bearings. A midnight hush came down upon the deep then, spite
of the plash and gurgle of waters in motion, and of a dull song of wind
up aloft in the rigging of the schooner.

Now it was that a single shaft of moonlight glanced through a rift down
upon the sea, flashing up the rolling head of a surge into a melting
hill of silver. The night seemed to sweep with a deeper dye of blackness
from either hand that pure crystal ray. Yet it made a light, too. It
gave substance and firmness to the visionary ship abeam.

Captain Parry saw a figure coming along the deck from the binnacle to
the rail to hail. He also perceived figures of seamen on the short
topgallant forecastle; likewise he beheld the bowsprit and jibbooms
forking out like a huge spear, poised for hurling in the grasp of a
giant, and betwixt that extreme point of jibboom and masthead floated
symmetric clouds of soft whiteness; but the moonbeam was eclipsed in a
few moments, and the white ship sank back into a vision, glimmering and
scarce determinable.

Again the schooner was hailed.

'The bearings of the derelict,' shouted the voice, in tones of the
volume of a speaking-trumpet, 'will be north-west by north half north,
about. Don't take this as if it was an observation. Try about forty mile
on that course, and if nothing heaves into view, sweep the sea. The
derelict's bound to be afloat. Farewell! Good luck attend you!' Then, a
minute later, 'Swing the main topsail yard! Ease away your weather main
braces!'

The pale and lofty shadow leaned from the damp night breeze, and the
water trembled into fire along the visionary length of her, when, with a
soft stoop of her bow to some invisible heave of the ocean, she broke
her way onwards, dissolving quickly into the night.

'About forty miles distant,' said Mr. Blundell, stepping to the compass.
'Shall we head on a course for her, sir?'

'Oh, most certainly!' answered Captain Parry.

'Better jog along under easy canvas, till it comes daylight, anyhow,'
said the mate.

The course was shifted, sail trimmed, the gaff foresail was set, and the
schooner, carrying the midnight breeze abeam, slided soundless through
the gloom over the black, wide swell of the sea.

Captain Parry was too anxious to take rest. He lighted a cheroot, and
paced the deck with Mr. Blundell, who had heroically resolved not to
turn in that night--not to turn in at all until the timber-laden
derelict had been sighted, boarded and rummaged.

They kept the lanterns burning in the rigging. They never knew how it
might be with the eight men and the lady, supposing the lady with them.
It is true that the long-boat had been fallen in with adrift; but then,
as Mr. Blundell put it, 'That might be due to an accident, without
signifying that they'd been received on board a ship, and their boat let
go.'

'My own view's this, sir,' said he, as he lighted one of Parry's
cheroots at the glowing tip of the Captain's. 'The men saw that timber
craft, and being scorched with the heat, and wild with cramp, they
resolved to make for the shelter of it, where they could stretch their
arms and take the kinks out of their legs. The painter which held the
boat slipped, and she drifted softly off, and when they saw that she was
gone she was a dozen ships' lengths distant. They could do nothing,
aboard a drowned timberman with empty davits, and a list of perhaps
forty degrees, but let her go. That's my notion. We shall find all hands
aboard. If so, what will you wish me to do, sir?'

'Bring them into this schooner,' answered Captain Parry. 'If they have
murdered Miss Vanderholt, they shall swing for it, by God!'

'But pray consider this, sir,' said Mr. Blundell coolly. 'They are eight
men, daring, defiant devils, no doubt, bullies in the alley, jolly
examples of your Jack Muck. We are seven. To bring them on board we
should be obliged to fetch them. But, sir, we can't leave the schooner
deserted. She might run away from us. She got her liberty once, and the
appearance of the derelict might excite her appetite afresh for
freedom.'

'For God's sake, Mr. Blundell,' broke in Captain Parry, 'don't joke!'

'I mean, sir,' continued Mr. Blundell, in a voice that did him some
honour, as it proved he could be abashed, 'that we should have to leave
three of our people to look after the schooner, so that we should go
four to eight in order to fetch them.'

'We are armed,' exclaimed Captain Parry.

'Two pistols,' said the mate.

'We must bring them aboard--we must bring them aboard!' cried Captain
Parry, in a voice that almost shouted with nerve. 'Will they be
content,' he went on after a hard suck or two at his cigar, 'to continue
washing about in a wreck that might spread under them at any minute like
a pack of cards when they see a schooner alongside willing to receive
them?'

'To be hanged, sir.'

'Who's to tell them _that_ till we've got them under hatches?' said
Captain Parry.

'They know this craft,' said Blundell, in a note of gloom. 'It'll be a
job. Eight of 'em, and only four of us. It'll take us all we know.'

Captain Parry belonged to a fighting profession. When he talked of
boarding the timberman and bringing off the eight men, his imagination
was a little confused. He brandished a sword in fancy; he was followed
by a number of smart men in red coats, and with fixed bayonets. He did
not quite gather that, if he headed the boarders, he should be leading
into glory three timid seamen who were entirely averse to selling their
lives at any price. Moreover, Captain Parry was not a sailor. He could
not imagine how difficult it is to gain the deck of a ship whose people
do not want you. These eight men would, in a deck cargo of timber, find
plenty of materials fit for knocking out the bottom of a boat, and the
brains of those who should venture their noses above the rail.

But it was an idle argument betwixt him and the mate. Were they going to
find the half-foundered brig? Would the eight men be in her? Would Miss
Vanderholt be amongst them?

At daybreak nothing was visible in the telescope from the fore royal
yard. The weather had cleared in the night. It was a strange,
mountainous morning of huge swollen cloud, whose sun-bright bellies
amazingly whitened the silver of that ocean. Now and again, round about
the horizon, a spark of lightning flashed in the heart of a violet
shadow of vapour, and now and again a low note of thunder, distant,
tremulous as an organ strain, rolled across the sea, as though some
huge, deep-throated beast, big as a hill, and couchant behind the
horizon, was being worried.

There was breeze enough to keep the schooner's sails full, and sunrise
found the _Mowbray_ pursuing the course of the night. Captain Parry
refreshed himself with a bucket of cold green brine, and tried to make
some breakfast. Mr. Blundell ate heartily, and again, as they sat at
table, they argued upon the course to adopt should they find the eight
seamen on the wreck.

'If they've got Miss Vanderholt with them,' said the mate, 'I should
recommend asking them to allow us to receive her aboard--we leaving them
aboard the wreck to be taken off by the next thing that passes.'

'I like that idea,' said Captain Parry; 'it would save bloodshed. We
want nothing but the young lady. They should be glad to get easily rid
of her as a witness. If they are short of food, we can supply them with
stores enough to keep them going for a time that would allow of a
reasonable chance of their being rescued.'

'They'll want provisions, anyhow,' said the mate. 'Stove timbermen float
on their cargo. You need to dive to get at the grub in those derelicts.
I'm counting upon hunger courting them into the schooner without
obliging us to try what coaxing them with four men and two pistols is
going to do.'

They went on deck, and stared at the sea-line through glasses. A little
before noon, just at the moment when Mr. Blundell was coming out of his
cabin with his sextant, a man stationed aloft on the look-out hailed
him.

'What is it?' shouted Blundell, springing through the companion-hatch.

'There is a black object away down upon the port-bow. It looks like a
boat.'

'How does it bear on the bow?' cried Blundell to the little figure
aloft, a sailor with a face set in black whiskers.

He looked to tremble in the heat up there, and his shape, as he stood
erect to the height of the truck, seemed shot with the lights of several
dyes, and against a swollen heap of cloud past him he showed like a
coloured daguerreotype.

'About two points,' was his answer.

Mr. Blundell shifted his helm for it, but, whatever it might be, it was
not yet visible from the deck. The mate got an observation of the sun,
and went below to work it out. When he returned he found Captain Parry
examining a dark object on the bow with a telescope.

'It's a ship's boat most unquestionably,' said the captain, turning to
Mr. Blundell.

The mate was at this instant hailed afresh from the masthead.

'There's another dark object about a point on the weather-bow,' said the
fellow dangling high in air, his hoarse voice softening in falls as it
reached the ear from the hollows of the sails. 'She'll be the wreck,
sir,' he howled, after working away with his glass.

Captain Parry was as pale as the dawn with excitement and expectation.

'I vow to God,' said he, bringing his fist down on the rail, 'I would
certainly lose my left arm with cheerfulness to know at this instant
that Miss Vanderholt is alive and well in the wreck!'

'If she is with them they'll all come aboard together,' said the mate,
with scarce conscious dryness. 'Hunger and thirst will work their way
with beasts, let alone men.'

Little more was said whilst the schooner, driven by a five-knot breeze,
swept in long floating launches down upon the boat that came and went.
There had been wind somewhere, and a small swell rolled in from the
westward, running lightning flashes through the water. No man could say
it was the _Mowbray's_ long-boat till they had luffed and shaken the
wind out of the schooner close alongside the little fabric. Then her
identity was settled by a single glance at her through the glass. The
yacht's name, '_Mowbray_--London,' was painted in large black letters in
the stern-sheets.

'Stand by to hook her,' shouted the mate.

A seaman aft, jumping for a boathook in one of the quarter-boats,
sprang into the little ledge of the main chains. The schooner was
slightly manoeuvred; the boat was brought close alongside and captured.
She was as empty and dry as an old cocoanut-shell.

'What does that signify?' said Captain Parry.

'One of two things, clearly,' answered Blundell. 'Either they have
carried all the stores they left the yacht with aboard the wreck, or the
ship that picked them up emptied her before sending her adrift.'

'Would they let a valuable boat like that go?'

The mate shrugged his shoulders. There are some questions concerning the
sea which even a sailor cannot answer.

'Do you see that her long painter is trailing overboard?' exclaimed
Captain Parry. 'Does it not look as if the knot had unhitched and let
her slip away?'

'But from what, sir? That trailing length of rope might as easily mean
that she was let slip from a ship, as that she slipped of her own accord
from a wreck.'

This talk, uttered swiftly, occupied a minute, whilst they overhung the
rail, looking into the boat alongside.

'We must have her out of that,' said the mate, 'and restore her.'

The man who was hanging to her by the boathook, turning up a face as
dark as a new bronze coin, exclaimed:

'There's something white right aft, jammed away down under them
stern-sheets.'

It was immediately wanted, of course, but the man with the boathook
could not get it and keep a hold of the boat, too; so another man jumped
in and brought up a pocket-handkerchief.

'It's a lady's,' said the mate.

'It's Miss Vanderholt's!' exclaimed Captain Parry, observing a small 'V.
V.' in the corner.

Two or three marks of blood stained it, as though the lip, nose, or ear
had slightly bled.

'What does it betoken?' said Captain Parry, looking at the handkerchief,
and speaking softly, as though to himself. 'If it is a memorial, why,
in God's name, should it come to me blood-stained?'

They got the boat aboard; all hands, including Parry, pulling and
hauling at the tackles. When she was chocked, a course was shaped for
the derelict brig, according to the indication of the masthead man. It
was a time of thrilling anxiety for Parry. The handkerchief was no
warrant that the girl had been in the boat. They might have bound her,
and drowned her at the side of the schooner, and yet a handkerchief of
hers might have found its way into the boat. The handkerchief, then,
proved nothing. Nevertheless, Parry found a sinister significance in the
blood-marks. Was not this blood-stained token most tragically
portentous, as the only relic or memorial of his love that the sea had
to offer him? He looked at it, and in the wildness of his heart he made
a meaning of it: it was a farewell to him, a message mute and eloquent;
it said to him that her father was slain, and that she was lost to him
for ever. Thus he stood interpreting the thing.

Shortly after one o'clock the derelict was in view right ahead. The
telescope then easily resolved her. She was a small black brig, with her
lower masts standing and bowsprit gone. She sat tolerably high, but
rolled with the sickly sluggishness of the waterlogged hulk. As the
schooner approached, features of the wreck grew plain. She carried a
deck-load of timber, and her hold was evidently full of timber. By some
desperate gale she had been wrenched till her butts started, her strong
fastenings gave, her topmasts went, and the green seas rushing in,
drowned her into a lifelessness of helm.

On board the schooner they could perceive no wreckage floating near.
What sufferings, obscure and horrible, was that little wreck
memorializing? The phantoms of the imagination peopled her. White-faced
men, dying in squatting postures, were upon the sea-broken deck-load of
timber. There was no captain, no command, the fingers of famine had
effaced distinctions. Then one would die with a groan, falling sideways
with his white eyes glazing to the sun; and another would mutter in
delirium, and call upon the Lord Jesus Christ, and motion with a
ghastly smile to his mother to make haste with the drink of water she
was bringing him.

Phantoms or no phantoms, all were gone. The wreck lay apparently
lifeless, absolutely abandoned, a yawning frame, sodden by weeks of
washing to and fro. Thus it seemed to the eyes aboard the schooner as
she drew closer and closer to the desolate, mournful, storm-broken
fabric.

'There may be rats in that vessel,' said the mate, with a countenance
made up of relief and extreme curiosity; 'but I don't see them, Captain
Parry, neither do I see anything else that's living.'

'A ship has taken them off,' said Captain Parry, in a tone of hopeless
misery; 'and it may be months and years before I find out what is the
fate of Miss Vanderholt.'

They were now within a musket-shot of the wreck. The yacht's way was
arrested, and she seemed to stand at gaze, with her people staring. The
long swell swung a dismal roll into the lifeless hull. A raffle of
rigging lay over her sides, and whenever she rolled away she tore this
gear up from the water as if it had been sea-plants whose roots were a
thousand fathoms deep; it rose hissing to the drag, and sank, like
baffled snakes, when she came wearily over again. It made the heart sick
to watch her, to figure one's self as alone upon her; the loose timbers
clattering through the long, black night, the dark water welling in sobs
alongside, the awful and soul-subduing spirit of stillness that lies in
the sea when its billows are silent, as though the hush in the central
heart of the profound rose like an emanation of wind or vapour, taking
the senses of the lonely one with the maddening undertones of spiritual
utterance.

Mr. Blundell continued to view the wreck through a glass. Captain Parry
stood beside him with tightly-folded arms, death-white with grief and
the sickness of disappointment, and silent.

'There is nobody aboard that vessel, sir.'

'I fear not,' the captain answered in a low voice.

'The only place where people could find shelter,' said the mate, 'is in
that little green deck-house. If there were eight men sitting in the
house, one would have seen us, and all have tumbled out long ago.'

'The long-boat has told us the story,' said the captain. 'They have been
taken on board another vessel. Is Miss Vanderholt with them?'

He started as to a sudden access of temper and determination, and said:

'Blundell, give me two of your men, and lower that boat. I'll board the
brig. I may find something to give us a clue.'

'Put one of the revolvers in your pocket, sir,' said Mr. Blundell.

A boat was lowered, and two men and Captain Parry, armed, entered her.
All was lifeless aboard the wreck. It would have been ridiculous, then,
to suspect an ambush. She had old-fashioned channels, platforms by which
her lower rigging was extended and secured to dead-eyes. These platforms
remained. The hulk would souse them, hissing, and lift them seething and
streaming, but through long intervals they would sway dry with pendulum
regularity.

'The main chains will be your only chance, sir,' said one of the
seamen. 'Am I to go on board with ye?'

'If you will.'

'Then, Tom, when we're out of it, shove off for God's sake, and keep her
clear of them chains. If they come down upon you, your life and the boat
ain't worth a drowned cockroach.'

Watching his chance with great patience, Captain Parry sprang. He
stumbled; but a wild flourish of his arm brought his hand safely to an
iron belaying-pin in the rail above. He seized another hard by, and,
lifting his knees to the rail, gained the deck.

He stood holding on. The peculiar jerky rolling of the hull threatened
to throw him, until a minute or two of sympathetic feeling _into_ the
life of the fabric should have put some government of it into his legs.
The sailor had easily followed.

Captain Parry was looking at the forepart of the vessel, which was a
horrible litter and muddle of heaped-up timber and smashed caboose, when
his companion muttered in his ear in a low growl:

'My God, master, there's a living man!'

A living man it was, standing right in the door of the deck-house. He
was a seaman, and carried a strange face to those who looked at him,
though one might have said he should be familiar enough to anybody
belonging to the schooner _Mowbray_. He was James Jones, the boatswain
of the yacht. His cheeks were gaunt and grimy, and his eyes blazed in
their hollows. His hair lay in streaks over his ears, and down the back
of his head, as though to repeated greasy tuggings and pullings. He was
without his coat, and his great muscular arms were bare to above the
elbow.

Captain Parry recoiled a step, thrusting his hand into the pocket where
the pistol lay. He suspected this man to be one of the eight, and that
the seven would burst out in a minute.

'I'm damned if ye ain't come just in the nick of time!' said Jones; and
his grin, and exhibition of yellow fangs, and his dirty skin and flaming
eyes, made his face horrible. 'I tell ye what I've just found out. There
ain't no death! "How do I know that?" says you. Why, ye see, a man
ain't dead till he dies, and when he's dead death ain't got no existence
for him. D'ye see it?' said he with an inimitable leer.

Captain Parry saw that he was mad, but in the moment of detecting this
he observed something more. Behind the madman, looking over his
shoulders, stood Miss Vanderholt. She was robed in white, and wore a
small straw hat. She was pale, as though exhausted, perhaps from the
want of food or drink; otherwise, but for her impassioned transforming
gaze, she looked as though she had but now come with Captain Parry to
view the wreck.

'Oh, Violet, my dear one! Violet, I have found you!' cried Parry, and he
rushed towards her.

She shrieked, standing still and clasping her hands, and looking up to
God.

'There's no admission 'ere!' roared the madman, barricading the door by
extending his arms. 'This is a royal yacht. Why don't you cast your eyes
aloft and view the Royal Standard a-flying? The Princess Victoria is
within. Didn't I know her gracious mother, the Duchess? I'm an English
sailor, and I'm loyal to my native country. God save the King!'

Saying which, he turned and bowed with every mark of profound veneration
to Miss Vanderholt.

'Let me pass, man!' cried Captain Parry, pulling out his revolver and
hustling the powerful fellow.

'Hide it!' screamed Violet; 'he is mad! He has been kind to me! Oh, my
God! George, am I dreaming? Is it you in the flesh, or am I mad, too?'

She put her hands to her eyes, and reeled to a stanchion, against which
she leaned. The madman continued to barricade the door, both huge arms
extended.

'Look here,' cried Parry, almost as mad as the seaman he confronted,
with impatience, infuriated by this hellish lunatic obstruction, wild to
clasp the girl, whose reel and motion of hands had stabbed his heart;
'we want to get at this young lady at once, to take her on board yonder
schooner. Make way, for God's sake! I'll hear all about your views on
death when we're comfortable aboard that vessel.'

'There's no blooming man,' shouted the madman, 'a-going to approach the
Princess Victoria without falling down upon his bended knees and
crawling to her feet, as the custom is at St. James's Palace!'

Miss Vanderholt went into hysterics. She shrieked with laughter; she
sobbed as if her heart was breaking.

'I think you'd better go down upon your knees, sir,' said the sailor who
had accompanied Parry. 'Here, my lad,' said he, crooking his finger into
a fish-hook at the man, 'you just make way for the gent to crawl to her
Gracious 'Ighness, and whilst he's kow-towing, give me that there yarn
of yourn about death.'

He winked at the captain, who sank upon his knees. The scene was
grotesque, tragic, extraordinary. The boatswain watched the figure of
the captain with fiery suspicion whilst he passed on all fours through
the door of the deck-house. Miss Vanderholt was still in hysterics.

'Damn the ruffian! I can't stand it!' shouted the captain, and he sprang
to his feet and clasped the girl.

But the madman had begun to state his queer paradox with fearful
earnestness to the seaman, who had fixed him with a stare, and was, with
singular judgment in a common fool of a drunken sailor, drawing him out
of sight of the couple.

Miss Vanderholt lay in her lover's arms, weeping and laughing; but a few
kisses and murmurs of devotion produced a very good effect. She
controlled herself, and then they were able to talk in swift questions
and eager answers. Outside the madman continued to argue with the sailor
on the subject of death.

'There ain't no death!' he roared, with all the strength of his throat.
'D'ye call it a good job, mate? Here stands the man as has got rid of
the terror of the world. Hark you, bully! Ye can turn in now without
fearing to die. It'll do away with prayers, for there ain't no death!'

Thus he raved, whilst inside, the girl, in the embrace of her
sweetheart, talked in a score of feverish questions and answers. She was
white, but clearly not from want of food. Up in a corner of the
deck-house stood a little load of tins of meat and biscuit, removed
from the _Mowbray's_ hold by her revolted men. In another corner was the
long-boat's big breaker, and a pannikin at hand for a drink.

'Let's get away from this wreck,' said Parry, clasping the girl's hand.
'Yet, what a wonderful meeting!' he cried, devouring her with his eyes.
'What a miraculous deliverance! Oh, the hand of God is in it, and I am
grateful--I am grateful!'

They moved towards the door, and the madman saw them coming.

'Look here,' he cried, making for them in a jump or two, with an air so
menacing that Parry's hand instantly sought his pistol. 'No man walks
alongside the Princess Victoria aboard this Royal yacht. Her 'Ighness
the Duchess taught me how to behave myself in the eye of Royalty when I
was a young un, and this is how it's done,' said he, giving Captain
Parry a shove that drove him some feet from Miss Vanderholt; then,
stepping in front of the girl, he bowed low, with all those marks of
abject veneration which had distinguished his former obeisance, and
saying, 'If your Royal 'Ighness will now step out,' he moved backwards.

But a long plank lay athwart his path; the captain and the seaman saw
what was to happen; the madman fell heavily backwards over it.

'Bring the boat alongside, Jim!' bawled the sailor. 'This is the Ryle
yacht. See the Standard a-flying? The Princess Victoria is aboard, and
we've got to back her into the boat according to the custom of the Court
of St. James's Palace.'

The boatswain was up again, and, flourishing his hand, he cried:

'Right!'

'You leave him to me, sir,' said the sailor, with a half-wink at Captain
Parry, who was absolutely at a loss.

He would not for a million have shot the unhappy madman, and yet he
durst not approach Miss Vanderholt whilst that huge and brawny lunatic
watched him.

The seaman in the boat concluded that his shipmate had lost his mind.

'What the blooming blazes,' he thought to himself, 'is Bill a-jawing
about, with his Ryle yachts and Ryle Standards?'

And he looked right up into the sky.

'Stand by now, Tom, to receive her Ryle 'Ighness!' shouted the sailor,
with a glance at the madman. 'As her 'Ighness must go first, there's no
harm, I hope,' said he, 'in her walking face foremost?'

'She always do,' shouted the boatswain. 'Bow her to the rail, and hand
her over.'

Nothing could have been better. The swell gave them a good deal of
trouble, but two of them were sailors, and presently Miss Vanderholt was
in the boat. Captain Parry sprang into the chains, and, watching his
opportunity, leapt, and was by his sweetheart's side in a minute.

The madman overhung the rails, staring greedily. He knuckled his brow as
one who would drive a pain out of his brain, then began to laugh when
Captain Parry jumped into the boat.

'Bring him along, Bill. You lay he'll know what to do!' cried the sailor
in the boat.

'Her Ryle 'Ighness commands you to attend her, sir,' said the seaman.
'Step right over the side into the chains, and don't jump back'ards.'

The boatswain drew himself stiffly erect, and, after gazing aloft at the
vision of the Standard, which blew in rich folds under the swelling
clouds to his insane eye, he exclaimed:

'Who's going to look after her Royal 'Ighness's yacht if I leave her?'

'She'll lie quiet enough, mate, till you return,' said the sailor.
'Hark! Her Ryle 'Ighness is a-calling of you.'

'Pray attend upon me! I command your presence in this boat!' cried the
girl in the loudest, most imperious voice her condition would permit her
to manage.

The poor creature bowed low over the rail, then in silence dropped into
the chains, followed by the sailor, and in a minute or two both were
seated in the boat.

All went quietly. The boatswain shifted restlessly in his seat, with a
grin of stupefaction. His burning eyes rolled over the _Mowbray_, and
again and again he pulled his hair with hands that sweated like tallow.

Miss Vanderholt's first exclamation, when she was handed over the side,
was, 'My father! my poor father!' And she began to cry. The dreadful
scene rose before her mental vision, and she shook with old sensations
of terror.

Captain Parry, passing his arm through hers, gently and tenderly led her
below. She had been too much moved to address Mr. Blundell, and for a
little while she needed the privacy of the cabin and her lover's
company. Presently, whilst they sat below, she told Captain Parry the
story of the mutiny, and her adventures down to this hour.

It seems that some of the men were for going away at once in the
long-boat, after scuttling the yacht; others were for letting her lie
afloat; but all were agreed that she must be abandoned. Then Miss
Vanderholt found out that they were undecided what they should do with
her. Most of them, she gathered, were for leaving her in the yacht, to
take her chance of being picked up.

'Why not?' said they. 'We can shorten sail for her before we leave. We
can lash the helm amidships. She's got plenty to eat and drink. She
can't come to hurt in these waters, and is bound to be rescued.'

But the boatswain, who had grown ferocious in temper, and had manifested
many symptoms of insanity, swore that she should not be abandoned to her
fate. She was an Englishwoman; he was an English seaman. By God! he
would brain any man who talked of leaving the poor young lady alone to
wash about in the schooner.

She told Captain Parry that this Jones overawed the men, and they seemed
to treat him as though his madness made him superior to themselves. They
all left in the long-boat. The boatswain next morning went quite mad,
and took Miss Vanderholt to be the Princess Victoria. He bowed humbly to
her in the boat; he would sometimes kneel to her. He whipped a straw hat
off a man's head to shade her with.

His hallucination was, fortunately, a sober one. He supposed the men to
be the crew of the cutter of some Royal yacht or other, and himself in
command, seeking the vessel that her Gracious Highness, as he frequently
called her, might sail round the world. A man cut his finger in opening
a tin, and the young lady gave him her handkerchief to bind the wound.
He left it in the boat.

When they fell in with the derelict they were exhausted with the
scorching heat and the exposure by night, and determined to take shelter
and rest aboard, and signal for help, if help should heave into view.
They emptied the long-boat; but that same evening of their entering the
derelict, about an hour before sundown, a small brigantine leisurely
came flapping down upon them, and seven men entered the long-boat and
rowed for her, leaving the boatswain and the young lady to their fate.

Not until long afterwards was it discovered that this brigantine was a
Frenchman, that her crew had mutinied, and sent her captain and mate
adrift, and that, though they perceived the figures of the boatswain and
the young lady on the brig, yet, on the _Mowbray's_ men telling them
that one could bear witness to the mutiny, and that the other was a
dangerous madman, they put their helm up and sailed away.

Before the set of sun the _Mowbray_ was heeling to a fresh breeze; every
cloth that could draw was driving her cutwater through it, and her
clipper-stem rose the white brine raving to her hawse-pipes. She seemed,
like those on board, to have got the scent, and to know that she was
going home.


THE END.


BILLING AND SONS, PRINTERS, GUILDFORD.

[Illustration: Decoration]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Last Entry, by William Clark Russell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAST ENTRY ***

***** This file should be named 44546.txt or 44546.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/4/5/4/44546/

Produced by Martin Pettit and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
