The Project Gutenberg EBook of Polly, by Thomas Nelson Page

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Polly
       A Christmas Recollection

Author: Thomas Nelson Page

Illustrator: A. Castaigne

Release Date: December 31, 2013 [EBook #44547]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POLLY ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)










POLLY




IN UNIFORM STYLE


    MARSE CHAN. A Tale of Old Virginia. Illustrated by W.
      T. Smedley.

    MEH LADY. A Story of the War. Illustrated by C. S.
      Reinhart.

    POLLY. A Christmas Recollection. Illustrated by A.
      Castaigne.

    UNC' EDINBURG. A Plantation Echo. Illustrated by B.
      West Clinedinst.

    _Each, small quarto, $1.00_

[Illustration: "_The young man found it necessary to lean over and
throw a steadying arm around her._"]




POLLY [Illustration]

A CHRISTMAS RECOLLECTION

    BY THOMAS NELSON PAGE

    ILLUSTRATED BY A. CASTAIGNE

[Illustration]

    CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS
    NEW YORK, 1897 [Illustration]




    Copyright, 1894, by
    Charles Scribner's Sons

    TROW DIRECTORY
    PRINTING AND BOOKBINDING COMPANY
    NEW YORK




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


  "_The young man found it necessary to lean over and throw
        a steadying arm around her._"                    Frontispiece.

  _Vignette heading._                                          Page 1.

  "_Drinkwater Torm fell sprawling on the floor._"            Page 10.

  "_'I will!' he said, throwing up his head._"                Page 22.

  "_There he was standing on the bridge just before her._"    Page 30.

  "_He made Torm, Charity, and a half-dozen younger
        house-servants dress him._"                           Page 38.




[Illustration]


IT was Christmas Eve. I remember it just as if it was yesterday. The
Colonel had been pretending not to notice it, but when Drinkwater
Torm[A] knocked over both the great candlesticks, and in his attempt to
pick them up lurched over himself and fell sprawling on the floor, he
yelled at him. Torm pulled himself together, and began an explanation,
in which the point was that he had not "teched a drap in Gord knows how
long," but the Colonel cut him short.

"Get out of the room, you drunken vagabond!" he roared.

Torm was deeply offended. He made a low, grand bow, and with as much
dignity as his unsteady condition would admit, marched very statelily
from the room, and passing out through the dining-room, where he
stopped to abstract only one more drink from the long, heavy, cut-glass
decanter on the sideboard, meandered to his house in the back-yard,
where he proceeded to talk religion to Charity, his wife, as he always
did when he was particularly drunk. He was expounding the vision of the
golden candlestick, and the bowl and seven lamps and two olive-trees,
when he fell asleep.

The roarer, as has been said, was the Colonel; the meanderer was
Drinkwater Torm. The Colonel gave him the name, "because," he said, "if
he were to drink water once he would die."

As Drinkwater closed the door, the Colonel continued, fiercely:

"Damme, Polly, I will! I'll sell him to-morrow morning; and if I can't
sell him I'll give him away."

Polly, with troubled great dark eyes, was wheedling him vigorously.

"No; I tell you, I'll sell him.--'Misery in his back!' the mischief!
he's a drunken, trifling, good-for-nothing nigger! and I have sworn to
sell him a thousand--yes, ten thousand times; and now I'll have to do
it to keep my word."

This was true. The Colonel swore this a dozen times a day--every time
Torm got drunk, and as that had occurred very frequently for many
years before Polly was born, he was not outside of the limit. Polly,
however, was the only one this threat ever troubled. The Colonel knew
he could no more have gotten on without Torm than his old open-faced
watch, which looked for all the world like a model of himself, could
have run without the mainspring. From tying his shoes and getting his
shaving-water to making his juleps and lighting his candles, which was
all he had to do, Drinkwater Torm was necessary to him. (I think he
used to make the threat just to prove to himself that Torm did not own
him; if so, he failed in his purpose--Torm did own him.) Torm knew it
as well as he, or better; and while Charity, for private and wifely
reasons, occasionally held the threat over him when his expoundings
passed even her endurance, she knew it also.

Thus, Polly was the only one it deceived or frightened. It always
deceived her, and she never rested until she had obtained Torm's
reprieve "for just one more time." So on this occasion, before she got
down from the Colonel's knees, she had given him in bargain "just one
more squeeze," and received in return Torm's conditional pardon, "only
till next time."

Everybody in the county knew the Colonel, and everybody knew Drinkwater
Torm, and everybody who had been to the Colonel's for several years
past (and that was nearly everybody in the county, for the Colonel
kept open house) knew Polly. She had been placed in her chair by the
Colonel's side at the club dinner on her first birthday after her
arrival, and had been afterward placed on the table and allowed to
crawl around among and in the dishes to entertain the gentlemen, which
she did to the applause of every one, and of herself most of all;
and from that time she had exercised in her kingdom the functions of
both Vashti and Esther, and whatever Polly ordered was done. If the
old inlaid piano in the parlor had been robbed of strings, it was all
right, for Polly had taken them. Bob had cut them out for her, without
a word of protest from anyone but Charity. The Colonel would have given
her his heartstrings if Polly had required them.

She had owned him body and soul from the second he first laid eyes on
her, when, on the instant he entered the room, she had stretched out
her little chubby hands to him, and on his taking her had, after a few
infantile caresses, curled up and, with her finger in her mouth, gone
to sleep in his arms like a little white kitten.

Bob used to wonder in a vague, boyish way where the child got her
beauty, for the Colonel weighed two hundred and fifty pounds, and
was as ugly as a red head and thirty or forty years of Torm's
mint-juleps piled on a somewhat reckless college career could make
him; but one day, when the Colonel was away from home, Charity showed
him a daguerreotype of a lady, which she got out of the top drawer
of the Colonel's big secretary with the brass lions on it, and it
looked exactly like Polly. It had the same great big dark eyes and
the same soft white look, though Polly was stouter; for she was a
great tomboy, and used to run wild over the place with Bob, climbing
cherry-trees, fishing in the creek, and looking as blooming as a
rose, with her hair all tangled over her pretty head, until she grew
quite large, and the Colonel got her a tutor. He thought of sending
her to a boarding-school, but the night he broached the subject he
raised such a storm, and Polly was in such a tempest of tears, that
he gave up the matter at once. It was well he did so, for Polly and
Charity cried all night and Torm was so overcome that even next
morning he could not bring the Colonel his shaving-water, and he
had to shave with cold water for the first time in twenty years. He
therefore employed a tutor. Most people said the child ought to have
had a governess, and one or two single ladies of forgotten age in
the neighborhood delicately hinted that they would gladly teach her;
but the Colonel swore that he would have no women around him, and he
would be eternally condemned if any should interfere with Polly; so he
engaged Mr. Cranmer, and invited Bob to come over and go to school to
him also, which he did; for his mother, who had up to that time taught
him herself, was very poor, and was unable to send him to school, her
husband, who was the Colonel's fourth cousin, having died largely
indebted, and all of his property, except a small farm adjoining the
Colonel's, and a few negroes, having gone into the General Court.

Bob had always been a great favorite with the Colonel, and ever since
he was a small boy he had been used to coming over and staying with him.

He could gaff a chicken as well as Drinkwater Torm, which was a great
accomplishment in the Colonel's eyes; for he had the best game-chickens
in the county, and used to fight them, too, matching them against
those of one or two of his neighbors who were similarly inclined, until
Polly grew up and made him stop. He could tame a colt quicker than
anybody on the plantation. Moreover he could shoot more partridges in
a day than the Colonel, and could beat him shooting with a pistol as
well, though the Colonel laid the fault of the former on his being so
fat, and that of the latter on his spectacles. They used to practice
with the Colonel's old pistols that hung in their holsters over the
tester of his bed, and about which Drinkwater used to tell so many
lies; for although they were kept loaded, and their brass-mounted butts
peeping out of their leathern covers used to look ferocious enough to
give some apparent ground for Torm's story of how "he and the Colonel
had shot Judge Cabell spang through the heart," the Colonel always said
that Cabell behaved very handsomely, and that the matter was arranged
on the field without a shot. Even at that time some people said that
Bob's mother was trying to catch the Colonel, and that if the Colonel
did not look out she would yet be the mistress of his big plantation.
And all agreed that the boy would come in for something handsome at the
Colonel's death; for Bob was his cousin and his nearest male relative,
if Polly _was_ his niece, and he would hardly leave her all his
property, especially as she was so much like her mother, with whom, as
everybody knew, the Colonel had been desperately in love, but who had
treated him badly, and, notwithstanding his big plantation and many
negroes, had run away with his younger brother, and both of them had
died in the South of yellow fever, leaving of all their children only
this little Polly; and the Colonel had taken Drinkwater and Charity,
and had travelled in his carriage all the way to Mississippi, to get
and bring Polly back.

It was Christmas Eve when they reached home, and the Colonel had sent
Drinkwater on a day ahead to have the fires made and the house aired
for the baby; and when the carriage drove up that night you would have
thought a queen was coming, sure enough.

Every hand on the plantation was up at the great house waiting for
them, and every room in the house had a fire in it. (Torm had told the
overseer so many lies that he had had the men cutting wood all day,
although the regular supply was already cut.) And when Charity stepped
out of the carriage, with the baby all bundled up in her arms, making
a great show about keeping it wrapped up, and walked up the steps as
slowly as if it were made of gold, you could have heard a pin drop;
even the Colonel fell back, and spoke in a whisper. The great chamber
was given up to the baby, the Colonel going to the wing room, where he
always stayed after that. He spoke of sitting up all night to watch
the child, but Charity assured him that she was not going to take her
eyes off of her during the night, and with a promise to come in every
hour and look after them, the Colonel went to his room, where he snored
until nine o'clock the next morning.

But I was telling what people said about Bob's mother.

When the report reached the Colonel about the widow's designs, he took
Polly on his knees and told her all about it, and then both laughed
until the tears ran down the Colonel's face and dropped on his big
flowered vest and on Polly's little blue frock; and he sent the widow
next day a fine short-horned heifer to show his contempt of the gossip.

And now Bob was the better shot of the two; and they taught Polly to
shoot also, and to load and unload the pistols, at which the Colonel
was as proud as if one of his young stags had whipped an old rooster.

But they never could induce her to shoot at anything except a mark. She
was the tenderest-hearted little thing in the world.

If her taste had been consulted she would have selected a crossbow, for
it did not make such a noise, and she could shoot it without shutting
her eyes; besides that, she could shoot it in the house, which, indeed,
she did, until she had shot the eyes out of nearly all the bewigged
gentlemen and bare-necked, long-fingered ladies on the walls. Once she
came very near shooting Torm's eye out also; but this was an accident,
though Drinkwater declared it was not, and tried to make out that Bob
had put her up to it. "Dat's de mischievouses' boy Gord uver made,"
he said, complainingly, to Charity. Fortunately, his eye got well,
and it gave him an excuse for staying half drunk for nearly a week;
and afterward, like a dog that has once been lame in his hind-leg,
whenever he saw Polly, and did not forget it, he squinted up that eye
and tried to look miserable. Polly was quite a large girl then, and was
carrying the keys (except when she lost them), though she could not
have been more than twelve years old; for it was just after this that
the birthday came when the Colonel gave her her first real silk dress.
It was blue silk, and came from Richmond, and it was hard to tell which
was the proudest, Polly, or Charity, or Drinkwater, or the Colonel.
Torm got drunk before the dinner was over, "drinking de healthsh to
de young mistis in de sky-blue robes what stands befo' de throne, you
know," he explained to Charity, after the Colonel had ordered him from
the dining-room, with promises of prompt sale on the morrow.

[Illustration: "_Drinkwater Torm fell sprawling on the floor._"]

Bob was there, and it was the last time Polly ever sucked her thumb.
She had almost gotten out of the habit anyhow, and it was in a moment
of forgetfulness that she let Bob see her do it. He was a great tease,
and when she was smaller had often worried her about it until she would
fly at him and try to bite him with her little white teeth. On this
occasion, however, she stood everything until he said that about a
girl who wore a blue silk dress sucking her thumb; then she boxed his
jaws. The fire flew from his eyes, but hers were even more sparkling.
He paused for a minute, and then caught her in his arms and kissed her
violently. She never sucked her thumb after that.

This happened out in front of her mammy's house, within which Torm was
delivering a powerful exhortation on temperance; and, strange to say,
Charity took Bob's side, while Torm espoused Polly's, and afterward
said she ought to have "tooken a stick and knocked Marse Bob's head
spang off." This, fortunately, Polly did not do (and when Bob went to
the university afterward he was said to have the best head in his
class). She just turned around and ran into the house, with her face
very red. But she never slapped Bob after that. Not long after this he
went off to college; for Mr. Cranmer, the tutor, said he already knew
more than most college graduates did, and that it would be a shame for
him not to have a university education. When the question of ways and
means was mooted, the Colonel, who was always ready to lend money if he
had it, and to borrow it if he did not, swore he would give him all the
money he wanted; but, to his astonishment, Bob refused to accept it,
and although the Colonel abused him for it, and asked Polly if she did
not think he was a fool (which Polly did, for she was always ready to
take and spend all the money he or any one else gave her), yet he did
not like him the less for it, and he finally persuaded Bob to take it
as a loan, and Bob gave him his bond.

The day before he left home he was over at the Colonel's, where they
had a great dinner for him, and Polly presided in her newest silk dress
(she had three then); and when Bob said good-by she slipped something
into his hand, and ran away to her room, and when he looked at it, it
was her ten-dollar gold piece, and he took it.

He was at college not quite three years, for his mother was taken sick,
and he had to come home and nurse her; but he had stood first in most
of his classes, and not lower than third in any; and he had thrashed
the carpenter on Vinegar Hill, who was the bully of the town. So that
although he did not take his degree, he had gotten the start which
enabled him to complete his studies during the time he was taking care
of his mother, which he did until her death, so that as soon as he was
admitted to the bar he made his mark. It was his splendid defence of
the man who shot the deputy-sheriff at the court-house on election day
that brought him out as the Democratic candidate for the Constitutional
Convention, where he made such a reputation as a speaker that the
_Enquirer_ declared him the rising man of the State; and even the
_Whig_ admitted that perhaps the Loco-foco party might find a leader to
redeem it. Polly was just fifteen when she began to take an interest
in politics; and although she read the papers diligently, especially
the _Enquirer_, which her uncle never failed to abuse, yet she never
could exactly satisfy herself which side was right; for the Colonel was
a stanch Whig, while most people must have been Democrats, as Bob was
elected by a big majority. She wanted to be on the Colonel's side,
and made him explain everything to her, which he did to his own entire
satisfaction, and to hers too, she tried to think; but when Bob came
over to tea, which he very frequently did, and the Colonel and he got
into a discussion, her uncle always seemed to her to get the worst of
the argument; at any rate, he generally got very hot. This, however,
might have been because Bob was so cool, while the Colonel was so
hot-tempered.

Bob had grown up very handsome. His mouth was strong and firm, and
his eyes were splendid. He was about six feet, and his shoulders were
as broad as the Colonel's. She did not see him now as often as she
did when he was a boy, but it was because he was kept so busy by his
practice. (He used to get cases in three or four counties now, and big
ones at that.) She knew, however, that she was just as good a friend
of his as ever; indeed, she took the trouble to tell herself so. A
compliment to him used to give her the greatest happiness, and would
bring deeper roses into her cheeks. He was the greatest favorite with
everybody. Torm thought that there was no one in the world like him.
He had long ago forgiven him his many pranks, and said "he was the
grettest gent'man in the county skusin him [Torm] and the Colonel,"
and that "he al'ays handled heself to be raisin'," by which Torm made
indirect reference to regular donations made to him by the aforesaid
"gent'man," and particularly to an especially large benefaction then
lately conferred. It happened one evening at the Colonel's, after
dinner, when several guests, including Bob, were commenting on the
perfections of various ladies who were visiting in the neighborhood
that summer. The praises were, to Torm's mind, somewhat too liberally
bestowed, and he had attempted to console himself by several visits to
the pantry; but when all the list was disposed of, and Polly's name had
not been mentioned, endurance could stand it no longer, and he suddenly
broke in with his judgment that they "didn't none on 'em hol' a candle
to his young mistis, whar wuz de ve'y pink an' flow'r on 'em all."

The Colonel, immensely pleased, ordered him out, with a promise of
immediate sale on the morrow. But that evening, as he got on his horse,
Bob slipped into his hand a five-dollar gold piece, and he told Polly
that if the Colonel really intended to sell Torm, just to send him over
to his house; he wanted the benefit of his judgment.

Polly, of course, did not understand his allusion, though the Colonel
had told her of Torm's speech; but Bob had a rose on his coat when
he came out of the window, and the long pin in Polly's bodice was not
fastened very securely, for it slipped, and she lost all her other
roses, and he had to stoop and pick them up for her. Perhaps, though,
Bob was simply referring to his having saved some money, for shortly
afterward he came over one morning, and, to the Colonel's disgust, paid
him down in full the amount of his bond. He attempted a somewhat formal
speech of thanks, but broke down in it so lamentably that two juleps
were ordered out by the Colonel to reinstate easy relations between
them--an effect which apparently was not immediately produced--and the
Colonel confided to Polly next day that since the fellow had been taken
up so by those Loco-focos he was not altogether as he used to be.

"Why, he don't even drink his juleps clear," the old man asserted, as
if he were charging him with, at the least, misprision of treason.
"However," he added, softening as the excuse presented itself to his
mind, "that may be because his mother was always so opposed to it. You
know mint never would grow there," he pursued to Polly, who had heard
him make the same observation, with the same astonishment, a hundred
times. "Strangest thing I ever knew. But he's a confoundedly clever
fellow, though, Polly," he continued, with a sudden reviving of the
old-time affection. "Damme! I like him." And, as Polly's face turned
a sweet carmine, added: "Oh, I forgot, Polly; didn't mean to swear;
damme! if I did. It just slipped out. Now I haven't sworn before for
a week; you know I haven't; yes, of course, I mean except _then_."
For Polly, with softly fading color, was reading him the severest of
lectures on his besetting sin, and citing an ebullition over Torm's
failing of the day before. "Come and sit down on your uncle's knee and
kiss him once as a token of forgiveness. Just one more squeeze," as the
fair girlish arms were twined about his neck, and the sweetest of faces
was pressed against his own rough cheek. "Polly, do you remember,"
asked the old man, holding her off from him and gazing at the girlish
face fondly--"do you remember how, when you were a little scrap, you
used to climb up on my knee and squeeze me, 'just once more,' to save
that rascal Drinkwater, and how you used to say you were 'going to
marry Bob' and me when you were grown up?"

Polly's memory, apparently, was not very good. That evening, however,
it seemed much better, when, dressed all in soft white, and with cheeks
reflecting the faint tints of the sunset clouds, she was strolling
through the old flower-garden with a tall young fellow whose hat sat
on his head with a jaunty air, and who was so very careful to hold
aside the long branches of the rose-bushes. They had somehow gotten
to recalling each in turn some incident of the old boy-and-girl days.
Bob knew the main facts as well as she, but Polly remembered the
little details and circumstances of each incident best, except those
about the time they were playing "knucks" together. Then, singularly,
Bob recollected most. He was positive that when she cried because he
shot so hard, he had kissed her to make it well. Curiously, Polly's
recollection failed again, and was only distinct about very modern
matters. She remembered with remarkable suddenness that it was tea-time.

They were away down at the end of the garden, and her lapse of memory
had a singular effect on Bob; for he turned quite pale, and insisted
that she did remember it; and then said something about having wanted
to see the Colonel, and having waited, and did so strangely that if
that rose-bush had not caught her dress, he might have done something
else. But the rose-bush caught her dress, and Polly, who looked really
scared at it or at something, ran away just as the Colonel's voice was
heard calling them to tea.

Bob was very silent at the table, and when he left, the Colonel was
quite anxious about him. He asked Polly it she had not noticed his
depression. Polly had not.

"That's just the way with you women," said the Colonel, testily. "A
man might die under your very eyes, and you would not notice it. _I_
noticed it, and I tell you the fellow's sick. I say he's sick!" he
reiterated, with a little habit he had acquired since he had begun to
grow slightly deaf. "I shall advise him to go away and have a little
fling somewhere. He works too hard, sticks too close at home. He never
goes anywhere except here, and he don't come here as he used to do. He
ought to get married. Advise him to get married. Why don't he set up to
Sally Brent or Malviny Pegram? He's a likely fellow, and they'd both
take him--fools if they didn't;--I say they are fools if they didn't.
What say?"

"I didn't say anything," said Polly, quietly going to the piano.

Her music often soothed the Colonel to sleep.

The next morning but one Bob rode over, and instead of hooking his
horse to the fence as he usually did, he rode on around toward the
stables. He greeted Torm, who was in the backyard, and after extracting
some preliminary observations from him respecting the "misery in his
back," he elicited the further facts that Miss Polly was going down the
road to dine at the Pegrams', of which he had some intimation before,
and that the Colonel was down on the river farm, but would be back
about two o'clock. He rode on.

At two o'clock promptly Bob returned. The Colonel had not yet gotten
home. He, however, dismounted, and, tying his horse, went in. He must
have been tired of sitting down, for he now walked up and down the
portico without once taking a seat.

"Marse Bob'll walk heself to death," observed Charity to Torm, from her
door.

Presently the Colonel came in, bluff, warm, and hearty. He ordered
dinner from the front gate as he dismounted, and juleps from the middle
of the walk, greeted Bob with a cheeriness which that gentleman in vain
tried to imitate, and was plumped down in his great split-bottomed
chair, wiping his red head with his still redder bandana handkerchief,
and abusing the weather, the crops, the newspapers, and his overseer
before Bob could get breath to make a single remark. When he did, he
pitched in on the weather.

That is a safe topic at all times. It was astonishing how much comfort
Bob got out of it this afternoon. He talked about it until dinner began
to come in across the yard, the blue china dishes gleaming in the hands
of Phoebe and her numerous corps of ebon and mahogany assistants,
and Torm brought out the juleps, with the mint looking as if it were
growing in the great silver cans, with frosted work all over the sides.

Dinner was rather a failure, so far as Bob was concerned. Perhaps he
missed something that usually graced the table; perhaps only his body
was there, while he himself was down at Miss Malviny Pegram's; perhaps
he had gone back and was unfastening an impertinent rose-bush from a
filmy white dress in the summer twilight; perhaps--; but anyhow he was
so silent and abstracted that the Colonel rallied him good-humoredly,
which did not help matters.

They had adjourned to the porch, and had been there for some time, when
Bob broached the subject of his visit.

"Colonel," he said, suddenly, and wholly irrelevant to everything
that had gone before, "there is a matter I want to speak to you
about--a--ah--we--a little matter of great importance to--ah--myself."
He was getting very red and confused, and the Colonel instantly
divining the matter, and secretly flattering himself, and determining
to crow over Polly, said, to help him out:

"Aha, you rogue, I knew it. Come up to the scratch, sir. So you are
caught at last. Ah, you sly fox! It's the very thing you ought to do.
Why, I know half a dozen girls who'd jump at you. I knew it. I said so
the other night. Polly--"

Bob was utterly off his feet by this time. "I want to ask your consent
to marry Polly," he blurted out desperately; "I love her."

"The devil you do!" exclaimed the Colonel. He could say no more; he
simply sat still, in speechless, helpless, blank amazement. To him
Polly was still a little girl climbing his knees, and an emperor might
not aspire to her.

[Illustration: _"'I will!' he said, throwing up his head."_]

"Yes, sir, I do," said Bob, calm enough now--growing cool as the
Colonel became excited. "I love her, and I want her.

"Well, sir, you can't have her!" roared the Colonel, pulling himself up
from his seat in the violence of his refusal. He looked like a tawny
lion whose lair had been invaded.

Bob's face paled, and a look came on it that the Colonel recalled
afterward, and which he did not remember ever to have seen on it
before, except once, when, years ago, some one shot one of his dogs--a
look made up of anger and of dogged resolution. "I will!" he said,
throwing up his head and looking the Colonel straight in the eyes, his
voice perfectly calm, but his eyes blazing, the mouth drawn close, and
the lines of his face as if they had been carved in granite.

"I'll be ---- if you shall!" stormed the Colonel: "the King of England
should not have her!" and, turning, he stamped into the house and
slammed the door behind him.

Bob walked slowly down the steps and around to the stables, where he
ordered his horse. He rode home across the fields without a word,
except, as he jumped his horse over the line fence, "I will have her,"
he repeated, between his fast-set teeth.

That evening Polly came home all unsuspecting anything of the kind;
the Colonel waited until she had taken off her things and come down in
her fresh muslin dress. She surpassed in loveliness the rose-buds that
lay on her bosom, and the impertinence that could dare aspire to her
broke over the old man in a fresh wave. He had nursed his wrath all the
evening.

"Polly!" he blurted out, suddenly rising with a jerk from his
arm-chair, and unconsciously striking an attitude before the
astonished girl, "do you want to marry Bob?"

"Why, no," cried Polly, utterly shaken out of her composure by the
suddenness and vehemence of the attack.

"I _knew it_!" declared the Colonel, triumphantly. "It was a piece of
cursed impertinence!" and he worked himself up to such a pitch of fury,
and grew so red in the face, that poor Polly, who had to steer between
two dangers, was compelled to employ all her arts to soothe the old man
and keep him out of a fit of apoplexy. She learned the truth, however,
and she learned something which, until that time, she had never known;
and though, as she kissed her uncle "good-night," she made no answer
to his final shot of, "Well, I'm glad we are not going to have any
nonsense about the fellow; I have made up my mind, and we'll treat his
impudence as it deserves," she locked her door carefully when she was
within her own room, and the next morning she said she had a headache.

Bob did not come that day.

If the Colonel had not been so hot-headed--that is, if he had not been
a man--things would doubtless have straightened themselves out in some
of those mysterious ways in which the hardest knots into which two
young peoples' affairs contrive to get untangle themselves; but being a
man, he must needs, man-like, undertake to manage according to his own
plan, which is always the wrong one.

When, therefore, he announced to Polly at the breakfast-table that
morning that she would have no further annoyance from that fellow's
impertinence; for he had written him a note apologizing for leaving him
abruptly in his own house the day before, but forbidding him, in both
their names, to continue his addresses, or, indeed, to put his foot on
the place again; he fully expected to see Polly's face brighten, and to
receive her approbation and thanks. What, then, was his disappointment
to see her face grow distinctly white. All she said was, "Oh, uncle!"

It was unfortunate that the day was Sunday, and that the Colonel went
with her to church (which she insisted on attending, notwithstanding
her headache), and was by when she met Bob. They came on each other
suddenly. Bob took off his hat and stood like a soldier on review,
erect, expectant, and a little pale. The Colonel, who had almost
forgotten his "impertinence," and was about to shake hands with him as
usual, suddenly remembered it, and drawing himself up, stepped to the
other side of Polly, and handed her by the younger gentleman as if he
were protecting her from a mob. Polly, who had been looking anxiously
everywhere but in the right place, meaning to give Bob a smile which
would set things straight, caught his eye only at that second, and felt
rather than saw the change in his attitude and manner. She tried to
throw him the smile, but it died in her eyes, and even after her back
was turned she was sensible of his defiance. She went into church, and
dropped down on her knees in the far end of her pew, with her little
heart needing all the consolations of her religion.

The man she prayed hardest for did not come into church that day.

Things went very badly after that, and the knots got tighter and
tighter. An attempt which Bob made to loosen them failed disastrously,
and the Colonel, who was the best-hearted man in the world, but whose
prejudices were made of wrought iron, took it into his head that Bob
had insulted him, and Polly's indirect efforts at pacification aroused
him to such an extent that for the first time in his life he was almost
hard with her. He conceived the absurd idea that she was sacrificing
herself for Bob on account of her friendship for him, and that it was
his duty to protect her against herself, which, man-like, he proceeded
to do in his own fashion, to poor Polly's great distress.

She was devoted to her uncle, and knew the strength of his affection
for her. On the other hand, Bob and she had been friends so long. She
never could remember the time when she did not have Bob. But he had
never said a word of love to her in his life. To be sure, on that
evening in the garden she had known it just as well as if he had fallen
on his knees at her feet. She knew his silence was just because he had
owed her uncle the money; and oh! if she just hadn't gotten frightened;
and oh! if her uncle just hadn't done it; and oh! she was so unhappy!
The poor little thing, in her own dainty, white-curtained room, where
were the books and things he had given her, and the letters he had
written her, used to--but that is a secret. Anyhow, it was not because
he was gone. She knew that was not the reason--indeed, she very often
said so to herself; it was because he had been treated so unjustly,
and suffered so, and she had done it all. And she used to introduce
many new petitions into her prayers, in which, if there was not any
name expressed, she felt that it would be understood, and the blessings
would reach him just the same.

The summer had gone, and the Indian summer had come in its place,
hazy, dreamy, and sad. It always made Polly melancholy, and this year,
although the weather was perfect, she was affected, she said, by the
heat, and did not go out of doors much. So presently her cheeks were
not as blooming as they had been, and even her great dark eyes lost
some of their lustre; at least, Charity thought so, and said so too,
not only to Polly, but to her master, whom she scared half to death;
and who, notwithstanding that Dr. Stopper was coming over every other
day to see a patient on the plantation, and that the next day was the
time for his regular visit, put a boy on a horse that night and sent
him with a note urging him to come the next morning to breakfast.

The doctor came, and spent the day: examined Polly's lungs and
heart, prescribed out-door exercise, and left something less than a
bushel-basketful of medicines for her to take.

Polly was, at the time of his visit, in a very excited state, for the
Colonel had, with a view of soothing her, the night before delivered
a violent philippic against marriage in general, and in particular
against marriage with "impudent young puppies who did not know their
places;" and he had proposed an extensive tour, embracing all the
United States and Canada, and intended to cover the entire winter and
spring following. Polly, who had stood as much as she could stand,
finally rebelled, and had with flashing eyes and mantling cheeks
espoused Bob's cause with a courage and dash which had almost routed
the old Colonel. "Not that he was anything to her except a friend," she
was most careful to explain; but she was tired of hearing her "friend"
assailed, and she thought that it was the highest compliment a man
could pay a woman, etc., etc., for all of which she did a great deal of
blushing in her own room afterwards.

Thus it happened, that she was both excited and penitent the next day,
and thinking to make some atonement, and at the same time to take the
prescribed exercise, which would excuse her from taking the medicines,
she filled a little basket with goodies to take old Aunt Betty at the
Far Quarters; and thus it happened, that, as she was coming back along
the path which ran down the meadow on the other side of the creek which
was the dividing line between the two plantations, and was almost at
the foot-bridge that Somebody had made for her so carefully with logs
cut out of his own woods, and the long shadows of the willows made it
gloomy, and everything was so still that she had grown very lonely and
unhappy--thus it happened, that just as she was thinking how kind he
had been about making the bridge and hand-rail so strong, and about
everything, and how cruel he must think her, and how she would never
see him any more as she used to do, she turned the clump of willows
to step up on the log, and there he was standing on the bridge just
before her, looking down into her eyes! She tried to get by him--she
remembered that afterwards; but he was so mean. It was always a little
confused in her memory, and she could never recall exactly how it was.
She was sure, however, that it was because he was so pale that she said
it, and that she did not begin to cry until afterwards, and that it was
because he would not listen to her explanation; and that she didn't let
him do it, she could not help it, and she did not know her head was on
his shoulder.

[Illustration: _"There he was standing on the bridge just before her."_]

Anyhow, when she got home that evening her improvement was so apparent
that the Colonel called Charity in to note it, and declared that
Virginia country doctors were the finest in the world, and that Stopper
was the greatest doctor in the State. The change was wonderful, indeed;
and the old gilt mirror, with its gauze-covered frame, would never have
known for the sad-eyed Polly of the day before the bright, happy
maiden that stood before it now and smiled at the beaming face which
dimpled at its own content.

Old Betty's was a protracted pleurisy, and the good things Polly
carried her daily did not tend to shorten the sickness. Ever afterwards
she "blessed the Lord for dat chile" whenever Polly's name was
mentioned. She would doubtless have included Bob in her benison had she
known how sympathetic he was during this period.

But although he was inspecting that bridge every afternoon regularly,
notwithstanding Polly's oft-reiterated wish and express orders as
regularly declared, no one knew a word of all this. And it was a bow
drawn at a venture when, on the evening that Polly had tried to carry
out her engagement to bring her uncle around, the old man had said,
"Why, hoity-toity! the young rascal's cause seems to be thriving."
She had been so confident of her success that she was not prepared
for failure, and it struck her like a fresh blow; and though she did
not cry until she got into her own room, when she got there she threw
herself on the bed and cried herself to sleep. "It was so cruel in
him," she said to herself, "to desire me never to speak to him again!
And, oh! if he should really catch him on the place and shoot him!"
The pronouns in our language were probably invented by young women.

The headache Polly had the next morning was not invented. Poor little
thing! her last hope was gone. She determined to bid Bob good-by, and
never see him again. She had made up her mind to this on her knees, so
she knew she was right. The pain it cost her satisfied her that she was.

She was firmly resolved when she set out that afternoon to see
old Betty, who was in everybody's judgment except her own quite
convalescent, and whom Dr. Stopper pronounced entirely well. She
wavered a little in her resolution when, descending the path along the
willows, which were leafless now, she caught sight of a tall figure
loitering easily up the meadow, and she abandoned--that is, she forgot
it altogether when, having doubtfully suggested it, she was suddenly
enfolded in a pair of strong arms, and two gray eyes, lighting a
handsome face strong with the self-confidence which women love, looked
down into hers.

Then he proposed it!

Her heart almost stood still at his boldness. But he was so strong,
so firm, so reasonable, so self-reliant, and yet so gentle, she could
not but listen to him. Still she refused--and she never did consent;
she forbade him ever to think of it again. Then she begged him never
to come there again, and told him of her uncle's threats, and of her
fears for him; and then, when he laughed at them, she begged him never,
never, under any circumstances, to take any notice of what her uncle
might do or say, but rather to stand still and be shot dead; and then,
when Bob promised this, she burst into tears, and he had to hold her
and comfort her like a little girl.

It was pretty bad after that, and but for Polly's out-door exercise
she would undoubtedly have succumbed. It seemed as if something had
come between her and her uncle. She no longer went about singing like a
bird. She suffered under the sense of being misunderstood, and it was
so lonely! He too was oppressed by it. Even Torm shared in it, and his
expositions assumed a cast terrific in the last degree.

It was now December.

One evening it culminated. The weather had been too bad for Polly to
go out, and she was sick. Finally Stopper was sent for. Polly, who,
to use Charity's expression, was "pestered till she was fractious,"
rebelled flatly, and refused to keep her bed or to take the medicines
prescribed. Charity backed her. Torm got drunk. The Colonel was in
a fume, and declared his intention to sell Torm next morning, as
usual, and to take Charity and Polly and go to Europe. This was well
enough; but to Polly's consternation, when she came to breakfast next
morning, she found that the old man's plans had ripened into a scheme
to set out on the very next day for Louisiana and New Orleans, where he
proposed to spend the winter looking after some plantations she had,
and showing her something of the world. Polly remonstrated, rebelled,
cajoled. It was all in vain. Stopper had seriously frightened the old
man about her health, and he was adamant. Preparations were set on
foot; the brown hair trunks, with their lines of staring brass tacks,
were raked out and dusted; the Colonel got into a fever, ordered up all
the negroes in the yard, and gave instructions from the front door,
like a major-general reviewing his troops; got Torm, Charity, and
all the others into a wild flutter; attempted to superintend Polly's
matters; made her promises of fabulous gifts; became reminiscent, and
told marvelous stories of his old days, which Torm corroborated; and so
excited Polly and the plantation generally, that from old Betty, who
came from the Far Quarters for the purpose of taking it in, down to the
blackest little dot on the place, there was not one who did not get
into a wild whirl, and talk as if they were all going to New Orleans
the next morning, with Joe Rattler on the boot.

Polly had, after a stout resistance, surrendered to her fate, and
packed her modest trunk with very mingled feelings. Under other
circumstances she would have enjoyed the trip immensely; but she felt
now as if it were parting from Bob forever. Her heart was in her throat
all day, and even the excitement of packing could not drive away the
feeling. She knew she would never see him again. She tried to work out
what the end would be. Would he die, or would he marry Malviny Pegram?
Every one said she would just suit him, and she'd certainly marry him
if he asked her.

The sun was shining over the western woods. Bob rode down that way in
the afternoon, even when it was raining; he had told her so. He would
think it cruel of her to go away thus, and never even let him know. She
would at least go and tell him good-by. So she did.

Bob's face paled suddenly when she told him all, and that look which
she had not seen often before settled on it. Then he took her hand and
began to explain everything to her. He told her that he had loved her
all her life; showed her how she had inspired him to work for and
win every success that he had achieved; how it had been her work even
more than his. Then he laid before her the life plans he had formed,
and proved how they were all for her, and for her only. He made it all
so clear, and his voice was so confident, and his face so earnest, as
he pleaded and proved it step by step, that she felt, as she leaned
against him and he clasped her closely, that he was right, and that she
could not part from him.

That evening Polly was unusually silent; but the Colonel thought she
had never been so sweet. She petted him until he swore that no man on
earth was worthy of her, and that none should ever have her.

After tea she went to his room to look over his clothes (her especial
work), and would let no one, not even her mammy, help her; and when
the Colonel insisted on coming in to tell her some more concerning the
glories of New Orleans in his day, she finally put him out and locked
the door on him.

She was very strange all the evening. As they were to start the next
morning, the Colonel was for retiring early; but Polly would not go;
she loitered around, hung about the old fellow, petted him, sat on his
knee and kissed him, until he was forced to insist on her going to
bed. Then she said good-night, and astonished the Colonel by throwing
herself into his arms and bursting out crying.

The old man soothed her with caresses and baby talk, such as he used to
comfort her with when she was a little girl, and when she became calm
he handed her to her door as if she had been a duchess.

The house was soon quiet, except that once the Colonel heard Polly
walking in her room, and mentally determined to chide her for sitting
up so late. He, however, drifted off from the subject when he heard
some of his young mules galloping around the yard, and he made a sleepy
resolve to sell them all, or to dismiss his overseer next day for
letting them out of the lot. Before he had quite determined which he
should do, he dropped off to sleep again.

It was possibly about this time that a young man lifted into her saddle
a dark-habited little figure, whose face shone very white in the
starlight, and whose tremulous voice would have suggested a refusal had
it not been drowned in the deep, earnest tone of her lover. Although
she declared that she could not think of doing it, she had on her hat
and furs and riding-habit when Bob came. She did, indeed, really beg
him to go away; but a few minutes later a pair of horses cantered
down the avenue toward the lawn gate, which shut with a bang that so
frightened the little lady on the bay mare that the young man found it
necessary to lean over and throw a steadying arm around her.

For the first time in her life Polly saw the sun rise in North
Carolina, and a few hours later a gentle-voiced young clergyman, whose
sweet-faced wife was wholly carried away by Polly's beauty, received
under protest Bob's only gold piece, a coin which he twisted from his
watch-chain with the promise to quadruple it if he would preserve it
until he could redeem it.

When Charity told the Colonel next morning that Polly was gone, the
old man for the first time in fifty years turned perfectly white. Then
he fell into a consuming rage, and swore until Charity would not have
been much surprised to see the devil appear in visible shape and claim
him on the spot. He cursed Bob, cursed himself, cursed Torm, Charity,
and the entire female sex individually and collectively, and then,
seized by a new idea, he ordered his horse, that he might pursue the
runaways, threatened an immediate sale of his whole plantation, and
the instantaneous death of Bob, and did in fact get down his great
brass-mounted pistols, and lay them by him as he made Torm, Charity,
and a half-dozen younger house-servants dress him.

[Illustration: _"He made Torm, Charity, and a half-dozen younger
house-servants dress him."_]

Dressing and shaving occupied him about an hour--he always averred
that a gentleman could not dress like a gentleman in less time--and,
still breathing out threatenings and slaughter, he marched out of his
room, making Torm and Charity follow him, each with a pistol. Something
prompted him to stop and inspect them in the hall. Taking first one and
then the other, he examined them curiously.

"Well, I'll be----!" he said, dryly, and flung both of them crashing
through the window. Turning, he ordered waffles and hoe-cakes for
breakfast, and called for the books to have prayers.

Polly had utilized the knowledge she had gained as a girl, and had
unloaded both pistols the night before, and rammed the balls down again
without powder, so as to render them harmless.

By breakfast time Torm was in a state of such advanced intoxication
that he was unable to walk through the back yard gate, and the Colonel
was forced to content himself with sending by Charity a message that
he would get rid of him early the next morning. He straitly enjoined
Charity to tell him, and she as solemnly promised to do so. "Yes, suh,
_I_ gwi' tell him," she replied, with a faint tone of being wounded at
his distrust; and she did.

She needed an outlet.

Things got worse. The Colonel called up the overseer and gave new
orders, as if he proposed to change everything. He forbade any mention
of Polly's name, and vowed that he would send for Mr. Steep, his
lawyer, and change his will to spite all creation. This humor, instead
of wearing off, seemed to grow worse as the time stretched on, and Torm
actually grew sober in the shadow that had fallen on the plantation.
The Colonel had Polly's room nailed up and shut himself up in the house.

The negroes discussed the condition of affairs in awed undertones, and
watched him furtively whenever he passed. Various opinions by turns
prevailed. Aunt Betty, who was regarded with veneration, owing partly
to the interest the lost Polly had taken in her illness, and partly
to her great age (to which she annually added three years) prophesied
that he was going to die "in torments," just like some old uncle of his
whom no one else had ever heard of until now, but who was raked up by
her to serve as a special example. The chief resemblance seemed to be a
certain "rankness in cussin'."

Things were certainly going badly, and day by day they grew worse. The
Colonel became more and more morose.

"He don' even quoil no mo'," Torm complained pathetically to Charity.
"He jes set still and study. I 'feard he gwine 'stracted."

It was, indeed, lamentable. It was accepted on the plantation that Miss
Polly had gone for good--some said down to Louisiana--and would never
come back any more. The prevailing impression was that, if she did, the
Colonel would certainly kill Bob. Torm had not a doubt of it.

Thus matters stood three days before Christmas. The whole plantation
was plunged in gloom. It would be the first time since Miss Polly was a
baby that they had not had "a big Christmas."

Torm's lugubrious countenance one morning seemed to shock the
Colonel out of his lethargy. He asked how many days there would be
before Christmas, and learning that there were but three, he ordered
preparations to be made for a great feast and a big time generally.
He had the wood-pile replenished as usual, got up his presents, and
superintended the Christmas operations himself, as Polly used to do.
But it was sad work, and when Torm and Charity retired Christmas Eve
night, although Torm had imbibed plentifully, and the tables were all
spread for the great dinner for the servants next day, there was no
peace in Torm's discourse; it was all of wrath and judgment to come.

He had just gone to sleep when there was a knock at the door.

"Who dat out dyah?" called Charity. "You niggers better go 'long to
bed."

The knock was repeated.

"Who dat out dyah, I say?" queried Charity, testily. "Whyn't you go
'long 'way from dat do'? Torm, Torm, dee's somebody at de do'," she
said, as the knocking was renewed.

Torm was hard to wake, but at length he got up and moved slowly to the
door, grumbling to himself all the time.

When finally he undid the latch, Charity, who was in bed, heard him
exclaim, "Well, name o' Gord! good Gord A'mighty!" and burst into a
wild explosion of laughter.

In a second she too was outside of the door, and had Polly in her arms,
laughing, jumping, hugging, and kissing her while Torm executed a
series of caracoles around them.

"Whar Marse Bob?" asked both negroes, finally, in a breath.

"Hello, Torm! How are you, Mam' Charity?" called that gentleman,
cheerily, coming up from where he had been fastening the horses; and
Charity, suddenly mindful of her peculiar appearance and of the frosty
air, "scuttled" into the house, conveying her young mistress with her.

Presently she came out dressed, and invited Bob in too. She insisted
on giving them something to eat; but they had been to supper, and
Polly was much too excited hearing about her uncle to eat anything.
She cried a little at Charity's description of him, which she tried to
keep Bob from seeing, but he saw it, and had to--however, when they
got ready to go home, Polly insisted on going to the yard and up on
the porch, and when there, she actually kissed the window-blind of the
room whence issued a muffled snore suggestive at least of some degree
of forgetfulness. She wanted Bob to kiss it too, but that gentleman
apparently found something else more to his taste, and her entreaty was
drowned in another sound.

Before they remounted their horses Polly carried Bob to the greenhouse,
where she groped around in the darkness for something, to Bob's
complete mystification. "Doesn't it smell sweet in here?" she asked.

"I don't smell anything but that mint bed you've been walking on," he
laughed.

As they rode off, leaving Torm and Charity standing in the road, the
last thing Polly said was, "Now be sure you tell him--nine o'clock."

"Umm! I know he gwi' sell me den sho 'nough," said Torm, in a tone of
conviction, as the horses cantered away in the frosty night.

Once or twice, as they galloped along, Bob made some allusion to the
mint bed on which Polly had stepped, to which she made no reply. But as
he helped her down at her own door, he asked, "What in the world have
you got there?"

"Mint," said she, with a little low, pleased laugh.

By light next morning it was known all over the plantation that Miss
Polly had returned. The rejoicing, however, was clouded by the fear
that nothing would come of it.

In Charity's house it was decided that Torm should break the news. Torm
was doubtful on the point as the time drew near, but Charity's mind
never wavered. Finally he went in with his master's shaving-water,
having first tried to establish his courage by sundry pulls at a black
bottle. He essayed three times to deliver the message, but each time
his courage failed, and he hastened out under pretence of the water
having gotten cold. The last time he attracted Charity's attention.

"Name o' Gord, Torm, you gwine to scawl hawgs'?" she asked,
sarcastically.

The next time he entered the Colonel was in a fume of impatience, so
he had to fix the water. He set down the can, and bustled about with
hypocritical industry. The Colonel, at last, was almost through; Torm
retreated to the door. As his master finished, he put his hand on the
knob, and turning it, said, "Miss Polly come home larse night; sh' say
she breakfast at nine o'clock."

Slapbang! came the shaving-can, smashing against the door, just as he
dodged out, and the roar of the Colonel followed him across the hall.

When finally their master appeared on the portico, Torm and Charity
were watching in some doubt whether he would not carry out on the spot
his long-threatened purpose. He strode up and down the long porch,
evidently in great excitement.

"He's turrible dis mornin'," said Torm; "he th'owed de whole kittle o'
b'ilin' water at me."

"Pity he didn' scawl you to death," said his wife, sympathizingly. She
thought Torm's awkwardness had destroyed Polly's last chance. Torm
resorted to his black bottle, and proceeded to talk about the lake of
brimstone and fire.

Up and down the portico strode the old Colonel. His horse was at the
rack, where he was always brought before breakfast. (For twenty years
he had probably never missed a morning.) Finally he walked down,
and looked at the saddle; of course, it was all wrong. He fixed it,
and, mounting, rode off in the opposite direction to that whence his
invitation had come. Charity, looking out of her door, inserted into
her diatribe against "all wuthless, drunken, fool niggers" a pathetic
parenthesis to the effect that "Ef Marster meet Marse Bob dis mornin',
de don' be a hide nor hyah left o'nyah one on 'em; an' dat lamb over
dyah maybe got oystchers waitin' for him too."

Torm was so much impressed that he left Charity and went out of doors.

The Colonel rode down the plantation, his great gray horse quivering
with life in the bright winter sunlight. He gave him the rein, and he
turned down a cross-road which led out of the plantation into the main
high-way. Mechanically he opened the gate and rode out. Before he knew
where he was he was through the wood, and his horse had stopped at the
next gate. It was the gate of Bob's place. The house stood out bright
and plain among the yard trees; lines of blue smoke curled up almost
straight from the chimneys; and he could see two or three negroes
running backward and forward between the kitchen and the house. The
sunlight glistened on something in the hand of one of them, and sent
a ray of dazzling light all the way to the old man. He knew it was a
plate or a dish. He took out his watch and glanced at it; it was five
minutes to nine o'clock. He started to turn around to go home. As he
did so, the memory of all the past swept over him, and of the wrong
that had been done him. He would go in and show them his contempt for
them by riding in and straight out again; and he actually unlatched
the gate and went in. As he rode across the field he recalled all that
Polly had been to him from the time when she had first stretched out
her arms to him; all the little ways by which she had brought back his
youth, and had made his house home, and his heart soft again. Every
scene came before him as if to mock him. He felt once more the touch
of her little hand; heard again the sound of her voice as it used to
ring through the old house and about the grounds; saw her and Bob as
children romping about his feet, and he gave a great gulp as he thought
how desolate the house was now. He sat up in his saddle stiffer than
ever. D---- him! he would enter his very house, and there to his face
and hers denounce him for his baseness; he pushed his horse to a trot.
Up to the yard gate he rode, and, dismounting, hitched his horse to the
fence, and slamming the gate fiercely behind him, stalked up the walk
with his heavy whip clutched fast in his hand. Up the walk and up the
steps, without a pause, his face set as grim as rock, and purple with
suppressed emotion; for a deluge of memories was overwhelming him.

The door was shut; they had locked it on him; but he would burst it in,
and--Ah! what was that?

The door flew suddenly open; there was a cry, a spring, a vision of
something swam before his eyes, and two arms were clasped about his
neck, while he was being smothered with kisses from the sweetest
mouth in the world, and a face made up of light and laughter, yet
tearful, too, like a dew-bathed flower, was pressed to his, and before
the Colonel knew it he had, amid laughter and sobs and caresses,
been borne into the house, and pressed down at the daintiest little
breakfast-table eyes ever saw, set for three persons, and loaded with
steaming dishes, and with a great fresh julep by the side of his plate,
and Torm standing behind his chair, whilst Bob was helping him to
"oystchers," and Polly, with dimpling face, was attempting the exploit
of pouring out his coffee without moving her arm from around his neck.

The first thing he said after he recovered his breath was, "Where did
you get this mint?"

Polly broke into a peal of rippling, delicious laughter, and tightened
the arm about his neck.

"Just one more squeeze," said the Colonel; and as she gave it he said,
with the light of it all breaking on him, "Damme if I don't sell you!
or, if I can't sell you, I'll give you away--that is, if he'll come
over and live with us."

That evening, after the great dinner, at which Polly had sat in her
old place at the head of the table, and Bob at the foot, because
the Colonel insisted on sitting where Polly could give him one more
squeeze, the whole plantation was ablaze with "Christmas," and
Drinkwater Torm, steadying himself against the sideboard, delivered a
discourse on peace on earth and good-will to men so powerful and so
eloquent that the Colonel, delighted, rose and drank his health, and
said, "Damme if I ever sell him again!"

FOOTNOTE:

[A] This spelling is used because he was called "Torm" until it became
his name.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Polly, by Thomas Nelson Page

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POLLY ***

***** This file should be named 44547.txt or 44547.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/4/5/4/44547/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
