The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Stoneground Ghost Tales, by E. G. Swain

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Stoneground Ghost Tales
       Compiled from the recollections of the reverend Roland
       Batchel, the vicar of the parish.

Author: E. G. Swain

Release Date: January 4, 2014 [EBook #44581]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STONEGROUND GHOST TALES ***




Produced by eagkw, sp1nd and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







  [Illustration]

  LONDON:
  SIMPKIN, MARSHALL AND CO., LTD.




  THE STONEGROUND
  GHOST TALES

  COMPILED FROM THE RECOLLECTIONS OF
  THE REVEREND ROLAND BATCHEL,
  VICAR OF THE PARISH.

  BY

  E. G. SWAIN

  CAMBRIDGE:
  W. HEFFER & SONS LTD.
  1912




  TO

  MONTAGUE RHODES JAMES

  (LITT.D., HON. LITT.D. DUBLIN,
  HON. LL.D. ST. ANDR., F.B.A., F.S.A., ETC.)
  PROVOST OF KING'S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE,
  FOR TWENTY PLEASANT YEARS MR. BATCHEL'S FRIEND,
  AND THE INDULGENT PARENT OF SUCH TASTES
  AS THESE PAGES INDICATE.




CONTENTS


                              PAGE
  I.--THE MAN WITH THE ROLLER    1

  II.--BONE TO HIS BONE         19

  III.--THE RICHPINS            35

  IV.--THE EASTERN WINDOW       63

  V.--LUBRIETTA                 83

  VI.--THE ROCKERY             103

  VII.--THE INDIAN LAMP SHADE  123

  VIII.--THE PLACE OF SAFETY   147

  IX.--THE KIRK SPOOK          175




I.

THE MAN WITH THE ROLLER.


On the edge of that vast tract of East Anglia, which retains its
ancient name of the Fens, there may be found, by those who know where
to seek it, a certain village called Stoneground. It was once a
picturesque village. To-day it is not to be called either a village,
or picturesque. Man dwells not in one "house of clay," but in two, and
the material of the second is drawn from the earth upon which this and
the neighbouring villages stood. The unlovely signs of the industry
have changed the place alike in aspect and in population. Many who have
seen the fossil skeletons of great saurians brought out of the clay
in which they have lain from pre-historic times, have thought that
the inhabitants of the place have not since changed for the better.
The chief habitations, however, have their foundations not upon clay,
but upon a bed of gravel which anciently gave to the place its name,
and upon the highest part of this gravel stands, and has stood for
many centuries, the Parish Church, dominating the landscape for miles
around.

Stoneground, however, is no longer the inaccessible village, which in
the middle ages stood out above a waste of waters. Occasional floods
serve to indicate what was once its ordinary outlook, but in more
recent times the construction of roads and railways, and the drainage
of the Fens, have given it freedom of communication with the world from
which it was formerly isolated.

The Vicarage of Stoneground stands hard by the Church, and is renowned
for its spacious garden, part of which, and that (as might be expected)
the part nearest the house, is of ancient date. To the original plot
successive Vicars have added adjacent lands, so that the garden has
gradually acquired the state in which it now appears.

The Vicars have been many in number. Since Henry de Greville was
instituted in the year 1140 there have been 30, all of whom have lived,
and most of whom have died, in successive vicarage houses upon the
present site.

The present incumbent, Mr. Batchel, is a solitary man of somewhat
studious habits, but is not too much enamoured of his solitude to
receive visits, from time to time, from schoolboys and such. In the
summer of the year 1906 he entertained two, who are the occasion of
this narrative, though still unconscious of their part in it, for
one of the two, celebrating his 15th birthday during his visit to
Stoneground, was presented by Mr. Batchel with a new camera, with which
he proceeded to photograph, with considerable skill, the surroundings
of the house.

One of these photographs Mr. Batchel thought particularly pleasing. It
was a view of the house with the lawn in the foreground. A few small
copies, such as the boy's camera was capable of producing, were sent
to him by his young friend, some weeks after the visit, and again Mr.
Batchel was so much pleased with the picture, that he begged for the
negative, with the intention of having the view enlarged.

The boy met the request with what seemed a needlessly modest plea.
There were two negatives, he replied, but each of them had, in the same
part of the picture, a small blur for which there was no accounting
otherwise than by carelessness. His desire, therefore, was to discard
these films, and to produce something more worthy of enlargement, upon
a subsequent visit.

Mr. Batchel, however, persisted in his request, and upon receipt of the
negative, examined it with a lens. He was just able to detect the blur
alluded to; an examination under a powerful glass, in fact revealed
something more than he had at first detected. The blur was like the
nucleus of a comet as one sees it represented in pictures, and seemed
to be connected with a faint streak which extended across the negative.
It was, however, so inconsiderable a defect that Mr. Batchel resolved
to disregard it. He had a neighbour whose favourite pastime was
photography, one who was notably skilled in everything that pertained
to the art, and to him he sent the negative, with the request for an
enlargement, reminding him of a long-standing promise to do any such
service, when as had now happened, his friend might see fit to ask it.

This neighbour who had acquired such skill in photography was one Mr.
Groves, a young clergyman, residing in the Precincts of the Minster
near at hand, which was visible from Mr. Batchel's garden. He lodged
with a Mrs. Rumney, a superannuated servant of the Palace, and a
strong-minded vigorous woman still, exactly such a one as Mr. Groves
needed to have about him. For he was a constant trial to Mrs. Rumney,
and but for the wholesome fear she begot in him, would have converted
his rooms into a mere den. Her carpets and tablecloths were continually
bespattered with chemicals; her chimney-piece ornaments had been
unceremoniously stowed away and replaced by labelled bottles; even the
bed of Mr. Groves was, by day, strewn with drying films and mounts, and
her old and favourite cat had a bald patch on his flank, the result of
a mishap with the pyrogallic acid.

Mrs. Rumney's lodger, however, was a great favourite with her, as
such helpless men are apt to be with motherly women, and she took no
small pride in his work. A life-size portrait of herself, originally a
peace-offering, hung in her parlour, and had long excited the envy of
every friend who took tea with her.

"Mr. Groves," she was wont to say, "is a nice gentleman, AND a
gentleman; and chemical though he may be, I'd rather wait on him for
nothing than what I would on anyone else for twice the money."

Every new piece of photographic work was of interest to Mrs. Rumney,
and she expected to be allowed both to admire and to criticise. The
view of Stoneground Vicarage, therefore, was shown to her upon its
arrival. "Well may it want enlarging," she remarked, "and it no
bigger than a postage stamp; it looks more like a doll's house than a
vicarage," and with this she went about her work, whilst Mr. Groves
retired to his dark room with the film, to see what he could make of
the task assigned to him.

Two days later, after repeated visits to his dark room, he had made
something considerable; and when Mrs. Rumney brought him his chop for
luncheon, she was lost in admiration. A large but unfinished print
stood upon his easel, and such a picture of Stoneground Vicarage was in
the making as was calculated to delight both the young photographer and
the Vicar.

Mr. Groves spent only his mornings, as a rule, in photography. His
afternoons he gave to pastoral work, and the work upon this enlargement
was over for the day. It required little more than "touching up,"
but it was this "touching up" which made the difference between
the enlargements of Mr. Groves and those of other men. The print,
therefore, was to be left upon the easel until the morrow, when it
was to be finished. Mrs. Rumney and he, together, gave it an admiring
inspection as she was carrying away the tray, and what they agreed in
admiring most particularly was the smooth and open stretch of lawn,
which made so excellent a foreground for the picture. "It looks," said
Mrs. Rumney, who had once been young, "as if it was waiting for someone
to come and dance on it."

Mr. Groves left his lodgings--we must now be particular about the
hours--at half-past two, with the intention of returning, as usual,
at five. "As reg'lar as a clock," Mrs. Rumney was wont to say, "and a
sight more reg'lar than some clocks I knows of."

Upon this day he was, nevertheless, somewhat late, some visit had
detained him unexpectedly, and it was a quarter-past five when he
inserted his latch-key in Mrs. Rumney's door.

Hardly had he entered, when his landlady, obviously awaiting him,
appeared in the passage: her face, usually florid, was of the colour
of parchment, and, breathing hurriedly and shortly, she pointed at the
door of Mr. Groves' room.

In some alarm at her condition, Mr. Groves hastily questioned her; all
she could say was: "The photograph! the photograph!" Mr. Groves could
only suppose that his enlargement had met with some mishap for which
Mrs. Rumney was responsible. Perhaps she had allowed it to flutter into
the fire. He turned towards his room in order to discover the worst,
but at this Mrs. Rumney laid a trembling hand upon his arm, and held
him back. "Don't go in," she said, "have your tea in the parlour."

"Nonsense," said Mr. Groves, "if that is gone we can easily do another."

"Gone," said his landlady, "I wish to Heaven it was."

The ensuing conversation shall not detain us. It will suffice to say
that after a considerable time Mr. Groves succeeded in quieting his
landlady, so much so that she consented, still trembling violently, to
enter the room with him. To speak truth, she was as much concerned for
him as for herself, and she was not by nature a timid woman.

The room, so far from disclosing to Mr. Groves any cause for
excitement, appeared wholly unchanged. In its usual place stood every
article of his stained and ill-used furniture, on the easel stood the
photograph, precisely where he had left it; and except that his tea was
not upon the table, everything was in its usual state and place.

But Mrs. Rumney again became excited and tremulous, "It's there," she
cried. "Look at the lawn."

Mr. Groves stepped quickly forward and looked at the photograph. Then
he turned as pale as Mrs. Rumney herself.

There was a man, a man with an indescribably horrible suffering face,
rolling the lawn with a large roller.

Mr. Groves retreated in amazement to where Mrs. Rumney had remained
standing. "Has anyone been in here?" he asked.

"Not a soul," was the reply, "I came in to make up the fire, and
turned to have another look at the picture, when I saw that dead-alive
face at the edge. It gave me the creeps," she said, "particularly from
not having noticed it before. If that's anyone in Stoneground, I said
to myself, I wonder the Vicar has him in the garden with that awful
face. It took that hold of me I thought I must come and look at it
again, and at five o'clock I brought your tea in. And then I saw him
moved along right in front, with a roller dragging behind him, like you
see."

Mr. Groves was greatly puzzled. Mrs. Rumney's story, of course, was
incredible, but this strange evil-faced man had appeared in the
photograph somehow. That he had not been there when the print was made
was quite certain.

The problem soon ceased to alarm Mr. Groves; in his mind it was
investing itself with a scientific interest. He began to think of
suspended chemical action, and other possible avenues of investigation.
At Mrs. Rumney's urgent entreaty, however, he turned the photograph
upon the easel, and with only its white back presented to the room, he
sat down and ordered tea to be brought in.

He did not look again at the picture. The face of the man had about it
something unnaturally painful: he could remember, and still see, as
it were, the drawn features, and the look of the man had unaccountably
distressed him.

He finished his slight meal, and having lit a pipe, began to brood over
the scientific possibilities of the problem. Had any other photograph
upon the original film become involved in the one he had enlarged? Had
the image of any other face, distorted by the enlarging lens, become
a part of this picture? For the space of two hours he debated this
possibility, and that, only to reject them all. His optical knowledge
told him that no conceivable accident could have brought into his
picture a man with a roller. No negative of his had ever contained such
a man; if it had, no natural causes would suffice to leave him, as it
were, hovering about the apparatus.

His repugnance to the actual thing had by this time lost its freshness,
and he determined to end his scientific musings with another inspection
of the object. So he approached the easel and turned the photograph
round again. His horror returned, and with good cause. The man with
the roller had now advanced to the middle of the lawn. The face was
stricken still with the same indescribable look of suffering. The man
seemed to be appealing to the spectator for some kind of help. Almost,
he spoke.

Mr. Groves was naturally reduced to a condition of extreme nervous
excitement. Although not by nature what is called a nervous man, he
trembled from head to foot. With a sudden effort, he turned away
his head, took hold of the picture with his outstretched hand, and
opening a drawer in his sideboard thrust the thing underneath a folded
tablecloth which was lying there. Then he closed the drawer and took up
an entertaining book to distract his thoughts from the whole matter.

In this he succeeded very ill. Yet somehow the rest of the evening
passed, and as it wore away, he lost something of his alarm. At ten
o'clock, Mrs. Rumney, knocking and receiving answer twice, lest by any
chance she should find herself alone in the room, brought in the cocoa
usually taken by her lodger at that hour. A hasty glance at the easel
showed her that it stood empty, and her face betrayed her relief. She
made no comment, and Mr. Groves invited none.

The latter, however, could not make up his mind to go to bed. The face
he had seen was taking firm hold upon his imagination, and seemed to
fascinate him and repel him at the same time. Before long, he found
himself wholly unable to resist the impulse to look at it once more.
He took it again, with some indecision, from the drawer and laid it
under the lamp.

The man with the roller had now passed completely over the lawn, and
was near the left of the picture.

The shock to Mr. Groves was again considerable. He stood facing the
fire, trembling with excitement which refused to be suppressed. In
this state his eye lighted upon the calendar hanging before him, and
it furnished him with some distraction. The next day was his mother's
birthday. Never did he omit to write a letter which should lie upon
her breakfast-table, and the pre-occupation of this evening had
made him wholly forgetful of the matter. There was a collection of
letters, however, from the pillar-box near at hand, at a quarter before
midnight, so he turned to his desk, wrote a letter which would at least
serve to convey his affectionate greetings, and having written it, went
out into the night and posted it.

The clocks were striking midnight as he returned to his room. We may be
sure that he did not resist the desire to glance at the photograph he
had left on his table. But the results of that glance, he, at any rate,
had not anticipated. The man with the roller had disappeared. The lawn
lay as smooth and clear as at first, "looking," as Mrs. Rumney had
said, "as if it was waiting for someone to come and dance on it."

The photograph, after this, remained a photograph and nothing more. Mr.
Groves would have liked to persuade himself that it had never undergone
these changes which he had witnessed, and which we have endeavoured to
describe, but his sense of their reality was too insistent. He kept
the print lying for a week upon his easel. Mrs. Rumney, although she
had ceased to dread it, was obviously relieved at its disappearance,
when it was carried to Stoneground to be delivered to Mr. Batchel.
Mr. Groves said nothing of the man with the roller, but gave the
enlargement, without comment, into his friend's hands. The work of
enlargement had been skilfully done, and was deservedly praised.

Mr. Groves, making some modest disclaimer, observed that the view, with
its spacious foreground of lawn, was such as could not have failed to
enlarge well. And this lawn, he added, as they sat looking out of the
Vicar's study, looks as well from within your house as from without.
It must give you a sense of responsibility, he added, reflectively, to
be sitting where your predecessors have sat for so many centuries and
to be continuing their peaceful work. The mere presence before your
window, of the turf upon which good men have walked, is an inspiration.

The Vicar made no reply to these somewhat sententious remarks. For
a moment he seemed as if he would speak some words of conventional
assent. Then he abruptly left the room, to return in a few minutes with
a parchment book.

"Your remark, Groves," he said as he seated himself again, "recalled to
me a curious bit of history: I went up to the old library to get the
book. This is the journal of William Longue who was Vicar here up to
the year 1602. What you said about the lawn will give you an interest
in a certain portion of the journal. I will read it."

  Aug. 1, 1600.--I am now returned in haste from a journey to
      Brightelmstone whither I had gone with full intention to
      remain about the space of two months. Master Josiah Wilburton,
      of my dear College of Emmanuel, having consented to assume
      the charge of my parish of Stoneground in the meantime. But
      I had intelligence, after 12 days' absence, by a messenger
      from the Churchwardens, that Master Wilburton had disappeared
      last Monday sennight, and had been no more seen. So here I am
      again in my study to the entire frustration of my plans, and
      can do nothing in my perplexity but sit and look out from my
      window, before which Andrew Birch rolleth the grass with much
      persistence. Andrew passeth so many times over the same place
      with his roller that I have just now stepped without to demand
      why he so wasteth his labour, and upon this he hath pointed out
      a place which is not levelled, and hath continued his rolling.


  Aug. 2.--There is a change in Andrew Birch since my absence, who
      hath indeed the aspect of one in great depression, which is
      noteworthy of so chearful a man. He haply shares our common
      trouble in respect of Master Wilburton, of whom we remain
      without tidings. Having made part of a sermon upon the seventh
      Chapter of the former Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians
      and the 27th verse, I found Andrew again at his task, and bade
      him desist and saddle my horse, being minded to ride forth and
      take counsel with my good friend John Palmer at the Deanery,
      who bore Master Wilburton great affection.


  Aug. 2 continued.--Dire news awaiteth me upon my return. The
      Sheriff's men have disinterred the body of poor Master W. from
      beneath the grass Andrew was rolling, and have arrested him on
      the charge of being his cause of death.


  Aug. 10--Alas! Andrew Birch hath been hanged, the Justice having
      mercifully ordered that he should hang by the neck until he
      should be dead, and not sooner molested. May the Lord have
      mercy on his soul. He made full confession before me, that he
      had slain Master Wilburton in heat upon his threatening to
      make me privy to certain peculation of which I should not have
      suspected so old a servant. The poor man bemoaned his evil
      temper in great contrition, and beat his breast, saying that
      he knew himself doomed for ever to roll the grass in the place
      where he had tried to conceal his wicked fact.

"Thank you," said Mr. Groves. "Has that little negative got the date
upon it?" "Yes," replied Mr. Batchel, as he examined it with his glass.
The boy has marked it August 10. The Vicar seemed not to remark the
coincidence with the date of Birch's execution. Needless to say that it
did not escape Mr. Groves. But he kept silence about the man with the
roller, who has been no more seen to this day.

Doubtless there is more in our photography than we yet know of. The
camera sees more than the eye, and chemicals in a freshly prepared and
active state, have a power which they afterwards lose. Our units of
time, adopted for the convenience of persons dealing with the ordinary
movements of material objects, are of course conventional. Those who
turn the instruments of science upon nature will always be in danger of
seeing more than they looked for. There is such a disaster as that of
knowing too much, and at some time or another it may overtake each of
us. May we then be as wise as Mr. Groves in our reticence, if our turn
should come.




II.

BONE TO HIS BONE.


William Whitehead, Fellow of Emmanuel College, in the University of
Cambridge, became Vicar of Stoneground in the year 1731. The annals
of his incumbency were doubtless short and simple: they have not
survived. In his day were no newspapers to collect gossip, no Parish
Magazines to record the simple events of parochial life. One event,
however, of greater moment then than now, is recorded in two places.
Vicar Whitehead failed in health after 23 years of work, and journeyed
to Bath in what his monument calls "the vain hope of being restored."
The duration of his visit is unknown; it is reasonable to suppose that
he made his journey in the summer, it is certain that by the month of
November his physician told him to lay aside all hope of recovery.

Then it was that the thoughts of the patient turned to the comfortable
straggling vicarage he had left at Stoneground, in which he had hoped
to end his days. He prayed that his successor might be as happy there
as he had been himself. Setting his affairs in order, as became one
who had but a short time to live, he executed a will, bequeathing
to the Vicars of Stoneground, for ever, the close of ground he had
recently purchased because it lay next the vicarage garden. And by a
codicil, he added to the bequest his library of books. Within a few
days, William Whitehead was gathered to his fathers.

A mural tablet in the north aisle of the church, records, in Latin, his
services and his bequests, his two marriages, and his fruitless journey
to Bath. The house he loved, but never again saw, was taken down 40
years later, and re-built by Vicar James Devie. The garden, with Vicar
Whitehead's "close of ground" and other adjacent lands, was opened out
and planted, somewhat before 1850, by Vicar Robert Towerson. The aspect
of everything has changed. But in a convenient chamber on the first
floor of the present vicarage the library of Vicar Whitehead stands
very much as he used it and loved it, and as he bequeathed it to his
successors "for ever."

The books there are arranged as he arranged and ticketed them. Little
slips of paper, sometimes bearing interesting fragments of writing,
still mark his places. His marginal comments still give life to pages
from which all other interest has faded, and he would have but a dull
imagination who could sit in the chamber amidst these books without
ever being carried back 180 years into the past, to the time when the
newest of them left the printer's hands.

Of those into whose possession the books have come, some have doubtless
loved them more, and some less; some, perhaps, have left them severely
alone. But neither those who loved them, nor those who loved them not,
have lost them, and they passed, some century and a half after William
Whitehead's death, into the hands of Mr. Batchel, who loved them as a
father loves his children. He lived alone, and had few domestic cares
to distract his mind. He was able, therefore, to enjoy to the full what
Vicar Whitehead had enjoyed so long before him. During many a long
summer evening would he sit poring over long-forgotten books; and since
the chamber, otherwise called the library, faced the south, he could
also spend sunny winter mornings there without discomfort. Writing at
a small table, or reading as he stood at a tall desk, he would browse
amongst the books like an ox in a pleasant pasture.

There were other times also, at which Mr. Batchel would use the books.
Not being a sound sleeper (for book-loving men seldom are), he elected
to use as a bedroom one of the two chambers which opened at either
side into the library. The arrangement enabled him to beguile many a
sleepless hour amongst the books, and in view of these nocturnal visits
he kept a candle standing in a sconce above the desk, and matches
always ready to his hand.

There was one disadvantage in this close proximity of his bed to the
library. Owing, apparently, to some defect in the fittings of the room,
which, having no mechanical tastes, Mr. Batchel had never investigated,
there could be heard, in the stillness of the night, exactly such
sounds as might arise from a person moving about amongst the books.
Visitors using the other adjacent room would often remark at breakfast,
that they had heard their host in the library at one or two o'clock in
the morning, when, in fact, he had not left his bed. Invariably Mr.
Batchel allowed them to suppose that he had been where they thought
him. He disliked idle controversy, and was unwilling to afford an
opening for supernatural talk. Knowing well enough the sounds by which
his guests had been deceived, he wanted no other explanation of them
than his own, though it was of too vague a character to count as an
explanation. He conjectured that the window-sashes, or the doors, or
"something," were defective, and was too phlegmatic and too unpractical
to make any investigation. The matter gave him no concern.

Persons whose sleep is uncertain are apt to have their worst nights
when they would like their best. The consciousness of a special need
for rest seems to bring enough mental disturbance to forbid it. So on
Christmas Eve, in the year 1907, Mr. Batchel, who would have liked to
sleep well, in view of the labours of Christmas Day, lay hopelessly
wide awake. He exhausted all the known devices for courting sleep,
and, at the end, found himself wider awake than ever. A brilliant moon
shone into his room, for he hated window-blinds. There was a light
wind blowing, and the sounds in the library were more than usually
suggestive of a person moving about. He almost determined to have the
sashes "seen to," although he could seldom be induced to have anything
"seen to." He disliked changes, even for the better, and would submit
to great inconvenience rather than have things altered with which he
had become familiar.

As he revolved these matters in his mind, he heard the clocks strike
the hour of midnight, and having now lost all hope of falling asleep,
he rose from his bed, got into a large dressing gown which hung in
readiness for such occasions, and passed into the library, with the
intention of reading himself sleepy, if he could.

The moon, by this time, had passed out of the south, and the library
seemed all the darker by contrast with the moonlit chamber he had
left. He could see nothing but two blue-grey rectangles formed by the
windows against the sky, the furniture of the room being altogether
invisible. Groping along to where the table stood, Mr. Batchel felt
over its surface for the matches which usually lay there; he found,
however, that the table was cleared of everything. He raised his right
hand, therefore, in order to feel his way to a shelf where the matches
were sometimes mislaid, and at that moment, whilst his hand was in
mid-air, the matchbox was gently put into it!

Such an incident could hardly fail to disturb even a phlegmatic person,
and Mr. Batchel cried "Who's this?" somewhat nervously. There was no
answer. He struck a match, looked hastily round the room, and found
it empty, as usual. There was everything, that is to say, that he was
accustomed to see, but no other person than himself.

It is not quite accurate, however, to say that everything was in
its usual state. Upon the tall desk lay a quarto volume that he had
certainly not placed there. It was his quite invariable practice to
replace his books upon the shelves after using them, and what we may
call his library habits were precise and methodical. A book out of
place like this, was not only an offence against good order, but a
sign that his privacy had been intruded upon. With some surprise,
therefore, he lit the candle standing ready in the sconce, and
proceeded to examine the book, not sorry, in the disturbed condition in
which he was, to have an occupation found for him.

The book proved to be one with which he was unfamiliar, and this made
it certain that some other hand than his had removed it from its place.
Its title was "The Compleat Gard'ner" of M. de la Quintinye made
English by John Evelyn Esquire. It was not a work in which Mr. Batchel
felt any great interest. It consisted of divers reflections on various
parts of husbandry, doubtless entertaining enough, but too deliberate
and discursive for practical purposes. He had certainly never used the
book, and growing restless now in mind, said to himself that some boy
having the freedom of the house, had taken it down from its place in
the hope of finding pictures.

But even whilst he made this explanation he felt its weakness. To begin
with, the desk was too high for a boy. The improbability that any boy
would place a book there was equalled by the improbability that he
would leave it there. To discover its uninviting character would be
the work only of a moment, and no boy would have brought it so far from
its shelf.

Mr. Batchel had, however, come to read, and habit was too strong
with him to be wholly set aside. Leaving "The Compleat Gard'ner" on
the desk, he turned round to the shelves to find some more congenial
reading.

Hardly had he done this when he was startled by a sharp rap upon the
desk behind him, followed by a rustling of paper. He turned quickly
about and saw the quarto lying open. In obedience to the instinct of
the moment, he at once sought a natural cause for what he saw. Only a
wind, and that of the strongest, could have opened the book, and laid
back its heavy cover; and though he accepted, for a brief moment, that
explanation, he was too candid to retain it longer. The wind out of
doors was very light. The window sash was closed and latched, and, to
decide the matter finally, the book had its back, and not its edges,
turned towards the only quarter from which a wind could strike.

Mr. Batchel approached the desk again and stood over the book. With
increasing perturbation of mind (for he still thought of the matchbox)
he looked upon the open page. Without much reason beyond that he felt
constrained to do something, he read the words of the half completed
sentence at the turn of the page--

      "at dead of night he left the house and passed into the
      solitude of the garden."

But he read no more, nor did he give himself the trouble of discovering
whose midnight wandering was being described, although the habit was
singularly like one of his own. He was in no condition for reading,
and turning his back upon the volume he slowly paced the length of the
chamber, "wondering at that which had come to pass."

He reached the opposite end of the chamber and was in the act of
turning, when again he heard the rustling of paper, and by the time he
had faced round, saw the leaves of the book again turning over. In a
moment the volume lay at rest, open in another place, and there was no
further movement as he approached it. To make sure that he had not been
deceived, he read again the words as they entered the page. The author
was following a not uncommon practise of the time, and throwing common
speech into forms suggested by Holy Writ: "So dig," it said, "that ye
may obtain."

This passage, which to Mr. Batchel seemed reprehensible in its levity,
excited at once his interest and his disapproval. He was prepared to
read more, but this time was not allowed. Before his eye could pass
beyond the passage already cited, the leaves of the book slowly turned
again, and presented but a termination of five words and a colophon.

The words were, "to the North, an Ilex." These three passages, in which
he saw no meaning and no connection, began to entangle themselves
together in Mr. Batchel's mind. He found himself repeating them in
different orders, now beginning with one, and now with another. Any
further attempt at reading he felt to be impossible, and he was in
no mind for any more experiences of the unaccountable. Sleep was, of
course, further from him than ever, if that were conceivable. What he
did, therefore, was to blow out the candle, to return to his moonlit
bedroom, and put on more clothing, and then to pass downstairs with the
object of going out of doors.

It was not unusual with Mr. Batchel to walk about his garden at
night-time. This form of exercise had often, after a wakeful hour,
sent him back to his bed refreshed and ready for sleep. The convenient
access to the garden at such times lay through his study, whose French
windows opened on to a short flight of steps, and upon these he now
paused for a moment to admire the snow-like appearance of the lawns,
bathed as they were in the moonlight. As he paused, he heard the city
clocks strike the half-hour after midnight, and he could not forbear
repeating aloud

      "At dead of night he left the house, and passed into the
      solitude of the garden."

It was solitary enough. At intervals the screech of an owl, and now and
then the noise of a train, seemed to emphasise the solitude by drawing
attention to it and then leaving it in possession of the night. Mr.
Batchel found himself wondering and conjecturing what Vicar Whitehead,
who had acquired the close of land to secure quiet and privacy for
garden, would have thought of the railways to the west and north. He
turned his face northwards, whence a whistle had just sounded, and saw
a tree beautifully outlined against the sky. His breath caught at the
sight. Not because the tree was unfamiliar. Mr. Batchel knew all his
trees. But what he had seen was "to the north, an Ilex."

Mr. Batchel knew not what to make of it all. He had walked into the
garden hundreds of times and as often seen the Ilex, but the words out
of the "Compleat Gard'ner" seemed to be pursuing him in a way that made
him almost afraid. His temperament, however, as has been said already,
was phlegmatic. It was commonly said, and Mr. Batchel approved the
verdict, whilst he condemned its inexactness, that "his nerves were
made of fiddle-string," so he braced himself afresh and set upon his
walk round the silent garden, which he was accustomed to begin in a
northerly direction, and was now too proud to change. He usually passed
the Ilex at the beginning of his perambulation, and so would pass it
now.

He did not pass it. A small discovery, as he reached it, annoyed and
disturbed him. His gardener, as careful and punctilious as himself,
never failed to house all his tools at the end of a day's work. Yet
there, under the Ilex, standing upright in moonlight brilliant enough
to cast a shadow of it, was a spade.

Mr. Batchel's second thought was one of relief. After his extraordinary
experiences in the library (he hardly knew now whether they had been
real or not) something quite commonplace would act sedatively, and he
determined to carry the spade to the tool-house.

The soil was quite dry, and the surface even a little frozen, so Mr.
Batchel left the path, walked up to the spade, and would have drawn it
towards him. But it was as if he had made the attempt upon the trunk
of the Ilex itself. The spade would not be moved. Then, first with one
hand, and then with both, he tried to raise it, and still it stood
firm. Mr. Batchel, of course, attributed this to the frost, slight
as it was. Wondering at the spade's being there, and annoyed at its
being frozen, he was about to leave it and continue his walk, when
the remaining words of the "Compleat Gard'ner" seemed rather to utter
themselves, than to await his will--

      "So dig, that ye may obtain."

Mr. Batchel's power of independent action now deserted him. He took the
spade, which no longer resisted, and began to dig. "Five spadefuls and
no more," he said aloud. "This is all foolishness."

Four spadefuls of earth he then raised and spread out before him in the
moonlight. There was nothing unusual to be seen. Nor did Mr. Batchel
decide what he would look for, whether coins, jewels, documents in
canisters, or weapons. In point of fact, he dug against what he deemed
his better judgment, and expected nothing. He spread before him the
fifth and last spadeful of earth, not quite without result, but with
no result that was at all sensational. The earth contained a bone. Mr.
Batchel's knowledge of anatomy was sufficient to show him that it was
a human bone. He identified it, even by moonlight, as the _radius_, a
bone of the forearm, as he removed the earth from it, with his thumb.

Such a discovery might be thought worthy of more than the very
ordinary interest Mr. Batchel showed. As a matter of fact, the presence
of a human bone was easily to be accounted for. Recent excavations
within the church had caused the upturning of numberless bones, which
had been collected and reverently buried. But an earth-stained bone is
also easily overlooked, and this _radius_ had obviously found its way
into the garden with some of the earth brought out of the church.

Mr. Batchel was glad, rather than regretful at this termination to
his adventure. He was once more provided with something to do. The
re-interment of such bones as this had been his constant care, and he
decided at once to restore the bone to consecrated earth. The time
seemed opportune. The eyes of the curious were closed in sleep, he
himself was still alert and wakeful. The spade remained by his side
and the bone in his hand. So he betook himself, there and then, to the
churchyard. By the still generous light of the moon, he found a place
where the earth yielded to his spade, and within a few minutes the bone
was laid decently to earth, some 18 inches deep.

The city clocks struck one as he finished. The whole world seemed
asleep, and Mr. Batchel slowly returned to the garden with his spade.
As he hung it in its accustomed place he felt stealing over him the
welcome desire to sleep. He walked quietly on to the house and ascended
to his room. It was now dark: the moon had passed on and left the room
in shadow. He lit a candle, and before undressing passed into the
library. He had an irresistible curiosity to see the passages in John
Evelyn's book which had so strangely adapted themselves to the events
of the past hour.

In the library a last surprise awaited him. The desk upon which the
book had lain was empty. "The Compleat Gard'ner" stood in its place
on the shelf. And then Mr. Batchel knew that he had handled a bone of
William Whitehead, and that in response to his own entreaty.




III.

THE RICHPINS.


Something of the general character of Stoneground and its people has
been indicated by stray allusions in the preceding narratives. We must
here add that of its present population only a small part is native,
the remainder having been attracted during the recent prosperous days
of brickmaking, from the nearer parts of East Anglia and the Midlands.
The visitor to Stoneground now finds little more than the signs of
an unlovely industry, and of the hasty and inadequate housing of the
people it has drawn together. Nothing in the place pleases him more
than the excellent train-service which makes it easy to get away. He
seldom desires a long acquaintance either with Stoneground or its
people.

The impression so made upon the average visitor is, however, unjust, as
first impressions often are. The few who have made further acquaintance
with Stoneground have soon learned to distinguish between the permanent
and the accidental features of the place, and have been astonished by
nothing so much as by the unexpected evidence of French influence.
Amongst the household treasures of the old inhabitants are invariably
found French knick-knacks: there are pieces of French furniture in what
is called "the room" of many houses. A certain ten-acre field is called
the "Frenchman's meadow." Upon the voters' lists hanging at the church
door are to be found French names, often corrupted; and boys who run
about the streets can be heard shrieking to each other such names as
Bunnum, Dangibow, Planchey, and so on.

Mr. Batchel himself is possessed of many curious little articles of
French handiwork--boxes deftly covered with split straws, arranged
ingeniously in patterns; models of the guillotine, built of carved
meat-bones, and various other pieces of handiwork, amongst them an
accurate road-map of the country between Stoneground and Yarmouth,
drawn upon a fly-leaf torn from some book, and bearing upon the other
side the name of Jules Richepin. The latter had been picked up,
according to a pencilled-note written across one corner, by a shepherd,
in the year 1811.

The explanation of this French influence is simple enough. Within five
miles of Stoneground a large barracks had been erected for the custody
of French prisoners during the war with Bonaparte. Many thousands were
confined there during the years 1808-14. The prisoners were allowed
to sell what articles they could make in the barracks; and many of
them, upon their release, settled in the neighbourhood, where their
descendants remain. There is little curiosity amongst these descendants
about their origin. The events of a century ago seem to them as remote
as the Deluge, and as immaterial. To Thomas Richpin, a weakly man who
blew the organ in church, Mr. Batchel shewed the map. Richpin, with a
broad, black-haired skull and a narrow chin which grew a little pointed
beard, had always a foreign look about him: Mr. Batchel thought it more
than possible that he might be descended from the owner of the book,
and told him as much upon shewing him the fly-leaf. Thomas, however,
was content to observe that "his name hadn't got no E," and shewed no
further interest in the matter. His interest in it, before we have done
with him, will have become very large.

For the growing boys of Stoneground, with whom he was on generally
friendly terms, Mr. Batchel formed certain clubs to provide them with
occupation on winter evenings; and in these clubs, in the interests
of peace and good-order, he spent a great deal of time. Sitting one
December evening, in a large circle of boys who preferred the warmth
of the fire to the more temperate atmosphere of the tables, he found
Thomas Richpin the sole topic of conversation.

"We seen Mr. Richpin in Frenchman's Meadow last night," said one.

"What time?" said Mr. Batchel, whose function it was to act as a sort
of fly-wheel, and to carry the conversation over dead points. He had
received the information with some little surprise, because Frenchman's
Meadow was an unusual place for Richpin to have been in, but his
question had no further object than to encourage talk.

"Half-past nine," was the reply.

This made the question much more interesting. Mr. Batchel, on the
preceding evening, had taken advantage of a warmed church to practise
upon the organ. He had played it from nine o'clock until ten, and
Richpin had been all that time at the bellows.

"Are you sure it was half-past nine?" he asked.

"Yes," (we reproduce the answer exactly), "we come out o' night-school
at quarter-past, and we was all goin' to the Wash to look if it was
friz."

"And you saw Mr. Richpin in Frenchman's Meadow?" said Mr. Batchel.

"Yes. He was looking for something on the ground," added another boy.

"And his trousers was tore," said a third.

The story was clearly destined to stand in no need of corroboration.

"Did Mr. Richpin speak to you?" enquired Mr. Batchel.

"No, we run away afore he come to us," was the answer.

"Why?"

"Because we was frit."

"What frightened you?"

"Jim Lallement hauled a flint at him and hit him in the face, and he
didn't take no notice, so we run away."

"Why?" repeated Mr. Batchel.

"Because he never hollered nor looked at us, and it made us feel so
funny."

"Did you go straight down to the Wash?"

They had all done so.

"What time was it when you reached home?"

They had all been at home by ten, before Richpin had left the church.

"Why do they call it Frenchman's Meadow?" asked another boy, evidently
anxious to change the subject.

Mr. Batchel replied that the meadow had probably belonged to a
Frenchman whose name was not easy to say, and the conversation after
this was soon in another channel. But, furnished as he was with an
unmistakeable _alibi_, the story about Richpin and the torn trousers,
and the flint, greatly puzzled him.

"Go straight home," he said, as the boys at last bade him good-night,
"and let us have no more stone-throwing." They were reckless boys, and
Richpin, who used little discretion in reporting their misdemeanours
about the church, seemed to Mr. Batchel to stand in real danger.

Frenchman's Meadow provided ten acres of excellent pasture, and the
owners of two or three hard-worked horses were glad to pay three
shillings a week for the privilege of turning them into it. One of
these men came to Mr. Batchel on the morning which followed the
conversation at the club.

"I'm in a bit of a quandary about Tom Richpin," he began.

This was an opening that did not fail to command Mr. Batchel's
attention. "What is it?" he said.

"I had my mare in Frenchman's Meadow," replied the man, "and Sam Bower
come and told me last night as he heard her gallopin' about when he was
walking this side the hedge."

"But what about Richpin?" said Mr. Batchel.

"Let me come to it," said the other. "My mare hasn't got no wind to
gallop, so I up and went to see to her, and there she was sure enough,
like a wild thing, and Tom Richpin walking across the meadow."

"Was he chasing her?" asked Mr. Batchel, who felt the absurdity of the
question as he put it.

"He was not," said the man, "but what he could have been doin' to put
the mare into that state, I can't think."

"What was he doing when you saw him?" asked Mr. Batchel.

"He was walking along looking for something he'd dropped, with his
trousers all tore to ribbons, and while I was catchin' the mare, he
made off."

"He was easy enough to find, I suppose?" said Mr. Batchel.

"That's the quandary I was put in," said the man. "I took the mare home
and gave her to my lad, and straight I went to Richpin's, and found Tom
havin' his supper, with his trousers as good as new."

"You'd made a mistake," said Mr. Batchel.

"But how come the mare to make it too?" said the other.

"What did you say to Richpin?" asked Mr. Batchel.

"Tom," I says, "when did you come in? 'Six o'clock,' he says, 'I bin
mendin' my boots'; and there, sure enough, was the hobbin' iron by his
chair, and him in his stockin'-feet. I don't know what to do."

"Give the mare a rest," said Mr. Batchel, "and say no more about it."

"I don't want to harm a pore creature like Richpin," said the man,
"but a mare's a mare, especially where there's a family to bring
up." The man consented, however, to abide by Mr. Batchel's advice,
and the interview ended. The evenings just then were light, and both
the man and his mare had seen something for which Mr. Batchel could
not, at present, account. The worst way, however, of arriving at an
explanation is to guess it. He was far too wise to let himself wander
into the pleasant fields of conjecture, and had determined, even before
the story of the mare had finished, upon the more prosaic path of
investigation.

Mr. Batchel, either from strength or indolence of mind, as the reader
may be pleased to determine, did not allow matters even of this
exciting kind, to disturb his daily round of duty. He was beginning
to fear, after what he had heard of the Frenchman's Meadow, that he
might find it necessary to preach a plain sermon upon the Witch of
Endor, for he foresaw that there would soon be some ghostly talk in
circulation. In small communities, like that of Stoneground, such talk
arises upon very slight provocation, and here was nothing at all to
check it. Richpin was a weak and timid man, whom no one would suspect,
whilst an alternative remained open, of wandering about in the dark;
and Mr. Batchel knew that the alternative of an apparition, if once
suggested, would meet with general acceptance, and this he wished, at
all costs, to avoid. His own view of the matter he held in reserve, for
the reasons already stated, but he could not help suspecting that there
might be a better explanation of the name "Frenchman's Meadow" than he
had given to the boys at their club.

Afternoons, with Mr. Batchel, were always spent in making pastoral
visits, and upon the day our story has reached he determined to include
amongst them a call upon Richpin, and to submit him to a cautious
cross-examination. It was evident that at least four persons, all
perfectly familiar with his appearance, were under the impression that
they had seen him in the meadow, and his own statement upon the matter
would be at least worth hearing.

Richpin's home, however, was not the first one visited by Mr. Batchel
on that afternoon. His friendly relations with the boys has already
been mentioned, and it may now be added that this friendship was but
part of a generally keen sympathy with young people of all ages, and of
both sexes. Parents knew much less than he did of the love affairs of
their young people; and if he was not actually guilty of match-making,
he was at least a very sympathetic observer of the process. When lovers
had their little differences, or even their greater ones, it was Mr.
Batchel, in most cases, who adjusted them, and who suffered, if he
failed, hardly less than the lovers themselves.

It was a negotiation of this kind which, on this particular day, had
given precedence to another visit, and left Richpin until the later
part of the afternoon. But the matter of the Frenchman's Meadow had,
after all, not to wait for Richpin. Mr. Batchel was calculating how
long he should be in reaching it, when he found himself unexpectedly
there. Selina Broughton had been a favourite of his from her childhood;
she had been sufficiently good to please him, and naughty enough to
attract and challenge him; and when at length she began to walk out
with Bob Rockfort, who was another favourite, Mr. Batchel rubbed his
hands in satisfaction. Their present difference, which now brought
him to the Broughtons' cottage, gave him but little anxiety. He had
brought Bob half-way towards reconciliation, and had no doubt of
his ability to lead Selina to the same place. They would finish the
journey, happily enough, together.

But what has this to do with the Frenchman's Meadow? Much every way.
The meadow was apt to be the rendezvous of such young people as desired
a higher degree of privacy than that afforded by the public paths; and
these two had gone there separately the night before, each to nurse
a grievance against the other. They had been at opposite ends, as it
chanced, of the field; and Bob, who believed himself to be alone there,
had been awakened from his reverie by a sudden scream. He had at once
run across the field, and found Selina sorely in need of him. Mr.
Batchel's work of reconciliation had been there and then anticipated,
and Bob had taken the girl home in a condition of great excitement to
her mother. All this was explained, in breathless sentences, by Mrs.
Broughton, by way of accounting for the fact that Selina was then lying
down in "the room."

There was no reason why Mr. Batchel should not see her, of course, and
he went in. His original errand had lapsed, but it was now replaced by
one of greater interest. Evidently there was Selina's testimony to add
to that of the other four; she was not a girl who would scream without
good cause, and Mr. Batchel felt that he knew how his question about
the cause would be answered, when he came to the point of asking it.

He was not quite prepared for the form of her answer, which she gave
without any hesitation. She had seen Mr. Richpin "looking for his
eyes." Mr. Batchel saved for another occasion the amusement to be
derived from the curiously illogical answer. He saw at once what had
suggested it. Richpin had until recently had an atrocious squint, which
an operation in London had completely cured. This operation, of which,
of course, he knew nothing, he had described, in his own way, to anyone
who would listen, and it was commonly believed that his eyes had ceased
to be fixtures. It was plain, however, that Selina had seen very much
what had been seen by the other four. Her information was precise, and
her story perfectly coherent. She preserved a maidenly reticence about
his trousers, if she had noticed them; but added a new fact, and a
terrible one, in her description of the eyeless sockets. No wonder she
had screamed. It will be observed that Mr. Richpin was still searching,
if not looking, for something upon the ground.

Mr. Batchel now proceeded to make his remaining visit. Richpin lived
in a little cottage by the church, of which cottage the Vicar was the
indulgent landlord. Richpin's creditors were obliged to shew some
indulgence, because his income was never regular and seldom sufficient.
He got on in life by what is called "rubbing along," and appeared to
do it with surprisingly little friction. The small duties about the
church, assigned to him out of charity, were overpaid. He succeeded in
attracting to himself all the available gifts of masculine clothing,
of which he probably received enough and to sell, and he had somehow
wooed and won a capable, if not very comely, wife, who supplemented
his income by her own labour, and managed her house and husband to
admiration.

Richpin, however, was not by any means a mere dependent upon charity.
He was, in his way, a man of parts. All plants, for instance,
were his friends, and he had inherited, or acquired, great skill
with fruit-trees, which never failed to reward his treatment with
abundant crops. The two or three vines, too, of the neighbourhood,
he kept in fine order by methods of his own, whose merit was proved
by their success. He had other skill, though of a less remunerative
kind, in fashioning toys out of wood, cardboard, or paper; and every
correctly-behaving child in the parish had some such product of his
handiwork. And besides all this, Richpin had a remarkable aptitude for
making music. He could do something upon every musical instrument that
came in his way, and, but for his voice, which was like that of the
peahen, would have been a singer. It was his voice that had secured him
the situation of organ-blower, as one remote from all incitement to
join in the singing in church.

Like all men who have not wit enough to defend themselves by argument,
Richpin had a plaintive manner. His way of resenting injury was to
complain of it to the next person he met, and such complaints as he
found no other means of discharging, he carried home to his wife, who
treated his conversation just as she treated the singing of the canary,
and other domestic sounds, being hardly conscious of it until it ceased.

The entrance of Mr. Batchel, soon after his interview with Selina,
found Richpin engaged in a loud and fluent oration. The fluency was
achieved mainly by repetition, for the man had but small command of
words, but it served none the less to shew the depth of his indignation.

"I aren't bin in Frenchman's Meadow, am I?" he was saying in appeal to
his wife--this is the Stoneground way with auxiliary verbs--"What am
I got to go there for?" He acknowledged Mr. Batchel's entrance in no
other way than by changing to the third person in his discourse, and he
continued without pause--"if she'd let me out o' nights, I'm got better
places to go to than Frenchman's Meadow. Let policeman stick to where I
am bin, or else keep his mouth shut. What call is he got to say I'm bin
where I aren't bin?"

From this, and much more to the same effect, it was clear that the
matter of the meadow was being noised abroad, and even receiving
official attention. Mr. Batchel was well aware that no question he
could put to Richpin, in his present state, would change the flow of
his eloquence, and that he had already learned as much as he was likely
to learn. He was content, therefore, to ascertain from Mrs. Richpin
that her husband had indeed spent all his evenings at home, with the
single exception of the one hour during which Mr. Batchel had employed
him at the organ. Having ascertained this, he retired, and left Richpin
to talk himself out.

No further doubt about the story was now possible. It was not
twenty-four hours since Mr. Batchel had heard it from the boys at the
club, and it had already been confirmed by at least two unimpeachable
witnesses. He thought the matter over, as he took his tea, and was
chiefly concerned in Richpin's curious connexion with it. On his
account, more than on any other, it had become necessary to make
whatever investigation might be feasible, and Mr. Batchel determined,
of course, to make the next stage of it in the meadow itself.

The situation of "Frenchman's Meadow" made it more conspicuous than
any other enclosure in the neighbourhood. It was upon the edge of
what is locally known as "high land"; and though its elevation was
not great, one could stand in the meadow and look sea-wards over many
miles of flat country, once a waste of brackish water, now a great
chess-board of fertile fields bounded by straight dykes of glistening
water. The point of view derived another interest from looking down
upon a long straight bank which disappeared into the horizon many
miles away, and might have been taken for a great railway embankment
of which no use had been made. It was, in fact, one of the great works
of the Dutch Engineers in the time of Charles I., and it separated the
river basin from a large drained area called the "Middle Level," some
six feet below it. In this embankment, not two hundred yards below
"Frenchman's Meadow," was one of the huge water gates which admitted
traffic through a sluice, into the lower level, and the picturesque
thatched cottage of the sluice-keeper formed a pleasing addition to
the landscape. It was a view with which Mr. Batchel was naturally
very familiar. Few of his surroundings were pleasant to the eye, and
this was about the only place to which he could take a visitor whom
he desired to impress favourably. The way to the meadow lay through a
short lane, and he could reach it in five minutes: he was frequently
there.

It was, of course, his intention to be there again that evening: to
spend the night there, if need be, rather than let anything escape
him. He only hoped he should not find half the parish there also. His
best hope of privacy lay in the inclemency of the weather; the day was
growing colder, and there was a north-east wind, of which Frenchman's
Meadow would receive the fine edge.

Mr. Batchel spent the next three hours in dealing with some arrears
of correspondence, and at nine o'clock put on his thickest coat and
boots, and made his way to the meadow. It became evident, as he walked
up the lane, that he was to have company. He heard many voices, and
soon recognised the loudest amongst them. Jim Lallement was boasting of
the accuracy of his aim: the others were not disputing it, but were
asserting their own merits in discordant chorus. This was a nuisance,
and to make matters worse, Mr. Batchel heard steps behind him.

A voice soon bade him "Good evening." To Mr. Batchel's great relief it
proved to be the policeman, who soon overtook him. The conversation
began on his side.

"Curious tricks, sir, these of Richpin's."

"What tricks?" asked Mr. Batchel, with an air of innocence.

"Why, he's been walking about Frenchman's Meadow these three nights,
frightening folk and what all."

"Richpin has been at home every night, and all night long," said Mr.
Batchel.

"I'm talking about where he was, not where he says he was," said the
policeman. "You can't go behind the evidence."

"But Richpin has evidence too. I asked his wife."

"You know, sir, and none better, that wives have got to obey. Richpin
wants to be took for a ghost, and we know that sort of ghost. Whenever
we hear there's a ghost, we always know there's going to be turkeys
missing."

"But there are real ghosts sometimes, surely?" said Mr. Batchel.

"No," said the policeman, "me and my wife have both looked, and there's
no such thing."

"Looked where?" enquired Mr. Batchel.

"In the 'Police Duty' Catechism. There's lunatics, and deserters, and
dead bodies, but no ghosts."

Mr. Batchel accepted this as final. He had devised a way of ridding
himself of all his company, and proceeded at once to carry it into
effect. The two had by this time reached the group of boys.

"These are all stone-throwers," said he, loudly.

There was a clatter of stones as they dropped from the hands of the
boys.

"These boys ought all to be in the club instead of roaming about here
damaging property. Will you take them there, and see them safely in? If
Richpin comes here, I will bring him to the station."

The policeman seemed well pleased with the suggestion. No doubt he had
overstated his confidence in the definition of the "Police Duty." Mr.
Batchel, on his part, knew the boys well enough to be assured that they
would keep the policeman occupied for the next half-hour, and as the
party moved slowly away, felt proud of his diplomacy.

There was no sign of any other person about the field gate, which he
climbed readily enough, and he was soon standing in the highest part of
the meadow and peering into the darkness on every side.

It was possible to see a distance of about thirty yards; beyond that
it was too dark to distinguish anything. Mr. Batchel designed a
zig-zag course about the meadow, which would allow of his examining
it systematically and as rapidly as possible, and along this course
he began to walk briskly, looking straight before him as he went, and
pausing to look well about him when he came to a turn. There were no
beasts in the meadow--their owners had taken the precaution of removing
them; their absence was, of course, of great advantage to Mr. Batchel.

In about ten minutes he had finished his zig-zag path and arrived at
the other corner of the meadow; he had seen nothing resembling a man.
He then retraced his steps, and examined the field again, but arrived
at his starting point, knowing no more than when he had left it. He
began to fear the return of the policeman as he faced the wind and set
upon a third journey.

The third journey, however, rewarded him. He had reached the end of his
second traverse, and was looking about him at the angle between that
and the next, when he distinctly saw what looked like Richpin crossing
his circle of vision, and making straight for the sluice. There was
no gate on that side of the field; the hedge, which seemed to present
no obstacle to the other, delayed Mr. Batchel considerably, and still
retains some of his clothing, but he was not long through before he
had again marked his man. It had every appearance of being Richpin.
It went down the slope, crossed the plank that bridged the lock, and
disappeared round the corner of the cottage, where the entrance lay.

Mr. Batchel had had no opportunity of confirming the gruesome
observation of Selina Broughton, but had seen enough to prove that the
others had not been romancing. He was not a half-minute behind the
figure as it crossed the plank over the lock--it was slow going in the
darkness--and he followed it immediately round the corner of the house.
As he expected, it had then disappeared.

Mr. Batchel knocked at the door, and admitted himself, as his custom
was. The sluice-keeper was in his kitchen, charring a gate post. He was
surprised to see Mr. Batchel at that hour, and his greeting took the
form of a remark to that effect.

"I have been taking an evening walk," said Mr. Batchel. "Have you seen
Richpin lately?"

"I see him last Saturday week," replied the sluice-keeper, "not since."

"Do you feel lonely here at night?"

"No," replied the sluice-keeper, "people drop in at times. There was a
man in on Monday, and another yesterday."

"Have you had no one to-day?" said Mr. Batchel, coming to the point.

The answer showed that Mr. Batchel had been the first to enter the door
that day, and after a little general conversation he brought his visit
to an end.

It was now ten o'clock. He looked in at Richpin's cottage, where he saw
a light burning, as he passed. Richpin had tired himself early, and had
been in bed since half-past eight. His wife was visibly annoyed at the
rumours which had upset him, and Mr. Batchel said such soothing words
as he could command, before he left for home.

He congratulated himself, prematurely, as he sat before the fire in his
study, that the day was at an end. It had been cold out of doors, and
it was pleasant to think things over in the warmth of the cheerful fire
his housekeeper never failed to leave for him. The reader will have no
more difficulty than Mr. Batchel had in accounting for the resemblance
between Richpin and the man in the meadow. It was a mere question of
family likeness. That the ancestor had been seen in the meadow at some
former time might perhaps be inferred from its traditional name. The
reason for his return, then and now, was a matter of mere conjecture,
and Mr. Batchel let it alone.

The next incident has, to some, appeared incredible, which only means,
after all, that it has made demands upon their powers of imagination
and found them bankrupt.

Critics of story-telling have used severe language about authors
who avail themselves of the short-cut of coincidence. "That must
be reserved, I suppose," said Mr. Batchel, when he came to tell of
Richpin, "for what really happens; and that fiction is a game which
must be played according to the rules."

"I know," he went on to say, "that the chances were some millions to
one against what happened that night, but if that makes it incredible,
what is there left to believe?"

It was thereupon remarked by someone in the company, that the credible
material would not be exhausted.

"I doubt whether anything happens," replied Mr. Batchel in his dogmatic
way, "without the chances being a million to one against it. Why did
they choose such a word? What does 'happen' mean?"

There was no reply: it was clearly a rhetorical question.

"Is it incredible," he went on, "that I put into the plate last Sunday
the very half-crown my uncle tipped me with in 1881, and that I spent
next day?"

"Was that the one you put in?" was asked by several.

"How do I know?" replied Mr. Batchel, "but if I knew the history of the
half-crown I did put in, I know it would furnish still more remarkable
coincidences."

All this talk arose out of the fact that at midnight on the eventful
day, whilst Mr. Batchel was still sitting by his study fire, he had
news that the cottage at the sluice had been burnt down. The thatch had
been dry; there was, as we know, a stiff east-wind, and an hour had
sufficed to destroy all that was inflammable. The fire is still spoken
of in Stoneground with great regret. There remains only one building in
the place of sufficient merit to find its way on to a postcard.

It was just at midnight that the sluice-keeper rung at Mr.
Batchel's door. His errand required no apology. The man had found a
night-fisherman to help him as soon as the fire began, and with two
long sprits from a lighter they had made haste to tear down the thatch,
and upon this had brought down, from under the ridge at the South end,
the bones and some of the clothing of a man. Would Mr. Batchel come
down and see?

Mr. Batchel put on his coat and returned to the place. The people whom
the fire had collected had been kept on the further side of the water,
and the space about the cottage was vacant. Near to the smouldering
heap of ruin were the remains found under the thatch. The fingers of
the right hand still firmly clutched a sheep bone which had been gnawed
as a dog would gnaw it.

"Starved to death," said the sluice-keeper, "I see a tramp like that
ten years ago."

They laid the bones decently in an outhouse, and turned the key, Mr.
Batchel carried home in his hand a metal cross, threaded upon a cord.
He found an engraved figure of Our Lord on the face of it, and the name
of Pierre Richepin upon the back. He went next day to make the matter
known to the nearest Priest of the Roman Faith, with whom he left
the cross. The remains, after a brief inquest, were interred in the
cemetery, with the rites of the Church to which the man had evidently
belonged.

Mr. Batchel's deductions from the whole circumstances were curious, and
left a great deal to be explained. It seemed as if Pierre Richepin had
been disturbed by some premonition of the fire, but had not foreseen
that his mortal remains would escape; that he could not return to his
own people without the aid of his map, but had no perception of the
interval that had elapsed since he had lost it. This map Mr. Batchel
put into his pocket-book next day when he went to Thomas Richpin for
certain other information about his surviving relatives.

Richpin had a father, it appeared, living a few miles away in Jakesley
Fen, and Mr. Batchel concluded that he was worth a visit. He mounted
his bicycle, therefore, and made his way to Jakesley that same
afternoon.

Mr. Richpin was working not far from home, and was soon brought in. He
and his wife shewed great courtesy to their visitor, whom they knew
well by repute. They had a well-ordered house, and with a natural and
dignified hospitality, asked him to take tea with them. It was evident
to Mr. Batchel that there was a great gulf between the elder Richpin
and his son; the former was the last of an old race, and the latter
the first of a new. In spite of the Board of Education, the latter was
vastly the worse.

The cottage contained some French kickshaws which greatly facilitated
the enquiries Mr. Batchel had come to make. They proved to be family
relics.

"My grandfather," said Mr. Richpin, as they sat at tea, "was a
prisoner--he and his brother."

"Your grandfather was Pierre Richepin?" asked Mr. Batchel.

"No! Jules," was the reply. "Pierre got away."

"Shew Mr. Batchel the book," said his wife.

The book was produced. It was a Book of Meditations, with the name
of Jules Richepin upon the title-page. The fly-leaf was missing. Mr.
Batchel produced the map from his pocket-book. It fitted exactly. The
slight indentures along the torn edge fell into their place, and Mr.
Batchel left the leaf in the book, to the great delight of the old
couple, to whom he told no more of the story than he thought fit.




IV.

THE EASTERN WINDOW.


It may well be that Vermuyden and the Dutchmen who drained the fens did
good, and that it was interred with their bones. It is quite certain
that they did evil and that it lives after them. The rivers, which
these men robbed of their water, have at length silted up, and the
drainage of one tract of country is proving to have been achieved by
the undraining of another.

Places like Stoneground, which lie on the banks of these defrauded
rivers, are now become helpless victims of Dutch engineering. The water
which has lost its natural outlet, invades their lands. The thrifty
cottager who once had the river at the bottom of his garden, has his
garden more often in these days, at the bottom of the river, and a
summer flood not infrequently destroys the whole produce of his ground.

Such a flood, during an early year in the 20th century, had been
unusually disastrous to Stoneground, and Mr. Batchel, who, as
a gardener, was well able to estimate the losses of his poorer
neighbours, was taking some steps towards repairing them.

Money, however, is never at rest in Stoneground, and it turned out
upon this occasion that the funds placed at his command were wholly
inadequate to the charitable purpose assigned to them. It seemed as if
those who had lost a rood of potatoes could be compensated for no more
than a yard.

It was at this time, when he was oppressed in mind by the failure
of his charitable enterprise, that Mr. Batchel met with the happy
adventure in which the Eastern window of the Church played so singular
a part.

The narrative should be prefaced by a brief description of the window
in question. It is a large painted window, of a somewhat unfortunate
period of execution. The drawing and colouring leave everything to be
desired. The scheme of the window, however, is based upon a wholesome
tradition. The five large lights in the lower part are assigned to
five scenes in the life of Our Lord, and the second of these, counting
from the North, contains a bold erect figure of St. John Baptist, to
whom the Church is dedicated. It is this figure alone, of all those
contained in the window, that is concerned in what we have to relate.

It has already been mentioned that Mr. Batchel had some knowledge of
music. He took an interest in the choir, from whose practices he was
seldom absent; and was quite competent, in the occasional absence of
the choirmaster, to act as his deputy. It is customary at Stoneground
for the choirmaster, in order to save the sexton a journey, to
extinguish the lights after a choir-practice and to lock up the Church.
These duties, accordingly, were performed by Mr. Batchel when the need
arose.

It will be of use to the reader to have the procedure in detail.
The large gas-meter stood in an aisle of the Church, and it was Mr.
Batchel's practice to go round and extinguish all the lights save one,
before turning off the gas at the meter. The one remaining light, which
was reached by standing upon a choir seat, was always that nearest the
door of the chancel, and experience proved that there was ample time to
walk from the meter to that light before it died out. It was therefore
an easy matter to turn off the last light, to find the door without its
aid, and thence to pass out, and close the Church for the night.

Upon the evening of which we have to speak, the choir had hurried out
as usual, as soon as the word had been given. Mr. Batchel had remained
to gather together some of the books they had left in disorder, and
then turned out the lights in the manner already described. But as soon
as he had extinguished the last light, his eye fell, as he descended
carefully from the seat, upon the figure of the Baptist. There was just
enough light outside to make the figures visible in the Eastern Window,
and Mr. Batchel saw the figure of St. John raise the right arm to its
full extent, and point northward, turning its head, at the same time,
so as to look him full in the face. These movements were three times
repeated, and, after that, the figure came to rest in its normal and
familiar position.

The reader will not suppose, any more than Mr. Batchel supposed, that a
figure painted upon glass had suddenly been endowed with the power of
movement. But that there had been the appearance of movement admitted
of no doubt, and Mr. Batchel was not so incurious as to let the matter
pass without some attempt at investigation. It must be remembered,
too, that an experience in the old library, which has been previously
recorded, had pre-disposed him to give attention to signs which another
man might have wished to explain away. He was not willing, therefore,
to leave this matter where it stood. He was quite prepared to think
that his eye had been deceived, but was none the less determined to
find out what had deceived it. One thing he had no difficulty in
deciding. If the movement had not been actually within the Baptist's
figure, it had been immediately behind it. Without delay, therefore,
he passed out of the church and locked the door after him, with the
intention of examining the other side of the window.

Every inhabitant of Stoneground knows, and laments, the ruin of the old
Manor House. Its loss by fire some fifteen years ago was a calamity
from which the parish has never recovered. The estate was acquired,
soon after the destruction of the house, by speculators who have been
unable to turn it to any account, and it has for a decade or longer
been "let alone," except by the forces of Nature and the wantonness of
trespassers. The charred remains of the house still project above the
surrounding heaps of fallen masonry, which have long been overgrown by
such vegetation as thrives on neglected ground; and what was once a
stately house, with its garden and park in fine order, has given place
to a scene of desolation and ruin.

Stoneground Church was built, some 600 years ago, within the enclosure
of the Manor House, or, as it was anciently termed, the Burystead,
and an excellent stratum of gravel such as no builder would wisely
disregard, brought the house and Church unusually near together. In
more primitive days, the nearness probably caused no inconvenience;
but when change and progress affected the popular idea of respectful
distance, the Churchyard came to be separated by a substantial stone
wall, of sufficient height to secure the privacy of the house.

The change was made with necessary regard to economy of space. The
Eastern wall of the Church already projected far into the garden of
the Manor, and lay but fifty yards from the south front of the house.
On that side of the Churchyard, therefore, the new wall was set back.
Running from the north to the nearest corner of the Church, it was
there built up to the Church itself, and then continued from the
southern corner, leaving the Eastern wall and window within the garden
of the Squire. It was his ivy that clung to the wall of the Church, and
his trees that shaded the window from the morning sun.

Whilst we have been recalling these facts, Mr. Batchel has made his
way out of the Church and through the Churchyard, and has arrived at
a small door in the boundary wall, close to the S.E. corner of the
chancel. It was a door which some Squire of the previous century had
made, to give convenient access to the Church for himself and his
household. It has no present use, and Mr. Batchel had some difficulty
in getting it open. It was not long, however, before he stood on the
inner side, and was examining the second light of the window. There
was a tolerably bright moon, and the dark surface of the glass could
be distinctly seen, as well as the wirework placed there for its
protection.

A tall birch, one of the trees of the old Churchyard, had thrust its
lower boughs across the window, and their silvery bark shone in the
moonlight. The boughs were bare of leaves, and only very slightly
interrupted Mr. Batchel's view of the Baptist's figure, the leaden
outline of which was clearly traceable. There was nothing, however, to
account for the movement which Mr. Batchel was curious to investigate.

He was about to turn homewards in some disappointment, when a cloud
obscured the moon again, and reduced the light to what it had been
before he left the Church. Mr. Batchel watched the darkening of the
window and the objects near it, and as the figure of the Baptist
disappeared from view there came into sight a creamy vaporous figure of
another person lightly poised upon the bough of the tree, and almost
coincident in position with the picture of the Saint.

It could hardly be described as the figure of a person. It had more the
appearance of half a person, and fancifully suggested to Mr. Batchel,
who was fond of whist, one of the diagonally bisected knaves in a pack
of cards, as he appears when another card conceals a triangular half of
the bust.

There was no question, now, of going home. Mr. Batchel's eyes were
riveted upon the apparition. It disappeared again for a moment, when
an interval between two clouds restored the light of the moon; but no
sooner had the second cloud replaced the first than the figure again
became distinct. And upon this, its single arm was raised three times,
pointing northwards towards the ruined house, just as the figure of the
Baptist had seemed to point when Mr. Batchel had seen it from within
the Church.

It was natural that upon receipt of this sign Mr. Batchel should step
nearer to the tree, from which he was still at some little distance,
and as he moved, the figure floated obliquely downwards and came
to rest in a direct line between him and the ruins of the house.
It rested, not upon the ground, but in just such a position as it
would have occupied if the lower parts had been there, and in this
position it seemed to await Mr. Batchel's advance. He made such haste
to approach it as was possible upon ground encumbered with ivy and
brambles, and the figure responded to every advance of his by moving
further in the direction of the ruin.

As the ground improved, the progress became more rapid. Soon they were
both upon an open stretch of grass, which in better days had been a
lawn, and still the figure retreated towards the building, with Mr.
Batchel in respectful pursuit. He saw it, at last, poised upon the
summit of a heap of masonry, and it disappeared, at his near approach,
into a crevice between two large stones.

The timely re-appearance of the moon just enabled Mr. Batchel to
perceive this crevice, and he took advantage of the interval of light
to mark the place. Taking up a large twig that lay at his feet, he
inserted it between the stones. He made a slit in the free end and drew
into it one of some papers that he had carried out of the Church. After
such a precaution it could hardly be possible to lose the place--for,
of course, Mr. Batchel intended to return in daylight and continue his
investigation. For the present, it seemed to be at an end. The light
was soon obscured again, but there was no re-appearance of the singular
figure he had followed, so after remaining about the spot for a few
minutes, Mr. Batchel went home to his customary occupation.

He was not a man to let these occupations be disturbed even by a
somewhat exciting adventure, nor was he one of those who regard an
unusual experience only as a sign of nervous disorder. Mr. Batchel had
far too broad a mind to discredit his sensations because they were not
like those of other people. Even had his adventure of the evening been
shared by some companion who saw less than he did, Mr. Batchel would
only have inferred that his own part in the matter was being regarded
as more important.

Next morning, therefore, he lost no time in returning to the scene
of his adventure. He found his mark undisturbed, and was able to
examine the crevice into which the apparition had seemed to enter.
It was a crevice formed by the curved surfaces of two large stones
which lay together on the top of a small heap of fallen rubbish, and
these two stones Mr. Batchel proceeded to remove. His strength was
just sufficient for the purpose. He laid the stones upon the ground on
either side of the little mound, and then proceeded to remove, with his
hands, the rubbish upon which they had rested, and amongst the rubbish
he found, tarnished and blackened, two silver coins.

It was not a discovery which seemed to afford any explanation of what
had occurred the night before, but Mr. Batchel could not but suppose
that there had been an attempt to direct his attention to the coins,
and he carried them away with a view of submitting them to a careful
examination. Taking them up to his bedroom he poured a little water
into a hand basin, and soon succeeded, with the aid of soap and a nail
brush, in making them tolerably clean. Ten minutes later, after adding
ammonia to the water, he had made them bright, and after carefully
drying them, was able to make his examination. They were two crowns
of the time of Queen Anne, minted, as a small letter E indicated, at
Edinburgh, and stamped with the roses and plumes which testified to the
English and Welsh silver in their composition. The coins bore no date,
but Mr. Batchel had no hesitation in assigning them to the year 1708
or thereabouts. They were handsome coins, and in themselves a find of
considerable interest, but there was nothing to show why he had been
directed to their place of concealment. It was an enigma, and he could
not solve it. He had other work to do, so he laid the two crowns upon
his dressing table, and proceeded to do it.

Mr. Batchel thought little more of the coins until bedtime, when
he took them from the table and bestowed upon them another admiring
examination by the light of his candle. But the examination told him
nothing new: he laid them down again, and, before very long, had lain
his own head upon the pillow.

It was Mr. Batchel's custom to read himself to sleep. At this time he
happened to be re-reading the Waverley novels, and "Woodstock" lay
upon the reading-stand which was always placed at his bedside. As he
read of the cleverly devised apparition at Woodstock, he naturally
asked himself whether he might not have been the victim of some
similar trickery, but was not long in coming to the conclusion that
his experience admitted of no such explanation. He soon dismissed the
matter from his mind and went on with his book.

On this occasion, however, he was tired of reading before he was ready
for sleep; it was long in coming, and then did not come to stay. His
rest, in fact, was greatly disturbed. Again and again, perhaps every
hour or so, he was awakened by an uneasy consciousness of some other
presence in the room.

Upon one of his later awakenings, he was distinctly sensible of a
sound, or what he described to himself as the "ghost" of a sound. He
compared it to the whining of a dog that had lost its voice. It was
not a very intelligible comparison, but still it seemed to describe
his sensation. The sound, if we may so call it caused him first to sit
up in bed and look well about him, and then, when nothing had come of
that, to light his candle. It was not to be expected that anything
should come of that, but it had seemed a comfortable thing to do, and
Mr. Batchel left the candle alight and read his book for half an hour
or so, before blowing it out.

After this, there was no further interruption, but Mr. Batchel
distinctly felt, when it was time to leave his bed, that he had had
a bad night. The coins, almost to his surprise, lay undisturbed. He
went to ascertain this as soon as he was on his feet. He would almost
have welcomed their removal, or at any rate, some change which might
have helped him towards a theory of his adventure. There was, however,
nothing. If he had, in fact, been visited during the night, the coins
would seem to have had nothing to do with the matter.

Mr. Batchel left the two crowns lying on his table on this next day,
and went about his ordinary duties. They were such duties as afforded
full occupation for his mind, and he gave no more than a passing
thought to the coins, until he was again retiring to rest. He had
certainly intended to return to the heap of rubbish from which he had
taken them, but had not found leisure to do so. He did not handle the
coins again. As he undressed, he made some attempt to estimate their
value, but without having arrived at any conclusion, went on to think
of other things, and in a little while had lain down to rest again,
hoping for a better night.

His hopes were disappointed. Within an hour of falling asleep he found
himself awakened again by the voiceless whining he so well remembered.
This sound, as for convenience we will call it, was now persistent and
continuous. Mr. Batchel gave up even trying to sleep, and as he grew
more restless and uneasy, decided to get up and dress.

It was the entire cessation of the sound at this juncture which led
him to a suspicion. His rising was evidently giving satisfaction. From
that it was easy to infer that something had been desired of him, both
on the present and the preceding night. Mr. Batchel was not one to
hold himself aloof in such a case. If help was wanted, even in such
unnatural circumstances, he was ready to offer it. He determined,
accordingly, to return to the Manor House, and when he had finished
dressing, descended the stairs, put on a warm overcoat and went out,
closing his hall door behind him, without having heard any more of the
sound, either whilst dressing, or whilst leaving the house.

Once out of doors, the suspicion he had formed was strengthened into a
conviction. There was no manner of doubt that he had been fetched from
his bed; for about 30 yards in front of him he saw the strange creamy
half-figure making straight for the ruins. He followed it as well as he
could; as before, he was impeded by the ivy and weeds, and the figure
awaited him; as before, it made straight for the heap of masonry and
disappeared as soon as Mr. Batchel was at liberty to follow.

There were no dungeons, or subterranean premises beneath the Manor
House. It had never been more than a house of residence, and the
building had been purely domestic in character. Mr. Batchel was
convinced that his adventure would prove unromantic, and felt some
impatience at losing again, what he had begun to call his triangular
friend. If this friend wanted anything, it was not easy to say why he
had so tamely disappeared. There seemed nothing to be done but to wait
until he came out again.

Mr. Batchel had a pipe in his pocket, and he seated himself upon the
base of a sun-dial within full view of the spot. He filled and smoked
his pipe, sitting in momentary expectation of some further sign, but
nothing appeared. He heard the hedgehogs moving about him in the
undergrowth, and now and then the sound of a restless bird overhead,
otherwise all was still. He smoked a second pipe without any further
discovery, and that finished, he knocked out the ashes against his
boot, walked to the mound, near to which his labelled stick was lying,
thrust the stick into the place where the figure had disappeared, and
went back to bed, where he was rewarded with five hours of sound sleep.

Mr. Batchel had made up his mind that the next day ought to be a day
of disclosure. He was early at the Manor House, this time provided
with the gardener's pick, and a spade. He thrust the pick into the
place from which he had removed his mark, and loosened the rubbish
thoroughly. With his hands, and with his spade, he was not long in
reducing the size of the heap by about one-half, and there he found
more coins.

There were three more crowns, two half-crowns, and a dozen or so
of smaller coins. All these Mr. Batchel wrapped carefully in his
handkerchief, and after a few minutes rest went on with his task. As
it proved, the task was nearly over. Some strips of oak about nine
inches long, were next uncovered, and then, what Mr. Batchel had begun
to expect, the lid of a box, with the hinges still attached. It lay,
face downwards, upon a flat stone. It proved, when he had taken it up,
to be almost unsoiled, and above a long and wide slit in the lid was
the gilded legend, "for ye poore" in the graceful lettering and the
redundant spelling of two centuries ago.

The meaning of all this Mr. Batchel was not long in interpreting.
That the box and its contents had fallen and been broken amongst
the masonry, was evident enough. It was as evident that it had been
concealed in one of the walls brought down by the fire, and Mr. Batchel
had no doubt at all that he had been in the company of a thief, who
had once stolen the poor-box from the Church. His task seemed to be at
an end, a further rummage revealed nothing new. Mr. Batchel carefully
collected the fragments of the box, and left the place.

His next act cannot be defended. He must have been aware that these
coins were "treasure trove," and therefore the property of the Crown.
In spite of this, he determined to convert them into current coin, as
he well knew how, and to apply the proceeds to the Inundation Fund
about which he was so anxious. Treating them as his own property, he
cleaned them all, as he had cleaned the two crowns, sent them to an
antiquarian friend in London to sell for him, and awaited the result.
The lid of the poor box he still preserves as a relic of the adventure.

His antiquarian friend did not keep him long waiting. The coins had
been eagerly bought, and the price surpassed any expectation that Mr.
Batchel had allowed himself to entertain. He had sent the package
to London on Saturday morning. Upon the following Tuesday, the last
post in the evening brought a cheque for twenty guineas. The brief
subscription list of the Inundation Fund lay upon his desk, and he
at once entered the amount he had so strangely come by, but could
not immediately decide upon its description. Leaving the line blank,
therefore, he merely wrote down L21 in the cash column, to be assigned
to its source in some suitable form of words when he should have found
time to frame them.

In this state he left the subscription list upon his desk, when he
retired for the night. It occurred to him as he was undressing, that
the twenty guineas might suitably be described as a "restitution," and
so he determined to enter it upon the line he had left vacant. As he
reconsidered the matter in the morning, he saw no reason to alter his
decision, and he went straight from his bedroom to his desk to make the
entry and have done with it.

There was an incident in the adventure, however, upon which Mr. Batchel
had not reckoned. As he approached the list, he saw, to his amazement,
that the line had been filled in. In a crabbed, elongated hand was
written, "At last, St. Matt. v. 26."

What may seem more strange is that the handwriting was familiar to Mr.
Batchel, he could not at first say why. His memory, however, in such
matters, was singularly good, and before breakfast was over he felt
sure of having identified the writer.

His confidence was not misplaced. He went to the parish chest, whose
contents he had thoroughly examined in past intervals of leisure, and
took out the roll of parish constable's accounts. In a few minutes
he discovered the handwriting of which he was in search. It was
unmistakably that of Salathiel Thrapston, constable from 1705-1710, who
met his death in the latter year, whilst in the execution of his duty.
The reader will scarcely need to be reminded of the text of the Gospel
at the place of reference--

"Thou shalt by no means come out thence till thou hast paid the
uttermost farthing."




V.

LUBRIETTA.


For the better understanding of this narrative we shall furnish the
reader with a few words of introduction. It amounts to no more than
a brief statement of facts which Mr. Batchel obtained from the Lady
Principal of the European College in Puna, but the facts nevertheless
are important. The narrative itself was obtained from Mr. Batchel with
difficulty: he was disposed to regard it as unsuitable for publication
because of the delicate nature of the situations with which it deals.
When, however, it was made clear to him that it would be recorded in
such a manner as would interest only a very select body of readers,
his scruples were overcome, and he was induced to communicate the
experience now to be related. Those who read it will not fail to see
that they are in a manner pledged to deal very discreetly with the
knowledge they are privileged to share.

Lubrietta Rodria is described by her Lady Principal as an attractive
and high-spirited girl of seventeen, belonging to the Purple of Indian
commerce. Her nationality was not precisely known; but drawing near,
as she did, to a marriageable age, and being courted by more than one
eligible suitor, she was naturally an object of great interest to her
schoolfellows, with whom her personal beauty and amiable temper had
always made her a favourite. She was not, the Lady Principal thought,
a girl who would be regarded in Christian countries as of very high
principle; but none the less, she was one whom it was impossible not to
like.

Her career at the college had ended sensationally. She had been
immoderately anxious about her final examination, and its termination
had found her in a state of collapse. They had at once removed her to
her father's house in the country, where she received such nursing
and assiduous attention as her case required. It was apparently of no
avail. For three weeks she lay motionless, deprived of speech, and
voluntarily, taking no food. Then for a further period of ten days she
lay in a plight still more distressing. She lost all consciousness,
and, despite the assurance of the doctors, her parents could hardly be
persuaded that she lived.

Her _fiance_ who by this time had been declared, was in despair, not
only from natural affection for Lubrietta, but from remorse. It
was his intellectual ambition that had incited her to the eagerness
in study which was threatening such dire results, and it was well
understood that neither of the lovers would survive these anxious days
of watching if they were not to be survived by both.

After ten days, however, a change supervened. Lubrietta came back to
life amid the frenzied rejoicing of the household and all her circle.
She recovered her health and strength with incredible speed, and within
three months was married--as the Lady Principal had cause to believe,
with the happiest prospects.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Batchel had not, whilst residing at Stoneground, lost touch
with the University which had given him his degree, and in which he
had formerly held one or two minor offices. He had earned no great
distinction as a scholar, but had taken a degree in honours, and was
possessed of a useful amount of general knowledge, and in this he found
not only constant pleasure, but also occasional profit.

The University had made herself, for better or worse, an examiner of
a hundred times as many students as she could teach; her system of
examinations had extended to the very limits of the British Empire, and
her certificates of proficiency were coveted in every quarter of the
globe.

In the examination of these students, Mr. Batchel, who had considerable
experience in teaching, was annually employed. Papers from all parts
of the world were to be found littered about his study, and the
examination of these papers called for some weeks of strenuous labour
at every year's end. As the weeks passed, he would anxiously watch
the growth of a neat stack of papers in the corner of the room, which
indicated the number to which marks had been assigned and reported to
Cambridge. The day upon which the last of these was laid in its place
was a day of satisfaction, second only to that which later on brought
him a substantial cheque to remunerate him for his labours.

During this period of special effort, Mr. Batchel's servants had their
share of its discomforts. The chairs and tables they wanted to dust and
to arrange, were loaded with papers which they were forbidden to touch;
and although they were warned against showing visitors into any room
where these papers were lying, Mr. Batchel would inconsiderately lay
them in every room he had. The privacy of his study, however, where the
work was chiefly done, was strictly guarded, and no one was admitted
there unless by Mr. Batchel himself.

Imagine his annoyance, therefore, when he returned from an evening
engagement at the beginning of the month of January, and found a
stranger seated in the study! Yet the annoyance was not long in
subsiding. The visitor was a lady, and as she sat by the lamp, a glance
was enough to shew that she was young, and very beautiful. The interest
which this young lady excited in Mr. Batchel was altogether unusual,
as unusual as was the visit of such a person at such a time. His
conjecture was that she had called to give him notice of a marriage,
but he was really charmed by her presence, and was quite content to
find her in no haste to state her errand. The manner, however, of the
lady was singular, for neither by word nor movement did she show that
she was conscious of Mr. Batchel's entry into the room.

He began at length with his customary formula "What can I have the
pleasure of doing for you?" and when, at the sound of his voice, she
turned her fine dark eyes upon him, he saw that they were wet with
tears.

Mr. Batchel was now really moved. As a tear fell upon the lady's cheek,
she raised her hand as if to conceal it--a brilliant sapphire sparkling
in the lamp-light as she did so. And then the lady's distress, and
the exquisite grace of her presence, altogether overcame him. There
stole upon him a strange feeling of tenderness which he supposed to
be paternal, but knew nevertheless to be indiscreet. He was a prudent
man, with strict notions of propriety, so that, ostensibly with a view
to giving the lady a few minutes in which to recover her composure,
he quietly left the study and went into another room, to pull himself
together.

Mr. Batchel, like most solitary men, had a habit of talking to himself.
"It is of no use, R. B.," he said, "to pretend that you have retired on
this damsel's account. If you don't take care, you'll make a fool of
yourself." He took up from the table a volume of the encyclopedia in
which, the day before, he had been looking up Pestalozzi, and turned
over the pages in search of something to restore his equanimity. An
article on Perspective proved to be the very thing. Wholly unromantic
in character, its copious presentment of hard fact relieved his mind,
and he was soon threading his way along paths of knowledge to which he
was little accustomed. He applied his remedy with such persistence that
when four or five minutes had passed, he felt sufficiently composed to
return to the study. He framed, as he went, a suitable form of words
with which to open the conversation, and took with him his register
of Banns of Marriage, of which he thought he foresaw the need. As he
opened the study-door, the book fell from his hands to the ground, so
completely was he overcome by surprise, for he found the room empty.
The lady had disappeared; her chair stood vacant before him.

Mr. Batchel sat down for a moment, and then rang the bell. It was
answered by the boy who always attended upon him.

"When did the lady go?" asked Mr. Batchel.

The boy looked bewildered.

"The lady you showed into the study before I came."

"Please, sir, I never shown anyone into the study; I never do when
you're out."

"There was a lady here," said Mr. Batchel, "when I returned."

The boy now looked incredulous.

"Did you not let someone out just now?"

"No, sir," said the boy. "I put the chain on the front door as soon as
you came in."

This was conclusive. The chain upon the hall-door was an ancient and
cumbrous thing, and could not be manipulated without considerable
effort, and a great deal of noise. Mr. Batchel released the boy, and
began to think furiously. He was not, as the reader is well aware,
without some experience of the supranormal side of nature, and he knew
of course that the visit of this enthralling lady had a purpose. He was
beginning to know, however, that it had had an effect. He sat before
his fire reproducing her image, and soon gave it up in disgust because
his imagination refused to do her justice. He could recover the details
of her appearance, but could combine them into nothing that would
reproduce the impression she had first made upon him.

He was unable now to concentrate his attention upon the examination
papers lying on his table. His mind wandered so often to the other
topic that he felt himself to be in danger of marking the answers
unfairly. He turned away from his work, therefore, and moved to another
chair, where he sat down to read. It was the chair in which she herself
had sat, and he made no attempt to pretend that he had chosen it on any
other account. He had, in fact, made some discoveries about himself
during the last half-hour, and he gave himself another surprise when
he came to select his book. In the ordinary course of what he had
supposed to be his nature, he would certainly have returned to the
article on Perspective; it was lying open in the next room, and he
had read no more than a tenth part of it. But instead of that, his
thoughts went back to a volume he had but once opened, and that for
no more than two minutes. He had received the book, by way of birthday
present, early in the preceding year, from a relative who had bestowed
either no consideration at all, or else a great deal of cunning, upon
its selection. It was a collection of 17th century lyrics, which Mr.
Batchel's single glance had sufficed to condemn. Regarding the one
lyric he had read as a sort of literary freak, he had banished the book
to one of the spare bedrooms, and had never seen it since. And now,
after this long interval, the absurd lines which his eye had but once
lighted upon, were recurring to his mind:

    "Fair, sweet, and young, receive a prize
    Reserved for your victorious eyes";

and so far from thinking them absurd, as he now recalled them, he went
upstairs to fetch the book, in which he was soon absorbed. The lyrics
no longer seemed unreasonable. He felt conscious, as he read one after
another, of a side of nature that he had strangely neglected, and was
obliged to admit that the men whose feelings were set forth in the
various sonnets and poems had a fine gift of expression.

    "Thus, whilst I look for her in vain,
    Methinks I am a child again,
      And of my shadow am a-chasing.
    For all her graces are to me
    Like apparitions that I see,
      But never can come near th' embracing."

No! these men were not, as he had formerly supposed, writing with
air, and he felt ashamed at having used the term "freak" at their
expense.

Mr. Batchel read more of the lyrics, some of them twice, and one of
them much oftener. That one he began to commit to memory, and since the
household had retired to rest, to recite aloud. He had been unaware
that literature contained anything so beautiful, and as he looked again
at the book to recover an expression his memory had lost, a tear fell
upon the page. It was a thing so extraordinary that Mr. Batchel first
looked at the ceiling, but when he found that it was indeed a tear from
his own eye he was immoderately pleased with himself. Had not she also
shed a tear as she sat upon the same chair? The fact seemed to draw
them together.

Contemplation of this sort was, however, a luxury to be enjoyed in
something like moderation. Mr. Batchel soon laid down his lyric and
savagely began to add up columns of marks, by way of discipline; and
when he had totalled several pages of these, respect for his normal
self had returned with sufficient force to take him off to bed.

The matter of his dreams, or whether he dreamed at all, has not been
disclosed. He awoke, at any rate, in a calmer state of mind, and such
romantic thoughts as remained were effectually dispelled by the sight
of his own countenance when he began to shave. "Fancy you spouting
lyrics," he said, as he dabbed the brush upon his mouth, and by the
time he was ready for breakfast he pronounced himself cured.

The prosaic labours awaiting him in the study were soon forced upon his
notice, and for once he did not regret it. Amongst the letters lying
upon the breakfast table was one from the secretary who controlled the
system of examination. The form of the envelope was too familiar to
leave him in doubt as to what it contained. It was a letter which, to a
careful man like Mr. Batchel, seemed to have the nature of a reproof,
inasmuch as it probably asked for information which it had already
been his duty to furnish. The contents of the envelope, when he had
impatiently torn it open, answered to his expectation--he was formally
requested to supply the name and the marks of candidate No. 1004, and
he wondered, as he ate his breakfast, how he had omitted to return
them. He hunted out the paper of No. 1004 as soon as the meal was over.
The candidate proved to be one Lubrietta Bodria, of whom, of course,
he had never heard, and her answers had all been marked. He could not
understand why they should have been made the subject of enquiry.

He took her papers in his hand, and looked at them again as he stood
with his back to the fire, having lit the pipe which invariably
followed his breakfast, and then he discovered something much harder to
understand. The marks were not his own. In place of the usual sketchy
numerals, hardly decipherable to any but himself, he saw figures which
were carefully formed; and the marks assigned to the first answer, as
he saw it on the uppermost sheet, were higher than the maximum number
obtainable for that question.

Mr. Batchel laid down his pipe and seated himself at the table. He was
greatly puzzled. As he turned over the sheets of No. 1004 he found
all the other questions marked in like manner, and making a total of
half as much again as the highest possible number. "Who the dickens,"
he said, using a meaningless, but not uncommon expression, "has been
playing with this; and how came I to pass it over?" The need of the
moment, however, was to furnish the proper marks to the secretary at
Cambridge, and Mr. Batchel proceeded to read No. 1004 right through.

He soon found that he had read it all before, and the matter began to
bristle with queries. It proved, in fact, to be a paper over which he
had spent some time, and for a singularly interesting reason. He had
learned from a friend in the Indian Civil Service that an exaggerated
value was often placed by ambitious Indians and Cingalese upon a
European education, and that many aspiring young men declined to
take a wife who had not passed this very examination. It was to Mr.
Batchel a disquieting reflection that his blue pencil was not only
marking mistakes, but might at the same time be cancelling matrimonial
engagements, and his friend's communication had made him scrupulously
careful in examining the work of young ladies in Oriental Schools. The
matter had occurred to him at once as he had examined the answers of
Lubrietta Rodria. He perfectly remembered the question upon which her
success depended. A problem in logic had been answered by a rambling
and worthless argument, to which, somehow, the right conclusion was
appended: the conclusion might be a happy guess, or it might have been
secured by less honest means, but Mr. Batchel, following his usual
practice, gave no marks for it. It was not here that he found any cause
for hesitation, but when he came to the end of the paper and found that
the candidate had only just failed, he had turned back to the critical
question, imagined an eligible bachelor awaiting the result of the
examination, and then, after a period of vacillation, had hastily put
the symbol of failure upon the paper lest he should be tempted to bring
his own charity to the rescue of the candidate's logic, and unfairly
add the three marks which would suffice to pass her.

As he now read the answer for the second time, the same pitiful thought
troubled him, and this time more than before; for over the edge of
the paper of No. 1004 there persistently arose the image of the young
lady with the sapphire ring. It directed the current of his thoughts.
Suppose that Lubrietta Rodria were anything like that! and what if the
arguments of No. 1004 were worthless! Young ladies were notoriously
weak in argument, and as strong in conclusions! and after all, the
conclusion was correct, and ought not a correct conclusion to have its
marks? There followed much more to the same purpose, and in the end Mr.
Batchel stultified himself by adding the necessary three marks, and
passing the candidate.

"This comes precious near to being a job," he remarked, as he entered
the marks upon the form and sealed it in the envelope, "but No. 1004
must pass, this time." He enclosed in the envelope a request to know
why the marks had been asked for, since they had certainly been
returned in their proper place. A brief official reply informed him
next day that the marks he had returned exceeded the maximum, and must,
therefore, have been wrongly entered.

"This," said Mr. Batchel, "is a curious coincidence."

Curious as it certainly was, it was less curious than what immediately
followed. It was Mr. Batchel's practice to avoid any delay in returning
these official papers, and he went out, there and then, to post his
envelope. The Post Office was no more than a hundred yards from his
door, and in three minutes he was in his study again. The first object
that met his eye there was a beautiful sapphire ring lying upon the
papers of No. 1004, which had remained upon the table.

Mr. Batchel at once recognised the ring. "I knew it was precious near a
job," he said, "but I didn't know that it was as near as this."

He took up the ring and examined it. It looked like a ring of great
value; the stone was large and brilliant, and the setting was of fine
workmanship. "Now what on earth," said Mr. Batchel, "am I to do with
this?"

The nearest jeweller to Stoneground was a competent and experienced
tradesman of the old school. He was a member of the local Natural
History Society, and in that capacity Mr. Batchel had made intimate
acquaintance with him. To this jeweller, therefore, he carried the
ring, and asked him what he thought of it.

"I'll give you forty pounds for it," said the jeweller.

Mr. Batchel replied that the ring was not his. "What about the make of
it?" he asked. "Is it English?"

The jeweller replied that it was unmistakably Indian.

"You are sure?" said Mr. Batchel.

"Certain," said the jeweller. "Major Ackroyd brought home one like it,
all but the stone, from Puna; I repaired it for him last year."

The information was enough, if not more than enough, for Mr. Batchel.
He begged a suitable case from his friend the jeweller, and within
an hour had posted the ring to Miss Lubrietta Rodria at the European
College in Puna. At the same time he wrote to the Principal the letter
whose answer is embodied in the preface to this narrative.

Having done this, Mr. Batchel felt more at ease. He had given Lubrietta
Rodria what he amiably called the benefit of the doubt, but it should
never be said that he had been bribed.

The rest of his papers he marked with fierce justice. A great deal of
the work, in his zeal, he did twice over, but his conscience amply
requited him for the superfluous labour. The last paper was marked
within a day of the allotted time, Mr. Batchel shortly afterwards
received his cheque, and was glad to think that the whole matter was at
an end.

       *       *       *       *       *

That Lubrietta had been absent from India whilst her relatives and
attendants were trying to restore her to consciousness, he had good
reason to know. His friends, for the most part, took a very narrow view
of human nature and its possibilities, so that he kept his experience,
for a long time, to himself; there were personal reasons for not
discussing the incident. The reader has been already told upon what
understanding it is recorded here.

There remains, however, an episode which Mr. Batchel all but managed
to suppress. Upon the one occasion when he allowed himself to speak of
this matter, he was being pressed for a description of the sapphire
ring, and was not very successful in his attempt to describe it. There
was no reason, of course, why this should lay his good faith under
suspicion. Few of us could pass an examination upon objects with which
we are supposed to be familiar, or say which of our tables have three
legs, and which four.

One of Mr. Batchel's auditors, however, took a captious view of the
matter, and brusquely remarked, in imitation of a more famous sceptic,
"I don't believe there's no sich a thing."

Mr. Batchel, of course, recognised the phrase, and it was his eagerness
to establish his credit that committed him at this point to a last
disclosure about Lubrietta. He drew a sapphire ring from his pocket,
handed it to the incredulous auditor, and addressed him in the manner
of Mrs. Gamp.

"What! you bage creetur, have I had this ring three year or more to be
told there ain't no sech a thing. Go along with you."

"But I thought the ring was sent back," said more than one.

"How did you come by it?" said all the others.

Mr. Batchel thereupon admitted that he had closed his story prematurely.
About six weeks after the return of the ring to Puna he had found it
once again upon his table, returned through the post. Enclosed in the
package was a note which Mr. Batchel, being now committed to this part
of the story, also passed round for inspection. It ran as follows:--

      "Accept the ring, dear one, and wear it for my sake. Fail not
      to think sometimes of her whom you have made happy.--L. R."

"What on earth am I to do with this?" Mr. Batchel had asked himself
again. And this time he had answered the question, after the briefest
possible delay, by slipping the ring upon his fourth finger.

The book of Lyrics remained downstairs amongst the books in constant
use. Mr. Batchel can repeat at least half of the collection from memory.

He knows well enough that such terms as "dear one" are addressed to
bald gentlemen only in a Pickwickian sense, but even with that sense
the letter gives him pleasure.

He admits that he thinks very often of "her whom he has made happy,"
but that he cannot exclude from his thoughts at these times an
ungenerous regret. It is that he has also made happy a nameless
Oriental gentleman whom he presumptuously calls "the other fellow."




VI.

THE ROCKERY.


The Vicar's garden at Stoneground has certainly been enclosed for more
than seven centuries, and during the whole of that time its almost
sacred privacy has been regarded as permanent and unchangeable. It has
remained for the innovators of later and more audacious days to hint
that it might be given into other hands, and still carry with it no
curse that should make a new possessor hasten to undo his irreverence.
Whether there can be warrant for such confidence, time will show. The
experiences already related will show that the privacy of the garden
has been counted upon both by good men and worse. And here is a story,
in its way, more strange than any.

By way of beginning, it may be well to describe a part of the garden
not hitherto brought into notice. That part lies on the western
boundary, where the garden slopes down to a sluggish stream, hardly a
stream at all, locally known as the Lode. The Lode bounds the garden
on the west along its whole length, and there the moor-hen builds her
nest, and the kingfisher is sometimes, but in these days too rarely,
seen. But the centre of vision, as it were, of this western edge lies
in a cluster of tall elms. Towards these all the garden paths converge,
and about their base is raised a bank of earth, upon which is heaped a
rockery of large stones lately overgrown with ferns.

Mr. Batchel's somewhat prim taste in gardening had long resented
this disorderly bank. In more than one place in his garden had wild
confusion given place to a park-like trimness, and there were not a
few who would say that the change was not for the better. Mr. Batchel,
however, went his own way, and in due time determined to remove the
rockery. He was puzzled by its presence; he could see no reason why a
bank should have been raised about the feet of the elms, and surmounted
with stones; not a ray of sunshine ever found its way there, and none
but coarse and uninteresting plants had established themselves. Whoever
had raised the bank had done it ignorantly, or with some purpose not
easy for Mr. Batchel to conjecture.

Upon a certain day, therefore, in the early part of December, when
the garden had been made comfortable for its winter rest, he began,
with the assistance of his gardener, to remove the stones into another
place.

We do but speak according to custom in this matter, and there are few
readers who will not suspect the truth, which is that the gardener
began to remove the stones, whilst Mr. Batchel stood by and delivered
criticisms of very slight value. Such strength, in fact, as Mr. Batchel
possessed had concentrated itself upon the mind, and somewhat neglected
his body, and what he called help, during his presence in the garden,
was called by another name when the gardener and his boy were left to
themselves, with full freedom of speech.

There were few of the stones rolled down by the gardener that Mr.
Batchel could even have moved, but his astonishment at their size soon
gave place to excitement at their appearance. His antiquarian tastes
were strong, and were soon busily engaged. For, as the stones rolled
down, his eyes were feasted, in a rapid succession, by capitals of
columns, fragments of moulded arches and mullions, and other relics of
ecclesiastical building.

Repeatedly did he call the gardener down from his work to put these
fragments together, and before long there were several complete lengths
of arcading laid upon the path. Stones which, perhaps, had been
separated for centuries, once more came together, and Mr. Batchel,
rubbing his hands in excited satisfaction, declared that he might
recover the best parts of a Church by the time the rockery had been
demolished.

The interest of the gardener in such matters was of a milder kind. "We
must go careful," he merely observed, "when we come to the organ." They
went on removing more and more stones, until at length the whole bank
was laid bare, and Mr. Batchel's chief purpose achieved. How the stones
were carefully arranged, and set up in other parts of the garden, is
well known, and need not concern us now.

One detail, however, must not be omitted. A large and stout stake of
yew, evidently of considerable age, but nevertheless quite sound, stood
exposed after the clearing of the bank. There was no obvious reason for
its presence, but it had been well driven in, so well that the strength
of the gardener, or, if it made any difference, of the gardener and Mr.
Batchel together, failed even to shake it. It was not unsightly, and
might have remained where it was, had not the gardener exclaimed, "This
is the very thing we want for the pump." It was so obviously "the very
thing" that its removal was then and there decided upon.

The pump referred to was a small iron pump used to draw water from the
Lode. It had been affixed to many posts in turn, and defied them all
to hold it. Not that the pump was at fault. It was a trifling affair
enough. But the pumpers were usually garden-boys, whose impatient
energy had never failed, before many days, to wriggle the pump away
from its supports. When the gardener had, upon one occasion, spent
half a day in attaching it firmly to a post, they had at once shaken
out the post itself. Since, therefore, the matter was causing daily
inconvenience, and the gardener becoming daily more concerned for his
reputation as a rough carpenter, it was natural for him to exclaim,
"This is the very thing." It was a better stake than he had ever used,
and as had just been made evident, a stake that the ground would hold.

"Yes!" said Mr. Batchel, "it is the very thing; but can we get it up?"
The gardener always accepted this kind of query as a challenge, and
replied only by taking up a pick and setting to work, Mr. Batchel,
as usual, looking on, and making, every now and then, a fruitless
suggestion. After a few minutes, however, he made somewhat more than a
suggestion. He darted forward and laid his hand upon the pick. "Don't
you see some copper?" he asked quickly.

Every man who digs knows what a hiding place there is in the earth.
The monotony of spade work is always relieved by a hope of turning up
something unexpected. Treasure lies dimly behind all these hopes, so
that the gardener, having seen Mr. Batchel excited over so much that
was precious from his own point of view, was quite ready to look for
something of value to an ordinary reasonable man. Copper might lead to
silver, and that, in turn, to gold. At Mr. Batchel's eager question,
therefore, he peered into the hole he had made, and examined everything
there that might suggest the rounded form of a coin.

He soon saw what had arrested Mr. Batchel. There was a lustrous scratch
on the side of the stake, evidently made by the pick, and though the
metal was copper, plainly enough, the gardener felt that he had been
deceived, and would have gone on with his work. Copper of that sort
gave him no sort of excitement, and only a feeble interest.

Mr. Batchel, however, was on his hands and knees. There was a small
irregular plate of copper nailed to the stake; without any difficulty
he tore it away from the nails, and soon scraped it clean with a
shaving of wood; then, rising to his feet, he examined his find.

There was an inscription upon it, so legible as to need no deciphering.
It had been roughly and effectually made with a hammer and nail, the
letters being formed by series of holes punched deeply into the metal,
and what he read was:--

         MOVE NOT THIS
      STAKE, NOV. 1, 1702.

But to move the stake was what Mr. Batchel had determined upon, and the
metal plate he held in his hand interested him chiefly as showing how
long the post had been there. He had happened, as he supposed, upon an
ancient landmark. The discovery, recorded elsewhere, of a well, near to
the edge of his present lawn, had shown him that his premises had once
been differently arranged. One of the minor antiquarian tasks he had
set himself was to discover and record the old arrangement, and he felt
that the position of this stake would help him. He felt no doubt of
its being a point upon the western limit of the garden; not improbably
marked in this way to show where the garden began, and where ended the
ancient hauling-way, which had been secured to the public for purposes
of navigation.

The gardener, meanwhile, was proceeding with his work. With no small
difficulty he removed the rubble and clay which accounted for the
firmness of the stake. It grew dark as the work went on, and a distant
clock struck five before it was completed. Five was the hour at
which the gardener usually went home; his day began early. He was
not, however, a man to leave a small job unfinished, and he went on
loosening the earth with his pick, and trying the effect, at intervals,
upon the firmness of the stake. It naturally began to give, and could
be moved from side to side through a space of some few inches. He
lifted out the loosened stones, and loosened more. His pick struck
iron, which, after loosening, proved to be links of a rusted chain.
"They've buried a lot of rubbish in this hole," he remarked, as he went
on loosening the chain, which, in the growing darkness, could hardly
be seen. Mr. Batchel, meanwhile, occupied himself in a simpler task of
working the stake to and fro, by way of loosening its hold. Ultimately
it began to move with greater freedom. The gardener laid down his
tool and grasped the stake, which his master was still holding; their
combined efforts succeeded at once; the stake was lifted out.

It turned out to be furnished with an unusually long and sharp point,
which explained the firmness of its hold upon the ground. The gardener
carried it to the neighbourhood of the pump, in readiness for its next
purpose, and made ready to go home. He would drive the stake to-morrow,
he said, in the new place, and make the pump so secure that not even
the boys could shake it. He also spoke of some designs he had upon
the chain, should it prove to be of any considerable length. He was an
ingenious man, and his skill in converting discarded articles to new
uses was embarrassing to his master. Mr. Batchel, as has been said, was
a prim gardener, and he had no liking for makeshift devices. He had
that day seen his runner beans trained upon a length of old gas-piping,
and had no intention of leaving the gardener in possession of such a
treasure as a rusty chain. What he said, however, and said with truth,
was that he wanted the chain for himself. He had no practical use for
it, and hardly expected it to yield him any interest. But a chain
buried in 1702 must be examined--nothing ancient comes amiss to a man
of antiquarian tastes.

Mr. Batchel had noticed, whilst the gardener had been carrying away
the stake, that the chain lay very loosely in the earth. The pick had
worked well round it. He said, therefore, that the chain must be lifted
out and brought to him upon the morrow, bade his gardener good night,
and went in to his fireside.

This will appear to the reader to be a record of the merest trifles,
but all readers will accept the reminder that there is no such
thing as a trifle, and that what appears to be trivial has that
appearance only so long as it stands alone. Regarded in the light
of their consequences, those matters which have seemed to be least
in importance, turn out, often enough, to be the greatest. And these
trifling occupations, as we may call them for the last time, of Mr.
Batchel and the gardener, had consequences which shall now be set down
as Mr. Batchel himself narrated them. But we must take events in their
order. At present Mr. Batchel is at his fireside, and his gardener at
home with his family. The stake is removed, and the hole, in which lies
some sort of an iron chain, is exposed.

Upon this particular evening Mr. Batchel was dining out. He was a
good natured man, with certain mild powers of entertainment, and his
presence as an occasional guest was not unacceptable at some of the
more considerable houses of the neighbourhood. And let us hasten to
observe that he was not a guest who made any great impression upon
the larders or the cellars of his hosts. He liked port, but he liked
it only of good quality, and in small quantity. When he returned
from a dinner party, therefore, he was never either in a surfeited
condition of body, or in any confusion of mind. Not uncommonly after
his return upon such occasions did he perform accurate work. Unfinished
contributions to sundry local journals were seldom absent from his
desk. They were his means of recreation. There they awaited convenient
intervals of leisure, and Mr. Batchel was accustomed to say that of
these intervals he found none so productive as a late hour, or hour and
a half, after a dinner party.

Upon the evening in question he returned, about an hour before
midnight, from dining at the house of a retired officer residing in the
neighbourhood, and the evening had been somewhat less enjoyable than
usual. He had taken in to dinner a young lady who had too persistently
assailed him with antiquarian questions. Now Mr. Batchel did not like
talking what he regarded as "shop," and was not much at home with young
ladies, to whom he knew that, in the nature of things, he could be
but imperfectly acceptable. With infinite good will towards them, and
a genuine liking for their presence, he felt that he had but little
to offer them in exchange. There was so little in common between his
life and theirs. He felt distinctly at his worst when he found himself
treated as a mere scrap-book of information. It made him seem, as he
would express it, de-humanised.

Upon this particular evening the young lady allotted to him, perhaps
at her own request, had made a scrap-book of him, and he had returned
home somewhat discontented, if also somewhat amused. His discontent
arose from having been deprived of the general conversation he so
greatly, but so rarely, enjoyed. His amusement was caused by the
incongruity between a very light-hearted young lady and the subject
upon which she had made him talk, for she had talked of nothing else
but modes of burial.

He began to recall the conversation as he lit his pipe and dropped into
his armchair. She had either been reflecting deeply upon the matter,
or, as seemed to Mr. Batchel, more probable, had read something and
half forgotten it. He recalled her questions, and the answers by which
he had vainly tried to lead her to a more attractive topic. For example:

  She: Will you tell me why people were buried at cross roads?

  He: Well, consecrated ground was so jealously guarded that a
      criminal would be held to have forfeited the right to be buried
      amongst Christian folk. His friends would therefore choose
      cross roads where there was set a wayside cross, and make his
      grave at the foot of it. In some of my journeys in Scotland I
      have seen crosses....

But the young lady had refused to be led into Scotland. She had stuck
to her subject.

  She: Why have coffins come back into use? There is nothing in our
      Burial Service about a coffin.

  He: True, and the use of the coffin is due, in part, to an ignorant
      notion of confining the corpse, lest, like Hamlet's father, he
      should walk the earth. You will have noticed that the corpse
      is always carried out of the house feet foremost, to suggest a
      final exit, and that the grave is often covered with a heavy
      slab. Very curious epitaphs are to be found on these slabs....

But she was not to be drawn into the subject of epitaphs. She had made
him tell of other devices for confining spirits to their prison, and
securing the peace of the living, especially of those adopted in the
case of violent and mischievous men. Altogether an unusual sort of
young lady.

The conversation, however, had revived his memories of what was, after
all, a matter of some interest, and he determined to look through his
parish registers for records of exceptional burials. He was surprised
at himself for never having done it. He dismissed the matter from his
mind for the time being, and as it was a bright moonlight night he
thought he would finish his pipe in the garden.

Therefore, although midnight was close at hand, he strolled complacently
round his garden, enjoying the light of the moon no less than in the
daytime he would have enjoyed the sun; and thus it was that he arrived
at the scene of his labours upon the old rockery. There was more light
than there had been at the end of the afternoon, and when he had walked
up the bank, and stood over the hole we have already described, he could
distinctly see the few exposed links of the iron chain. Should he remove
it at once to a place of safety, out of the way of the gardener? It was
about time for bed. The city clocks were then striking midnight. He
would let the chain decide. If it came out easily he would remove it;
otherwise, it should remain until morning.

The chain came out more than easily. It seemed to have a force within
itself. He gave but a slight tug at the free end with a view of
ascertaining what resistance he had to encounter, and immediately found
himself lying upon his back with the chain in his hand. His back had
fortunately turned towards an elm three feet away which broke his fall,
but there had been violence enough to cause him no little surprise.

The effort he had made was so slight that he could not account for
having lost his feet; and being a careful man, he was a little anxious
about his evening coat, which he was still wearing. The chain, however,
was in his hand, and he made haste to coil it into a portable shape,
and to return to the house.

Some fifty yards from the spot was the northern boundary of the garden,
a long wall with a narrow lane beyond. It was not unusual, even at
this hour of the night, to hear footsteps there. The lane was used by
railway men, who passed to and from their work at all hours, as also by
some who returned late from entertainments in the neighbouring city.

But Mr. Batchel, as he turned back to the house, with his chain over
one arm, heard more than footsteps. He heard for a few moments the
unmistakable sound of a scuffle, and then a piercing cry, loud and
sharp, and a noise of running. It was such a cry as could only have
come from one in urgent need of help.

Mr. Batchel dropped his chain. The garden wall was some ten feet high
and he had no means of scaling it. But he ran quickly into the house,
passed out by the hall door into the street, and so towards the lane
without a moment's loss of time.

Before he has gone many yards he sees a man running from the lane with
his clothing in great disorder, and this man, at the sight of Mr.
Batchel, darts across the road, runs along in the shadow of an opposite
wall and attempts to escape.

The man is known well enough to Mr. Batchel. It is one Stephen Medd, a
respectable and sensible man, by occupation a shunter, and Mr. Batchel
at once calls out to ask what has happened. Stephen, however, makes no
reply but continues to run along the shadow of the wall, whereupon Mr.
Batchel crosses over and intercepts him, and again asks what is amiss.
Stephen answers wildly and breathlessly, "I'm not going to stop here,
let me go home."

As Mr. Batchel lays his hand upon the man's arm and draws him into the
light of the moon, it is seen that his face is streaming with blood
from a wound near the eye.

He is somewhat calmed by the familiar voice of Mr. Batchel, and is
about to speak, when another scream is heard from the lane. The voice
is that of a boy or woman, and no sooner does Stephen hear it than he
frees himself violently from Mr. Batchel and makes away towards his
home. With no less speed does Mr. Batchel make for the lane, and finds
about half way down a boy lying on the ground wounded and terrified.

At first the boy clings to the ground, but he, too, is soon reassured
by Mr. Batchel's voice, and allows himself to be lifted on to his
feet. His wound is also in the face, and Mr. Batchel takes the boy
into his house, bathes and plasters his wound, and soon restores him
to something like calm. He is what is termed a call-boy, employed by
the Railway Company to awaken drivers at all hours, and give them their
instructions.

Mr. Batchel is naturally impatient for the moment he can question
the boy about his assailant, who is presumably also the assailant
of Stephen Medd. No one had been visible in the lane, though the
moon shone upon it from end to end. At the first available moment,
therefore, he asks the boy, "Who did this?"

The answer came, without any hesitation, "Nobody." "There was nobody
there," he said, "and all of a sudden somebody hit me with an iron
thing."

Then Mr. Batchel asked, "Did you see Stephen Medd?" He was becoming
greatly puzzled.

The boy replied that he had seen Mr. Medd "a good bit in front," with
nobody near him, and that all of a sudden someone knocked him down.

Further questioning seemed useless. Mr. Batchel saw the boy to his
home, left him at the door, and returned to bed, but not to sleep.
He could not cease from thinking, and he could think of nothing but
assaults from invisible hands. Morning seemed long in coming, but came
at last.

Mr. Batchel was up betimes and made a very poor breakfast. Dallying
with the morning paper, rather than reading it, his eye was arrested by
a headline about "Mysterious assaults in Elmham." He felt that he had
mysteries of his own to occupy him and was in no mood to be interested
in more assaults. But he had some knowledge of Elmham, a small town ten
miles distant from Stoneground, and he read the brief paragraph, which
contained no more than the substance of a telegram. It said, however,
that three persons had been victims of unaccountable assaults. Two of
them had escaped with slight injuries, but the third, a young woman,
was dangerously wounded, though still alive and conscious. She declared
that she was quite alone in her house and had been suddenly struck
with great violence by what felt like a piece of iron, and that she
must have bled to death but for a neighbour who heard her cries. The
neighbour had at once looked out and seen nobody, but had bravely gone
to her friend's assistance.

Mr. Batchel laid down his newspaper considerably impressed, as was
natural, by the resemblance of these tragedies to what he had
witnessed himself. He was in no condition, after his excitement and
his sleepless night, to do his usual work. His mind reverted to the
conversation at the dinner party and the trifle of antiquarian research
it had suggested. Such occupation had often served him when he found
himself suffering from a cold, or otherwise indisposed for more serious
work. He would get the registers and collect what entries there might
be of irregular burial.

He found only one such entry, but that one was enough. There was a note
dated All Hallows, 1702, to this effect:

      "This day did a vagrant from Elmham beat cruelly to death two
      poor men who had refused him alms, and upon a hue and cry being
      raised, took his own life. He was buried in one Parson's Close
      with a stake through his body and his arms confined in chains,
      and stoutly covered in."

No further news came from Elmham. Either the effort had been exhausted,
or its purpose achieved. But what could have led the young lady, a
stranger to Mr. Batchel and to his garden, to hit upon so appropriate
a topic? Mr. Batchel could not answer the question as he put it to
himself again and again during the day. He only knew that she had given
him a warning, by which, to his shame and regret, he had been too
obtuse to profit.




VII.

THE INDIAN LAMP-SHADE.


What has been already said of Mr. Batchel will have sufficed to inform
the reader that he is a man of very settled habits. The conveniences
of life, which have multiplied so fast of late, have never attracted
him, even when he has heard of them. Inconveniences to which he is
accustomed have always seemed to him preferable to conveniences with
which he is unfamiliar. To this day, therefore, he writes with a quill,
winds up his watch with a key, and will drink no soda-water but from a
tumbling bottle with the cork wired to its neck.

The reader accordingly will learn without surprise that Mr. Batchel
continues to use the reading-lamp he acquired 30 years ago as a
Freshman in College. He still carries it from room to room as
occasion requires, and ignores all other means of illumination. It
is an inexpensive lamp of very poor appearance, and dates from a
time when labour-saving was not yet a fine art. It cannot be lighted
without the removal of several of its parts, and it is extinguished
by the primitive device of blowing down the chimney. What has always
shocked the womenfolk of the Batchel family, however, is the lamp's
unworthiness of its surroundings. Mr. Batchel's house is furnished in
dignified and comfortable style, but the handsome lamp, surmounting
a fluted brazen column, which his relatives bestowed upon him at his
institution, is still unpacked.

One of his younger and subtler relatives succeeded in damaging the old
lamp, as she thought, irretrievably, by a well-planned accident, but
found it still in use a year later, most atrociously repaired. The
whole family, and some outsiders, had conspired to attack the offending
lamp, and it had withstood them all.

The single victory achieved over Mr. Batchel in this matter is quite
recent, and was generally unexpected. A cousin who had gone out to
India as a bride, and that of Mr. Batchel's making, had sent him
an Indian lamp-shade. The association was pleasing. The shade was
decorated with Buddhist figures which excited Mr. Batchel's curiosity,
and to the surprise of all his friends he set it on the lamp and there
allowed it to remain. It was not, however, the figures which had
reconciled him to this novel and somewhat incongruous addition to the
old lamp. The singular colour of the material had really attracted
him. It was a bright orange-red, like no colour he had ever seen, and
the remarks of visitors whose experience of such things was greater
than his own soon justified him in regarding it as unique. No one had
seen the colour elsewhere; and of all the tints which have acquired
distinctive names, none of the names could be applied without some
further qualification. Mr. Batchel himself did not trouble about
a name, but was quite certain that it was a colour that he liked;
and more than that, a colour which had about it some indescribable
fascination. When the lamp had been brought in, and the curtains drawn,
he used to regard with singular pleasure the interiors of rooms with
whose appearance he was unaccustomed to concern himself. The books in
his study, and the old-fashioned solid furniture of his dining room, as
reflected in the new light, seemed to assume a more friendly aspect,
as if they had previously been rigidly frozen, and had now thawed
into life. The lamp-shade seemed to bestow upon the light some active
property, and gave to the rooms, as Mr. Batchel said, the appearance of
being wide-awake.

These optical effects, as he called them, were especially noticeable in
the dining room, where the convenience of a large table often induced
him to spend the evening. Standing in a favourite attitude, with his
elbow on the chimney-piece, Mr. Batchel found increasing pleasure in
contemplating the interior of the room as he saw it reflected in a
large old mirror above the fireplace. The great mahogany sideboard
across the room, seemed, as he gazed upon it, to be penetrated by the
light, and to acquire a softness of outline, and a sort of vivacity,
which operated pleasantly upon its owner's imagination. He found
himself playfully regretting, for example, that the mirror had no power
of recording and reproducing the scenes enacted before it since the
close of the 18th century, when it had become one of the fixtures of
the house. The ruddy light of the lamp-shade had always a stimulating
effect upon his fancy, and some of the verses which describe his
visions before the mirror would delight the reader, but that the
author's modesty forbids their reproduction. Had he been less firm in
this matter we should have inserted here a poem in which Mr. Batchel
audaciously ventured into the domain of Physics. He endowed his mirror
with the power of retaining indefinitely the light which fell upon it,
and of reflecting it only when excited by the appropriate stimulus. The
passage beginning

    The mirror, whilst men pass upon their way,
    Treasures their image for a later day,

might be derided by students of optics. Mr. Batchel has often read
it in after days, with amazement, for, when his idle fancies came to be
so gravely substantiated, he found that in writing the verses he had
stumbled upon a new fact--a fact based as soundly, as will soon appear,
upon experiment, as those which the text-books use in arriving at the
better-known properties of reflection.

He was seated in his dining room one frosty evening in January. His
chair was drawn up to the fire, and the upper part of the space behind
him was visible in the mirror. The brighter and clearer light thrown
down by the shade was shining upon his book. It is the fate of most
of us to receive visits when we should best like to be alone, and Mr.
Batchel allowed an impatient exclamation to escape him, when, at nine
o'clock on this evening, he heard the door-bell. A minute later, the
boy announced "Mr. Mutcher," and Mr. Batchel, with such affability as
he could hastily assume, rose to receive the caller. Mr. Mutcher was
the Deputy Provincial Grand Master of the Ancient Order of Gleaners,
and the formality of his manner accorded with the gravity of his title.
Mr. Batchel soon became aware that the rest of the evening was doomed.
The Deputy Provincial Grand Master had come to discuss the probable
effect of the Insurance Act upon Friendly Societies, of which Mr.
Batchel was an ardent supporter. He attended their meetings, in some
cases kept their accounts, and was always apt to be consulted in their
affairs. He seated Mr. Mutcher, therefore, in a chair on the opposite
side of the fireplace, and gave him his somewhat reluctant attention.

"This," said Mr. Mutcher, as he looked round the room, "is a cosy nook
on a cold night. I cordially appreciate your kindness, Reverend Sir, in
affording me this interview, and the comfort of your apartment leads me
to wish that it might be more protracted."

Mr. Batchel did his best not to dissent, and as he settled himself
for a long half-hour, began to watch the rise and fall, between two
lines upon the distant wall-paper of the shadow of Mr. Mutcher's
side-whisker, as it seemed to beat time to his measured speech.

The D.P.G.M. (for these functionaries are usually designated by
initials) was not a man to be hurried into brevity. His style had been
studiously acquired at Lodge meetings, and Mr. Batchel knew it well
enough to be prepared for a lengthy preamble.

"I have presumed," said Mr. Mutcher, as he looked straight before him
into the mirror, "to trespass upon your Reverence's forbearance,
because there are one or two points upon this new Insurance Act
which seem calculated to damage our long-continued prosperity--I say
long-continued prosperity," repeated Mr. Mutcher, as though Mr. Batchel
had missed the phrase. "I had the favour of an interview yesterday,"
he went on, "with the Sub-Superintendent of the Perseverance Accident
and General (these were household words in circles which Mr. Batchel
frequented, so that he was at no loss to understand them), and he
was unanimous with me in agreeing that the matter called for careful
consideration. There are one or two of our rules which we know to be
essential to the welfare of our Order, and yet which will have to go by
the board--I say by the board--as from July next. Now we are not Medes,
nor yet Persians"--Mr. Mutcher was about to repeat "Persians" when he
was observed to look hastily round the room and then to turn deadly
pale. Mr. Batchel rose and hastened to his support; he was obviously
unwell. The visitor, however, made a strong effort, rose from his chair
at once, saying "Pray allow me to take leave," and hurried to the door
even as he said the words. Mr. Batchel, with real concern, followed
him with the offer of brandy, or whatever might afford relief. Mr.
Mutcher did not so much as pause to reply. Before Mr. Batchel could
reach him he had crossed the hall, and the door-knob was in his hand.
He thereupon opened the door and passed into the street without another
word. More unaccountably still, he went away at a run, such as ill
became his somewhat majestic figure, and Mr. Batchel closed the door
and returned to the dining-room in a state of bewilderment. He took
up his book, and sat down again in his chair. He did not immediately
begin to read, but set himself to review Mr. Mutcher's unaccountable
behaviour, and as he raised his eyes to the mirror he saw an elderly
man standing at the sideboard.

Mr. Batchel quickly turned round, and as he did so, recalled the
similar movement of his late visitor. The room was empty. He
turned again to the mirror, and the man was still there--evidently
a servant--one would say without much hesitation, the butler.
The cut-away coat, and white stock, the clean-shaven chin, and
close-trimmed side-whiskers, the deftness and decorum of his movements
were all characteristic of a respectable family servant, and he stood
at the sideboard like a man who was at home there.

Another object, just visible above the frame of the mirror, caused
Mr. Batchel to look round again, and again to see nothing unusual.
But what he saw in the mirror was a square oaken box some few inches
deep, which the butler was proceeding to unlock. And at this point Mr.
Batchel had the presence of mind to make an experiment of extraordinary
value. He removed, for a moment, the Indian shade from the lamp, and
laid it upon the table, and thereupon the mirror showed nothing but
empty space and the frigid lines of the furniture. The butler had
disappeared, as also had the box, to re-appear the moment the shade was
restored to its place.

As soon as the box was opened, the butler produced a bundled
handkerchief which his left hand had been concealing under the tails
of his coat. With his right hand he removed the contents of the
handkerchief, hurriedly placed them in the box, closed the lid, and
having done this, left the room at once. His later movements had been
those of a man in fear of being disturbed. He did not even wait to lock
the box. He seemed to have heard someone coming.

Mr. Batchel's interest in the box will subsequently be explained. As
soon as the butler had left, he stood before the mirror and examined it
carefully. More than once, as he felt the desire for a closer scrutiny,
he turned to the sideboard itself, where of course no box was to be
seen, and returned to the mirror unreasonably disappointed. At length,
with the image of the box firmly impressed upon his memory, he sat down
again in his chair, and reviewed the butler's conduct, or as he doubted
he would have to call it, misconduct. Unfortunately for Mr. Batchel,
the contents of the handkerchief had been indistinguishable. But for
the butler's alarm, which caused him to be moving away from the box
even whilst he was placing the thing within it, the mirror could not
have shewn as much as it did. All that had been made evident was that
the man had something to conceal, and that it was surreptitiously done.

"Is this all?" said Mr. Batchel to himself as he sat looking into the
mirror, "or is it only the end of the first Act?" The question was, in
a measure, answered by the presence of the box. That, at all events
would have to disappear before the room could resume its ordinary
aspect; and whether it was to fade out of sight or to be removed by the
butler, Mr. Batchel did not intend to be looking another way at the
time. He had not seen, although perhaps Mr. Mutcher had, whether the
butler had brought it in, but he was determined to see whether he took
it out.

He had not gazed into the mirror for many minutes before he learned
that there was to be a second Act. Quite suddenly, a woman was at
the sideboard. She had darted to it, and the time taken in passing
over half the length of the mirror had been altogether too brief to
show what she was like. She now stood with her face to the sideboard,
entirely concealing the box from view, and all Mr. Batchel could
determine was that she was tall of stature, and that her hair was
raven-black, and not in very good order. In his anxiety to see her
face, he called aloud, "Turn round." Of course, he understood, when he
saw that his cry had been absolutely without effect, that it had been a
ridiculous thing to do. He turned his head again for a moment to assure
himself that the room was empty, and to remind himself that the curtain
had fallen, perhaps a century before, upon the drama--he began to think
of it as a tragedy--that he was witnessing. The opportunity, however,
of seeing the woman's features was not denied him. She turned her face
full upon the mirror--this is to speak as if we described the object
rather than the image--so that Mr. Batchel saw it plainly before him;
it was a handsome, cruel-looking face, of waxen paleness, with fine,
distended, lustrous, eyes. The woman looked hurriedly round the room,
looked twice towards the door, and then opened the box.

"Our respectable friend was evidently observed," said Mr. Batchel.
"If he has annexed anything belonging to this magnificent female,
he is in for a bad quarter of an hour." He would have given a great
deal, for once, to have had a sideboard backed by a looking glass, and
lamented that the taste of the day had been too good to tolerate such
a thing. He would have then been able to see what was going on at the
oaken box. As it was, the operations were concealed by the figure of
the woman. She was evidently busy with her fingers; her elbows, which
shewed plainly enough, were vibrating with activity. In a few minutes
there was a final movement of the elbows simultaneously away from her
sides, and it shewed, as plainly as if the hands had been visible, that
something had been plucked asunder. It was just such a movement as
accompanies the removal, after a struggle, of the close-fitting lid of
a canister.

"What next?" said Mr. Batchel, as he observed the movement, and
interpreted it as the end of the operation at the box. "Is this the end
of the second Act?"

He was soon to learn that it was not the end, and that the drama of the
mirror was indeed assuming the nature of tragedy. The woman closed the
box and looked towards the door, as she had done before; then she made
as if she would dart out of the room, and found her movement suddenly
arrested. She stopped dead, and, in a moment, fell loosely to the
ground. Obviously she had swooned away.

Mr. Batchel could then see nothing, except that the box remained in
its place on the sideboard, so that he arose and stood close up to the
mirror in order to obtain a view of the whole stage, as he called it.
It showed him, in the wider view he now obtained, the woman lying in
a heap upon the carpet, and a grey-wigged clergyman standing in the
doorway of the room.

"The Vicar of Stoneground, without a doubt," said Mr. Batchel. "The
household of my reverend predecessor is not doing well by him; to judge
from the effect of his appearance upon this female, there's something
serious afoot. Poor old man," he added, as the clergyman walked into
the room.

This expression of pity was evoked by the Vicar's face. The marks of
tears were upon his cheeks, and he looked weary and ill. He stood for
a while looking down upon the woman who had swooned away, and then
stooped down, and gently opened her hand.

Mr. Batchel would have given a great deal to know what the Vicar found
there. He took something from her, stood erect for a moment with an
expression of consternation upon his face; then his chin dropped, his
eyes showed that he had lost consciousness, and he fell to the ground,
very much as the woman had fallen.

The two lay, side by side, just visible in the space between the table
and the sideboard. It was a curious and pathetic situation. As the
clergyman was about to fall, Mr. Batchel had turned to save him, and
felt a real distress of helplessness at being reminded again that it
was but an image that he had looked upon. The two persons now lying
upon the carpet had been for some hundred years beyond human aid. He
could no more help them than he could help the wounded at Waterloo. He
was tempted to relieve his distress by removing the shade of the lamp;
he had even laid his hand upon it, but the feeling of curiosity was now
become too strong, and he knew that he must see the matter to its end.

The woman first began to revive. It was to be expected, as she had
been the first to go. Had not Mr. Batchel seen her face in the mirror,
her first act of consciousness would have astounded him. Now it only
revolted him. Before she had sufficiently recovered to raise herself
upon her feet, she forced open the lifeless hands beside her and
snatched away the contents of that which was not empty; and as she did
this, Mr. Batchel saw the glitter of precious stones. The woman was
soon upon her feet and making feebly for the door, at which she paused
to leer at the prostrate figure of the clergyman before she disappeared
into the hall. She appeared no more, and Mr. Batchel felt glad to be
rid of her presence.

The old Vicar was long in coming to his senses; as he began to move,
there stood in the doorway the welcome figure of the butler. With
infinite gentleness he raised his master to his feet, and with a strong
arm supported him out of the room, which at last, stood empty.

"That, at least," said Mr. Batchel, "is the end of the second Act. I
doubt whether I could have borne much more. If that awful woman comes
back I shall remove the shade and have done with it all. Otherwise, I
shall hope to learn what becomes of the box, and whether my respectable
friend who has just taken out his master is, or is not, a rascal." He
had been genuinely moved by what he had seen, and was conscious of
feeling something like exhaustion. He dare not, however, sit down,
lest he should lose anything important of what remained. Neither the
door nor the lower part of the room was visible from his chair, so
that he remained standing at the chimney-piece, and there awaited the
disappearance of the oaken box.

So intently were his eyes fixed upon the box, in which he was
especially interested, that he all but missed the next incident. A
velvet curtain which he could see through the half-closed door had
suggested nothing of interest to him. He connected it indefinitely,
as it was excusable to do, with the furniture of the house, and only
by inadvertence looked at it a second time. When, however, it began
to travel slowly along the hall, his curiosity was awakened in a new
direction. The butler, helping his master out of the room ten minutes
since, had left the door half open, but as the opening was not towards
the mirror, only a strip of the hall beyond could be seen. Mr. Batchel
went to open the door more widely, only to find, of course, that
the vividness of the images had again betrayed him. The door of his
dining-room was closed, as he had closed it after Mr. Mutcher, whose
perturbation was now so much easier to understand.

The curtain continued to move across the narrow opening, and explained
itself in doing so. It was a pall. The remains it so amply covered
were being carried out of the house to their resting-place, and were
followed by a long procession of mourners in long cloaks. The hats
they held in their black-gloved hands were heavily banded with crepe
whose ends descended to the ground, and foremost among them was the
old clergyman, refusing the support which two of the chief mourners
were in the act of proffering. Mr. Batchel, full of sympathy, watched
the whole procession pass the door, and not until it was evident that
the funeral had left the house did he turn once more to the box. He
felt sure that the closing scene of the tragedy was at hand, and it
proved to be very near. It was brief and uneventful. The butler very
deliberately entered the room, threw aside the window-curtains and drew
up the blinds, and then went away at once, taking the box with him. Mr.
Batchel thereupon blew out his lamp and went to bed, with a purpose of
his own to be fulfilled upon the next day.

His purpose may be stated at once. He had recognised the oaken box,
and knew that it was still in the house. Three large cupboards in
the old library of Vicar Whitehead were filled with the papers of a
great law-suit about tithe, dating from the close of the 18th century.
Amongst these, in the last of the three cupboards, was the box of which
so much has been said. It was filled, so far as Mr. Batchel remembered,
with the assessments for poor's-rate of a large number of landholders
concerned in the suit, and these Mr. Batchel had never thought it worth
his while to disturb. He had gone to rest, however, on this night with
the full intention of going carefully through the contents of the box.
He scarcely hoped, after so long an interval, to discover any clue to
the scenes he had witnessed, but he was determined at least to make the
attempt. If he found nothing, he intended that the box should enshrine
a faithful record of the transactions in the dining-room.

It was inevitable that a man who had so much of the material of a story
should spend a wakeful hour in trying to piece it together. Mr. Batchel
spent considerably more than an hour in connecting, in this way and
that, the butler and his master, the gypsy-looking woman, the funeral,
but could arrive at no connexion that satisfied him. Once asleep, he
found the problem easier, and dreamed a solution so obvious as to make
him wonder that the matter had ever puzzled him. When he awoke in the
morning, also, the defects of the solution were so obvious as to make
him wonder that he had accepted it; so easily are we satisfied when
reason is not there to criticise. But there was still the box, and this
Mr. Batchel lifted down from the third cupboard, dusted with his towel,
and when he was dressed, carried downstairs with him. His breakfast
occupied but a small part of a large table, and upon the vacant area
he was soon laying, as he examined them, one by one, the documents
which the box contained. His recollection of them proved to be right.
They were overseers' lists of parochial assessments, of which he soon
had a score or more laid upon the table. They were of no interest in
themselves, and did nothing to further the matter in hand. They would
appear to have been thrust into the box by someone desiring to find a
receptacle for them.

In a little while, however, the character of the papers changed. Mr.
Batchel found himself reading something of another kind, written upon
paper of another form and colour.

"Irish bacon to be had of Mr. Broadley, hop merchant in Southwark."

"Rasin wine is kept at the Wine and Brandy vaults in Catherine Street."

"The best hones at Mr. Forsters in Little Britain."

There followed a recipe for a "rhumatic mixture," a way of making a
polish for mahogany, and other such matters. They were evidently the
papers of the butler.

Mr. Batchel removed them one by one, as he had removed the others;
household accounts followed, one or two private letters, and the
advertisement of a lottery, and then he reached a closed compartment
at the bottom of the box, occupying about half its area. The lid of
the compartment was provided with a bone stud, and Mr. Batchel lifted
it off and laid it upon the table amongst the papers. He saw at once
what the butler had taken from his handkerchief. There was an open
pocket-knife, with woeful-looking deposits upon its now rusty blade.
There was a delicate human finger, now dry and yellow, and on the
finger a gold ring.

Mr. Batchel took up this latter pitiful object and removed the ring,
even now, not quite easily. He allowed the finger to drop back into the
box, which he carried away at once into another room. His appetite for
breakfast had left him, and he rang the bell to have the things cleared
away, whilst he set himself, with the aid of a lens, to examine the
ring.

There had been three large stones, all of which had been violently
removed. The claws of their settings were, without exception, either
bent outwards, or broken off. Within the ring was engraved, in graceful
italic characters, the name AMEY LEE, and on the broader part, behind
the place of the stones

    She doth joy double,
    And halveth trouble.

This pathetic little love token Mr. Batchel continued to hold in his
hand as he rehearsed the whole story to which it afforded the clue.
He knew that the ring had been set with such stones as there was no
mistaking: he remembered only too well how their discovery had affected
the aged vicar. But never would he deny himself the satisfaction of
hoping that the old man had been spared the distress of learning how
the ring had been removed.

The name of Amey Lee was as familiar to Mr. Batchel as his own. Twice
at least every Sunday during the past seven years had he read it at
his feet, as he sat in the chancel, as well as the name of Robert Lee
upon an adjacent slab, and he had wondered during the leisurely course
of many a meandering hymn whether there was good precedent for the
spelling of the name. He made another use now of his knowledge of the
pavement. There was a row of tiles along the head of the slabs, and Mr.
Batchel hastened to fulfil without delay, what he conceived to be his
duty. He replaced the ring upon Amey Lee's finger and carried it into
the church, and there, having raised one of the tiles with a chisel,
gave it decent burial.

Whether the butler ever learned that he had been robbed in his turn,
who shall say? His immediate dismissal, after the funeral, seemed
inevitable, and his oaken box was evidently placed by him, or by
another, where no man heeded it. It still occupies a place amongst
the law papers and may lie undisturbed for another century; and when
Mr. Batchel put it there, without the promised record of events, he
returned to the dining room, removed the Indian shade from the lamp,
and, having put a lighted match to the edge, watched it slowly burn
away.

Only one thing remained. Mr. Batchel felt that it would give him some
satisfaction to visit Mr. Mutcher. His address, as obtained from the
District Miscellany of the Order of Gleaners, was 13, Albert Villas,
Williamson Street, not a mile away from Stoneground.

Mr. Mutcher, fortunately, was at home when Mr. Batchel called, and
indeed opened the door with a copious apology for being without his
coat.

"I hope," said Mr. Batchel, "that you have overcome your indisposition
of last Tuesday evening."

"Don't mention it, your Reverence," said Mr. Mutcher, "my wife gave
me such a talking to when I came 'ome that I was quite ashamed of
myself--I say ashamed of myself."

"She observed that you were unwell," said Mr. Batchel, "I am sure; but
she could hardly blame you for that."

By this time the visitor had been shewn into the parlour, and Mrs.
Mutcher had appeared to answer for herself.

"I really was ashamed, Sir," she said, "to think of the way Mutcher was
talking, and a clergyman's 'ouse too. Mutcher is not a man, Sir, that
takes anything, not so much as a drop; but he is wonderful partial to
cold pork, which never does agree with him, and never did, at night in
partic'lar."

"It was the cold pork, then, that made you unwell?" asked Mr. Batchel.

"It was, your Reverence, and it was not," Mr. Mutcher replied,
"for internal discomfort there was none--I say none. But a little
light-'eaded it did make me, and I could 'ave swore, your Reverence,
saving your presence, that I saw an elderly gentleman carry a box into
your room and put it down on the sheffoneer."

"There was no one there, of course," observed Mr. Batchel.

"No!" replied the D.P.G.M., "there was not; and the discrepancy was too
much for me. I hope you will pardon the abruptness of my departure."

"Certainly," said Mr. Batchel, "discrepancies are always embarrassing."

"And you will allow me one day to resume our discourse upon the subject
of National Insurance," he added, when he shewed his visitor to the
door.

"I shall not have much leisure," said Mr. Batchel, audaciously, taking
all risks, "until the Greek Kalends."

"Oh, I don't mind waiting till it does end," said Mr. Mutcher, "there
is no immediate 'urry."

"It's rather a long time," remarked Mr. Batchel.

"Pray don't mention it," answered the Deputy Provincial Grand Master,
in his best manner. "But when the time comes, perhaps you'll drop me a
line."




VIII.

THE PLACE OF SAFETY.


"I thank my governors, teachers, spiritual pastors, and masters," said
Wardle, as he lit a cigar after breakfast, "that I never acquired a
taste for that sort of thing."

Wardle was a pragmatical and candid friend who paid Mr. Batchel
occasional visits at Stoneground. He regarded antiquarian tastes
as a form of insanity, and it annoyed him to see his host poring
over registers, churchwardens' accounts, and documents which he
contemptuously alluded to as "dirty papers." "If you would throw those
things away, Batchel," he used to say, "and read the _Daily Mail_,
you'd be a better man for it."

Mr. Batchel replied only with a tolerant smile, and, as his friend went
out of doors with his cigar, continued to read the document before
him, although it was one he had read twenty times before. It was an
inventory of church goods, dated the 6th year of Edward VI.--to be
exact, the 15th May, 1552. By a royal order of that year, all Church
goods, saving only what sufficed for the barest necessities of
Divine Service, were collected and deposited in safe hands, there to
await further instructions. The instructions, which had not been long
delayed, had consisted in a curt order for seizure. Everyone who cares
for such matters, knows and laments the grievous spoliation of those
times.

Mr. Batchel's document, however, proved that the Churchwardens of the
day were not incapable of self-defence. They were less dumb than sheep
before the shearers. For, on the copy of the inventory of which he
had become possessed, was written the Commissioners' Report that "at
Stoneground did John Spayn and John Gounthropp, Churchwardens, declare
upon their othes that two gilded senseres with candellstickes, old
paynted clothes, and other implements, were contayned in a chest which
was robbed on St. Peter's Eve before the first inventorye made."

Mr. Batchel had a shrewd suspicion, which the reader will not
improbably share, that John Spayne and his colleague knew more
about the robbery than they chose to admit. He said to himself
again and again, that the contents of the chest had been carefully
concealed until times should mend. But from the point of view of
the Churchwardens, times had not mended. There was evidence that
Stoneground had been in no mood to tolerate censers in the reign of
Mary, and it seemed unlikely that any later time could have re-admitted
the ancient ritual. On this account, Mr. Batchel had never ceased to
believe that the contents of the chest lay somewhere near at hand, nor
to hope that it might be his lot to discover it.

Whenever there was any work of the nature of excavation or demolition
within a hundred yards of the Church, Mr. Batchel was sure to be
there. His presence was very distasteful in most cases, to the workmen
engaged, whom it deprived of many intervals of leisure to which they
were accustomed when left alone. During a long course of operations
connected with the restoration of the Church, Mr. Batchel's vigilance
had been of great advantage to the work, both in raising the standard
of industry and in securing attention to details which the builders
were quite prepared to overlook. It had, however, brought him no nearer
to the censers and other contents of the chest, and when the work was
completed, his hopes of discovery had become pitifully slender.

Mr. Wardle, notwithstanding his general contempt for antiquarian
pursuits, was polite enough to give Mr. Batchel's hobbies an occasional
place in their conversation, and in this way was informed of the
"stolen" goods. The information, however, gave him no more than a very
languid interest.

"Why can't you let the things alone?" he said, "what's the use of them?"

Mr. Batchel felt it all but impossible to answer a man who could say
this; yet he made the attempt.

"The historic interest," he said seriously, "of censers that were used
down to the days of Edward VI. is in itself sufficient to justify----"

"Etcetera," said his friend, interrupting the sentence which even Mr.
Batchel was not sure of finishing to his satisfaction, "but it takes so
little to justify you antiquarians, with your axes and hammers. What
can you do with it when you get it, if you ever do get it?"

"There are two censers," Mr. Batchel mildly observed in correction,
"and other things."

"All right," said Wardle; "tell me about one of them, and leave me to
do the multiplication."

With this permission, Mr. Batchel entered upon a general description of
such ancient thuribles as he knew of, and Wardle heard him with growing
impatience.

"It seems to me," he burst in at length, "that what you are making all
this pother about is a sort of silver cruet-stand, which was thin
metal to begin with, and cleaned down to the thickness of egg-shell
before the Commissioners heard of it. At this moment, if it exists,
it is a handful of black scrap. If you found it, I wouldn't give a
shilling for it; and if I would, it isn't yours to sell. Why can't you
let the things alone?"

"But the interest of it," said Mr. Batchel, "is what attracts me."

"It's a pity you can't take an interest in something less
uninteresting," said Wardle, petulantly; "but let me tell you what I
think about your censers and all the rest of it. Your Churchwardens
lied about them, but that's all right; I'd have done the same myself.
If their things couldn't be used, they were not going to have them
abused, so they put them safely out of the way, your's and everybody's
else."

"I was not proposing to abuse them," interrupted Mr. Batchel.

"Were you proposing to use them?" rejoined Wardle. "It's one thing or
the other, to my mind. There are people who dig out Bishops and steal
their rings to put in glass cases, but I don't know how they square
the police; and it's the same sort of thing you seem to be up to. Let
the things alone. You're a Prayer Book man, and just the sort the
Churchwardens couldn't stomach. You talk fast enough at the Dissenters
because they want to collar your property now. Why can't you do as you
would be done by?"

Mr. Batchel thought it useless to say any more to a man in so
unsympathetic an attitude, or to enter upon any defence of the
antiquarian researches to which his friend had so crudely referred.
He did not much like, however, to be anticipated in a theory of the
"robbery" which he felt to be reasonable and probable. He had hoped to
propound the same theory himself, and to receive a suitable compliment
upon his penetration. He began, therefore, somewhat irritably, to make
the most of conjectures which, at various times, had occurred to him.
"Men of that sort," he said, "would have disposed of the censers to
some one who could go on using them, and in that case they are not here
at all."

"Men of that sort," answered Wardle, "are as careful of their skins
as men of any other sort, and besides that, your Stoneground men have
a very good notion of sticking to what they have got. The things are
here, I daresay, if they are anywhere; but they are not yours, and you
have no business to meddle with them. If you would spend your time in
something else than poking about after other people's things, you'd get
better value for it."

This brief conversation, in which Mr. Batchel had scarcely been allowed
the part to which he felt entitled, was in one respect satisfactory.
It supported his belief that the censers lay somewhere within reach.
In other respects, however, the attitude of Wardle was intolerable. He
was evidently out of all sympathy with the quest upon which Mr. Batchel
was set, and, for their different reasons, each was glad to drop the
subject.

During the next two or three days, the matter of the censers was not
referred to, if only for lack of opportunity. Wardle was a kind of
visitor for whom there was always a welcome at Stoneground, and the
welcome was in his case no less cordial on account of his brutal
frankness of expression, which, on the whole, his host enjoyed. His
pungent criticisms of other men were vastly entertaining to Mr.
Batchel, who was not so unreasonable as to feel aggrieved at an
occasional attack upon himself.

A guest of this unceremonious sort makes but small demands upon his
host. Mr. Wardle used to occupy himself contentedly and unobtrusively
in the house or in the garden whilst his host followed his usual
avocations. The two men met at meals, and liked each other none the
less because they were apart at most other times. A great part of Mr.
Wardle's day was passed in the company of the gardener, to whose
talk his own master was but an indifferent listener. The visitor and
the gardener were both lovers of the soil, and taught each other a
great deal as they worked side by side. Mr. Wardle found that sort of
exercise wholesome, and, as the gardener expressed it, "was not frit to
take his coat off."

The gardening operations at this time of year were such as Mr. Wardle
liked. The over-crowded shrubberies were being thinned, and a score or
so of young shrubs had to be moved into better quarters. Upon a certain
morning, when Mr. Batchel was occupied in his study, some aucubas were
being transplanted into a strip of ground in front of the house, and
Wardle had undertaken the task of digging holes to receive them. It
was this task that he suddenly interrupted in order to burst in upon
his host in what seemed to the latter a repulsive state of dirt and
perspiration.

"Talk of discoveries," he cried, "come and see what I've found."

"Not the censers, I suppose," said Mr. Batchel.

"Censers be hanged," said Wardle, "come and look."

Mr. Batchel laid down his pen, with a sigh, and followed Wardle to the
front of the house. His guest had made three large holes, each about
two feet square, and drawing Mr. Batchel to the nearest of them, said
"Look there."

Mr. Batchel looked. He saw nothing, and said so.

"Nothing?" exclaimed Wardle with impatience. "You see the bottom of the
hole, I suppose?"

This Mr. Batchel admitted.

"Then," said Wardle, "kindly look and see whether you cannot see
something else."

"There is apparently a cylindrical object lying across the angle of
your excavation," said Mr. Batchel.

"That," replied his guest, "is what you are pleased to call nothing.
Let me inform you that the cylindrical object is a piece of thick lead
pipe, and that the pipe runs along the whole front of your house."

"Gas-pipe, no doubt," said Mr. Batchel.

"Is there any gas within a mile of this place?" asked Wardle.

Mr. Batchel admitted that there was not, and felt that he had made a
needlessly foolish suggestion. He felt safer in the amended suggestion
that the object was a water-pipe.

An ironical cross-examination by Mr. Wardle disposed of the amended
suggestion as completely as he had disposed of the other, and his host
began to grow restive. "If this sort of discovery pleases you," he
said testily, "I will not grudge you your pleasure, but, to quote your
own words, why can't you let it alone?"

"Have you any idea," said Mr. Wardle, "of the value of this length of
piping, at the present price of lead?"

Even Mr. Wardle could hardly have suspected his host of knowing
anything so preposterous as the price of lead, but he felt himself
ill-used when Mr. Batchel disclaimed any interest in the matter, and
returned to his study.

Wardle had a commercial mind, which elsewhere was the means of securing
him a very satisfactory income, and on this account, his host, as
he resumed his work indoors, excused what he regarded as a needless
interruption.

He little suspected that his friend's commercial mind was to do him the
great service of putting him in possession of the censers, and then to
do him a disservice even greater.

Had any such connexion so much as suggested itself, Mr. Batchel would
more willingly have answered to the summons which came an hour later,
when the gardener appeared at the window of the study, evidently
bursting with information. When he had succeeded in attracting his
master's attention, and drawn him away from his desk, it was to say
that the whole length of pipe had been uncovered, and found to issue
from a well on the south side of the house.

The discovery was at least unexpected, and Mr. Batchel went out, even
if somewhat grudgingly, to look at the place. He came upon the well,
close by the window of his dining-room. It had been covered by a stone
slab, now partially removed. The narrow trench which Wardle and the
gardener had made in order to expose the pipe, extended eastwards to
the corner of the house, and thence along the whole length of the
front, probably to serve a pump on the north side, where lay the yard
and stables. The pipe itself, Mr. Wardle's prize, had been withdrawn,
and there remained only a rusted chain which passed from some anchorage
beneath the soil, over the lip of the well. Mr. Batchel inferred that
it had carried, and perhaps carried still, the bucket of former times,
and stooped down to see whether he could draw it up. He heard, far
below, the light splash of the soil disturbed by his hands; but before
he could grasp the chain, he felt himself seized by the waist and held
back.

The exaggerated attentions of his gardener had often annoyed Mr.
Batchel. He was not allowed even to climb a short ladder without having
to submit to absurd precautions for his safety, and he would have been
much better pleased to have more respect paid to his intelligence, and
less to his person. In the present instance, the precaution seemed so
unnecessary that he turned about angrily to protest, both against the
interference with his movements, and the unseemly force used.

It was at this point that he made a disquieting discovery. He was
standing quite alone. The gardener and Mr. Wardle were both on the
north side of the house, dealing with the only thing they cared
about--the lead pipe. Mr. Batchel made no further attempt to move the
chain; he was, in fact, in some bodily fear, and he returned to his
study by the way he had come, in a disordered condition of mind.

Half an hour later, when the gong sounded for luncheon, he was slowly
making his way into the dining-room, when he encountered his guest
running downstairs from his room, in great spirits. "A trifle over two
hundredweight!" he exclaimed, as he reached the foot of the staircase,
and seemed disappointed that Mr. Batchel did not immediately shake
hands with him upon so fine a result of the morning's work. Mr.
Batchel, needless to say, was occupied with other recollections.

"I suppose it is unnecessary to ask," said he to his guest as he
proceeded to carve a chicken, "whether you believe in ghosts?"

"I do not," said Wardle promptly, "why should I?"

"Why not?" asked Mr. Batchel.

"Because I've had the advantage of a commercial education," was the
reply, "instead of learning dead languages and soaking my mind in
heathen fables."

Mr. Batchel winced at this disrespectful allusion to the University
education of which he was justly proud. He wanted an opinion, however,
and the conversation had to go on.

"Your commercial education," he continued, "allows you, I daresay, to
know what is meant by a hypothetical case."

"Make it one," said Wardle.

"Assuming a ghost, then, would it be capable of exerting force upon a
material body?"

"Whose?" asked Wardle.

"If you insist upon making it a personal matter," replied Mr. Batchel,
"let us say mine."

"Let me have the particulars."

In reply to this, Mr. Batchel related his experience at the well.

Mr. Wardle merely said "Pass the salt, I need it."

Undeterred by the scepticism of his friend, Mr. Batchel pressed the
point, and upon that, Mr. Wardle closed the conversation by observing
that since, by hypothesis, ghosts could clank chains, and ring bells,
he was bound to suppose them capable of doing any silly thing they
chose. "A month in the City, Batchel," he gravely added, "would do you
a world of good."

As soon as the meal was over, Mr. Wardle went back to his gardening,
whilst his host betook himself to occupations more suited to his
tranquil habits. The two did not meet again until dinner; and during
that meal, and after it, the conversation turned wholly upon politics,
Mr. Wardle being congenially occupied until bed-time in demonstrating
that the politics of his host had been obsolete for three-quarters of
a century. His outdoor exercise, followed by an excellent dinner, had
disposed him to retire early; he rose from his chair soon after ten.
"There is one thing," he pleasantly remarked to his host, "that I am
bound to say in favour of a University education; it has given you a
fine taste in victuals." With this compliment, he said "good-night,"
and went up to bed.

Mr. Batchel himself, as the reader knows, kept later hours. There were
few nights upon which he omitted to take his walk round the garden when
the world had grown quiet, even in unfavourable weather. It was far
from favourable upon the present occasion; there was but little moon,
and a light rain was falling. He determined, however, to take at least
one turn round, and calling his terrier Punch from the kitchen, where
he lay in his basket, Mr. Batchel went out, with the dog at his heel.
He carried, as his custom was, a little electric lamp, by whose aid he
liked to peep into birds' nests, and make raids upon slugs and other
pests.

They had hardly set out upon their walk when Punch began to show signs
of uneasiness. Instead of running to and fro, with his nose to the
ground, as he ordinarily did, the terrier remained whining in the rear.
Shortly, they came upon a hedgehog lying coiled up in the path; it
was a find which the dog was wont to regard as a rare piece of luck,
and to assail with delirious enjoyment. Now, for some reason, Punch
refused to notice it, and, when it was illuminated for his especial
benefit, turned his back upon it and looked up, in a dejected attitude,
at his master. The behaviour of the dog was altogether unnatural, and
Mr. Batchel occupied himself, as they passed on, in trying to account
for it, with the animal still whining at his heel. They soon reached
the head of the little path which descended to the Lode, and there Mr.
Batchel found a much harder problem awaiting him, for at the other end
of the path he distinctly saw the outline of a boat.

There had been no boat on the Lode for twenty years. Just so long ago
the drainage of the district had required that the main sewer should
cross the stream at a point some hundred yards below the Vicar's
boundary fence. There, ever since, a great pipe three feet in diameter
had obstructed the passage. It lay just at the level of the water, and
effectually closed it to all traffic. Mr. Batchel knew that no boat
could pass the place, and that none survived in the parts above it. Yet
here was a boat drawn up at the edge of his garden. He looked at it
intently for a minute or so, and had no difficulty in making out the
form of such a boat as was in common use all over the Fen country--a
wide flat-bottomed boat, lying low in the water. The "sprit" used for
punting it along lay projecting over the stern. There was no accounting
for such a boat being there: Mr. Batchel did not understand how it
possibly could be there, and for a while was disposed to doubt whether
it actually was. The great drain-pipe was so perfect a defence against
intrusion of the kind that no boat had ever passed it. The Lode,
when its water was low enough to let a boat go under the pipe, was
not deep enough to float it, or wide enough to contain it. Upon this
occasion the water was high, and the pipe half submerged, forming an
insuperable obstacle. Yet there lay, unmistakeably, a boat, within ten
yards of the place where Mr. Batchel stood trying to account for it.

These ten yards, unfortunately, were impassable. The slope down to the
water's edge had to be warily trodden even in dry weather. It was steep
and treacherous. After rain it afforded no foothold whatever, and to
attempt a descent in the darkness would have been to court disaster.
After examining the boat again, therefore, by the light of his little
lamp, Mr. Batchel proceeded upon his walk, leaving the matter to be
investigated by daylight.

The events of this memorable night, however, were but beginning. As
he turned from the boat his eye was caught by a white streak upon
the ground before him, which extended itself into the darkness and
disappeared. It was Punch, in veritable panic, making for home, across
flower-beds and other places he well knew to be out of bounds. The
whistle he had been trained to obey had no effect upon his flight;
he made a lightning dash for the house. Mr. Batchel could not help
regretting that Wardle was not there to see. His friend held the
coursing powers of Punch in great contempt, and was wont to criticise
the dog in sporting jargon, whose terms lay beyond the limits of Mr.
Batchel's vocabulary, but whose general drift was as obvious as it was
irritating. The present performance, nevertheless, was so exceptional
that it soon began to connect itself in Mr. Batchel's mind with the
unnatural conduct to which we have already alluded. It was somehow
proving to be an uncomfortable night, and as Mr. Batchel felt the rain
increasing to a steady drizzle he decided to abandon his walk and to
return to the house by the way he had come.

He had already passed some little distance beyond the little path which
descended to the Lode. The main path by which he had come was of course
behind him, until he turned about to retrace his steps.

It was at the moment of turning that he had ocular demonstration of the
fact that the boat had brought passengers. Not twenty yards in front
of him, making their way to the water, were two men carrying some kind
of burden. They had reached an open space in the path, and their forms
were quite distinct: they were unusually tall men; one of them was
gigantic. Mr. Batchel had little doubt of their being garden thieves.
Burglars, if there had been anything in the house to attract them,
could have found much easier ways of removing it.

No man, even if deficient in physical courage, can see his property
carried away before his eyes and make no effort to detain it. Mr.
Batchel was annoyed at the desertion of his terrier, who might at least
have embarrassed the thieves' retreat; meanwhile he called loudly upon
the men to stand, and turned upon them the feeble light of his lamp. In
so doing he threw a new light not only upon the trespassers, but upon
the whole transaction. No response was made to his challenge, but the
men turned away their faces as if to avoid recognition, and Mr. Batchel
saw that the nearest of them, a burly, square-headed man in a cassock,
was wearing the tonsure. He described it as looking, in the dim, steely
light of the lamp, like a crown-piece on a door-mat. Both the men, when
they found themselves intercepted, hastened to deposit their burden
upon the ground, and made for the boat. The burden fell upon the ground
with a thud, but the bearers made no sound. They skimmed down to the
Lode without seeming to tread, entered the boat in perfect silence, and
shoved it off without sound or splash. It has already been explained
that Mr. Batchel was unable to descend to the water's edge. He ran,
however, to a point of the garden which the boat must inevitably pass,
and reached it just in time. The boat was moving swiftly away, and
still in perfect silence. The beams of the pocket-lamp just sufficed to
reach it, and afforded a parting glimpse of the tonsured giant as he
gave a long shove with the sprit, and carried the boat out of sight. It
shot towards the drain-pipe, then not forty yards ahead, but the men
were travelling as men who knew their way to be clear.

It was by this time evident, of course, that these were no
garden-thieves. The aspect of the men, and the manner of their
disappearance, had given a new complexion to the adventure. Mr.
Batchel's heart was in his mouth, but his mind was back in the 16th
century; and having stood still for some minutes in order to regain his
composure, he returned to the path, with a view of finding out what the
men had left behind.

The burden lay in the middle of the path, and the lamp was once more
brought into requisition. It revealed a wooden box, covered in most
parts with moss, and all glistening with moisture. The wood was so far
decayed that Mr. Batchel had hopes of forcing open the box with his
hands; so wet and slimy was it, however, that he could obtain no hold,
and he hastened to the house to procure some kind of tool. Near to the
cupboard in which such things were kept was the sleeping-basket of the
dog, who was closely curled inside it, and shivering violently. His
master made an attempt to take him back into the garden; it would be
useful, he thought, to have warning in case the boat should return. The
prospect of being surprised by these large, noiseless men was not one
to be regarded with comfort. Punch, however, who was usually so eager
for an excursion, was now in such distress at being summoned that his
master felt it cruel to persist. Having found a chisel, therefore, he
returned to the garden alone. The box lay undisturbed where he had left
it, and in two minutes was standing open.

The reader will hardly need to be told what it contained. At the bottom
lay some heavy articles which Mr. Batchel did not disturb. He saw the
bases of two candlesticks. He had tried to lift the box, as it lay,
by means of a chain passing through two handles in the sides, but had
found it too heavy. It was by this chain that the men had been carrying
it. The heavier articles, therefore, he determined to leave where they
were until morning. His interest in them was small compared with that
which the other contents of the box had excited, for on the top of
these articles was folded "a paynted cloth," and upon this lay the two
gilded censers.

It was the discovery Mr. Batchel had dreamed of for years. His
excitement hardly allowed him to think of the strange manner in which
it had been made. He glanced nervously around him to see whether there
might be any sign of the occupants of the boat, and, seeing nothing, he
placed his broad-brimmed hat upon the ground, carefully laid in it the
two censers, closed the box again, and carried his treasure delicately
into the house. The occurrences of the last hour have not occupied
long in the telling; they occupied much longer in the happening. It
was now past midnight, and Mr. Batchel, after making fast the house,
went at once upstairs, carrying with him the hat and its precious
contents, just as he had brought it from the garden. The censers were
not exactly "black-scrap," as Mr. Wardle had anticipated, or pretended
to anticipate, but they were much discoloured, and very fragile. He
spread a clean handkerchief upon the chest of drawers in his bedroom,
and, removing the vessels with the utmost care, laid them upon it. Then
after spending some minutes in admiration of their singularly beautiful
form and workmanship, he could not deny himself the pleasure of calling
Wardle to look.

The guest-room was close at hand. Mr. Wardle, having been already
disturbed by the locking up of the house, was fully awakened by the
entrance of his host into the room with a candle in his hand. The look
of excitement on Mr. Batchel's face could not escape the observation
even of a man still yawning, and Mr. Wardle at once exclaimed "What's
up?"

"I have got them," said Mr. Batchel, in a hushed voice.

His guest, who had forgotten all about the censers, began by
interpreting "them" to mean a nervous disorder that is plural by
nature, and so was full of sympathy and counsel. When, however, his
host had made him understand the facts, he became merely impatient.

"Won't you come and look?" said Mr. Batchel.

"Not I," said Wardle, "I shall do where I am."

"They are in excellent preservation," said Mr. Batchel.

"Then they will keep till morning," was the answer.

"But just come and tell me what you think of them," said Mr. Batchel,
making a last attempt.

"I could tell you what I think of them," answered Wardle, "without
leaving my bed, which I have no intention of leaving; but I have to
leave Stoneground to-morrow, and I don't want to hurt your feelings,
so 'Good-night.'" Upon this, he turned over in bed and gave a loud
snore, which Mr. Batchel accepted as a manifesto. He has never ceased
to regret that he did not compel his guest to see the censers, but
he did not then foresee the sore need he would have of a witness. He
answered his friend's good-night, and returned to his own room. Once
more he admired the two censers as their graceful outlines stood out,
sharp and clear, against the white handkerchief, and having done this,
he was soon in bed and asleep. To the men in the boat he had not given
another thought, since he became possessed of the box they had left
behind; of the other contents of the box he had thought as little,
since he had secured the chief treasures of which he had been so long
in search.

Now, Mr. Wardle, when he arose in the morning, felt somewhat ashamed of
his surliness of the preceding night. His repudiation of all interest
in the censers had not been quite sincere, for beneath his affectation
of unconcern there lay a genuine curiosity about his friend's
discovery. Before he had finished dressing, therefore, he crossed over
into Mr. Batchel's room. The censers, to his surprise, were nowhere
to be seen. His host, less to his surprise, was still fast asleep.
Mr. Wardle opened the drawers, one by one, in search of the censers,
but the drawers proved to be all quite full of clothing. He looked
with no more success into every other place where they might have been
bestowed. His mind was always ready with a grotesque idea, "Blest if he
hasn't taken them to bed with him," he said aloud, and at the sound of
his voice Mr. Batchel awoke.

His eyes, as soon as they were open, turned to the chest of drawers;
and what he saw there, or rather, what he failed to see, caused him,
without more ado, to leap out of bed.

"What have you done with them?" he cried out.

The serious alarm of Mr. Batchel was so evident as to check the
facetious reply which Wardle was about to frame. He contented himself
with saying that he had not touched or seen the things.

"Where are they?" again cried Mr. Batchel, ignoring the disclaimer.
"You ought not to have touched them, they will not bear handling. Where
are they?"

Mr. Wardle turned away in disgust. "I expect," he said, "they're where
they've been this three hundred and fifty years." Upon that he returned
to his room, and went on with his dressing.

Mr. Batchel immediately followed him, and looked eagerly round the
room. He proceeded to open drawers, and to search, in a frenzied
manner, in every possible, and in many an impossible, place of
concealment. His distress was so patent that his friend soon ceased to
trifle with it. By a few minutes serious conversation he made it clear
that there had been no practical joking, and Mr. Batchel returned to
his room in tears. "Look here, Batchel," said Mr. Wardle as he left,
"you want a holiday."

Within a few minutes Mr. Batchel returned fully dressed. "You seem
to think, Wardle," he said, "that I have been dreaming about these
censers. Come out into the garden and let me shew you the box and the
other things."

Mr. Wardle was quite willing to assent to anything, if only out of
pity, and the two went together into the garden, Mr. Batchel leading
the way. Going at a great pace, they soon came to the path upon which
the box had lain. The marks it had left upon the soft gravel were plain
enough, and Mr. Batchel eagerly appealed to his friend to notice them.
Of the box and its contents, however, there was no other trace. The
whole adventure was described--the strange behaviour and subsequent
flight of the terrier--the men with averted faces--the boat--and the
opening of the box. Mr. Batchel tried to shake the obvious incredulity
of his guest by pointing to the chisel which still lay beside the path.
Mr. Wardle only replied, "You want a holiday, Batchel! Let's go in to
breakfast."

Breakfast on that morning was not the cheerful meal it was wont to
be. During the few minutes of waiting for it Mr. Batchel stood at
the window of his dining-room looking out upon the site of the well
which the gardener had now covered in. He rehearsed the whole of the
adventure from first to last, wondering whether the new place of safety
would ever be discovered. But he said no more to his guest; his heart
was too full.

The two breakfasted almost in silence, and the meal was scarcely over
when the cab arrived to take Mr. Wardle to his train. Mr. Batchel bade
him farewell, and saw him depart with genuine regret; he was returning
sadly into the house when he heard his name called. It was Wardle,
leaning out of the window of his cab as it drove away, and waving his
hand, "Batchel," he cried again, "mind you take a holiday."




IX.

THE KIRK SPOOK.


Before many years have passed it will be hard to find a person who has
ever seen a Parish Clerk. The Parish Clerk is all but extinct. Our
grandfathers knew him well--an oldish, clean-shaven man, who looked as
if he had never been young, who dressed in rusty black, bestowed upon
him, as often as not, by the Rector, and who usually wore a white tie
on Sundays, out of respect for the seriousness of his office. He it was
who laid out the Rector's robes, and helped him to put them on; who
found the places in the large Bible and Prayer Book, and indicated them
by means of decorous silken bookmarkers; who lighted and snuffed the
candles in the pulpit and desk, and attended to the little stove in the
squire's pew; who ran busily about, in short, during the quarter-hour
which preceded Divine Service, doing a hundred little things, with all
the activity, and much of the appearance, of a beetle.

Just such a one was Caleb Dean, who was Clerk of Stoneground in the
days of William IV. Small in stature, he possessed a voice which
Nature seemed to have meant for a giant, and in the discharge of his
duties he had a dignity of manner disproportionate even to his voice.
No one was afraid to sing when he led the Psalm, so certain was it that
no other voice could be noticed, and the gracious condescension with
which he received his meagre fees would have been ample acknowledgment
of double their amount.

Man, however, cannot live by dignity alone, and Caleb was glad enough
to be sexton as well as clerk, and to undertake any other duties by
which he might add to his modest income. He kept the Churchyard tidy,
trimmed the lamps, chimed the bells, taught the choir their simple
tunes, turned the barrel of the organ, and managed the stoves.

It was this last duty in particular, which took him into Church "last
thing," as he used to call it, on Saturday night. There were people
in those days, and may be some in these, whom nothing would induce
to enter a Church at midnight; Caleb, however, was so much at home
there that all hours were alike to him. He was never an early man on
Saturdays. His wife, who insisted upon sitting up for him, would often
knit her way into Sunday before he appeared, and even then would find
it hard to get him to bed. Caleb, in fact, when off duty, was a genial
little fellow; he had many friends, and on Saturday evenings he knew
where to find them.

It was not, therefore, until the evening was spent that he went to
make up his fires; and his voice, which served for other singing than
that of Psalms, could usually be heard, within a little of midnight,
beguiling the way to Church with snatches of convivial songs. Many a
belated traveller, homeward bound, would envy him his spirits, but
no one envied him his duties. Even such as walked with him to the
neighbourhood of the Churchyard would bid him "Good night" whilst still
a long way from the gate. They would see him disappear into the gloom
amongst the graves, and shudder as they turned homewards.

Caleb, meanwhile, was perfectly content. He knew every stone in the
path; long practice enabled him, even on the darkest night, to thrust
his huge key into the lock at the first attempt, and on the night we
are about to describe--it had come to Mr. Batchel from an old man
who heard it from Caleb's lips--he did it with a feeling of unusual
cheerfulness and contentment.

Caleb always locked himself in. A prank had once been played upon
him, which had greatly wounded his dignity; and though it had been no
midnight prank, he had taken care, ever since, to have the Church to
himself. He locked the door, therefore, as usual, on the night we speak
of, and made his way to the stove. He used no candle. He opened the
little iron door of the stove, and obtained sufficient light to shew
him the fuel he had laid in readiness; then, when he had made up his
fire, he closed this door again, and left the Church in darkness. He
never could say what induced him upon this occasion to remain there
after his task was done. He knew that his wife was sitting up, as
usual, and that, as usual, he would have to hear what she had to say.
Yet, instead of making his way home, he sat down in the corner of the
nearest seat. He supposed that he must have felt tired, but had no
distinct recollection of it.

The Church was not absolutely dark. Caleb remembered that he could make
out the outlines of the windows, and that through the window nearest
to him he saw a few stars. After his eyes had grown accustomed to the
gloom he could see the lines of the seats taking shape in the darkness,
and he had not long sat there before he could dimly see everything
there was. At last he began to distinguish where books lay upon the
shelf in front of him. And then he closed his eyes. He does not admit
having fallen asleep, even for a moment. But the seat was restful, the
neighbouring stove was growing warm, he had been through a long and
joyous evening, and it was natural that he should at least close his
eyes.

He insisted that it was only for a moment. Something, he could not say
what, caused him to open his eyes again immediately. The closing of
them seemed to have improved what may be called his dark sight. He saw
everything in the Church quite distinctly, in a sort of grey light. The
pulpit stood out, large and bulky, in front. Beyond that, he passed his
eyes along the four windows on the north side of the Church. He looked
again at the stars, still visible through the nearest window on his
left hand as he was sitting. From that, his eyes fell to the further
end of the seat in front of him, where he could even see a faint gleam
of polished wood. He traced this gleam to the middle of the seat, until
it disappeared in black shadow, and upon that his eye passed on to the
seat he was in, and there he saw a man sitting beside him.

Caleb described the man very clearly. He was, he said, a pale,
old-fashioned looking man, with something very churchy about him.
Reasoning also with great clearness, he said that the stranger had not
come into the Church either with him or after him, and that therefore
he must have been there before him. And in that case, seeing that the
Church had been locked since two in the afternoon, the stranger must
have been there for a considerable time.

Caleb was puzzled; turning therefore, to the stranger, he asked, "How
long have you been here?"

The stranger answered at once, "Six hundred years."

"Oh! come!" said Caleb.

"Come where?" said the stranger.

"Well, if you come to that, come out," said Caleb.

"I wish I could," said the stranger, and heaved a great sigh.

"What's to prevent you?" said Caleb. "There's the door, and here's the
key."

"That's it," said the other.

"Of course it is," said Caleb. "Come along."

With that he proceeded to take the stranger by the sleeve, and then it
was that he says you might have knocked him down with a feather. His
hand went right into the place where the sleeve seemed to be, and Caleb
distinctly saw two of the stranger's buttons on the top of his own
knuckles.

He hastily withdrew his hand, which began to feel icy cold, and sat
still, not knowing what to say next. He found that the stranger was
gently chuckling with laughter, and this annoyed him.

"What are you laughing at?" he enquired peevishly.

"It's not funny enough for two," answered the other.

"Who are you, anyhow?" said Caleb.

"I am the kirk spook," was the reply.

Now Caleb had not the least notion what a "kirk spook" was. He was not
willing to admit his ignorance, but his curiosity was too much for his
pride, and he asked for information.

"Every Church has a spook," said the stranger, "and I am the spook of
this one."

"Oh," said Caleb, "I've been about this Church a many years, but I've
never seen you before."

"That," said the spook, "is because you've always been moving about.
I'm very flimsy--very flimsy indeed--and I can only keep myself
together when everything is quite still."

"Well," said Caleb, "you've got your chance now. What are you going to
do with it?"

"I want to go out," said the spook, "I'm tired of this Church, and I've
been alone for six hundred years. It's a long time."

"It does seem rather a long time," said Caleb, "but why don't you go if
you want to? There's three doors."

"That's just it," said the spook, "They keep me in."

"What?" said Caleb, "when they're open."

"Open or shut," said the spook, "it's all one."

"Well, then," said Caleb, "what about the windows?"

"Every bit as bad," said the spook, "They're all pointed."

Caleb felt out of his depth. Open doors and windows that kept a person
in--if it was a person--seemed to want a little understanding. And the
flimsier the person, too, the easier it ought to be for him to go where
he wanted. Also, what could it matter whether they were pointed or not?

The latter question was the one which Caleb asked first.

"Six hundred years ago," said the spook, "all arches were made round,
and when these pointed things came in I cursed them. I hate new-fangled
things."

"That wouldn't hurt them much," said Caleb.

"I said I would never go under one of them," said the spook.

"That would matter more to you than to them," said Caleb.

"It does," said the spook, with another great sigh.

"But you could easily change your mind," said Caleb.

"I was tied to it," said the spook, "I was told that I never more
should go under one of them, whether I would or not."

"Some people will tell you anything," answered Caleb.

"It was a Bishop," explained the spook.

"Ah!" said Caleb, "that's different, of course."

The spook told Caleb how often he had tried to go under the pointed
arches, sometimes of the doors, sometimes of the windows, and how
a stream of wind always struck him from the point of the arch, and
drifted him back into the Church. He had long given up trying.

"You should have been outside," said Caleb, "before they built the last
door."

"It was my Church," said the spook, "and I was too proud to leave."

Caleb began to sympathise with the spook. He had a pride in the Church
himself, and disliked even to hear another person say Amen before him.
He also began to be a little jealous of this stranger who had been six
hundred years in possession of the Church in which Caleb had believed
himself, under the Vicar, to be master. And he began to plot.

"Why do you want to get out?" he asked.

"I'm no use here," was the reply, "I don't get enough to do to keep
myself warm. And I know there are scores of Churches now without any
kirk-spooks at all. I can hear their cheap little bells dinging every
Sunday."

"There's very few bells hereabouts," said Caleb.

"There's no hereabouts for spooks," said the other. "We can hear any
distance you like."

"But what good are you at all?" said Caleb.

"Good!" said the spook. "Don't we secure proper respect for Churches,
especially after dark? A Church would be like any other place if it
wasn't for us. You must know that."

"Well, then," said Caleb, "you're no good here. This Church is all
right. What will you give me to let you out?"

"Can you do it?" asked the spook.

"What will you give me?" said Caleb.

"I'll say a good word for you amongst the spooks," said the other.

"What good will that do me?" said Caleb.

"A good word never did anybody any harm yet," answered the spook.

"Very well then, come along," said Caleb.

"Gently then," said the spook; "don't make a draught."

"Not yet," said Caleb, and he drew the spook very carefully (as one
takes a vessel quite full of water) from the seat.

"I can't go under pointed arches," cried the spook, as Caleb moved off.

"Nobody wants you to," said Caleb. "Keep close to me."

He led the spook down the aisle to the angle of the wall where a small
iron shutter covered an opening into the flue. It was used by the
chimney sweep alone, but Caleb had another use for it now. Calling to
the spook to keep close, he suddenly removed the shutter.

The fires were by this time burning briskly. There was a strong
up-draught as the shutter was removed. Caleb felt something rush across
his face, and heard a cheerful laugh away up in the chimney. Then he
knew that he was alone. He replaced the shutter, gave another look at
his stoves, took the keys, and made his way home.

He found his wife asleep in her chair, sat down and took off his boots,
and awakened her by throwing them across the kitchen.

"I've been wondering when you'd wake," he said.

"What?" she said, "Have you been in long?"

"Look at the clock," said Caleb. "Half after twelve."

"My gracious," said his wife. "Let's be off to bed."

"Did you tell her about the spook?" he was naturally asked.

"Not I," said Caleb. "You know what she'd say. Same as she always does
of a Saturday night."

       *       *       *       *       *

This fable Mr. Batchel related with reluctance. His attitude towards
it was wholly deprecatory. Psychic phenomena, he said, lay outside the
province of the mere humourist, and the levity with which they had been
treated was largely responsible for the presumptuous materialism of the
age.

He said more, as he warmed to the subject, than can here be repeated.
The reader of the foregoing tales, however, will be interested to know
that Mr. Batchel's own attitude was one of humble curiosity. He refused
even to guess why the _revenant_ was sometimes invisible, and at other
times partly or wholly visible; sometimes capable of using physical
force, and at other times powerless. He knew that they had their
periods, and that was all.

There is room, he said, for the romancer in these matters; but for
the humourist, none. Romance was the play of intelligence about the
confines of truth. The invisible world, like the visible, must have its
romancers, its explorers, and its interpreters; but the time of the
last was not yet come.

Criticism, he observed in conclusion, was wholesome and necessary.
But of the idle and mischievous remarks which were wont to pose as
criticism, he held none in so much contempt as the cheap and irrational
POOH-POOH.




  PRINTED BY
  W. HEFFER AND SONS LTD.
  104 HILLS ROAD, CAMBRIDGE.




Transcriber's note


Text in italics has been surrounded with _underscores_, and small
capitals changed to all capitals.

A few punctuation errors were corrected and on page 106 "lode" was
changed to "Lode". Otherwise the original has been preserved, including
inconsistent hyphenation.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Stoneground Ghost Tales, by E. G. Swain

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STONEGROUND GHOST TALES ***

***** This file should be named 44581.txt or 44581.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/4/5/8/44581/

Produced by eagkw, sp1nd and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
