Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, January 25, 1881, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Harper's Young People, January 25, 1881
       An Illustrated Monthly

Author: Various

Release Date: January 19, 2014 [EBook #44712]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, JAN 25, 1881 ***




Produced by Annie R. McGuire








[Illustration: HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE
AN ILLUSTRATED WEEKLY.]

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. II.--NO. 65. PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK. PRICE FOUR
CENTS.

Tuesday, January 25, 1881. Copyright, 1881, by HARPER & BROTHERS. $1.50
per Year, in Advance.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: THE BREAKDOWN, AND ESCAPE OF THE MONKEYS.]

[Begun in No. 58 of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, December 7.]

TOBY TYLER;

OR, TEN WEEKS WITH A CIRCUS.

BY JAMES OTIS.

CHAPTER VII.

AN ACCIDENT AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.


Toby's experience of the evening was very similar to that of the
afternoon, save that he was so fortunate as not to take any more bad
money in payment for his goods. Mr. Jacobs scolded and swore
alternately, and the boy really surprised him in the way of selling
goods, though he was very careful not to say anything about it, but made
Toby believe that he was doing only about half as much work as he ought
to do. Toby's private hoard of money was increased that evening by
presents, ninety cents, and he began to look upon himself as almost a
rich man.

When the performance was nearly over, Mr. Jacobs called to him to help
in packing up; and by the time the last spectator had left the tent, the
worldly possessions of Messrs. Lord and Jacobs were ready for removal,
and Toby allowed to do as he had a mind to, so long as he was careful to
be on hand when old Ben was ready to start.

Toby thought that he would have time to pay a visit to his friends the
skeleton and the fat woman, and to that end started toward the place
where their tent had been standing; but to his sorrow he found that it
was already being taken down, and he only had time to thank Mrs. Treat
and to press the fleshless hand of her shadowy husband as they entered
their wagon to drive away.

He was disappointed, for he had hoped to be able to speak with his
new-made friends a few moments before the weary night's ride commenced;
but failing in that, he went hastily back to the monkeys' cage. Old Ben
was there getting things ready for a start; but the wooden sides of the
cage had not been put up, and Toby had no difficulty in calling the aged
monkey up to the bars. He held one of the fat woman's doughnuts in his
hand, and he said, as he passed it through to the animal:

"I thought perhaps you might be hungry, Mr. Stubbs, and this is some of
what the skeleton's wife give me. I hain't got very much time to talk
with you now; but the first chance I can get away to-morrow, an' when
there hain't anybody 'round, I want to tell you something."

The monkey had taken the doughnut in his hand-like paws, and was tearing
it to pieces, eating small portions of it very rapidly.

"Don't hurry yourself," said Toby, warningly, "for Uncle Dan'l always
told me the worst thing a feller could do was to eat fast. If you want
any more, after we start, just put your hand through the little hole up
there near the seat, an' I'll give you all you want."

From the look on his face, Toby confidently believed the monkey was
going to make some reply; but just then Ben shut up the sides,
separating Toby and Mr. Stubbs, and the order was given to start.

Toby clambered up on to the high seat, Ben followed him, and in another
instant the team was moving along slowly down the dusty road, preceded
and followed by the many wagons with their tiny swinging lights.

"Well," said Ben, when he had got his team well under way; and felt that
he could indulge in a little conversation, "how did you get along
to-day?"

Toby related all of his movements, and gave the driver a faithful
account of all that had happened to him, concluding his story by saying,
"That was one of Mrs. Treat's doughnuts that I just gave to Mr. Stubbs."

"To whom?" asked Ben, in surprise.

"To Mr. Stubbs--the old fellow here in the cart, you know, that's been
so good to me."

Toby heard a sort of gurgling sound, saw the driver's body sway back and
forth in a trembling way, and was just becoming thoroughly alarmed, when
he thought of the previous night, and understood that Ben was only
laughing in his own peculiar way.

"How did you know his name was Stubbs?" asked Ben, after he had
recovered his breath.

"Oh, I don't know that that is his real name," was the quick reply; "I
only call him that because he looks so much like a feller with that name
that I knew at home. He don't seem to mind because I call him Stubbs."

Ben looked at Toby earnestly for a moment, acting all the time as if he
wanted to laugh again, but didn't dare to for fear he might burst a
blood-vessel, and then he said, as he patted him on the shoulder, "Well,
you are the queerest little fish that I ever saw in all my travels. You
seem to think that that monkey knows all you say to him."

"I'm sure he does," said Toby, positively. "He don't say anything right
out to me, but he knows everything I tell him. Do you suppose he could
talk if he tried to?"

"Look here, Mr. Toby Tyler," and Ben turned half around in his seat, and
looked Toby full in the face, as to give more emphasis to his words,
"are you heathen enough to think that that monkey could talk if he
wanted to?"

"I know I hain't a heathen," said Toby, thoughtfully, "for if I had
been, some of the missionaries would have found me out a good while ago;
but I never saw anybody like this old Mr. Stubbs before, an' I thought
he could talk if he wanted to, just as the Living Skeleton does, or his
wife. Anyhow, Mr. Stubbs winks at me; an' how could he do that if he
didn't know what I've been sayin' to him?"

"Look here, my son," said Ben, in a most fatherly fashion, "monkeys
hain't anything but beasts, an' they don't know how to talk any more
than they know what you say to 'em."

"Didn't you ever hear any of them speak a word?"

"Never. I've been in a circus, man an' boy, nigh on to forty years, an'
I never seen nothin' in a monkey more'n any other beast, except their
awful mischiefness."

"Well," said Toby, still unconvinced, "I believe Mr. Stubbs knew what I
said to him, anyway."

"Now don't be foolish, Toby," pleaded Ben. "You can't show me one thing
that a monkey ever did because you told him to."

Just at that moment Toby felt some one pulling at the back of his coat,
and looking around, he saw it was a little brown hand, reaching through
the bars of the air-hole of the cage, that was tugging away at his coat.

"There!" he said, triumphantly, to Ben. "Look there. I told Mr. Stubbs
if he wanted anything more to eat, to tell me, an' I would give it to
him. Now you can see for yourself that he's come for it," and Toby took
a doughnut from his pocket, and put it into the tiny hand, which was
immediately withdrawn. "Now what do you think of Mr. Stubbs knowing what
I say to him?"

"They often stick their paws up through there," said Ben, in a
matter-of-fact tone. "I've had 'em pull my coat in the night till they
made me as nervous as ever any old woman was. You see, Toby, my boy,
monkeys is monkeys; an' you mustn't go to gettin' the idea that they're
anything else, for it's a mistake. You think this old monkey in here
knows what you say? Why, that's just the cuteness of the old fellow; he
watches you to see if he can't do just as you do, an' that's all there
is about it."

Toby was more than half convinced that Ben was putting the matter in its
proper light, and he would have believed all that had been said if, just
at that moment, he had not seen that brown hand reaching through the
hole to clutch him again by the coat.

The action seemed so natural, so like a hungry boy who gropes in the
dark pantry for something to eat, that it would have taken more
arguments than Ben had at his disposal to persuade Toby that his Mr.
Stubbs could not understand all that was said to him. Toby put another
doughnut in the outstretched hand, and then sat silently, as if in a
brown-study over some difficult problem.

For some time the ride was made in silence. Ben was going through all
the motions of whistling without uttering a sound, a favorite amusement
of his, and Toby's thoughts were far away in the humble home he had
scorned, with Uncle Daniel, whose virtues had increased with every mile
of distance which had been put between them, and whose faults had
decreased in a corresponding ratio.

Toby's thoughtfulness had made him sleepy, and his eyes were almost
closed in slumber, when he was startled by a crashing sound, was
conscious of a sense of being hurled from his seat by some great force,
and then he lay senseless by the side of the road, while the wagon
remained a perfect wreck, from out of which a small army of monkeys
were escaping. Ben's experienced ear had told him at the first crash
that his wagon was breaking down, and without having time to warn Toby
of his peril, he had leaped clear of the wreck, keeping his horses in
perfect control, thus averting any more trouble. It was the breaking of
one of the axles which Toby had heard just before he was thrown from his
seat, and when the body of the wagon had come down upon the hard road,
the entire structure had been wrecked.

The monkeys, thus suddenly released from their confinement, had
scampered off in every direction, and, by a singular chance, Toby's aged
friend started for the woods in such a direction as to bring him
directly upon the boy's senseless body. As the monkey came up to Toby he
stopped, through the well-known curiosity of his kind, and began to
examine the body carefully, prying into each pocket he could reach, and
trying to open the half-closed eyelids in order to peep in under them.

Fortunately for Toby, he had fallen upon a mud-bank, and was only
stunned for the moment, having received no serious bruises, even though
he had been thrown such a distance. The attentions bestowed upon him by
the monkey served the purpose of bringing him to his senses; and after
he had looked around him in the gray light of the coming morning, it
would have taken far more of a philosopher than ever old Ben was to have
persuaded the boy that monkeys did not possess reasoning faculties.

The monkey was picking at his ears, nose, and mouth, as monkeys always
do when they get an opportunity, and the expression of his face was as
grave as possible. Toby firmly believed that the monkey's face showed
sorrow at his fall, and he believed that the attentions which were being
bestowed upon him were for the purpose of learning whether he had been
injured or not.

"Don't worry, Mr. Stubbs," said Toby, anxious to reassure his friend, as
he sat upright and looked about him. "I didn't get hurt any, but I would
like to know how I got 'way over here."

It really seemed as if the monkey was pleased to know that his little
friend was not hurt, for he seated himself on his haunches, and his face
expressed the liveliest pleasure that Toby was well again--or at least
that was the way the boy interpreted the look.

By this time the news of the accident had been shouted ahead from one
team to the other, and all hands were hurrying to the scene for the
purpose of rendering some aid. As Toby saw them coming, he also saw a
number of small forms, looking something like men, hurrying past him,
and for the first time he understood how it was that the aged monkey was
at liberty, and knew that those little dusky forms were the other
occupants of the cage escaping to the woods.

"See there, Mr. Stubbs! see there!" he exclaimed, quickly, pointing
toward the fugitives; "they're all going off into the woods. What shall
we do?"

The sight of the runaways seemed to excite the old monkey quite as much
as it had the boy. He jumped to his feet, chattered in the most excited
way, screamed two or three times as if he was calling them back, and
then started off in vigorous pursuit.

"Now he's gone too," said Toby, disconsolately, believing the old fellow
had run away from him; "I didn't think Mr. Stubbs would treat me this
way."

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




A LITTLE ARAB GIRL'S MISSION.

BY F. E. FRYATT.


Many of the readers of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE will be both surprised and
sorry to learn that there are parents who are not only willing to sell
their baby girls for a few pennies, but when this can not be done, to
cast them out upon the highways to perish either by the wild beasts that
prowl about at night, or by the fiercely glaring sun that heats the sand
so that even a dog will not venture out at noonday for fear of burning
his paws.

"Where do these cruel people live, and who are they?" I hear a bright
little girl ask.

They are the Arabs who inhabit the deserts of Kabylia and the Sahara, in
and south of Algiers, the most northern country in Africa.

"Ah, but the Arabs live in Arabia, don't they?" objects my young friend.

Yes, they do; but centuries ago the Arabians, or Saracens--desert
dwellers, as they were then called, Sara meaning desert--sent out large
armies to conquer other nations. These Saracens swept victoriously
through Northern Africa up to the heart of Spain.

Algiers is now a French province, but the greater part of its people are
descendants of its ancient inhabitants, called Moors, and their
conquerors, the Arabs, together with negroes from Soudan, French
colonists, and a sprinkling of Turks, Maltese, and Spaniards.

Neither the Moors nor the Arabs think much of little girls. The
latter--especially the poor ones--are sorry when one is born; but when a
boy baby comes, they make him presents, and a bowl of "mughly"--a
compound of rice flavored with sugar and spices, and sprinkled with
delicious nuts--is given to each relative.

A Moorish girl of even rich parents is considered well enough educated
if she can make preserves, and dye her finger-nails with henna leaves.
She is not treated as unkindly, however, as the little Arab damsels, who
are compelled when quite young to work very hard. They have to draw
water from the wells in heavy leathern buckets; to churn; to feed and
water the young camels and horses: in fact, they live more like slaves
than daughters of the family.

[Illustration: MARIA IMMANUEL.]

The subject of my sketch, little Maria Immanuel, is a young Arabian girl
twelve years of age, who, accompanied by a French Missionary Sister, or
nun, has been all through Europe, and is now travelling through this
country, on a curious but praiseworthy mission: she is trying to raise
money to buy and support little Arabian children who are sold or cast
out on the desert.

Maria Immanuel was herself one of these unfortunates. When a mere baby,
not yet two years old, she was picked up on the highway by some good
women, and taken to their mission-house, where she has lived ever since.

I dare say my readers would like to know just how she looks, so I will
describe her to the best of my ability.

Imagine a dark-complexioned, plump young girl, with rather heavy but
pleasant features; fluffy, dark, silken hair floating around her head
and overshadowing her eyes like a little cloud; red lips and milky-white
teeth; and eyes that light up her whole face, so soft are they, yet
brilliant and full of mischievous fire.

Immanuel--for so her friends call her--is very like many American girls
in disposition, being intensely lively, merry as a cricket, and a great
tease when in the society of children of her own age.

She has two accomplishments--she speaks French fluently, and sings
sweetly, having a fine contralto voice.

Immanuel dresses just as she did at the mission-house in the desert of
Kabylia, wearing an Arab cloak of white wool, called a "burnoose," with
a hood for stormy weather, over a white cashmere gown, which hangs in
folds to her ankles, and is made with a yoke at the neck, and full
flowing sleeves. A double row of scarlet and white beads; a girdle, or
sash, of scarlet, blue, and yellow silk, knotted at the waist, and
falling in long fringed ends in front; and a scarlet "fez," or cap,
ornamented with a band of embroidery and a golden tassel, complete her
gay and picturesque costume. Dark or solemn colors offend an Arab's eye,
for he regards them as omens of misfortune.

There are two sorts of Arabs among whom the missionaries work--the
farmer Arabs, who live in mud villages, and the Bedouins, who dwell in
tents, and roam the deserts a little farther south, and keep large
flocks of sheep and camels.

These shepherd Arabs despise the milder farmers, but condescend to visit
them, after harvest-time, to barter camels and goats for their barley
and other grains, for _they_ never stoop to till the soil or do work of
any kind; their girls and women--at least such as they see fit to
rear--do all their necessary work, such as cooking, sewing tent and
saddle cloths, making mats, dyeing wool, and tending the animals, with
which they live almost in common, and which are often ranked above them.

The shepherd Arabs live in tents, removing in winter to the farther
south, but the farmer Arabs live in mud houses, called "gourbis." The
"gourbis," like all native dwellings, are only one story high, on
account of earthquakes; they are made of branches of trees and stones,
cemented together by mud, a thick layer of which covers the roof.
Sometimes forty or more of these houses are united in a village, and
hedged in by tall cactus plants armed with sharp thorns.

The animals live under the same roof with the family; so what with this
and the smoke, the smell of cookery, and the want of ventilation, you
may imagine the "gourbis" anything but a pleasant place to visit.

The mission-houses, some of them in the neighborhood of these miserable
villages, and some farther south, are square wooden buildings, with a
court-yard in the middle, on which the windows and doors of all the
rooms open. There are small doors on the outside of the building, but
these are carefully guarded, on account of robbers and wild beasts,
either of which may make attacks at night.

Now I must explain about the little Arab boys who are being educated and
taken care of by the Missionary Brothers.

The Arabs, as I have said, love their boys very much indeed, but some
families are so wretchedly poor that they have to dispose of the boys as
well as the girls, when there are too many of them.

The Brothers, when they pick them up or buy them, teach them to read and
write, and to till the ground, so that they may become farmers.

The Missionary Sisters teach the girls to read and write, to do plain
sewing and house-work.

The work of the missions does not stop when the children have grown to
be men and women; they are then allowed to visit each other socially
under proper supervision. If a young couple fall in love with each
other, and wish to marry, the consent of the Superior is asked, and
given; for she knows the youth has been well brought up, and is worthy
to have her young charge for a wife.

In speaking of these weddings, which are quite festive occasions, little
Maria Immanuel recently said to a lady, in her lively French, which I
will translate: "I do love to have weddings going on, we have _such_ a
good time. Oh, the music! it is fine; and then there is _such
feasting_!"

No wonder she laid such stress on feasting, for the mission people live
only on the very plainest fare, never seeing butter, meat, or any of the
delicacies American children have every day.

At weddings--and they generally manage to have them double, triple, or
quadruple weddings--I suppose they have fruit and honey and other fine
dishes for the great occasion.

To each newly married couple a house, an inclosed acre of land, a horse,
an ass, and a pair of goats are given; also some farming implements; six
each of dishes and bowls, knives and wooden spoons; a bed; and the few
other necessaries for simple housekeeping.

They now commence life as farmers, and, what is still better, as
Christian young people. Already two Christian Arab villages have sprung
up on the desert, while a third is being built.

Are the young fathers and mothers sorry when a dear little girl baby
comes into the world? No, they are glad, and love it tenderly, as you
may tell by this little nursery song here translated. I wish I could
give you the wild, sweet music too. Listen--a young Arab mother sings:

  "Come, Cameleer, as quick as you can,
  And make us some soap from green Shenan,
    To bathe our Lulu dear;
  We'll wash her and dress her,
  And then we'll caress her:
    She'll sleep in her little screer."[1]

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Cradle.




LUCKY TOM'S SHADOW; OR, THE SEA-GULLS' WARNING.

BY FRANK H. TAYLOR.


[Illustration: A LIFE-SAVING STATION.]

"Be still, Meg, be still. Don't trouble me. Go and play. Young 'uns like
you are good for naught else;" and so saying, Meg's grandmother turned
fretfully toward the window of the cottage, and resumed her listless
watching of the sea-gulls across the inlet, as they fluttered, dipped,
and arose over the wavelets, picking their dinner from the shoals of
little fish the mackerel had chased inshore.

"But I'm of some use, granny; you said so yesterday, when I fetched the
blueberries. An' I'll go fur some more if you like. I know where there's
lots of 'em--acres of 'em."

"Do as you please, child, but don't tease your granny," replied the old
woman.

There was little need to tell Maggie, or "Meg," as she was generally
called, to "do as she pleased," for in all of her short life of ten
years she had never done otherwise. She had roamed unmissed all the days
among the sand-hills of the beach, wading in the "mash" for lily pods,
or hunting in the scrub for birds' eggs. Such a place as school had
never been named to her. The alphabet was unknown to her, but she
understood the rough talk of the fishermen, and could mend a net or
'tend a line with the best man among them.

Meg lived with her "granny" in a little unpainted hut made from ships'
planking, and set among a few low twisted pines, within a short distance
of a cove where Lucky Tom, her father, who was a pilot, kept his boats
and moored his sloop, when not sailing out on the blue sea watching for
ships to give him employment.

Meg's mother had died while she was a baby; her "granny" was almost
always cross; so the child had grown up with but a single affection. It
was all for her father, and he returned it in a rough, good-natured way.
So these two were seldom apart when the pilot was ashore, and Meg came
to be known among the beach people as "Lucky Tom's Shadow."

Now just why the pilot was called "Lucky Tom" does not appear: but it
was said among the folks on the coast that fish would nibble at his
hooks, and obligingly allow themselves to be caught by the dozen, when
nobody else could catch even a porgy.

Near the cottage, Lucky Tom had raised the mast of a ship once wrecked
on the bar, and made a platform at the top, with steps leading to it;
and Meg was never so happy as when she sat high up in her "bird's nest,"
as she called it, with her father, and listened to his surprising yarns
about foreign ports, while they scanned the horizon with a glass for
incoming ships.

Meg tried hard to behave kindly toward her grandmother; but the old
woman never smiled, and seldom troubled herself about Meg's goings or
comings.

"She's purty certain to git 'round at meal-times, an' that's often
enough," was about all she would say when Lucky Tom scolded about the
child's "bringin' up."

Nearly twenty years before, Lucky Tom's father, Jack Bolden, had gone
off in his schooner, the _Petrel_, to catch cod, and from that day
neither the _Petrel_ nor her crew were ever seen. After months had gone
by, poor Mrs. Bolden fell into a fever, and when she was able to move
about, she sat all day by the window, looking out upon the waves, and
the neighbors gazed at her sorrowfully, for they said she had lost her
reason; but in Meg's eyes, to whom she had always been the same, she was
a very wise and mysterious person, and the tales she repeated to the
little girl, woven from her deranged fancy, were full of strange
sea-monsters, talking fish, and birds that whispered secrets to those
who watched for long-absent friends. All these were listened to and
believed with the full confidence of childish innocence.

Meg tied on her old and faded bonnet, picked up her basket, and walked
away with a light step to the blueberry pasture.

She soon became so busy picking the clusters of round little fruit, as
they peeped from beneath the dark and glossy leaves, that she did not
see how dark the eastern sky had become, until a cool gust of wind
caught her sun-bonnet, and sent it half across the field. Then she
noticed that the sun was already hidden by the advancing clouds, and
away out across the black fretted sea a long line of foam revealed the
white-caps leaping in great haste over each other, just like a flock of
sheep, in their race to reach the sands.

The only near refuge for poor Meg was the Life-saving Station--one of
those lonely buildings that the government has placed along the coast,
with boats and crews, whose duty keeps them on the watch all winter for
shipwrecks. It was midsummer now, and the station was locked up tight;
but Meg knew how to get the better of locks and bars. She reached the
building just in time to escape a wetting from the thick rain that now
shut out the sea and land alike, beating fiercely against the stout
structure, and running in many little rivulets down the sand, to be
swallowed up, as all water is at last, by the great ocean.

At one corner the winds had blown away the sand, so Meg found room to
crawl with her basket beneath the floor, and a loose board she had long
ago discovered admitted her to the interior. What a gloomy, close place
in contrast with the wildness of the scene outside! Have you ever
visited a station of the Life-saving Service? No? Well, then, I'll try,
with the aid of the picture, to explain what it is like.

[Illustration: INTERIOR OF THE LIFE-SAVING STATION.]

First, there is the life-boat, light but very strong, and shaped so it
will rise over the tops of the waves rather than go through them. This
one is handled by about six men; one, the captain, to steer, four men to
row, and one with a pike-staff and lines in the bow. You notice that the
wheels of the truck holding the boat are very wide; that allows them to
roll over the sand without sinking into it. Under the boat is a leathern
bucket, a coil of rope, and a grapnel or hook, and in front an ingenious
device, consisting of a board with a row of pegs about the edge, upon
which a line many hundreds of feet in length is placed, with the end
tied to a projectile in the queer-looking cannon above. This is intended
to be shot over the rigging of ships ashore, and used to haul out the
larger rope upon the cart to the left of the picture, and to which the
canvas bags hanging from the ceiling are fastened, to bring people from
the wreck. Back of the cart you see rockets and signal torches, with a
long tin trumpet, all neatly kept in a rack. There are lanterns too, and
against the partition a mortar and some balls, two axes, and many other
tools. With all of these and their uses Meg was well acquainted.
Sometimes she had seen the crew run with the boat down to the water, and
go through with their drill, when the Superintendent came there; and
once the men hauled it out in the night, everybody greatly excited, and
put out into the waves to pick up the crew of a sinking steamer; but a
schooner was there first, and they only brought back a woman and little
girl. How scared they did look, the poor things! and how thankful the
child was for the use of Meg's only spare frock!

There seemed no prospect of the rain ceasing, and so Meg sat down in the
back room upon a bench; and as it was not in the nature of such an
active little girl to sit still long and keep awake, she very soon fell
asleep.

When she started up from a dream full of strange sea-goblins, it was to
find that everything was dark. The rain had ceased, and Meg, after
rubbing her eyes, concluded to go home. When she lifted the board she
discovered, to her terror, that the rain had washed her burrow full of
sand, and she was a prisoner. The strong doors and windows resisted her
puny efforts, so she sat down upon a coil of rope to consider the
situation.

Now most children would have cried; but Meg hadn't done such a thing
since she was teething. No, she only taxed her little head for some
means of escape. First, she must have a light. She well knew where the
matches were kept, and in a moment she had a lantern burning brightly.
Then it occurred to her to try the roof. It was a difficult matter to
lift the heavy trap leading to the little platform from which the men
usually watched during the winter days; but she soon stood out in the
bleak night, the salt spray driving against her face, and the gale
rushing by, as though it would tear her hold from the railing to which
she clung.

White sea-gulls whirled about her head, attracted by the light,
screaming hoarse and discordant notes in her ears. They terrified her at
first, but she soon recalled what her "granny" had said, and felt sure
the birds were trying to tell her something, and that it must be about
her father, who was still out in the terrible storm, unable to find the
inlet.

From far out on the sea the wind brought a moaning sound, as though some
unhappy creature called in vain for help. It came nearer and more
distinct from the northward, finally dying away in the distance upon the
other hand.

Fierce lightning flashes broke from the retreating storm-clouds, and by
the weird electric glare Meg saw a wild figure, with arms upraised,
which seemed to come out of the surf, and speed along the sands. By the
same light she thought she saw the topmasts of a vessel on the sea.

The gulls wheeled and screamed now more excitedly than ever. Meg was
nearly overcome with terror, but losing not a moment, she sprang down
the stairs, returning with an armful of torches. And now the lurid flare
of the life-saving signal burned up fiercely, the winds catching the
flame, and bearing thousands of dancing sparks away across the beach,
while the shape of the station and the heroic little girl upon the roof
stood out boldly, just in time for Lucky Tom to put his helm down, and
head his boat away from the fatal breakers he was nearing in the
darkness.

And now suppose we let good-natured Lucky Tom tell the rest of the story
in his own style.

"Well, sir, you see, the blow came up kind o' unexpected like, an' I
knowed we couldn't make port; but I didn't much care for that, as pilots
has to take all sorts o' weather, but we reckoned we could keep the
craft off an' on about the blowin' buoy; but, bless you! the buoy got
adrift, an' floated away down the beach. We heard it groanin' ahead of
us all the time, an' afore we knowed where we was, we got nigh into the
breakers. Just then I seen a twinkle on the beach, an' shortly a torch
showed us the station, with an angel o' mercy a-wavin' it from the roof;
an' it wa'n't a minnit too soon, nuther.

"We kept away till daylight a-watchin' an' wonderin' at the torches
burnin' all the time from atop o' the station, and then we made the
inlet. Mebbe it'll seem queer to you, but none of us thought of Meg when
we saw the light; but the whole thing was plain enough when one of the
crew came runnin' to the house, after we'd been ashore a bit, an'
hollered:

"'Why, Lucky Tom, the angel we saw was nobody but your own Shadow,
little Meg, an' she's there yit, wavin' a flag.' So we went over an' let
her out. The young'un told us all about hearin' the sound o' complainin'
on the sea, the black figure that ran along the beach, an' the warnin'
the birds give her. You see, that was a notion her granny put into her
head, the one about the birds. Speakin' of the old woman, there was
another queer thing that happened on the same night. We couldn't find
marm high nor low; but when Meg spoke of the wild spirit on the beach,
we knowed it must be her, and sure enough we found the poor old body
'way up by the point, 'most dead. She had an idee, you see, that when it
blowed hard the _Petrel_ would come ashore, though I reckon the _Petrel_
has been at the bottom more'n twenty years now. We took her home an'
'tended her, but she didn't last long after that."

The story of Meg's adventure came to the ears of a lady on the mainland,
and she soon afterward paid a visit to the little girl, who was now left
all alone when her father went away, and it was arranged that she should
live in the lady's house, and go to school. And now the school-master
says she promises to prove as bright as she is brave.




HOW IT HAPPENED TO SNOW.

BY I. M.


  What Jack Frost said to the trees, dear,
    It never would do to tell;
  He whispered the magic words, dear,
    To oak and maple as well.
  Some of them blushed bright red, dear,
    And some of them turned to yellow,
  While Jack he laughed in his sleeve, dear,
    The good-for-nothing old fellow.

  What Jack Frost did to the leaves, dear,
    I never would dare to say;
  They wrung their little brown hands, dear,
    In a pitiful, helpless way.
  The kind sun felt so sad, dear,
    To see the leaves in pain,
  That he hid his face for a week, dear,
    And wept great showers of rain.

  But Jack Frost's cruel breath, dear,
    Grew colder day by day,
  And chilled the leaves, until, dear,
    They withered and dropped away.
  Then the tall trees stood amazed, dear,
    Lamenting, when they found
  That their green and rustling robes, dear,
    Lay faded on the ground.

  The angels too were grieved, dear,
    When the trees looked cold and bare,
  So they gathered the soft white clouds, dear,
    That floated in upper air,
  And tossed great armfuls down, dear,
    In the stillness of the night,
  And were glad to see how pure, dear,
    The world looked clothed in white.

  What the children said next day, dear,
    I think you must surely know;
  But please don't say that I told, dear,
    Just how it happened to snow;
  For that wicked old Jack Frost, dear,
    Would nip my nose in spite,
  And pinch my poor ten toes, dear,
    The next cold winter's night.




[Illustration: A MOTHER'S DEVOTION.--FROM AN ETCHING BY DE MARY.]




THE ADVENTURES OF A RUNAWAY KING.

BY I. D. WILDER.


A king running away from his kingdom, with all his courtiers and people
in hot pursuit to catch him and bring him back! Did you ever hear of
anything more absurd?

There was a reason for it too, or at least the King thought so. The
truth is, this unfortunate monarch was embarrassed by the possession of
two kingdoms at once, and it so happened that the kingdom where he was
was not the kingdom where he desired to be, so he made up his mind to
run away.

Now I suppose, before I go any farther, I may as well let you into the
secret of his name and country, if you have not already guessed it. He
was Henry III. of France and Poland, son of Catherine de Medicis, one of
the wickedest Queens who ever ruled over any country, and brother of
Charles IX., King of France.

Only a few months before his flight from Cracow he had been elected King
of Poland. He had been received with great magnificence by the Polish
nobles, and the festivities had lasted many days. After everything had
settled down into the usual quiet, Henry found life in Poland rather
dull; so when he received a letter from Queen Catherine announcing the
death of Charles IX., and saying that his presence in France was very
necessary to maintain his rights as his brother's heir, he was quite
ready to abandon his Polish kingdom, and start at once for Paris.

But it was very far from being the intention of the Polish magnates to
let him off so easily. They naturally considered the well-being of their
kingdom as important--to them at least--as that of France could possibly
be. So they voted an address of condolence to the King on the death of
his brother, prayed him still to remain King of Poland, and entreated
him not to leave the kingdom without giving notice to the Senate, and
first appointing some one to act as Viceroy.

Henry returned a courteous but rather vague reply, thanking the nobles
for their good wishes, but giving them little satisfaction as to his
intentions.

In the mean time Henry's French attendants were urging upon him the
necessity of returning at once to France, lest he should lose the French
crown. His mother, Queen Catherine, sent messenger after messenger,
urging him to hasten, and his own inclinations were entirely in favor of
instant departure. So during the night a council of the French nobles
was held in Henry's apartments, and it was settled that they should
arrange matters for a secret departure. They must go secretly, if they
went at all, for the Polish Senate was determined to keep their King in
the country, and the people were equally determined not to let him go.

Then the preparations began. In the first place, the French Ambassador,
as had been agreed upon, asked permission to return immediately to
France, as his mission had ended with the death of Charles IX.
Permission was granted, and he left Cracow at once. He took with him the
King's jewels and valuable papers, and made arrangements at all the
principal towns on his route for horses and provisions to be got ready
for illustrious members of his suite, who, as he said, were not able to
leave as soon as he did. Next the King sent off M. Chemerault (the
messenger who had brought him the news of Charles's death), on the
pretense of carrying letters to Queen Catherine, but really to wait at a
short distance from the capital until the King could join him. He was to
act as guide, and conduct Henry in safety across the border.

The next step was rather unfortunate for the King. A train of ten mules
laden with coffers was observed to leave the city, and when it was found
that the baggage belonged to the Grand Master of the King's household,
the suspicions of the people were aroused, and they became wild with
excitement. It was in vain that Henry assured them that he had no
intention of leaving the kingdom. They did not believe him--and with
very good reason--and the tumult increased, until at last the Senate
ordered guards to be placed at all the entrances to the palace, and gave
instructions to arrest any one who should that night attempt to stir
out, not even excepting the King himself.

After supper the King retired, and kept all his courtiers about him for
a long time, chatting merrily with them, and appearing so easy and
unconcerned that he fancied he must have entirely deceived the Poles,
and then he made a sign that he wanted to go to sleep. The Chamberlain,
Count Teuczin, drew the curtains of the King's bed, and a page put his
sword and a candle on a table close by--a ceremony which all understood
as a signal to leave the room, except the Chamberlain, whose duty it was
to stand at the foot of the bed until the King was asleep. It had been
agreed that the King and a few of his nobles should meet at a ruined
chapel, half a mile from the city gate, where one of Henry's equerries
was to be waiting with horses.

The nobles supped together, and then quietly left the palace. They were
permitted to pass the sentinels on their assurance that they were bound
for a frolic in the town.

Henry, in the mean time, was doing his best to make the Chamberlain
believe him asleep, and when he was at length convinced of the fact, he
left the room. In a moment the King's attendants had softly entered the
room and barred the door against all intruders, had hurriedly dressed
the King, and made all their preparations for departure. Fortunately,
Souvre, one of the King's gentlemen, happened to remember a small
postern-door at the end of a passage leading from the kitchen, which
opened at the back of the castle on a faubourg of Cracow outside the
walls. This door, which had been made for the use of the servants of the
palace, had often been found useful by the cavaliers of Henry's court
when they wished to go out and in unobserved. Souvre having found that
no sentinel had been posted there, sent Miron, the King's physician, to
reconnoitre, and see if they could get out by that way. He found the
door ajar, and was joyfully returning to report, when suddenly the
steward of the household, Alemanni, appeared from the kitchen, where he
was evidently on the watch, and carefully looking about him--though
without discovering Miron, who was sheltered by the staircase--gave
orders for the postern to be locked and the key to be brought to him.

This was a terrible blow to all their hopes. The King was in despair and
was about to return to bed, but Souvre encouraged him to persist, and
rely upon him to get him out of the dilemma.

So they cautiously left the apartments of the King, and crept softly
down the stairs until they came to the passage, where another flight of
steps led down to the kitchen. Here they got a great fright from hearing
the voice of the steward just at the foot of the stairs. He heard their
steps, and called out, "Who goes there?"

"It is I, monsieur," said Souvre, boldly descending a few steps, while
he made a sign to the others to go on toward the door.

"And what do you want?" asked the steward.

"The key of the postern-door," replied Souvre. "I have a private errand,
now that the King my master can dispense with my services."

"What errand?" persisted the steward.

"The truth is," replied Souvre, haughtily, "I have an appointment in the
faubourg. I pray you therefore, monsieur, give me the key of the little
door without further parley."

This haughty manner impressed the steward, who knew that Souvre was high
in his master's favor, and he somewhat reluctantly gave the key, and
offered to accompany Souvre to open the door for him. He, however, only
laughed at this, and bounding up the staircase long before the steward,
who was old and infirm, could reach the top, he found the King and his
companions concealing themselves as much as possible in the shadow of
the walls, opened the door, through which they hurriedly passed, and
locking it behind them, they made all possible speed toward the little
ruined chapel, the place of rendezvous.

The night was pleasant, though very dark, and after losing their way
once or twice, they finally reached the chapel. There they found the
equerry with the horses, but Chemerault, who was to be their guide, and
several other gentlemen of the King's household, had not made their
appearance. They waited for them as long as they dared, but finally
Souvre persuaded the King to mount, and trust to God and fortune for
safety.

They set out, therefore, but their difficulties had only just begun. In
the first place, not one of them knew the way, being all absolute
strangers in Poland; and they did not even understand the dialect of the
country, so that they could inquire. The night was dark, and the roads
were horrible, though that did not matter so much, as they could not
keep in them, but continually found themselves wandering away and
floundering in deep morasses, blundering about in pine forests, and
getting entangled in brambles.

So they went on, stumbling over stones, sinking into bogs, and wading
through brooks, till I think they must have wished themselves safe back
in their beds in Cracow.

At length Souvre saw a faint light glimmering in the distance, and on
approaching it he found it came from the hut of a charcoal burner deep
in the forest.

The poor charcoal burner was so terrified by the approach of the
horsemen that he darted up into his loft by a ladder on the outside,
which he drew up after him. The cavaliers shouted and knocked, and
knocked and shouted, but all in vain. Not an inch would the charcoal
burner stir; so at last they began to batter down the door.

Finally Souvre managed to scramble up to the loft, where he found the
poor man crouching in a corner in a perfect agony of terror. He tried to
calm his fears by speaking gently, but the strange language only made
him more terrified.

So there was nothing for it but to drag him down, and carry him off to
the King, which they accordingly did. Henry had learned a few words of
the peasants' dialect, so he soon re-assured the poor man, and made him
comprehend that they only wanted him for a guide--an office which he
readily took upon himself.

He was swung up on a horse in front of one of the cavaliers, and guided
them safely to the town of Liszki. Soon after this they came up with
Chemerault and the others, who had missed the King in the darkness, and
had arrived before him.

In the mean time you can readily imagine that there was a great uproar
in the palace at Cracow when the King's flight was discovered. The
Senate and the nobles were absolutely beside themselves with rage at
having been so outwitted. The French who had been left behind in
ignorance of their master's intended flight were deeply indignant with
the King for his treacherous betrayal of them. The mob howled and yelled
in the streets, and everybody scolded poor Alemanni.

Karnkowski, the Grand Referendary of Poland, was dispatched in a coach
and six to bring back the King, accompanied by a troop of Tartar cavalry
armed with bows and arrows, and a howling mob, with sticks, stones, and
javelins, followed after.

They came in sight of the fugitives at the town of Osweicin, where some
of the gentlemen had dismounted to rest and refresh themselves for an
hour. But when they caught sight of the Tartar troops they did not tarry
long, you may be sure, but put spurs to their horses, and fled as fast
as they could.

Then there followed a royal chase, in which the King was the hunted
instead of the hunter--the King and his cavaliers urging their tired
horses to their utmost speed in front; following fast behind,
Karnkowski, in his coach and six, the wild troop of Tartar bowmen, and
the disorderly mob bringing up the rear.

Henry and his gentlemen rode fast and well. They crossed the Vistula on
a bridge of planks, which the cavaliers destroyed just as their pursuers
came up; and as they rode on they left their Tartar enemies howling with
rage and gnashing their teeth, as they saw the river rolling between
them and the fugitives, and knew they must go six miles around in order
to come up with them.

The danger was over now. They did not overtake Henry until after he had
passed the frontier town of Plesse, and they dared not capture him on
Austrian territory.

Count Teuczin therefore approached the King, accompanied only by five
Tartars, and delivered his message from the Senate to entreat him to
return, and offering his own fealty to the King. Henry refused to
return, but he sent back fair words to the Senate, and they parted
amicably, Henry to pursue his journey to Vienna, where he arrived
without further adventures, the Count to return sadly to Cracow to
announce the escape of their King to the magnates of Poland.

But in my opinion if they had had Henry to rule over them four years
instead of four months, far from grieving over his loss, they would have
considered themselves well rid of him; for lazy, selfish, cowardly,
false, and cruel as he was, they might have sought the wide world over
without finding a worse King than Henry III. of Valois.




THE NEW SCHOLAR.

BY EMILY H. LELAND.


Elbert Collins had never been marked absent or tardy since his first
going to school in September, and it was his ambition to finish the
whole year without a "mark," partly because he really liked to be
prompt, and partly because he thought it would be so nice to see his
name in the paper at the end of the school year.

December had come, and the short mornings were very lively ones in his
mother's little kitchen, because of so many things to be done before the
nine-o'clock bell. There was the wood-box to fill, the canary to feed,
and generally the cradle to rock, while the mother attended to such work
as could be done best while there was some one to look after the baby.

On this particular morning, however, the mother had gone to Mrs.
Brown's, around the corner, for a cup of yeast, and had become so
interested in a recipe for chocolate cake, a pattern for a boy's
blouse, the pound party at the Methodist minister's, and some new ways
for trimming Christmas trees, that she entirely forgot the time of day.

Meanwhile little Elbert, with his overshoes and scarf on, and cap in
hand, rocked the cradle, and kept his eyes on the clock. Five, ten,
minutes passed away. The long hand was crawling alarmingly near
last-bell time. He tied his scarf, pulled his cap over his ears, and
rocked harder than ever. Still no mother. Then he went to the door,
looked anxiously toward the corner, and sent out a lusty
shout--"Mamma-a-a, come ho-o-ome!" but no one responded except the baby.
"Oh dear! dear!" he exclaimed, as he rushed back to the cradle; and just
then his expectant ears heard the first slow cling-clang of the last
bell. It would ring for five minutes; the school-house was only three
streets away, and there was time enough yet, if he could only start. One
thing was certain--he would never leave his little baby sister. He
remembered a story of a poor baby who was almost burned to death because
her brother, who had promised to take care of her, left her, and ran out
on the street to play.

He went to the door and shouted again. It was something like the case of
Casabianca. But when two mothers are talking about patterns and
Christmas trees, who ever knew them to notice every little outside
noise? Elbert's shout ended in a big sob. A man going to lose his entire
fortune couldn't feel worse than this little fellow did, with that
dreadful "tardy" mark hanging over his head.

Then a happy thought flashed into his mind. Running to the cradle, he
caught up the baby, scattering pillows and blankets right and left,
bundled an old shawl over her, and snatching her half-filled milk
bottle, dashed out of the house, and ran off in the direction of that
clanging bell as fast as his stout young legs could carry him. The baby
was a light little mite, only two and a half months old, and Elbert was
nearly six years, and large for his age.

He met two women whom he knew, and who commenced making weak remarks,
like, "Why, Elbert!" and "What on earth!" but he bounded past them, with
no answer but his panting breath, and reached the school-house in such
good time that the bell gave its last two clangs just as he handed over
his funny burden to his astonished teacher.

"I couldn't leave her, and I _couldn't_ be late," he said, as soon as he
could get breath enough to speak. "And she'll go to sleep, and be real
good," he continued, as the teacher began to unwind the shawl.

And then the whole room saw a surprised, half-smothered-looking little
baby, still in her night-gown, one bare foot sticking out, and her
little fists tightly clinched, as if defying anybody to send her home.

The teacher was a good-natured young lady, and she laughed so that she
almost dropped the baby on the floor, and then the whole room laughed,
and finally Elbert joined in; for he was glad he had escaped the tardy
mark, and the baby certainly did look funny in school.

Of course there could be no order. Nearly all the scholars had babies at
home, or were well acquainted with those of their neighbors; but they
acted as if they had never seen one before, and every movement of the
little pink hands and every turn of the small bald head made them scream
with laughter, until the principal of the school came into the room to
see what the disturbance was, and after trying to look severe for five
seconds, he laughed too.

And while all this fun was going on, Elbert's mother was running wildly
through the four rooms of her little house, calling her boy's name, and
feeling sure that the children were either killed and thrown into the
cistern, or else carried off like Charley Ross, and lost forever. The
scattered pillows and upset rocking-chair, indeed, made the kitchen
appear as if there had been a struggle, and the wide-open door and the
gate creaking to and fro had a dreadful look to Elbert's mother. Just
then the women whom Elbert had met stopped at the gate, and said to the
mother, who was coming hurriedly out, "Is anything the matter, Mrs.
Collins?"

"Oh, I don't know where my children are! I left them while I ran into
Mrs. Brown's a minute, and the kitchen's all upset, and I'm afraid--"

"Why, we just now met Elbert with the baby, kiting along like the wind,
over there by Webster & Green's. Leastways we supposed it was the baby,
from the way he carried it. And he never--"

"Merciful man! he's taken her to school!"

About ten minutes later, a flustered little woman rapped at the door of
the First Primary Room, and inquired for a baby. It was handed to her,
along with an empty milk bottle, and wrapping them both in a red cloak
which she carried, she thanked the smiling teacher, and walked quickly
home.

At first she had felt very angry toward Elbert; but when she looked at
the clock, and remembered his horror of being late, she softened toward
him considerably, and by the time she had got the baby home, and found
her none the worse for her little run away, she had her laugh also; and
being a fair-minded woman, she told Elbert when he came home to dinner
that it was very thoughtless in her to have staid so long at Mrs.
Brown's. And Elbert gave her a hug, and said he was "glad he didn't
_leave_ the baby, 'cause she might have been burned up, you know!"




[Begun in YOUNG PEOPLE No. 58, December 7.]

MILDRED'S BARGAIN.

A Story for Girls.

BY MRS. JOHN LILLIE.

CHAPTER VII.


How long she was unconscious, Milly never knew. She awoke to find
herself in a beautiful white bed, in a room she had never seen. All
signs of the storm seemed shut out; there was a bright fire on the
hearth; the room seemed full of pleasant shadows and flickering beams of
light. Milly was only half conscious that some one spoke to her, and
gave her something pleasant to drink. Then she drifted off again, with a
pleasant confusion of fancies in her mind. When she next awoke, it
seemed again to be evening, but she was conscious of a certain change in
her surroundings. A little table was drawn near her; half-used medicine
bottles were upon it; Deborah was sitting over by the fire, and Miss
Jenner was standing in the window.

"Debby," she said, surprised to find her voice so weak; and then she
lifted up her hand, and saw it was very thin.

"My blessed lamb!" cried the old woman, hastening to her side, followed
quickly by Alice. "So you're better!"

Mildred found she had to keep still a long time before she could say any
more. She nearly fell asleep again.

"Debby," she said presently, "is it long since I fainted? What time is
it?"

"Oh, my lovey," said the old nurse, "you've lain in that blessed bed two
weeks. You've been very ill, but, thank the Lord, you're better."

This was all Mildred knew for days. She had had a fever; and finding out
the condition of things at the cottage, Miss Jenner had taken Mrs. Lee's
affairs into her own hands. She had kept Milly, as a matter of course,
had sent a good servant to care for Mrs. Lee, filled the store closet
with every delicacy, and allowed Debby to watch and care for her
"child," as she always called Mildred. Sometimes, as she lay still in
her comfortable bed, Milly tried to recall the dreadful scene at Mr.
Hardman's; and one evening, when she was sitting up for the first time
before the fire, and after she had finished a dainty little supper; she
ventured to ask Miss Jenner a few questions.

[Illustration: MILDRED CONFESSES ALL TO MISS JENNER.]

"Miss Jenner," she said, softly, "do you know all about it?"

"Yes," said Miss Jenner, smiling.

"And are they going to take me to court?"

"_No_," answered the elder lady, emphatically.

"But why not?" Milly persisted. "They said I stole that money."

"And _I_ said you _didn't_," retorted Miss Jenner. "You let it all out
in your fever, my dear. I think I understand it all."

"And you know--" faltered Mildred.

Miss Jenner smiled.

"Just see if I don't know," she said. "One evening a precious old humbug
calling herself Widow Robbins came here to find you, and try and get out
of you what you owed her--you _did_ owe it, Milly--and my boy Roger was
standing behind one of the trees, and heard the conversation; so he knew
you were very badly off for twenty-two dollars, and as soon as he could
scrape it together, what does he do but send it to you in a private
note, saying you can pay it back to _him_ when you like."

"Yes," said Mildred, eagerly, "I found that note one afternoon on my
return home; but _in it_ he bound me over not to speak of where I got
the money until he came back. I felt dreadfully about it; but as soon as
mother got well I intended telling her the whole story, and devising
some way of paying Roger right back; and I will yet, Miss Jenner."

There was a moment's pause before Mildred said, "But how about the
store--the robbery?"

"My dear," said Miss Jenner, "I am of the opinion that that was all
arranged between Tom Hardman and Mrs. Robbins. I've seen her, and she
admits she told him the whole story. He was angry because you seemed to
snub him; and you made him feel his vulgarity, and so he devised this
trick out of revenge. If there _was_ any robbery, _he_ was the thief!"

"And have you seen him?" inquired Milly, tears of gratitude and
thankfulness pouring down her cheeks.

"Yes," said Miss Jenner, "and he and his father say the thing 'may blow
over'; but that won't do for me. The first day you're well enough, you
must drive down there in my carriage, and have them tell you they
withdraw the accusation, and apologize for having made it. Now you must
not talk any more." And Miss Jenner kissed her young friend, and moved
away, taking up a book in a distant part of the room.

Mildred never forgot the two weeks that followed. With Miss Jenner she
had long talks, in which she realized not only the folly of her
extravagance, but the actual sin of her running into debt. A great many
things which she had never thought of as serious now appeared to her in
the light of _principles_, without which, as Miss Jenner told her, she
could not live a perfect or even an upright life. When the day came on
which she was declared well enough to drive with Miss Jenner to Mr.
Hardman's, Mildred felt too humbled to rejoice in being received with
any honor.

The girls looked at her, as she followed Miss Jenner into Mr. Hardman's
office, nudging each other, and casting half-envious glances toward
their former companion. Mary Hardman was nowhere to be seen, but Mr. Tom
was with his father, and received Miss Jenner and Mildred with a stiff
sort of pompousness. Miss Jenner had very little to say, and it was only
later that Milly fully recalled the scene--Mr. Hardman's apologies, and
Mr. Tom's surly assent. When they came back to the store, Milly paused
to say a few words here and there, and as she walked away, it was some
relief to hear a voice saying,

"Well, I'm glad it's all right; I never _could_ believe it of Milly
Lee."

       *       *       *       *       *

When I knew Mildred Lee she was a woman of nearly thirty, and at the
head of her own house; but the lesson of her girlhood had done her a
lasting service. No one ever had it to say of her that she bought or
used any article for which she could not at the _moment_ pay, and her
advice to young people was invaluable. When I knew her, her home was in
the Brick House. Mrs. Lee did not long survive the serious illness of
that winter, and Miss Jenner cared tenderly for the orphans her old
friend's widow left.

Mildred speaks now with tears of gratitude of all the past, even of its
miseries; and the gray silk dress, worn but once, and still brown with
stains, is treasured as a memorial of the _bargain_ by which Mildred
purchased her high sense of honor.

THE END.




FAITHLESS SALLY BROWN.

AN OLD BALLAD.


  Young Ben he was a nice young man,
    A carpenter by trade;
  And he fell in love with Sally Brown,
    That was a lady's-maid.

[Illustration]

  But as they fetched a walk one day,
    They met a press-gang crew;
  And Sally she did faint away,
    Whilst Ben he was brought to.

  The boatswain swore with wicked words,
    Enough to shock a saint,
  That though she did seem in a fit,
    'Twas nothing but a feint.

  "Come, girl," said he, "hold up your head--
    He'll be as good as me;
  For when your swain is in our boat
    A boatswain he will be."

  So when they'd made their game of her,
    And taken off her elf,
  She roused, and found she only was
    A-coming to herself.

  "And is he gone, and is he gone?"
    She cried, and wept outright;
  "Then I will to the water-side,
    And see him out of sight."

[Illustration]

  A waterman came up to her;
    "Now, young woman," said he,
  "If you weep on so, you will make
    Eye water in the sea."

  "Alas! they've taken my beau, Ben,
    To sail with old Benbow";
  And her woe began to run afresh,
    As if she'd said, Gee woe!

  Says he, "They've only taken him
    To the tender ship, you see."
  "The tender ship," cried Sally Brown--
    "What a hardship that must be!

  "Oh! would I were a mermaid now,
    For then I'd follow him;
  But, oh! I'm not a fish woman,
    And so I can not swim.

  "Alas! I was not born beneath
    The Virgin and the Scales,
  So I must curse my cruel stars,
    And walk about in Wales."

  Now Ben had sailed to many a place
    That's underneath the world;
  But in two years the ship came home,
    And all her sails were furled.

  But when he called on Sally Brown,
    To see how she got on,
  He found she'd got another Ben,
    Whose Christian name was John.

[Illustration]

  "O Sally Brown, O Sally Brown,
    How could you serve me so?
  I've met with many a breeze before.
    But never such a blow!"

[Illustration]

  Then reading on his 'bacco box,
    He heaved a heavy sigh
  And then began to eye his pipe,
    And then to pipe his eye.

[Illustration]

  And then he tried to sing "All's Well!"
    But could not, though he tried;
  His head was turned--and so he chewed
    His pigtail till he died.

  His death, which happened in his berth,
    At forty-odd befell;
  They went and told the sexton, and
    The sexton tolled the bell.

  THOMAS HOOD.




[Illustration: OUR POST-OFFICE BOX]


  SIERRA VALLEY, CALIFORNIA.

     I live 'way up in the Sierra Nevada Mountains, five thousand feet
     above the sea. The snow here is four feet deep. My brother and I
     have lots of fun sliding down hill on snow-shoes. Our snow-shoes
     are made out of strips of wood about six feet long and four inches
     wide, with leather straps in the middle to put our toes in. The
     shoes that grown people use are from eight to fourteen feet long.

      I am ten years old. My father takes HARPER'S WEEKLY, and we like
      to look at the pictures. He subscribed for YOUNG PEOPLE for us at
      the beginning of the second volume.

  MAY C. T.

       *       *       *       *       *

  DERBY, CONNECTICUT.

     I am twelve years old. I like YOUNG PEOPLE very much, and all the
     scholars in my school like it. I get a copy every week because I am
     a good girl, and I wish every little girl would do the same.

  E. L. M.

       *       *       *       *       *

  WEST PHILADELPHIA, PENNSYLVANIA.

     We have taken HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE ever since it was published,
     and we think it grows better all the time. I enjoyed reading the
     letter from one of the party who visited Harper's Building, and I
     hope some time to see it all myself. I guess, if I am a girl, I
     should not be afraid, and "run away" from any of the machinery;
     anyhow, not from the folding-machines, for some of them are made
     right here in our own shop.

      After we have read our YOUNG PEOPLE all through, we send the
      numbers to the Children's Hospital, so that the poor little ones
      there may have the pleasure of reading such a nice little paper.

  ISABEL C.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BOZEMAN, MONTANA TERRITORY.

     I take YOUNG PEOPLE, and I like it very much. I was so sorry when
     the story of "Paul Grayson" was finished.

      I am boarding in town and going to school this winter, but my home
      is about five miles away, in the country. I go out there every
      Friday night.

      Yesterday I went out hunting. I have a double-barrelled shot-gun,
      which pa gave me for helping pick up potatoes. I have a horse and
      a saddle and bridle of my own, and in the summer I have to ride
      lots. Sometimes I ride thirty miles at a time.

      I get up the cows, and take them out every day. In the summer we
      have school within half a mile of our house.

  BERTIE R.

       *       *       *       *       *

  NEWPORT, KENTUCKY.

     This is the first letter I ever wrote to the Post-office Box. Now I
     thought I would tell about the freezing of the Ohio River. Just
     below here it is frozen solid, and crowds of people skate on it
     every day. It is not frozen in front of Newport, because a steam
     ferry runs between here and Cincinnati, and the boats keep the ice
     broken. They do not allow it to get thick enough to hold people,
     because if it was, everybody would walk over without having to pay
     the ferry.

      The Licking River, a very small tributary of the Ohio, is frozen
      over too, and I went skating on it yesterday.

  HENRY R.

       *       *       *       *       *

  ATLANTA, GEORGIA.

     We want to know who "Jimmy Brown" is. When papa read "Our Baby,"
     mamma, my aunts, uncles, and cousins laughed until the tears ran
     down their cheeks.

      I made me some arrows with pins stuck in them.

      The Christmas number of YOUNG PEOPLE was the best of all.

  STEWART H.

       *       *       *       *       *

  DETROIT, MICHIGAN.

     I am a little boy eight years old. I commenced to take YOUNG PEOPLE
     last November, and I like it very much. I enjoy reading the little
     letters in the Post-office Box, and I like all of the stories. I
     think "Toby Tyler" is splendid.

      I hope all the little folks who read YOUNG PEOPLE had a Merry
      Christmas and a Happy New Year.

  FRED R.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BALTIMORE, MARYLAND.

     I was nine years old on the 7th of January. Papa has taken YOUNG
     PEOPLE for me ever since it began. He sent for a cover, and is
     having the first volume bound. I like it very much indeed.

      I have had lots of sport coasting, and I will be very sorry when
      the snow is gone.

  CRAIG C.

       *       *       *       *       *

  EAST RUPERT, VERMONT.

     My home is in Factory Point, but I am up to my grandpa's now. He
     has got a big farm. He has fourteen cows and two calves. My papa is
     a doctor, and I have lots of rides with him. I am nine years old.

  CHARLEY C.

       *       *       *       *       *

  LOUISVILLE, KENTUCKY.

     I thought I would write to the Post-office about the big spring in
     Indiana. It is called Harrison Spring, because it was owned by
     General Harrison when he was Governor of the Northwestern
     Territory. It looks like a very large pond, and is fifty-five feet
     deep in the centre. There are two streams flowing from it, which
     form an island, as they unite and form one stream at a little
     distance from the spring. About a mile farther on, this stream runs
     a saw-mill and a flour-mill. This spring is near the great
     Wyandotte Cave.

  GILBERT C. S.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I have increased my collection of stamps from seventy-five to
     fifteen hundred by exchange. I think this is the grandest of all
     the departments of YOUNG PEOPLE. I would now like to exchange
     twenty-five foreign stamps for five birds' eggs. Correspondents
     will please label the eggs.

  ROBERT H. DAVIDSON,
  Care of the Postmaster,
  Tullahoma, Coffee County, Tenn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I would like to exchange Texas postmarks for minerals or postmarks.
     Or I will exchange an ounce of the soil of Texas for that of any
     other State.

  H. C. YANCEY,
  P. O. Box 224, Houston, Texas.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I wish to inform those correspondents who desire to exchange
     minerals, shells, and curiosities with me, that I have changed my
     residence. My new address is,

  CHARLES LEADBETTER,
  305 Fourth Street, Cincinnati, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I am a girl fourteen years old, but I am lame, and can not go out.
     I have a few crochet lace patterns which I would like to exchange
     for others. I would also like to exchange patterns of patchwork. If
     any little girl would like to know how to crochet a pair of doll's
     drawers, a jacket, or a petticoat, and will send me her address and
     a postage stamp, I will gladly answer her.

  ANNIE SLACK,
  170 Fourteenth Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I have a list of every Indian tribe in the United States which I
     will give a copy of in exchange for Indian relics, foreign stamps,
     or postal cards.

  JOHN E. WILLIAMS,
  4 Harrison Street, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I have some genuine Indian bows and arrows, some fine silver and
     copper specimens, and a great number of Lake Superior agates, which
     I should like to exchange for shells and ocean curiosities.

  HORACE H. MITCHELL, Duluth, Minn.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following exchanges are also offered by correspondents:

     A fifty-cent and a twenty-five cent stamp, for two Cape of Good
     Hope stamps.

  WILLIAM R. CARMER,
  Mount Vernon, Westchester County, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Fine samples of gold ore, showing the stages of concentration or
     separation of quartz from the precious metal, for rare postage
     stamps. In answering, correspondents will please specify stamps.

  DWIGHT MARFIELD,
  Circleville, Pickaway County, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postmarks.

  MARY B. REED,
  Norwich, Chenango County, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

     A piece of the first Atlantic cable for an American copper cent of
     1799, or the half-cent of 1836, 1843, or 1852; or one Spanish and
     one English coin and two French coins for the American twenty-cent
     piece of 1877 or 1878.

  WILLIE B. SHOBER,
  Cumberland, Md.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Lead or iron ore, and specimens of different varieties of quartz,
     for foreign postage stamps, skulls of small animals, ocean
     curiosities, petrifactions, and minerals of all kinds; or a piece
     of silver ore for a collection of the different varieties of stamps
     now in use in Canada.

  GEORGE C. BAKER,
  Comstocks, Washington County, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Foreign postage stamps for stones from the different States.

  ARTHUR D. PRINCE,
  Lowell, Mass.

We do not consider the above address sufficient. Correspondents who
reside in large cities should always give their street and number, or
the number of their post-office box.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postmarks and stamps for stamps.

  WILLIE H. HASKIN,
  Fort Preble, Portland, Maine.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Rare postmarks for any variety of South American postage stamps or
     United States department stamps.

  FRANK SWETT,
  1419 Taylor Street, San Francisco, California.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Stamps and postmarks in use in 1852, also some of 1869, for foreign
     postage stamps or curiosities of any kind.

  SADIE HAWLEY,
  Fair Haven, Rutland County, Vt.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Texas flints, pretty stones, snail shells, postmarks, stamps,
     specimens of different kinds of wood, petrified wood, cotton as it
     comes from the field, cotton seeds, or seeds of the "Indian plume,"
     for foreign postage stamps, or good specimens of minerals and ores
     of all kinds.

  SAMMIE RISIEN,
  Groesbeck, Limestone County, Texas.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Soil and sand from Ohio for soil and sand from any other State or
     Canada; or an Indian arrow-head two and a half inches long,
     together with a specimen of Ohio soil, for twenty-five foreign
     postage stamps.

  EMMER EDWARDS,
  Washington C. H., Fayette County, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Foreign postage stamps for United States Navy or Justice stamps.

  WALLACE GREEN,
  Hackensack, Bergen County, N. J.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Soil from Missouri or Texas for soil from any other State; or a
     stone from Missouri, Texas, Arkansas, or Georgia for one from any
     other State.

  HARVEY CLARK,
  Lock Box 26, Butler, Bates County, Missouri.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postage stamps and postmarks for winter skins of wild animals, or
     for stuffed birds.

  JOHN LAWRENCE,
  40 Washington Square, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Birds' eggs.

  GEORGE A. POST,
  Florence House, corner of Fourth Avenue and
  Eighteenth Street, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Minerals, fish eyes from China, or West India beans, for minerals
     or any kind of curiosities.

  CARL R. EABY,
  22 North Shippen Street, Lancaster, Penn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     A carved shell, some seeds from the Sandwich Islands, or stones
     from Lake Michigan, for any foreign postage stamps except English
     and German. Chinese stamps especially desired.

  WILLIAM C. MCCONNELL,
  262 Calhoun Street, Fort Wayne, Indiana.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postmarks and revenue stamps.

  WILLIS ROSE,
  939 Main Street, Buffalo, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Stones from New Jersey for stones from any other State or Territory
     except Colorado and Wyoming.

  JOHN W. ROSENBAUM,
  194-1/2 Morgan Street, Jersey City, N. J.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Two different War Department stamps and thirty postmarks for
     sea-weed, or the same, together with some moss and pretty shells,
     for a piece of stalagmite.

  FLORIE DICKSON, Brenford, Kent County, Del.

       *       *       *       *       *

J. W.--The earliest calendars, as the Jewish, the Egyptian, and the
Greek, did not begin the year where we do now; and the Jewish year,
which opened on the 25th of March, continued to have a legal position in
many Christian countries until a comparatively recent period. In
England, it was not until 1752 that the 1st of January became the initial
day of the legal, as it had long been of the popular, year. Several
other countries made this change earlier than England--France in 1564,
Scotland in 1600, Holland and Russia in 1700.

The Roman calendar, which made January the first month of the year, is
credited to the second King of Rome, Numa Pompilius, more than six
hundred years B.C. He added two months to the ten into which the year
had been previously divided, and called the first one Januarius, in
honor of Janus, the deity supposed to preside over doors.

Our Saxon ancestors originally called this the Wolf-month
(_Wolf-monat_), because wolves were more than usually ravenous and
daring in that season of the year.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. T. G.--Snow crystals were first observed by the arctic explorer
Scoresby, and for a time they were supposed to be peculiar to the polar
regions. It was found, however, that these crystals were formed wherever
snow falls. An interesting account of these beautiful formations, with
engravings of many of them, was given in YOUNG PEOPLE No. 15.

       *       *       *       *       *

F. T. B.--When metal pins were invented and brought into use, about the
beginning of the sixteenth century, they were a very acceptable
New-Year's gift to ladies, and money given for the purchase of them was
called "pin-money"--an expression which has come to mean the money set
apart for a wife's private expenses.

       *       *       *       *       *

INQUISITIVE JIM.--The best account of Petra, the wonderful rock-hewn
city of Arabia, is to be found in Stephens's book of travels called
_Egypt, Petra, and the Holy Land_. The present name of the little valley
where it was situated is Wady Musa. The city, shut in by high cliffs,
occupied an area of about half a mile square. The valley is watered by a
stream, and the principal entrance is through a deep ravine, with
rugged cliffs 300 feet high on each side. In ancient times Petra was a
very strong city. It is mentioned in the Bible under the name of Selah,
and received its present name, which signifies rock, from the Greeks,
about 300 B.C. It was finally destroyed, by whom is not known, and was
not heard of after the sixth century A.D. until it was discovered in
1812 by the traveller Burckhardt. The ruins, consisting of tombs, a
theatre, temple, etc., are very interesting and picturesque.

       *       *       *       *       *

W. H. J.--If your puzzles are good, and suitable for our columns, they
will be accepted. We can not judge of the merits of the enigma you have
already sent, as you neglected to inclose the answer. The _nom de plume_
you have chosen is not good, but you can easily invent a better one.

       *       *       *       *       *

LILLIE.--The introductory paragraph to the Post-office Box of No. 45
explains why your request for exchange is not printed.

       *       *       *       *       *

O. H. BRUCE.--1. The United States government began the coinage of
one-cent pieces in 1793. 2. In 1815, none were coined. 3. The last
coinage of large one-cent pieces was in 1857. 4. The coinage of two-cent
pieces began in 1864, and the last issue was in 1872. 5. The coinage of
the nickel five-cent pieces began in 1865. 6. In 1864, both copper and
nickel cents were coined. This double coinage did not happen in any
other year.

       *       *       *       *       *

D. L. S.--On page 398 of your bound volume of YOUNG PEOPLE is a story
entitled "Camping Out," which will give you the information you require.

       *       *       *       *       *

JOHNNIE.--White elephants are not a distinct species, but are simply
albinos, which are found among animals, birds, and insects, as well as
among members of the human family. In India the white elephant is
considered a sacred animal, and is treated with the greatest reverence.
When specimens are found in the woods and jungles, they are captured
with tender care, and their possession is eagerly sought for by the
sovereigns of the small kingdoms. White elephants have been the cause of
many wars, as their possession is supposed to bestow greater benefits on
their royal owners than either chests of gold or extended territory. One
of the proudest titles of the King of Ava is "Lord of the White
Elephant," and the King of Siam at Bangkok also counts his white
elephants among his most precious possessions, as, according to Burmese
superstition, they insure prosperity and good fortune to the nation. The
death of one of these creatures is regarded as a national calamity, its
funeral is conducted with great solemnity, and the entire people mourn
as for the loss of a dear relative. These elephants are kept under
richly embroidered canopies, are fed with the most delicious fruits, and
members of the nobility seek for the honor of being custodian to the
royal beast. When the elephant is taken to bathe in the river, it goes
escorted by a band of music, and is followed by adoring crowds.

This singular reverence for an albino elephant has existed in Burmah for
centuries. An English traveller who visited that country three hundred
years ago describes the same treatment of this beast which may be seen
at the present time.

Even the hairs of this creature are supposed to insure good fortune. In
1855, a foreign ambassador delivered some presents to the King of Siam,
who ordered many presents to be given in return. On the conclusion of
the ceremony, the King himself, with much solemnity, placed in the hands
of the ambassador a small golden box, locked with a golden key, which he
said was far more precious than all the other presents. The box, when
opened, was found to contain a few hairs of a white elephant!

And, after all, this elephant is not white, but of a dull yellow color.
It has white or reddish eyes, and is a very ugly-looking beast. No
greater proof could be found of the moral darkness and ignorance of the
natives of certain portions of India than their superstitious veneration
for this animal.

       *       *       *       *       *

F. O.--Read the paragraph appended to a letter from Ida Belle D. in the
Post-office Box of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE No. 51.

       *       *       *       *       *

HALLIE C. W.--The Hawaiian Islands were discovered by a Spanish
navigator about the middle of the sixteenth century, but they remained
comparatively unknown until visited by Captain Cook in 1778, who gave
them the name of Sandwich, in honor of Lord Sandwich, an English
statesman who conducted the naval affairs of England during our
Revolutionary war. On St. Valentine's Day, 1779, Captain Cook was killed
at Hawaii, the largest island of the group, in a quarrel with the
natives. Mauna Loa, the volcano on the island of Hawaii, which has
recently been in a state of eruption, is said to have the largest
burning crater in the world.

       *       *       *       *       *

EDMUND H. B.--There is no especial time for the printing of "Wiggles."

       *       *       *       *       *

MATTIE H.--The story "Who was Paul Grayson?" was concluded in HARPER'S
YOUNG PEOPLE No. 57.

       *       *       *       *       *

TILLIE DAVIS.--Send your full address, and we will print your request
for exchange.

       *       *       *       *       *

RIDLEY MCL.--Your puzzle is very good for the work of a "little
eight-year-old boy," but we can not print it, as the same solution has
already appeared in an earlier number of YOUNG PEOPLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

Favors are acknowledged from Ruby W., C. H. B., M. Stiefel, Frank R.,
Joseph W. Hawkins, Marshall R. Grimes, Gay Wood, John V. Gould, Gracie
K., R. M. Sites, Mamie K. Pope, Anna M. Roberts, Elsie E. T., Frank
Davis, Mae King, Mary Olive L.

       *       *       *       *       *

Correct answers to puzzles have been received from Harvey Ridgway, "Geo.
Graphy," Grace A. McElroy, Percy Lincoln McDermott, A. G. O. M.,
"Nightingale," Alfred A. True, Craig Coburn, C. F. Bishop, Cal I. Forny,
Carrie and George Hall, M. S. Brigham.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUZZLES FROM YOUNG CONTRIBUTORS.

No. 1.

ENIGMA.

  First in box, not in chest.
  Second in hole, not in nest.
  Third in meat, not in bones.
  Fourth in rubble, not in stones.
  Fifth in measure, not in mile.
  Sixth in fashion, not in style.
  Seventh in river, not in sound.
  Eighth in fly, not in bound.
  Ninth in mallet, not in saw.
  The whole an article used in war.

  D. L. S.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 2.

NUMERICAL CHARADES.

  1. I am a familiar adage composed of 18 letters.
  My 5, 12, 1, 18 is to separate.
  My 15, 7, 3, 16 is to propose.
  My 5, 2, 9, 10, 13, 4 is to describe.
  My 17, 8, 6, 4 is a character in music.
  My 11, 14, 15 is a boy's name.

  MARK MARCY.

  2. I am a shrub composed of 6 letters.
  My 4, 5, 3, 1 is a healthy drink.
  My 3, 5, 4, 6 is a South American city.
  My 4, 2, 5, 3 is armor.

  LIONEL.

  3. I am composed of 9 letters, and am very pleasant in winter.
  My 6, 2, 5 is part of the face.
  My 1, 9, 7, 3 is an emotion.
  My 6, 7, 8, 4 is used for trimming.

  MARY.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 3.

HIDDEN BIRDS.

  1. Isaac ran every step of the way.
  2. How Lillie has grown!
  3. See that Kit eats his dinner.
  4. Do you call him a hero? Not by any means.

  MABEL.

  5. O, Matthew, renounce the company of those bad boys.
  6. We were playing hide-and-seek, and I caught Rob in the swing near
        the tree.
  7. Let us run and pick up the pears now, Birdie.
  8. I saw your lunch pail in Nettie's closet.

  BESSIE.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANSWERS TO PUZZLES IN No. 62.

No. 1.

  F I N A L
  I B I S
  N I P
  A S
  L

No. 2.

1. Mouse-ear. 2. Porcupine. 3. Portland.

No. 3.

  C O L O R
    X E B E C
      G I B E S
        T U R I N
          T E N O N

No. 4.

  C H A M P L A I N
    C A R A C A S
      N A T A L
        T A Y
          G
        D O N
      G E N O A
    B O L I V I A
  G U A Y A Q U I L

       *       *       *       *       *

WIGGLES.

The following are the names of those who sent in answers to Wiggle No.
16:

Natalie Newell, Helen Edwards, I. La Rue, R. I. Brasher, Charlie
Conklin, Horace Dodge, Joseph Welsh, Edwin M. Cox, Mark Manley, F.
Place, M. P. Rich, Shelton A. Hibbs, Ellie Earle, Mansur Beard, G.
Darling, Jack Evert, Jim Evert, Tom Evert, Will Evert, Bobbie Hornfager,
C. H. L., N. Adda T., Toby, Crank, Dumper, G. H. A., Racy B. Sweet,
G. E. P., Newton I., M. Siegert. Annie A. Siegert, A. Utz, Worcester
Wiggle Club, Santa Claus, Robinson Crusoe, Robert E. Walsh, Frank
Zabriske, Millie Stephenson, Burton Harwood, Fanny Reed, Dayton Reed,
J. O. O., J. P. W., S. G. Hopkins, M. Goller, Alice Brown, H. M. Eaton,
Carrie Harding, E. A. H., Carrie Peddle, Charles L. Glessner, W. Doerr,
Thomas Buford, Frank J. Jones, A. R. B. H., N. P. Grensel, M. F. K.,
Randolph Bolles, J. Flaherty, T. Flaherty, Willie A. Scott, Fred
Dierking, Louise Brown, Mary Dancy, Isobel L. Jacobs, Robbie H.
Bradbury, G. H. Ralston, Lawrence Jones, Carrie E. Weightman, F. S. G.,
Willie Harris, J. M. Ingersoll, W. Harman, Louise Fowler, Scilla Fowler,
Helen S. Woodworth, Elsie E. Trautman, Lynn Trautman, Amelie Ferrand,
Harry B. Brazier, Stella Pratt, George H., Robert A. Magill, Nellie R.
Field, Paddy Miles, Clara S. A., Willie R. Perkins, Henry Welsh, Harry
Eichbaum, Albert Evans, Percy L. McDermott, C. C. Gardner, Rosa
Freyensee, L. G. Duffy, Meline Rosenthal, J. Frees, W. F. Reed, F. L.
Kittle, Walter Eichbaum, Tommy Booth, Charlie S. Bryant, Anna Jones,
Grace T. Lyman, Nellie Brees, Walter Mandell, Bronte Smith, Bertie
Seymour, Willie Seymour, Vannoy M. Wallace, Fanny M. Young, J. H. Young,
S. M. Young, Lou Bell, J. W. Long, J. W. Kittrell, Bob Ewing, Otto D.,
Harry O. Boone, Harry Kenderdine, Grace Lansingh, Addie M. Taylor, Roy
Demster, Percy Matthews, Harry Lander, Annie Reinhardt, Frank Lander,
Ahan Hyde, Sinclair G. Wills, Bessie H. Moore, Emma F. Cassidy, Pollie
Burke, "Lone Star" (R. H. Davidson), Louis Burtnett, Frank Edinger,
Nellie Hyde, Hallie Hyde, Daisy Hyde, Katie B. Barr, Mollie Edwards,
Eddie D. Knowles, G. W. Bird, Wendell M. Frank, Bertram Frank, Willie
Dorrance, Alfred P., Frank Hoover, S. H. S., J. S., George Shriver,
Grace E. Stevens, Pearlie Hare, Little Pet Hare, Little Mary Hare,
Little Johnnie Campbell, Edwin C. Hutman, Robert G. Bidwell, Edith B.,
J. F. H., B. M. Allison, H. M. P., Fred Dale, Leila King, Georgie
Clementson, Percy A. Robbins, Eddie Booth, Norrie M. E., Harry Harper,
Frank Ostrander, R. D. White, H. Sidway, F. Sidway, Gardner Howland,
John A. Tompkins, Emma R. Bullock, Theresa A. Morro, B. L. Worden, Lydia
M. Bennett, L. L. G., Cobweb, Du Puy, Waddy Thompson, D. W. G., John R.
Glen, Jessie Glen, Kirk Romaine, E. D. Kellogg, Frank Crabbs, Thomas M.
Armstrong, Henry C. Deknatels, Clarence Edsall, Fred R. Fisk, W. L.
Green, Melville Wilson, A. C. Chapin, W. F., C. J. Breek, Jun., A. C.
Pearsons, Albert J. Sullivan, Jacob Burr, Joe, Ed Smith, Joe
Fitzsimmons, J. F. S., Anna Gallett, E. J. B., M. J. Caldwell, H. F.,
J. A. Fritz, Grace Hamilton, H. W. Smith, Donna A. Smith, Harry C.
Sloan, Willie Reynolds, Charles D. Jones, Dimple McCrea, R. H. K., John
Carnahan, James W. Grubb, H. Adams, Little Jennie Simpson, Chester
Marslich, Howard, N. B. B., Mary C. Green, B. L. Worden, Harry Tompkins,
Jameson L. Fumey, Mattie L. Day, Jennie Janes, Wilfred H. Warner, Ben
W. G., Mary E. Heartwell, Teddy Smith, Charles H. Tucker, T. Bert. John,
Vinnie John, Sue John, Edmund H. Blunt, Nelson C. Metcalf, H. T.
Gottsleben, L. G. Baker, Genevieve, Carl Mueller, M. D. M., "Go Bang"
(J. R. Blake), Charles P. Gifford, Edmund Stirling, Bertie Headley,
Bertha S., O. Fuehrlein, M. M., Willie Green, Charles Barker, George St.
Clair, Daisy Crampton, George Taylor, John N. Howe, C. E. S. S.,
"Daisy," S. J. G., Carry Owen, Bertie W. Gifford, Bessie H. Moore,
Marion P. Wiggin, F. R. S., Mollie C. Wrenshall, B. E. H., George B.
Rogers, D. H. Rogers, W. H. Cantrell, Eddie G. Cantrell, Wamie Forse,
Bevy Pettit, Woodvill Wrenshall, Howard Rathbone, G. W. D., Arty Taylor,
Joralemon, G. V. E., L. A. Osborne, L. B. Parsons, Grace and Jennie,
Millie Olmstead, Lucy and Fred.




A NEW SERIAL.


In No. 66 of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, issued February 1, will be begun a
new Serial Story, entitled

  "PHIL'S FAIRIES,"

by MRS. W. J. HAYS, author of "The Princess Idleways," etc.




NOTICE.


HARPER & BROTHERS _beg leave to state, in answer to numerous inquiries,
that the Bound Volume of_ HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE _for 1880 is entirely
out of stock, and will not be reprinted at present_.




HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE.


SINGLE COPIES, 4 cents; ONE SUBSCRIPTION, one year, $1.50; FIVE
SUBSCRIPTIONS, one year, $7.00--_payable in advance, postage free_.

The Volumes of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE commence with the first Number in
November of each year.

Subscriptions may begin with any Number. When no time is specified, it
will be understood that the subscriber desires to commence with the
Number issued after the receipt of the order.

Remittances should be made by POST-OFFICE MONEY-ORDER OR DRAFT, to avoid
risk of loss.

  HARPER & BROTHERS,
  Franklin Square, N. Y.




[Illustration: SOME DRAWINGS OF WIGGLE No. 16, OUR ARTIST'S IDEA, AND
NEW WIGGLE No. 17.--SEE PAGE 207.]





End of Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, January 25, 1881, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, JAN 25, 1881 ***

***** This file should be named 44712.txt or 44712.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/4/7/1/44712/

Produced by Annie R. McGuire

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
