The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Life Of George Cruikshank, Vol. II. (of
II), by Blanchard Jerrold

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Life Of George Cruikshank, Vol. II. (of II)
       The Life Of George Cruikshank In Two Epochs, With Numerous Illustrations

Author: Blanchard Jerrold

Illustrator: George Cruikshank

Release Date: January 23, 2014 [EBook #44742]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE OF GEORGE CRUIKSHANK, II ***




Produced by David Widger






THE LIFE of GEORGE CRUIKSHANK

By BLANCHARD JERROLD

In Two Volumes--Volume Two

1882




THE LIFE OF GEORGE CRUIKSHANK.




EPOCH I. (continued).




CHAPTER XI. THE COMIC ALMANAC.

In 1835 the late Mr. Tilt, publisher, of Fleet Street, started the Comic
Almanac, and engaged George Cruikshank to illustrate it. It was a happy
idea, exactly suited to the more popular side of the mood and genius of
the artist; and Cruikshank entered upon his task with zest For nineteen
years this annual comic and satirical commentary on passing and probable
events, not only furnished him with a regular income, giving him work on
which he might reckon with certainty in estimating his very fluctuating
resources; but it afforded him the opportunity, in which he always
delighted, of recording in his own quaint, original manner, his opinions
on the questions of the day.

[Illustration: 017]

In the nineteen volumes to which the Almanac ran, there are nearly two
hundred and fifty etchings by him; and among these there are some of his
happiest bits of observation, of his shrewdest exposures of folly and
vice and cant, and of his original fancy. After looking over these
nineteen volumes, and noticing that the wit and earnestness of purpose
are as fresh and strong in that of 1853 as in the first volume, the
reader cannot refuse to endorse what Thackeray said of Cruikshank's
humour--viz., that it is so good and benevolent, any man must love it.
While in his illustrations of books the many-sided artist continued to
express his serious or tragic power, which Mr. Ruskin has asserted to
be as great as his grotesque power, though warped by "habits of
caricature"; in these pleasant annual volumes, in the letterpress
of which he had the assistance of his friends, Thackeray, Gilbert
a Beckett, Albert Smith, Robert Brough, Horace and Henry Mayhew, he
maintained his original popularity with the laughter-loving sections of
the British public.

[Illustration: 019]

In 1835, when the first almanac appeared, the water cure was amusing
the public. Cruikshank's first plate shows one enthusiast under the
water-butt, another under a burst water-pipe, and a third in an elegant
attitude, being pumped upon by his servant, and remarking, "Well, I
could not have supposed that being 'pumped upon' was such a luxury! and
so invigorating! And to think that so good a thing should hitherto
have been thrown away upon _qui tam_ attorneys, sprained ankles, and
pickpockets!" Then Mr. Rigdum Funnidos (originated by the late Mr.
Vizetelly, I am informed by his son Henry), enters upon the scene, and
continues year after year to be the _nom de plume_ of a succession of
wits and humourists; and Cruikshank unfolds his series of plates of the
months, each season being indicated by some humorous incident or some
happy notes of observation of our London streets. The ice-carts and
slides of January; the muddy streets and bustling postmen of St.
Valentine's day,--how unlike (with their great leather bags) the postmen
of our day! the winds of March outside Mr. Tilt's shop, blowing even
a dog's tail over his back; showery April, with a wonderful group
of Cockneys standing up; the sweeps of Mayday; June, at the Royal
Academy--a bit of Cruikshank at his brightest; July, in Vauxhall
Gardens, with the band in cocked hats, and the famous master of the
ceremonies in pumps; Cruikshank's old friend, the dustman, eating his
first oyster in August; Greenwich Fair in September; going into the
country by the stage coaches in October; Guy Fawkes in November; and the
Christmas pudding, with a laughing company welcoming it, in December. As
pictures of the humorous side of London life upwards of forty years ago,
these spirited etchings, which teem with life, are invaluable.

The fun of Mr. Rigdum Funnidos was of a kind that has found many
imitators. In the "proceedings of learned societies" we find that the
fossil remains of an antediluvian pawnbroker had been dug up within a
mile of Hog's Norton; that a successful method of converting stones
into bread has been transmitted to the New Poor Law Commissioners, and a
three-and-sixpenny medal presented to the ingenious discoverer thereof;
then that a laborious investigator has reckoned that there are exactly
nine millions, one hundred and sixty-four thousand, five hundred
and thirty-three hairs on a tom-cat's tail, which he defies all the
zoologists of Europe to disprove. Later on (1839) Thackeray contributed
"Stubbs' Diary" and "Barber Cox, or the Cutting of his Comb," to the
pages of Funnidos. From the first, Cruikshank hit hard at quacks and
shams. The first almanac has an "advertisement extraordinary" of the
"British Humbug College of Health," and some amusing testimonials from
Gudgeon and Gosling, who have been cured by "Morising Pills." The moral
at the close of the almanac is, "While we venerate what is deserving
of veneration, let us not forget that quackery, knavery, bigotry, and
superstition always merit exposure and castigation."

The versatility and the perennial vigour and vivacity of Cruikshank's
genius is nowhere more strikingly displayed than in the variety with
which he has treated of the seasons in the Comic Almanac. One year March
is illustrated by a meeting of workmen going to work, and roysterers
returning home, day and night being nearly equal. Next March the cook is
tossing pancakes. April is now shown upon the famous hill in Greenwich
Park, and now in a wet return from the races. One November we have Lord
Mayor's Day, with one of Cruikshank's dense crowds, and the next year we
are treated to a delicious bit of humour.

Guys in council over the gunpowder plot May now famishes the artist
with one of his happiest bits of suburban scenery, "all a-growing,"--a
housewife exchanging old garments for spring flowers; and now such
a crowd of lean-shanked charity boys, with such a beadle as only the
"inimitable George" could draw before Leech's time, are beating the
bounds. July furnishes a whimsical scene of the dog-days--with London
dogs fighting, drawing carts, playing Toby in a Punch and Judy show,
running under a truck, and an aristocratic dog looking haughtily down
from a first-floor window. (Landseer took more than one hint from
Cruikshank's animals.) June "down at Beulah," a December dance; May
"settling for the Derby"--a wonderful assemblage of broad and long
faces; July at the seaside, with cockneys donkey-riding--"long days
and long ears;" a November fog; December--"a swallow at Christmas," a
procession of the many substantial items of Christmas cheer, making a
procession into the prodigious maw of John Bull. The fountain of humour
is inexhaustible. The satirical contrasts also, are capital. Premium,
a smart gentleman, with the ladies smiling upon him; Discount, in the
dumps, and shabby, with the ladies' backs resolutely turned towards him.
The Parlour and the Cellar, each getting drunk after its fashion. The
"Shop and the Shay," two delightful bits of London life. Then there
is the British Museum in 2043, with a gibbet, the pillory, a stage
coachman, a Whig, a Tory, and a tax-gatherer's book among the
curiosities.

In 1844, Cruikshank began a series of large folded drawings, with a most
humorous etching of the probable effects of over-female emigration. An
importation of the fair sex from the savage islands has been effected,
"in consequence of exporting all our own to Australia;" and the dark
ladies are making eyes at a crowd of anxious men, who are advancing
towards them, while in the distance would-be husbands are running to the
scene. The faces of the imported squaws on shore, as well as those in
the boats, being landed from the big ship, are the creations of a most
searching humorous observer. Cruikshank's cartoon of Guy Fawkes treated
classically is wonderfully funny. The artist explained it himself in his
own rough fantastic way.

"Having been advised," he said, "by my friends to publish a sketch of my
cartoon" (the great cartoon competition for the Houses of Parliament was
going on in 1844) "intended for exhibition at Westminster Hall, I think
the public, upon seeing it, will require some explanation of it. The
subject has often been treated, and sometimes rather ill-treated, by
preceding artists. Being forcibly struck by the grand classical style,
I have aimed at it, and I trust I have succeeded in hitting it. At all
events, if I have not quite come up to the mark, I have had a good bold
fling at it. The first thing I thought it necessary to think of (though,
by-the-bye, it is generally the last thing thought of in historical
painting) was to get a faithful portrait of the principal character. For
that purpose I determined to study nature, and strolled about London and
the suburbs on the 5th of November, in search of a likeness of
Fawkes, caring little under what Guys it might be presented to me.
Unfortunately, some had long noses and some had short; so, putting this
and that together, the long and the short of it is, that I determined
on adopting a living prototype, who has been blowing up both Houses of
Parliament for several years, and if not a Guy Fawkes in other respects,
is at least famous for encouraging forking out on the part of others.
Having got over the preliminary difficulty,

"I set to work upon my cartoon; and being resolved to make it a greater
work than had ever before been known, I forgot the prescribed size,
for my head was far above the consideration of mere fact, and I did not
reflect, that where Parliament had given an inch, I was taking an ell as
the very lowest estimate.

[Illustration: 029]

"Having strolled towards Westminster Hall to survey the scene of my
future triumphs, it struck me that I had carried the grand classical
to such a height as to preclude all chance of my cartoon being got in
through the doorway; and I therefore, with the promptitude of a Richard
the Third, determined to 'off with his head' by taking a slice off the
top of the canvas. This necessary piece of execution rather spoiled
the design, but it enabled me to throw a heaviness into the brows of my
principal figure, which, if it marred the resemblance to Fawkes, gave
him an additional look of the Guy at all events. It then occurred to me
that I might diminish the dimensions by taking a couple of feet off the
legs; and this happy idea enabled me to carry out the historical notion
that Fawkes was the mere tool of others, in which case, to cramp him in
the understanding must be considered a nice blending of the false in art
with the true in nature. The Guy's feet were accordingly foreshortened,
till I left him as he appeared when trying to defend himself at his
trial, with hardly a leg to stand upon. Besides, I knew I could fresco
out his calves in fine style, when once I got permission to turn the
fruit of my labours into wall fruit on the inside of the Houses of
Parliament.

"It will now be naturally asked why my cartoon was not exhibited
with others, some of which were equally monstrous, in the Hall of
Westminster. The fact is, if the truth must out, the cartoon would not
go in. Though I had cramped my genius already to suit the views of the
Commissioners and the size of the door, I found I must have stooped much
lower if I had resolved on finding admittance for my work. I wrote at
once to the Woods and Forests, calling upon them to widen the door for
genius, by taking down a portion of the wall: but it will hardly be
believed, that though there were, at the time, plenty of workmen about
the building, no answer was returned to my request. Alas! it is all
very well to sing, as they do in Der Freischutz, 'Through the Woods
and through the Forests,' but towards me the Woods and Forests proved
themselves utterly impenetrable.

"It will be seen that the arch-conspirator--for so I must continue to
call him, though he could not be got into the archway--has placed his
hat upon the ground, a little point in which I have blended imagination
with history, and both with convenience. The imagination suggests that
such a villain ought not to wear his hat; history does not say that
he did, which is as much as to hint that he didn't; while convenience,
coming to the aid of both, renders it necessary for his hat to lie upon
the ground; for if I had tried to place it on his head, there would have
been no room for it There was one gratifying circumstance connected with
this cartoon, which, in spite of my being charged with vanity, I must
repeat. As it was carried through the streets, it seemed to be generally
understood and appreciated; every one, even children, exclaiming as it
passed, 'Oh! there's a Guy!'

"George Cruikshank."

There was some bitterness in this jesting; for Cruikshank felt conscious
of the latent power to execute a cartoon about which there should have
been no buffoonery. Alas! his lines had been cast in humble places. He
had lived to earn his bread from day to day in the grotesque market; and
the solemn and poetic side of his genius had been left unworked, or had
been only partially and fitfully developed as he became an illustrator
of books.

In the Almanac which included the Guy Fawkes cartoon appeared
Cruikshank's Father Mathew, a nice man for a small party. Father Mathew
appears in the shape of a pump or filter to a convivial domestic circle,
and holds parley with them. The animated pump, with the extended handle
for a warning arm, and the spout for a nose, is an old Cruikshankian
figure. "Touch not--taste not," says the preacher-pump: "if you _must_
take anything, take the Pledge."

Paterfamilias, with a severe frown and aggressive attitude, has turned
upon the intruder. "Dost thou think," he says, "because thou art
virtuous, there shall be no more cakes and ale?" Pater's friend is more
insinuating, and has an excuse. "Why, you see, old gent," he remarks,
"the case is this--the ladies insist upon my singing a comic song, and I
should like to know how I am to manage that over a glass of pump-water."
The grandfather pleads: "Won't you allow an old gentleman a little warm
elder wine this cold night?" And the buxom lady of the house is coaxing:
"Pray take a chair, sir, and taste my home-made wine, or a glass of our
home-brewed ale." These suggested compromises expressed very faithfully
the mood of the artist's mind at the time. His sympathies inclined him
towards the Apostle of Temperance; but he was not yet prepared to go
over, body and soul, to the cause. The picture is accompanied by an "Ode
to Father Mathew," conceived in a spirit of hearty opposition, that only
goes towards proving that Cruikshank was at the half-way house of elder
and home-made wines and home-brewed beer, between the punch bowl and the
pump. The ode is in the fine old style:--

     "Oh, Father Mathew I why dost thou incline
     Against all spirits thus to whine?
     To preach against good liquor is a scandal.
     Why to such rash conclusions jump--
     To airy, dull, unsocial pump,
     Why give a handle?
     Water is very well--but then 'tis known
     That well is always better let alone.
     Washing is water's only function,
     Save when a little drop poured in--
     To brandy, whisky, rum, or gin,
     Makes glorious grand junction."

The kindly humourist's etching-needle was inspired by every good cause.
These almanacs have all morals underlying the fun. Cruikshank liked to
have an object in view. No class, no creature was too humble for his
sympathy. Landseer never drew anything better than the plate of the
Dog-Days--suggested by "the Dogs Bill" of 1843. Two hard-working, very
radical dogs who are drawing a truckful of hardware, scowl at a pair of
genteel dogs, extravagantly arrayed, and smoking cigars, who cross their
path. First radical dog says he believes they don't know the side "their
tails hang on," they are so proud--adding, "Why, a cousin of mine, as
lives at Barking, tells me as how the celebrated dog Billy has grown so
proud that he has _declined_ to kill any more rats. And as to cigars!
why bless you, there ain't a _Puppy_ about Town but wot has got a cigar
stuck in his mouth." In a corner a watch-dog and a dancing dog are
talking over their grievances; while in the distance a lady tells her
footman to take care her spaniel, Duchess, does not get her feet
wet. The dogs are inimitable. Bloomers, crinoline, over-population (a
Cruikshankian plate showing the housetops covered with the superabundant
humanity), the "steamed-out" stage-coachman, the "fast man," female
parliaments, baby-jumpers, cheap excursion trains, taking the census,
the effect of the Peace Society (a regiment hay-making), Jullien as the
President of the French Republic, "with entire new politics and polkas,"
a pack of knaves, being a meeting of the betting interest,--these are
but a few notable pictures of the crowded gallery. Cruikshank revelled
in the fun, and sought to extract wisdom from it He had an old-fashioned
idea of woman and her rights, and was sharp with his needle over female
suffrage, ladies in pantalettes, and women of mind.

[Illustration: 041]

Henry Mayhew wrote some verses on a woman of mind, during one of the
years of his editorship (1847), beginning,--

     "My wife is a woman of mind,
     And Deville, who examined her bumps,
     Vow'd that never were found in a woman
     Such large intellectual lumps.
     'Ideality' big as an egg,
     With 'Causality'--great--was combined;
     He charg'd me ten shillings, and said,
     'Sir, your wife is a woman of mind.'"

Cruikshank's picture of her is one of his stereotyped, ill-favoured,
stuck-up, figureless ladies, of whom a friend said one day, when looking
over some sketches, in Amwell Street, "Why, George, your females are all
shaped like hour-glasses."

For pure fun nothing could be better than the "Banquet of the Black
Dolls," in commemoration of the reduction of the Duty on Bags. The doll
who occupies the chair has before her a Grand Potage de Dripping,
and the menu includes Pate de Horseshoes, Omelette de Old Iron, Bones
Boil-e, Rag-out de Superior White Linen Rag, Fricassee de Broken Glass,
and Poudin Kitchen Stuff.

The arrival of Tom Thumb, and his reception by the elite of society, as
the bills said, and the brilliant court he held under a shower of John
Bull's gold in Piccadilly, suggested two scenes to hard-working and most
moderately-paid Cruikshank. The first is called "Born a Genius." In a
garret a poor artist sits in despair and poverty--his empty plate upon
the table, his tattered boots upon the floor. The second is called "Born
a Dwarf."

[Illustration: 044]

The little man reclines upon a sofa, with a jewel-case and full
money-bags beside him. He toys with a trinket, having finished his
foie-gras and champagne.

He had seen inexcusable personalities in the paper, he remarked; and
when Lemon said to him, "We shall have you yet," George shouted in
reply, striking one of his theatrical attitudes, "Never!"

[Illustration: 049]

He had repented of his early days of unscrupulous caricature. It must be
remembered, always to Cruikshank's lasting honour, that, his wild youth
past, he refused scores of tempting offers of work that did not quite
commend itself to his conscience. He used to say he would illustrate
nothing which he did not feel.

Later, when _Punch_ goodnaturedly rallied him on his temperance
eccentricities, he declared that he had a great mind to go down to Fleet
Street "and knock the old rascal's wooden head about."

[Illustration: 050]


[Illustration: 051]




CHAPTER XII. LORD BATEMAN AND THE TABLE BOOK.

Between 1837 and 1847, in addition to his work with Dickens and
Ainsworth, and in his _Omnibus_ and "Comic Almanac," Cruikshank threw
off some of his most popular minor drawings and etchings. Within this
decade he etched many of his plates for the "Waverley Novels," he
illustrated "Peter Parley's Tales about Christmas," "Rambles in the
Footsteps of Don Quixote" (1837), "More Hints on Etiquette" (1838),
"Lympsfield and its Environs" (1838), "The Life of Mansie Waunch (1838)
for Blackwood, "Land-Sharks and Sea-Gulls" (1838), "Rejected Addresses"
(1838), "Out and About," a boy's adventures, by Hain Friswell (1840),
John O'Neill's poem of "The Drunkard" (1842), Dibdin's Songs (1841-2),
"Picnic Papers" (1841), edited by Dickens; Douglas Jerrold's "Cakes
and Ale" (1842), "Modern Chivalry, or a new Orlando Furioso" (1843);
Martin's "Vagaries," a sequel to "A Tale of a Tub" (1843); "The
Bachelor's own Book, or the Life of Mr. Lambkin, gent" (1844); Harry
Lorrequer's "Arthur O'Leary" (1844); Maxwell's "Irish Rebellion" (1845),
"The Old Sailor's Jolly Boat" (1845), "The Comic Blackstone" (1846),
Mrs. Gore's "Snow-Storm" and "New Year's Day" (1845), "Our Own Times"
(1845), the Brothers Mayhew's "Greatest Plague of Life" (1847), "The
Emigrant,' by Sir Francis Head, Captain Chamier's "Ben Brace" (1847),
"Nights at Mess," and Laman Blanchard's "Sketches from Life." He
also began his capital illustrations to "The Ingoldsby Legends," in
_Bentley's Miscellany_. To this period, also, his wellknown "John
Gilpin" and "Lord Bateman" (1839) belong.

According to Mr. Walter Hamilton, the history of the "Loving Ballad of
Lord Bateman" is, that George Cruikshank "sang the old English ballad,
in the manner of a street-ballad singer, at a dinner of the Antiquarian
Society, at which Dickens and Thackeray were present.

[Illustration: 053]

The latter is reported to have remarked, "I should like to print that
ballad, with illustrations." But Cruikshank warned him off, saying that
this was exactly what he himself had resolved to do. The original ballad
was much longer than that which Cruikshank illustrated, and to which
Charles Dickens furnished humorous notes; and was not comic in any
respect. Mr. Sala's version is the more _vraisetnblant_:--

"The authorship of the ballad itself, which has furnished the basis for
no less than three theatrical burlesques--one by a forgotten dramatist
at the Strand, another by Robert Brough at the Adelphi, and a third by
Henry J. Byron at the Globe--is involved in mystery. George Cruikshank's
assertion, and one to which he doggedly adhered, was that he heard the
song sung one night by an itinerant minstrel outside a public-house near
Battle Bridge; and that he subsequently chanted and 'performed' (George
was as good as any play, or as a story-teller in a Moorish coffee-house,
at 'performing') the ditty to Charles Dickens, who was so delighted with
it that he persuaded George to publish it, adorned with copper-plates.
But internal evidence would seem to be against the entire authenticity
of the artist's version. That he had heard some doggerel sung outside
a tavern, and relating to Lord Bateman, is likely enough. 'Vilikins and
his was immortalised by Robson in Jem Baggs. George Cruikshank's error,
it strikes us, was more one of omission than of commission. He may have
lyrically narrated the adventures of the 'Noble Lord of High Degree'
to Dickens; but he assuredly warbled and 'performed' them too in the
presence of Thackeray, who in all probability 'revised and settled' the
words, and made them fit for publication. Nobody but Thackeray could
have written those lines about 'The young bride's mother, who never
before was heard to speak so free,' and in the 'Proud Young Porter'
all Titmarshian students must recognise the embryo type of James de la
Pluche."

"Lord Bateman" was Cruikshank's delight. The exquisite foolery expressed
in his plates of this eccentric nobleman he would act, at any moment,
in any place, to the end of his life. Mr. Percival Leigh remembers a
characteristic scene at the Cheshire Cheese tavern, in Fleet Street,
about 1842 or 1843. "This," * he says, "was in G. C.'s pre-teetotal
period. After dinner came drink and smoke, of course; and G. C. was
induced to sing 'Billy Taylor,' which he did with grotesque expression
and action, varied to suit the words. He likewise sang 'Lord Bateman,'
in his shirt-sleeves, with his coat flung cloak-wise over his left arm,
whilst he paced up and down, disporting himself with a walking-stick,
after the manner of the noble lord, as represented in his illustration
to the ballad."

Six-and-twenty years afterwards we find the bright-hearted old man still
with spirits enough for his favourite part.

     * Letter to B. J., Feb. 18,1878.

"One day," says Mr. Frederick Locker, "he asked us to tea, and to hear
him sing 'Lord Bateman' _in character_, which he did to our infinite
delight. He posed in the costume of that, deeply interesting but
somewhat mysterious nobleman. I am often reminded of the circumstance;
for I have a copy of 'Lord Bateman' (1851), and on the false title is
written--

     'This Evening, July 13, 1868,

     I sang LORD BATEMAN to

     My dear little friend Eleanor Locker.

     George Cruikshank.'"


This in his seventy-sixth year!

Within the busy decade, 1837--1847, Cruikshank executed many separate
etchings for _Bentley's Miscellany and Ainsworth's Magazine_. His work
is to be found scattered far and wide. One month he appears as the
illustrator of a humorous song or scena by J. Blewitt--"The Matrimonial
Ladder" (the ladder was a favourite form with him for conveying the
various aspects of a subject)--or Keeley in the new comic song of "Wery
Ridiculous"; the next he is the whimsical illustrator of Beaufoy's
Advertisement of his Cure for the Toothache--wood drawings engraved by
Orrin Smith. Nor had he quite put aside his habit of expressing himself
pictorially on political events. In 1843 he published, from Mr. David
Bogue's shop in Fleet Street, a separate design entitled "The Queen and
the Union. No Repeal! No O'Connell!" It was a woodcut enclosing text
in type, the text being Cruikshank's own declamation against the Irish
Agitator. Britannia and Erin are represented in the drawing seated,
with joined hands, on the shores of the Channel; while the "blustering,
foul-mouthed bully, with one foot on Britannia's shoulder, and the other
on Erin's harp, has raised an axe to sunder the friends." Frontispieces
and covers he designed by the score,--now to "A Tale of a Comical
Stick," and now to _The Yorkshireman_, a religious and literary journal;
and now again a headpiece to one of Mrs. S. C. Hall's "Sketches of Irish
Character," or a frontispiece to a book on "Prisons and Prisoners."
To every item of this extraordinary quantity and variety of pictorial
labour Cruikshank gave his utmost energy. He was a most faithful worker,
who never stinted himself, even when the humblest or least important
subject was in hand. Let me note, however, some exceptions.

     * Letter to B. J.

In 1843 he had quarrelled with Mr. Bentley, and purposely put bad work
in them. This was his revenge--and to the end of his life he never
perceived the fault he committed in this act. "One day," says Mr.
Locker,* u at my house, he explained how these (the bad etchings) had
been etched. It appears that he had quarrelled with Mr. Richard Bentley
(he was a singularly kind-hearted man, but, I fancy, had a somewhat
remarkable faculty for quarrelling with almost every one with whom he
was connected in business), and was obliged to fulfil his contract to
supply an etching for each monthly number of Bentley's Miscellany, and
he did them as badly as he possibly could, and etched his name under
them so illegibly as to be quite indecipherable: 'And,' said he, 'I used
to take out my watch, and put it beside me on the table, and give myself
just--' (mentioning the number of minutes) 'for each plate.'"

It was after another and a final parting from Mr. Ainsworth, on the sale
of his magazine, that Cruikshank, "left in the lurch," to use his own
phrase, started his "Table-Book," with Gilbert a Beckett as editor, and
Bradbury and Evans as printers and publishers. The artist has put on
record the manner in which he and the eminent Whitefriars firm came
together:--

[Illustration: 059]

"I will not go into the details of how I assisted this _author_
(Ainsworth) with head and hand work in these novels, but I did my best
to design and suggest; and my time was so much occupied in performing
this duty, and also with some other matters, that I was not able to
bring out my _Omnibus_ as an _annual_, as I had intended to have done;
but I now determined to bring it out again in monthly numbers; and as
Bradbury and Evans (the fathers of the present firm) had printed that
work for me, I went to their office to see what stock there was of the
_Omnibus_ on hand, and to make arrangements for the republishing of it;
and when I mentioned this to my friend Bradbury, he said, 'Ah, it is a
pity that work was ever stopped; we should have been glad to have bought
it of you, and will buy it now, if you would like to sell it.' I replied
that I did not wish to dispose of it, but if they would like to join
me, I should be glad to have them as partners. 'Agreed,' said both
Mr. Bradbury and Mr. Evans; and as these friends of mine were _men of
business,_ as well as _gentlemen and men of honour, in this case there
was a written agreement_ clearly and legally drawn out, and duly signed
by both parties. But their engagements at that time were so many, that
a considerable time elapsed before arrangements could be made for the
republishing of the _Omnibus_; so they then suggested, as it was such
a long time since my _Omnibus_ had been on the road, that it would,
perhaps, be better to start another vehicle of the same build, but under
another name. To this I agreed; and thus originated 'The Table Book,'
which was edited by my friends the late Gilbert a Becket and Mark
Lemon."

The "Table Book" includes two of Cruikshank's most powerful and perfect
etchings--viz., "The Triumph of Cupid" and "The Folly of Crime." The
fertility of imagination manifest in "The Triumph of Cupid" is amazing.
The execution is that of an original master. No man who ever held an
etching-needle has surpassed the truth and beauty and boldness of the
touches by which hundreds of figures live, a happy tumultuous throng,
in this octavo plate. The central figure is the artist, in slippers
and embroidered dress-ing-gown, before his fire, smoking a handsome
meerschaum pipe, gazing abstractedly into the fire; and upon the cloud
of smoke from his lips, his dreams of the triumphs of Cupid rise till
they fill the room.

[Illustration: 064]

Cupid perches himself upon his foot, and toasts a heart at the
fire; jumps upon the back of Old Time who bears the clock upon the
mantelpiece; is enthroned in a triumphal car, with kings and princes,
bishops and generals, lawyers and stock-jobbers, drummer-boys and
jack-tars and sweeps, clown and harlequin, and even slippered pantaloon,
and Chelsea pensioners upon wooden stumps, for his court. The car is
drawn by subdued lions and leopards.

The blind beggar is waylaid by the little god, and brought to the
ground. He has floored a dustman on his rounds. He makes the Great Mogul
sue for mercy. He drags a little black page from under the armchair, and
puts gyves upon his wrists. All is clearly and beautifully grouped, and
frankly and boldly, and at the same time delicately, drawn. It is as
precise and luminous as Durer. It is perfect etching, by one who knew
the limits as well as all the capabilities of his exquisite art.

"The Folly of Crime" has been not extravagantly described by a writer
in the _London Quarterly Review_ (1873) as a very great work indeed. He
says it is perhaps the artist's highest effort: I should rather say it
"is clearly and beautifully, and at the same time precise and luminous
by one who knew the value of his exquisite art. He says it suggests an
undeveloped power of the highest order--albeit the management of the
direct and reflected lights is most admirable, and the skill throughout
is consummate. "Without lingering over the framework of lesser groups,
though these are sufficiently impressive," says the reviewer, "let us
go straight to the central picture. A murdered man lies stark in the
shadow. The murderer springs forward to catch at, a bowl of pearls,
snake-like and seemingly incandescent, that are borne swayingly before
him on the head of a grinning fiend. The ground smiles at his feet. He
falls, and, as he falls, the light from the pit leaps up, catching his
bloody hand, and the fatal knife, and the long ears of his fool's-cap,
and gleaming in his despairing eyes; while all the air is filled with
chattering and mowing demons, whose eyes and teeth also glitter white
and cruel. And the horror of the man's face is terrible." The little
morals framed around the central picture complete the awful story. The
murderer lies--always wearing the fool's-cap--in his bed, with a heavy
weight upon his chest, snakes hissing in his ears, and the scales
of justice held steady before his eyes. He is upon the treadmill. He
crouches in a corner of the condemned cell. A convict, he carries a
weighty burden upon his shoulders, marked "for life."

The many light, playful, and fanciful sketches that are included in the
one thin volume to which in "The Table Book" ran, are trifles light as
air, when compared with those two great efforts of Cruikshank's genius,
at its ripest and brightest. They mark the highest point of his ascent.
In the sequel we shall find him executing much noteworthy, honourable
Work,with the zeal of a great moral preacher; but he will not surpass
these two noble etchings.

[Illustration: 067]

George Cruikshank worked, as he reader knows, with great care and
deliberation. He thought out his subject well before beginning to
realize his conception. He made, to begin with, a careful design upon
paper, trying doubtful points on the margin of the paper. The design
was heightened by vigorous touches of colour. Then a careful tracing was
made, and laid, pencil side down, upon the steel plate. This was carried
to the printer, who having placed it between damp paper, and passed
it through the press, returned it, the blacklead outline distinctly
appearing upon the etching ground. And then the work was straightforward
to the artist's firm hand. The firmness and fineness of his touch are as
conspicuous in his wood drawings as in his etchings.

"It was the custom of the artist," according to his nephew, Percy
Cruikshank, "before parting with his plates, to have India-paper proofs
of the etchings, and this being 'before letters'--that is, before the
title was engraved on the plate--made them the more valuable. He also
insisted on the engraver's supplying him with a proof of his drawings
on wood when completed. This, in time, formed a scarce and choice
collection, of which he knew the value full well. The centralizing all
that was Cruikshankian within himself was the end which crowned the
work. The late Prince Consort being desirous of possessing a collection
of George's proofs, offered a considerable sum for them; but the artist,
although pressed for money, not considering it sufficient, respectfully
declined the proposal."

[Illustration: 069]

To return to the "Table Book." The miscellaneous etchings and drawings
in this book are mostly arrows aimed at folly as it was flying at
that time. The railway mania, clairvoyance, emigration, the fashions,
furnished Cruikshank with inexhaustible humorous or grave material. His
etching of Mr. John Ball in a Quandary, or the Anticipated Effects of
the Railway Calls, is one of those wondrously filled drawings, in the
composition of which he stands alone. John Bull is in his armchair, with
a great railway bell clanging over his head. Hosts of pestilent demons
cover him, and are stripping him. Some are hoisting his hat, some are
bearing away his wig, others have perched ladders against his capacious
paunch, and are dragging his money and his watch from his waistcoat
pockets. The greedy imps are tugging his gloves from his hands,
unfastening his neckcloth, and pulling his boots off. Liliputian
lawyers, at hand, are demolishing a barrel of oysters, and leaving a
plentiful supply of shells for their clients. Imps, driving a little
locomotive, have attached it to Bull's cash-box, and are making off with
it; and in the distance the pictures are marked for sale. Then we have
a few bits of Cruikshankian humour called "'Heads of the Table,"--the
final head being a capital study of an old gentleman who is _entre deux
vins_, saying, "Well, we'll just take another glass--and then--we'll
join the--the ladies." Opposite this page is a drawing of a family, and
also of their shoes.

[Illustration: 071]

[Illustration: 072]

I will now endeavour to afford the reader an idea of the man who created
the extraordinary variety of artistic work of high excellence briefly
described in the foregoing chapters. George Cruikshank was eminently a
convivial man. He was born in a boisterous and coarse convivial time;
when Lords and Commons boxed at Jackson's; went to see monkeys set to
fight terriers at Cribb's; fought "Charleys" and turnpike-men; and drank
hard and played high at Crockford's. Their humble imitators were the
associates of Robert and George Cruikshank. George's associates were
tavern frequenters for the most part: in those days taverns were used
by many of the men who now frequent clubs. The portrait of him drawn by
Maclise was Cruikshank in his earlier and humbler time, when he was in
the hands of the caricature vendors. The writer in _Fraser_ says: "Here
we have the sketcher sketched; and, as is fit, he is sketched
sketching. Here is George Cruikshank (see Frontispiece)--the George
Cruikshank--seated upon the head of a barrel, catching inspiration from
the scenes presented to him in a pot-house, and consigning the ideas of
the moment to immortality on the crown of his hat....

[Illustration: frontispiece]

Of George Cruikshank the history is short. He stands too often and too
well before the eyes of the public to render it necessary that we should
say much about him; and we confess that of his earlier annals we know
little or nothing.... The first of Cruikshank's works known to us are
his caricatures of George IV. and his friends. Tories as we were and
are, and as we trust we still shall be, these comic picturings haunt our
imagination. The poor old king in every attitude of ludicrous distress
(the 'Fat in the Fire' was perfection); Copley (sketched, as we have
been assured, merely from description, and yet a great likeness);
Castlereagh (but even the professed caricaturist could not destroy the
gentlemanly grace of that noble face and figure); the 'Waterloo man,'
with his sword dropping into the scale against the pen; the various
persons, jailors, jockeys, lawyers, and the rest, were first-rate. As
Cruikshank himself says of Gillray, 'He that did those things was a
great man, sir,--a very great man, sir.' To Cruikshank, however, they
were productive of nothing but the fame of their cleverness and the
odium of their politics; as Hone, for whom and his blockhead authors
George's talents floated the dire rubbish of the 'House that Jack
Built,' and other witless productions, never paid him for what he had
done. In all these stupid productions there were loud puffs at the power
of the _press_. George never knew anything of it when in their hands
but as a _screw_.* However, what he did, gave him fame and name....
Of course, George is, like all other men of undoubted genius, a most
ill-used gentleman. As Mathews laments that the general obtuseness of
the public will not recognise his talents for tragedy,--as Liston mourns
over the delusion which applauds him in _Sam Swipes and Paul Pry,_ and
does not permit him to appear as the Damon or Strephon of a sighing
opera,--so Cruikshank is shocked at the evil fate which consigns him to
drawing sketches and caricatures, instead of letting him loose in his
natural domain of epic or historical picture.

     * According to a Reviewer of "Three Courses and a Dessert,"
     in _Fraser_ (June 1830), the whole sum received by
     Cruikshank from Hone was L18; but this was not so.

Let him content himself; he can draw what will be held in honoured
remembrance when ninety-nine out of every hundred of the great 'masters'
of our 'schools' and a still larger proportion of all the R.A's
and A. RA.'s that ever existed, or ever are doomed to exist, will be
forgotten. The historical which _we_ should cultivate is such as that
which appears in his recently published 'Sketch-Book,' where, for
example, the life of Bonaparte, whether as eagle soaring over the
Alps, or eagle chained to a perch, is depicted in all its stages, from
artillery lad on watch, through triumph, splendour, and flight to the
little cock-hatted and round-paunched exile of St. Helena."

Many years later Cruikshank had not quite given up his dream of the
epic or historical picture; for the dream had been encouraged by the
criticisms of some of the most thoughtful of his contemporaries, who
set him on a level with Hogarth and Durer, and said that posterity would
delight in him as one of our most venerated old masters.

But our present concern is with George Cruikshank as he lived, and
moved, and impressed his friends. They all speak cordially of him. Poor
Samuel Phillips, who was hearty in spirit, albeit he lived for many
years at death's door, says of him: "George is popular among his
associates. His face is an index of his mind. There is nothing anomalous
about him and his doings. His appearance, his illustrations, his
speeches, are all alike--all picturesque, artistic, full of fun,
feeling, geniality, and quaintness. His seriousness is grotesque, and
his drollery is profound. He is the prince of caricaturists, and one of
the best of men."

In a whimsical account of an amateur strolling excursion, in which
Cruikshank was one of the company (1847), supposed to be written by Mrs.
Gamp, Dickens has vividly described the illustrator of 'Oliver Twist':--

"I do assure you, Mrs. Harris, when I stood in the railways office that
morning, with my bundle on my arm, and one patten in my hand, you might
have knocked me down with a feather, far less porkmangers which was a
lumping against me, continual and sewere all round. I was drove about
like a brute animal and almost worritted into fits, when a gentleman
with a large shirt-collar, and a hook nose, and a eye like one of
Mr. Sweedlepipes's hawks, and long locks of hair, and wiskers that I
wouldn't have no lady as I was engaged to meet suddenly a turning round
a corner, for any sum of money you could offer me, says, laughing,
'Halloa, Mrs. Gamp, what are _you_ up to?'

"I didn't know him from a man (except by his clothes); but I
says faintly, 'If you're a Christian man, show me where to get a
second-cladge ticket for Manjester, and have me put in a carriage, or
I shall drop.' Which he kindly did, in a cheerful kind of way, skipping
about in the strangest manner as ever I see, making all kinds of
actions, and looking and vinking at me from under the brim of his hat
(which was a good deal turned up), to that extent, that I should have
thought he meant something but for being so flurried as not to have
no thoughts at all until I was put in a carriage along with an
individgle--the politest as ever I see--in a shepherd's plaid suit with
a long gold watch-guard hanging round his neck, and his hand a trembling
through nervousness worse than an aspian leaf. Presently they fell into
conversation.

"'P'raps,' he says,'if you're not of the party, you don't know who it
was that assisted you into this carriage!'

"'No, sir,' I says, 'I don't indeed.'

"'Why, ma'am,' he says, a-wisperin, 'that was George, ma'am.'

"'What George, sir? I don't know no George,' says I.

'"The great George, ma'am,' says he. 'The Crookshanks.'

"'If you'll believe me, Mrs. Harris, I turned my head, and see the werry
man a-making pictures of me on his thumb nail, at the winder! While
another of em--a tall slim, melancholly gent, with dark hair, and a
bage vice--looks over his shoulder, with his head o' one side as if
he understood the subject, and cooly says, 'I've draw'd her several
times--in _Punch_,' he says too I The owdacious wretch.'"

The melancholy gent with the "_bage vice_" was Leech.

In those days, and down to those days, Cruikshank was
convivial--sometimes to excess. It was not for nothing that Maclise had
drawn him seated upon a beer barrel.*

     * His brother Robert drew his portrait as a young man, his
     hair and whiskers uncombed, cross-legged, in a contemplative
     mood, his dress in disorder, and called it "George in a
     Brown study." It was a picture of him in his days of
     dissipation, when his sister-in-law would occasionally seize
     and wash and comb him, while he laughed at the absurdity of
     his position. He was very sensitive in later life about any
     allusion to his appearance. When Mrs. Stowe, in her book of
     London impressions, roughly described him as "an old man,
     with a keen eye and grey hair," he was deeply mortified, and
     he addressed an expostulation to the papers. His portraits,
     by himself, in oil, abounded in his studio. They were marked
     with touches of chalk, giving a fresh curl to the whisker, a
     fiercer flash to the eye, a more effective arrangement of
     the hair; but not one was finished.

His fortunes threw him early among humble boon companions, at Grimaldi's
club and elsewhere, as we have seen; and his wild exuberant spirits and
lively sense of humour made him king among them. Later, when Dickens
knew him, he would fall away occasionally from his new and more
dignified friends (who were not ascetics), and run a wild career for
a night in his old haunts. Dickens used to describe one wonderful
day--among others--he had passed with "the inimitable George."

Dickens was living in Devonshire Place, and was just setting to work
one morning in his library, when Cruikshank, unwashed and "smelling of
tobacco, beer, and sawdust," as Dickens described him, burst into the
room. He said he had been up all night; was afraid to go home, and
begged for some breakfast. While he was breakfasting, Dickens did his
utmost to persuade him to go to bed. But George resolutely set his face
against it.

He said he dared not even think of Islington. Seeing the state of
affairs, Dickens closed his desk, and proposed to accompany his friend
to face the domestic storm with him. But Cruikshank would only consent
to a walk--the farther from Islington the better.

Dickens, under such circumstances, was an admirable friend. His cheery
talk and wise counsel had great weight with Cruikshank; but each time
he artfully turned the truant's face east, he drew back with a--"No, no,
Charley--not that way."

And so they walked about the streets for hours, strolling in the course
of the day into the famous aviary of the Pantheon in Oxford Street.*
Here Cruikshank came suddenly face to face with one of Mrs. Cruikshank's
intimate friends. The scene which ensued, Dickens used to say, was one
exquisitely farcical. And the manner in which he set forth the episodes
of the long day in the streets, with Cruikshank's droppings into various
hostelries, and his final dejected departure homewards, utterly worn
out, and having exhausted his faithful friend, was in his happiest vein.

     * Dickens used to tell, with humorous details, how "George,"
     On another occasion, was refused admittance because he was
     plashed to the shoulders with mud.

"I remember him about 1846," said Mr. W. H. Wills, another old friend.
"He was then flirting with Temperance. I wanted him to dine at my house;
but he excused himself, saying he should be led into temptation, and
he had resolved to be a water-drinker thenceforth." He did not go to
dinner, but dropped in later--much excited; and when his host pushed the
water-bottle towards him, he gently added brandy. The guests departed,
leaving the hilarious George, with two others, to finish the evening;
and when the trio got into the street, they found the old difficulty in
restraining Cruikshank's boisterous spirits. After trying in vain for
something more than an hour to lead him home, they left him--climbing up
a lamp-post!

The same friend hastens to tell me how generous this wild _bon-vivant_
was, even in his more convivial moods:--

"The force of George Cruikshank's character lay in the single-minded
earnestness with which he carried out his objects. These throughout his
life were numerous and always good. Zeal and energy glowed out of him
upon whatever he undertook, whether saving a family from starvation (and
there are instances in which he could only have done this at the risk
of stinting himself), or rehearsing the character assigned to him in a
private play, or commanding a regiment of volunteers, or advocating and
advancing the temperance cause at every conceivable sacrifice of time
and money. It was not until after his second marriage that he took to
temperance. In his first wife's lifetime he sacrificed to the jolly
god rather oftener than occasionally; and surely no man drank with more
fervour and enjoyment, nor carried his liquor so kindly, so merrily.
Then was the time to hear him sing 'Lord Bateman' in character,
and costume improvised from table-covers, table-napkins, and
antimacassars--anything he could lay hands on--with the laughing help
of his host. He was what Albert Smith called 'great fun' in this song at
any time.

"Even when dependent upon his pencil and etching-needle for means of
existence, if any good was to be done for a decayed brother artist or
literary friend, George was only too ready (for his own prosperity) to
throw down his tools, and stroll about the country with a theatrical
company, or go anywhere to solicit subscriptions and make speeches, or
to settle to his worktable again to make gratuitous sketches for bazaars
and charities. When acting in Edinburgh, for Leigh Hunt's benefit, with
Charles Dickens and his brilliant _dramatis personae_, news came to him
that a country editor, with a large family, whom he had often previously
helped, was on the edge of ruin for the want of fifty pounds. 'I _must_
send it to the poor fellow,' he said to Dickens, 'immediately.' 'That
would be very kind to him,' answered Dickens, 'but very unkind to
yourself. By-the-bye, have you got fifty pounds in your pocket?' 'Oh
dear, no,' was Cruikshank's reply, 'but I want you to lend me the money
to send to him--now--at once.' Dickens's rejoinder was not resort to his
cheque book, but the remark that he knew George's incapable friend would
be as badly off as ever after the execution had been paid out of his
house, even if the money was sent. 'Then,' he added, 'you would deny
yourself all sorts of things and be miserable till you paid me back.
That I can't stand, so I must decline.'"

On the day of his death, his old friend and fervent admirer repaid his
kindness by sketching this loving portrait of him:--

"Only a few days ago there was extant--nay, it may be said, flourishing,
in the midst of the life and bustle of the Great City, and to all
seeming as lively and bustling as any citizen there--a hale, bright,
active, elderly gentleman, whose age might, by the majority of cursory
age-judges, have been set down as 'a good sixty-five,' but who was in
reality closely verging upon ninety. A quarter of a century before his
death he had looked--so those who knew him well loved to declare--much
older than when he was past fourscore. Like the American lady mentioned
by Dickens, he seemed to have grown old, 'got over it,' and become
young again. He was slightly below the middle height, spare but solid of
frame, somewhat long-armed and short-legged, as powerful and long-lived
men are apt to be, and very broad in the chest. His head, scarcely bowed
or blanched to the very last, was massive and well-shapen. He had a high
forehead, blue-grey eyes full of a cheerful, sparkling light, penthouse
brows, somewhat high cheek-bones, a prominent aquiline nose that Caesar
would have liked to look upon, and a mouth cut in firm, sharp lines,
and from whose corners grew an ambiguous pair of hirsute ornaments which
were neither moustaches, nor whiskers, nor beard, but partook vaguely of
the characteristics of all three. But, beyond these, there was curious
and original individuality in his hair, which, after its fashion,
marked him as typically as the well-known _meche_ marks the portraits of
Napoleon L and M. Emile de Girardin. The elderly gentleman's _chevelure_
had dwindled down to a few thin locks, indigenous, it is to be
feared, to his occiput, but which, by careful combing, and an artful
contrivance--so rumour ran--of wire and 'elastic,' had been seduced over
his temples and his parietal bone. Thus to the greater justice could
point triumphantly to the fact that his sparse wisps of hair were still
mellow brown in hue, and soft as silk in texture. His face was full
of wrinkles; but the furrows seemed to have been ploughed more by hard
work, sedulously and unwearyingly performed, than by the mere plodding
footsteps of the dragging years. In his port and mien, indeed, until
almost the very moment when the hand of the Grim Sergeant was laid upon
his shoulder, there was but little of the feebleness and less of the
caducity of age. Its garrulity he had; but his friends rejoiced in
the good old man's loquacity, recognizing, as they did, the undimmed
clearness of his understanding and tenacity of his memory. Nor, with
one singular exception, to which we shall subsequently allude, did that
memory play him the woful tricks to which the very aged are so often
subject. He could remember perfectly well trifling occurrences which
happened in 1800, but he did not forget events of moment which had end
he repudiated the imputation of baldness, and with happened in 1877.
He was, to sum up, a light-hearted, merry, and, albeit a teetotaler, an
essentially 'jolly' old gentleman, full physically of humorous action
and impulsive gesticulation, imitatively illustrating the anecdotes
he related; somewhat dogged in assertion and combative in argument;
strong-rooted as the oldest of old oaks in old true British prejudices;
decidedly eccentric, obstinate, and whimsical; but in every word and
deed a God-fearing, queen-honouring, truth-loving, honest man.

"This was the famous George Cruikshank, caricaturist, social satirist
and moralist, illustrator of books, engraver on steel and copper,
draughtsman on wood, painter in oils and water-colours, the doughtiest
champion, in his degree, of the temperance cause; and, albeit his
'foaming bowl' was for many years replenished only from the pump, the
Prince of Good Fellows."

The Prince of Good Fellows looked very much as his later friends
remembered him, some five-and-thirty years ago, as I can well remember.
The ingeniously arranged _chevelure_ was within artful elastic bands
drawn over the skull, when I was a boy. I was one of many youngsters who
would creep round his chair clay pipe in his mouth (he always smoked a
long clay pipe while he smoked at all) and his brandy-and-water before
him, talking loudly and eagerly, gesticulating like a Frenchman, and
turning now one ear and now the other, to catch the conversation of the
company. A man incapable of rest, with a swift, glancing, steely eye, a
mobile mouth, and a grotesquely fierce general aspect, aggravated by
the hook-nose, which was awry; prodigal in the matters of whisker,
shirt-collar, and wristband; old-fashioned enough, even in the year
1845, to strike boys. *

     * George Cruikshank was very careful about any portrait of
     him that was drawn or painted. One in coloured chalks by his
     friend Mill, that hung in his Amwell Street studio,
     satisfied him entirely. The eyes were at their fiercest, and
     the whiskers were superb. One day, when Cruikshank was
     illustrating Scott, Mr. Lockhart called, and, remarking the
     portrait, said drily, "I saw a man, very like that, in
     Italy, executed for murder." Some people would have been
     offended, but Cruikshank was delighted. He affected the
     brigand look.

In his social habits and relations, Cruikshank was a most modest,
self-respecting man. He never courted great folk, he submitted to no
form of patronage, and he never pretended to ape the manners and
habits of the fashionable world. He lived the first half of his life
in Pentonville,* and the second in Camden Town. He confined his
acquaintance to congenial friends; and when these happened to be persons
of rank and wealth, in its unfashionable neighbourhood. In this he
set an example which many of his brother artists--his inferiors in
genius--might have followed with advantage to their fame. He stood, at
the end of his life, in strong contrast with the _petits maitres_ in
the arts, who give themselves fashionable airs, decorate their houses
extravagantly, and spend their too easily acquired gains in slavish
imitations of Mayfair life. Cruikshank, in his _Omnibus_, reproved, in
his own quaint way, a writer who had said that he was a collector of
curiosities.

     * Among the visitors to Amwell Street was the Baron de
     Berenger, a remarkable adventurer and spectator. George
     Cruikshank, when a young volunteer, had been intimate with
     Charles Ransom of his corps, who as a print colourer at
     Ackermann's, and who, as a volunteer, was remarked as a good
     shot. Being a well-mannered young fellow, he was patronized
     by Mr. Hammerley the banker; and at this gentleman's house
     he met the Baroness de Berenger, a German widow. He married
     her, and assumed the title of Baron de Berenger. Being a man
     fond of athletics, he conceived the idea of turning Cremorae
     Farm, Lord Cremome's place at Chelsea, into a suburban
     gymnasium and place for field sports. Cremorne Farm became
     the Stadium, and flourished under the Baron's management. He
     rode out always attended by his four sons on horseback,
     dressed in grey military tunics, and with swords at their
     sides. This cavalcade occasionally clattered along Amwell
     Street, Pentonville, to pay a business visit to Cruikshank,
     who, with his brother, was illustrating with sporting
     etchings the guide-book to the Stadium.

"No single symp--I was about to say that no single symptom of a
curiosity, however insignificant, is visible in my dwelling, when by
audible tokens I was (or rather am) rendered sensible of the existence
of a _pair of bellows_. Well, in these it must be admitted that we
_do_ possess a curiosity. We call them 'bellows,' because, on a close
inspection, they appear to bear a much stronger resemblance to 'bellows'
than to any other species of domestic implement; but what in reality
they are, the next annual meeting of the great Scientific Association
must determine; or the public may decide for themselves, when admitted
hereafter to view the precious deposit in the British Museum." Then
follows an amusing account of the old bellows, with a sketch of them.
"The origin of the bellows I know not," says their owner; "but a
suspicion has seized me that they might have been employed in the Ark,
had there been a kitchen fire there; and they may have assisted in
raising a flame under the first tea-kettle put on to celebrate the
laying of the first stone of the great wall of China."

Cruikshank, moreover, took exception to the description of his person by
the same writer. If careless about his house, he was vain of his person.
The writer said: "In person, G. C. is about the middle height, and
proportionbly made. His complexion is something between pale and clear;
and his hair, which is tolerably ample, partakes of a lightish hue.
His face is of the angular form, and his forehead has a 'prominently
receding shape." Cruikshank closed with his antagonist:--

"As Hamlet said to the ghost, I'll go no further! The indefinite
complexion, and the hair 'partaking' of an opposite hue to the real one,
may be borne; but I stand, not upon my head, but on my forehead! To
a man who has once passed the Rubicon in having dared to publish his
portrait, the exhibition of his mere profile can do no more injury than
a petty larceny would after the perpetration of a highway robbery. But
why be tempted to show, by an outline, that my forehead is innocent of
a shape (the 'prominently receding' one) that never yet was visible in
nature or in art? Let it pass, till it can be explained.

"'He delights in a handsome pair of whiskers.' Nero had one flower flung
upon his tomb. 'He has somewhat of a dandified appearance.' Flowers soon
fade, and are cut down; and this is the 'unkindest cut of all.' I, who,
humbly co-operating with the press, have helped to give permanence to
the name of dandy--I, who have all my life been breaking butterflies
upon wheels in warring against dandyism and dandies--am at last
discovered to be 'somewhat' of a dandy myself.

     'Come, Antony, and young Octavius, come!
      Revenge yourselves' as you may; but, dandies all,
     I have not done with you yet."

The "inimitable George," however, was a dandy--in his way.
Old-fashioned, tumbled, eccentric, his dress had a studied look. The
strong individuality of the vivacious and active little man (for he was
under the middle height) appeared to be preserved by attention to the
elaboration of a costume unlike that of any of his neighbours. It was
foppishness like that of the late Marquis of Lansdowne, whose buff and
blue had become a fancy dress at the end of his life.

I cannot do better than conclude this description of the George
Cruikshank of the first epoch, by an account of him, in 1840-42, written
by his old friend W. L. Sammons, who is now a Temperance light at the
Cape, but who has a vivid recollection of his friend in days when they
met over a mug of ale. It comes to me from Cape Town. The scene opens in
Amwell Street, Pentonville:--"The same evening a friend or two dropped
in--Douglas Jerrold and, I think, Laman Blanchard, the editor of
Cruikshank's _Omnibus_,--and the former Mrs. Cruikshank was present and
presided, and threw a charm over the tea and supper tables; and I saw
and revelled, as it were, through all the gems, both ancient and modern,
signed "G. Ck.," in the Royal workshop, and lingered over that famous
notorious Screen in it, covered by him with texts of thought for present
and future use, in the shape of "Odd People and Things"--queer "head and
tail pieces"--strange "monstrosities of Fashions" for the day--noses,
dresses, and phizes of all dimensions and shades, ready for adaptation
according to the age and epoch required. George Cruikshank was
particularly busy on this day, because of "The Miser's Daughter," by
Ainsworth, that he was illustrating for _Bentley's Miscellany_, and
he assured me if not finished by such an hour and such a day he
should forfeit fifty pounds; and yet he risked the uncertainty to show
hospitality to his friends.

"During this visit to London, dear George took me the round of several
of the theatres and gardens--Old Vauxhall, that we had seen as boys,
when unknown to each other, being closed, and the great "M. C."

Simpson dead; and I could not fail to perceive how he was petted and
respected by all, lessees, managers, and actors, and readily ushered
into any quarter that caprice, pleasure, or professional duties
required, whether pit-boxes, or gallery; but the "dress circle"
was less to his taste than others, because there life was fossilised,
artificial, and restrained, and dress mere tinsel; and no dialogue
suitable for his reports, or action worthy of his crayons. This may
account, perhaps, for that 'absence of beauty' that is said to pervade
his works; because beauty _per se_ is apt to give itself airs and become
unseemly and ungraceful; and George Cruikshank's high and stern
mission was in 'the highways and hedges,' and to reclaim by a moral and
pictorial force the repelling, the vicious, and the vile.

"But I confess to feeling a little disturbed, when at his side, at
seeing so many long necks and bright eyes and glasses turned upon him
from all directions, and to perceive the whispering and commotion in
consequence. Here G. C.'s thumb-nails often served as ample Space for a
photo.

"As a thing of beauty is said to be a joy for ever, so at the period
above stated we had our glorious days together, and may be figuratively
described as 'being in clover and sleeping in lavender'; for kind George
devoted many hours in taking me to some of his favourite, and it may
be added, requisite haunts, where he gathered his Fame for his simple
wants, without i hoarding. One morning he led me to the burial-ground
of St. James's Chapel, Pentonville, near his house, and pointed out the
graves of Thomas Dibdin, son of the great sea-songster, and of his old
and 'mutual friend,' Joey Grimaldi, whose mortal coils are laid near
each other; and I wish I could remember so as to record the tender and
sympathetic little oration he then delivered.

"At night Sadler's Wells was the scene of action, but poor Joey being
absent,

     'Greece was living Greece no more,'

and all things were changed since our boyhood Friend Cruikshank reminded
me of that passage (in Dickens's 'Life of the King of Clowns') that
he illustrated in two vols., where Joey and his much better-half, one
evening, disputing about precedency, resolved upon taking poison to end
all contention, and to settle their differences of opinion for ever. But
not taking enough, and forgetting the oft-quoted maxim, now travestied,

     'Drink deep, or taste not any poisonous thing,'

the feeble dose merely kept them awake and talkative, and lying in
the same room, with a slight partition between them, sensations became
unpleasant, and so they held a colloquy in their fears as follows:
'Joey, are you dead?' 'No, Mary,--are you?' 'No.' And then they altered
their minds, and felt disposed to live a little longer, arose, had
a good supper and something warm and comfortable as a sedative and
antidote, and then jogged on a little more in unison.

"On passing through the Queen's Bench with him, I called his attention
to the prison window, behind the bars of which stood a miserable inmate
with a black box before him, on which was written, 'Remember the
poor debtors.' George smiled, and said, 'Yes, but think of the poor
creditors.' And this scene I find recorded by him, and his own remarks,
on a small placard at the top of the picture 'Remember the poor
creditors.' But what numbers of similar Hogarthian hints he has left
behind him!

Shortly afterwards Cruikshank paid his friend a visit at Bath:--

"'The Bottle Conjurer' and smasher of it, and part destroyer of his
contents--I mean George Cruikshank--arrived safely at the city of King
Bladud and the throne of Beau Nash; and he commanded me with a willing
assent to become a second 'Anstey,' or little 'Bath Guide,' to ferret
all quarters with him--West to East and High to Low--having a monthly
serial still on hand that required certain characters for illustration
(perhaps 'Jack Sheppard' or the 'Tower of London,' after the _Omnibus_
had ceased running). Friend George began with the upper crust, as
nearest 'home' and Lansdown; and leaving his card the day before at
William Beckford's mansion in the Crescent, went with me where I had
been several times before. Possibly at the foot of Table Mountain it may
not be known that this William Beckford was an esquire and a somebody
in England, the owner and builder of Fonthill Abbey, inheritor but not
enjoyer of immense wealth, and the celebrated author of 'Vathek' and
the 'Halls of Eblis,' before which, in point of imagination, Byron, or
somebody else, said 'Rasselas' must bow."

Mr. Beckford, notwithstanding original gifts, and the accident of
riches, was a shy and eccentric bird that flew from every one, and
nobody must approach; and so, when we got there, and were passing along
a corridor, door suddenly in our faces, the apology being, 'he saw Mr.
Beckford coming, and it was more than he dare hazard for any one to
notice him.' And yet he left a gracious message in the hands of his
house-steward, Mr. F-, who himself kept a stylish establishment and
carriage, 'to show Mr. Cruikshank all he desired;' and even added, 'that
if Mr. Cruikshank knew how much he (Mr. B.) valued his earlier sketches,
he would not have refused some of them when once solicited.' I asked 'G.
C.' the cause of this, and he remarked, 'at that time he parted with
few of his originals;' and when we left Lansdown Crescent, he commented
warmly on the treat and pleasure he had derived, and as a red-letter day
in his biography. 'From the sublime to the ridiculous is but a step,'
and so we soon threaded the externals of Royal a black dwarf--or rather
a nutmeg shade--banged a Anstey's "New Bath Guide."

Crescents and Circuses, Pulteney and Milsom Streets, and Queen Squares,
and odd holes, lanes,' and corners, until reaching Avon Street, where
'the power of sinking could no further go,' nor the Pig and Whistle meet
with a more picturesque if degraded aspect In this latter neighbourhood
it was requisite for professional purposes and home orders that George
Cruikshank should have a nightly sojourn, if not revel; and so a
suitable tavern was chosen that had a skittle-alley attached, that
except in name or position might form a capital match for that Lion in
the Wood in Wilderness Lane, that he mentions in 'My Portrait,' at the
commencement of bis _Omnibus_. Whilst we were there as lookers-on only,
and sipping 'half-and-half' out of the same pewter 'between the acts,'
if they may be so called, or during the 'intervals,' at this Beggars'
Opera, friend Cruikshank amused himself by chalking one scene on the
wall, and all eyes were soon upon it, for it was lifelike and spirited.
Oh that I could have removed that wonderful cartoon from its surface,
or preserved a copy! it would now realize the value of many ordinary
frescoes and presumed originals--and more than drunken Morland's
'Goat-in-Boots' signboard. But leaving Bath for Cape Town three months
afterwards, the mind was absorbed in other matters, and both places
and scenes forgotten at the time, but now stand out in bold relief and
vividly."

[Illustration: 105]

This was George Cruikshank only a few years before he gave himself
wholly up to the cause of Temperance.

[Illustration: 106]





EPOCH II. 1848--1878.




CHAPTER I. AT GILLRAY's GRAVE.

No great stretch of the imagination is needed to conjure up an
interesting picture in the corner of the graveyard of St. James's,
Piccadilly, in that momentous June when the forces of France and the
Allies were gathering hastily for the field of Waterloo. It was on the
first of the month. From the famous print-shop of Mistress Humphrey in
St. James's Street, before which hosts of laughing men and women had
been wont to linger, a coffin was home, containing the mortal part of
the "Juvenal of caricature" as he had been called--of the hapless man of
genius, who had lain, with short flashes of sanity, full six years with
mind unstrung--a dreadful shadow over the mirthful shop. Behind followed
the good Mistress Humphrey and her faithful Betty, her maid; probably
stout Mortimer the picture dealer, possibly Mr. Gifford. Let us think
of Landseer and James Stanley and others to whom poor Gillray had been
known in his bright days, standing by the open grave near the Rectory
House, within full sound of the hum of Piccadilly. And at hand we shall
note a slim young man, with eager, piercing eyes, a hook nose, with fall
whiskers trimmed to the corners of his mouth; a young man with incessant
spasmodic action. His eyes start and his mouth works, as, the service
ended, he gazes into the yawning grave. To his neighbour he says, under
his breath, "A great man, sir--a very great man."

With a bow to weeping Mistress Humphrey he retires. The good soul, who
has now done her last duty to the poor madman with whom she has borne
patiently and gratefully so long, is pleased to note that Mr. Cruikshank
had not forgotten to pay his last tribute of respect and gratitude to
his master. Mrs. Humphrey, no doubt, regarded the young man whom she had
employed to finish Gillray's work when he first fell ill, and who had
since managed to keep the crowds laughing before her windows, as a
very poor substitute for the dead genius. And in those days Cruikshank
himself was still very modest, and was proud to be accounted strong
enough to hold the pencil and the needle of the stricken Gillray.

Upon a sensitive, imaginative, observant man like George Cruikshank,
the life of him whom he owned in his early days as his master, with its
awful close, must have made a deep impression. Men said that Gillray had
wrecked his career through frequenting low company, and by intemperate
habits. Cruikshank knew something of this, had seen much of such
company, and was in close companionship with tipplers. Gillray was not
the first man of mark whom he had watched from tavern to tavern, and
so on to poverty and death. Almost his earliest recollections were of
drinking bouts, and their debasing consequences. His boyish sight had
been offended at his father's house with the spectacle of drunken men
rolled up in carpets, upon whose blank and soddened faces the morning
sun was shining.* He had been saddened as a son by his father's example,
and inexpressibly shocked by the manner of his death. It appears that
Isaac Cruikshank, who was a heavy whisky drinker, laid a bet with a
boon companion that he would drink more tumblers than his friend without
falling under the table. He won his wager, but his excess brought upon
him the illness of which he died, about his fifty-fifth year. **

     * "At a meeting held at Manchester, this great artist gave
     an address on Temperance; in the course of which, referring
     to the early days of his life, and to the drinking habits
     which existed at that period, he said he recollected
     gentlemen coming to dine occasionally at his father's house,
     and he was often surprised on coming downstairs of a morning
     to find some of them rolled up in the carpet in an
     extraordinary manner. His own father took too much drink,
     and shortened his life by it. He shortened his life by the
     fashion of the day, and left him (the speaker)
     uneducated.... He had watched the effects of drink ever
     since he had begun to reflect, both among the higher and
     lower orders."--_Poor Richards Almanac_, 1876.

     **  This story was told to the Rev. Dr. Rogers by George
     Cruikshank.

Such experiences, albeit they led Cruikshank to reflect seriously on the
evils of excessive drinking, did not, as we have seen, at once turn him
from the bottle. Mr. Paget remarked in _Blackwood_ that Cruikshank was
a severe anatomist of the vice long before any idea of his celebrated
"Bottle" could have crossed his mind. In his "Sunday in London,"
published in 1833, he depicted the drunkard paying his week's score. In
one of his Temperance speeches he said: "I am ashamed to say that for
many years I went on following the ordinary custom of drinking, till
I fell into pecuniary difficulties. I had some money at a banker's; he
fell into difficulties, took to drinking brandy-and-water, and ended by
blowing out his brains.

I lost my money, and in my distress applied to friends who aided me for
a time, but they themselves fell into difficulties, and I was forced to
extricate myself by the most extraordinary exertions. In this strait I
thought, The best thing I can do is to take to water; but still I went
on for some time before I quite weaned myself from my own drinking
habits. I went to take luncheon with my friend Dickens (who, I am sorry
to say, is not a teetotaler); he asked me to take wine, but I told him I
had taken to water, for, in my opinion, a man had better take a glass of
prussic acid than fall into the other habit of taking brandy-and-water;
and I am happy to say that Charles Dickens quite agreed with me, that
a mam had better wipe himself out at once, than extinguish himself by
degrees by the soul-degrading and body-destroying enemy."

[Illustration: 112]

Immediately after the death of Gillray, we find evidence of the twinges
of conscience which Cruikshank felt, even while he continued to fall, at
intervals, into wild excesses. These were followed by dark passages of
remorse, and by resolutions which were again and again broken. The
fate of the men--and that of Gillray especially--whom he had seen fall
victims to what he was pleased to call the fashionable vice, would
rise before him. But, in an impulsive, convivial moment, his own sad
experiences of time wasted and opportunities gone, and of the friends he
had lost, were often forgotten; and he found himself, as of old, wending
his way home, in the small hours, covered with a sense of disgrace.
Cruikshank was no better, and no worse, than his contemporaries. A
letter in Procter's * neat hand lies before me. It is dated from Gray's
Inn Square, March 13th, 1839; and he says:

"I shall be very happy to be one of the number to dine with Macready.
But, remember, I cannot be one of those who will doubtless be found
_under_ the table at four a.m. (as I understand was the case upon a late
occasion)."

     * Barry Cornwall.

If, however, Cruikshank was not early a convert to the practice of
temperance, he was, as I have remarked, a preacher betimes.

His "Introduction to the Gout" (1818) is in his best vein. A toper is
seated over his pot, and holding a peach upon his fork, with which he
is about to cool his mouth. An imp--one Gout--approaches from the
fireplace, and with the tongs is about to drop a red coal on the
great-toe of Toper. Another drawing (a lithograph) of this date
is suggestive. It is called "Deadly Lively." Death has stepped in,
surprising a man and two women, who are drinking in a kitchen, before a
blazing fire. Death is filling the man's glass; the old woman is falling
from her seat, and the young man is tumbling drunk under the table.
Presently (in the same year) the artist is in a gayer mood as a
satirist. The picture is called "Tit-Bits." An Irishwoman, overcome by
beer, has fallen into a deep sleep under a tree. Her slumbers give a
yokel an opportunity of stealing one of her chickens, while a cur licks
the tarts in her basket.* Then we have "The Three Bottle Divine," no
_rara avis_ in those days. It is the head of a heavy, coarse-featured
man, in sporting guise, his face garnished with carbuncles and large
spectacles.

So far back as 1836, Cruikshank gave the public a foretaste of
"The Bottle" in a vignette to a music title. Two individuals are
represented--one old and spectacled, the other young and with an
eyeglass,--examining with horror the contents of a spirit bottle, which
is filled with malignant imps emblematical of alcohol as "doctored by
publicans," and sold for "Old Tom," etc. The cork has turned devil, and
throws up his arms in delight at the work of his imps.

     * The foregoing were drawn by Cruikshank from Captain Hehl's
     designs.

"Gin" remarks Mr. Thackeray, years before Cruikshank had become a
Temperance advocate, or in the least degree an abstainer; "gin has
furnished many subjects to Mr. Cruikshank, who labours in his own sound
and hearty way to teach his countrymen the dangers of that drink. In
the 'Sketch-book' is a plate upon the subject, remarkable for fancy and
beauty of design; it is called the 'Gin Juggernaut,' and represents
a hideous moving palace, with a reeking still as the roof, and vast
gin-barrels for wheels, under which unhappy millions are crushed to
death. An immense black cloud of desolation covers over the country
through which the gin monster had passed, dimly looming through the
darkness, whereof you see an agreeable prospect of gibbets with men
dangling, burnt houses, etc. The vast cloud comes sweeping on in the
wake of this horrible body-crusher; and you see, by way of contrast, a
distant, smiling, sunshiny tract of old English country, where gin as
yet is not known. The allegory is as good, as earnest, and as fanciful
as one of John Bunyan's, and we have often fancied there was a
similarity between the men."

The similarity, if you look deeply into the two imaginations, is strong
and striking, as it is between the genius of Dore in its grotesque and
moral moods, and that of Cruikshank. Compare Dore's "Wandering Jew," his
"Rabelais," his "Contes Drolatiques," with Cruikshank's work about 1826,
and even later, and you cannot fail to discover the strong affinity
between the two great artists. Dore knew nothing of Cruikshank's work
in his early time, and Cruikshank had never heard Dore's name when, in
1854, I brought over to England the blocks of his "Wandering Jew." **

     ** I introduced George Cruikshank to Gustave Dore in the
     Dore Gallery in Bond Street. Dore looked wonderingly at the
     vivacious, wild old man as he went through a pantomime in
     default of French, to express his admiration of the pictures
     the gallery.

In his illustrations to "Sketches by Boz," Cruikshank first approached
intemperance from that point of view in which he treated it afterwards
in "The Bottle." His view of the gin-shop comprehends a complete story.

"We have sketched this subject, says Dickens, "very slightly, not only
because our limits compel us to do so, but because, if it were pursued
further, it would be painful and repulsive. Well-disposed gentlemen
and charitable ladies would alike turn with coldness and disgust from
a description of the drunken besotted men and wretched, broken-down,
miserable women, who form no inconsiderable portion of the frequenters
of these haunts; forgetting, in the pleasant consciousness of their own
high rectitude, the poverty of the one and the temptation of the other.
Gin-drinking is a great vice in England, but poverty is a greater; and
until you can cure it, or persuade a half-famished wretch not to seek
relief in the temporary oblivion of his own misery with the pittance
which, divided among his family, would just furnish a morsel of bread
for each, gin-shops will increase in number and splendour If-Temperance
Societies could suggest an antidote against hunger and distress, or
establish dispensaries for the gratuitous distribution of bottles of
Lethe-water, gin palaces would be numbered among the things that were.
Until then, their decrease may be despaired of." Dickens here glanced,
and only carelessly, at the surface of the great question. This poverty
which he deplored was the result of the drink. The Lethe-water would be
unnecessary if the gin-and-water were stopped. Poverty, dirt, hunger,
promote the publican's trade; but this trade breeds the misery on which
it thrives. The quartern which the father drinks, helps to raise a
customer in his son, for the trade of the publican's son. More than ten
years elapsed before this view of the Temperance question was destined
to have complete sway and mastery over the genius of Dickens's
illustrator; but already he saw deeper into it, because he looked more
earnestly into it than the writer, who had not yet done with the comedy
element of drunkenness.

In 1841, Cruikshank drew for _Bentley's Miscellany_ an "allegorical
representation of the infatuation of the mob for ardent spirits, and the
drunkenness occasioned by an election, from a design by T. L. F." * In
1846, he illustrated _Our Own Times_, and in the _London Penetralia_
we find him moralizing with his etching-needle, in the ragged school of
Chick Lane, Smithfield, and satirising, under the head of "A Tremendous
Sacrifice," the slop-sellers who live in luxury on the work of poor
seamstresses.

     * "In the centre of the composition is the pedestal of an
     altar, ornamented with a bas-relief of Britannia, on which
     is resting a barrel of liquor, inscribed, 'Ruin Members and
     Co.--Poverty--Treadmill--Botany Bay,' the tap running for
     the gratification of an assemblage of drunken wretches, who
     eagerly endeavour to get their favourite beverage, excepting
     those who are helplessly drunk or fighting."--_Reid's
     Descriptive Catalogue._


[Illustration: 120]

Cruikshank was now inclining strongly to the work to which he was
destined to give the last thirty years of his life. And in 1847 he gave
himself up heart and soul to the preaching, by example as well as by
tongue and etching-needle, the moral which had haunted him so long, that
had left him no rest till he grappled with and conquered it, since he
had watched the eclipse of Gillray's genius, and seen his own father
hurried, by a boastful toper's bet, to his premature grave.

[Illustration: 121]




CHAPTER II. THE BOTTLE.

WE have seen that many years before the Temperance question fastened
itself upon Cruikshank's mind, never to be blotted out again for a
single day, he had marked and satirized the effects of drunkenness in
the desolate home, the workhouse, and the gaol. His "Gin Shop," where
Death sets a trap for a party of topers, the "Ale-house," and the
"Pillars of the Gin Shop," were drawn some fifteen years before he added
to the preaching of his needle and his pencil, the force of his personal
example.

In 1836, as the reader has already learned, the germ of "The Bottle"
appeared in a lithographed vignette to a music title, "The Dream of the
Bottle," and was published by poor old A. Schloss, proprietor of "lie
Bijou Almanac," a little annual that was issued with a magnifying
glass.* Schloss was a well-known figure in London years afterwards,
first as Staudigl's secretary, and afterwards as an _employe_ at
the office of Dickens's "Household Words." Then again, in "Sunday in
London," Cruikshank drew a Temperance moral from "The Pay Table." A
publican is pointing out a workman's score for the foreman to deduct
from his week's wages--with the lean and hungry wife and children at
hand. In the same series we find "The Sunday Market"--a butcher's shop
between two public-houses, where the food money is spent.

But "The Bottle" was Cruikshank's diploma work, as L. E. L., who edited
it, says in her dedication of the number for 1837 to Queen Adelaide. It
was bound in vellum and gold; illustrated with tiny portraits of Pastor,
Malibran, and others, enriched by fairy pages of music, and enclosed in
a blue velvet or morocco case, with a magnifying glass for the reader's
use. In that for 1839, poor L. E. L. bade her farewell to England.

It was a pictorial Temperance drama--so essentially dramatic indeed,
that on its first appearance it immediately found its way to the stage.
*

     * It was published by the late David Bogue, of Fleet Street.

The story of The Bottle is unfolded in eight designs executed in
glyphography--a process by which it was possible to execute the immense
number of copies which the publisher anticipated, and with good reason,
would be required by the public, but which is ungrateful and unfaithful
to the touch of the artist.

In the first plate we have a cosy family party. The open cupboard is
well supplied. The children are playing by the hearth; a kitten is
toying with the cat's tail upon the rug; the mantelpiece is loaded with
pretty ornaments; there is a picture of a village church against the
wall; at the table the husband and wife are seated at dinner, and he is
handing her a glass, which she coyly refuses. Under the plate we read:
"_The bottle is brought out for the first time: the husband induces his
wife 'just to take a drop._'" The interest deepens apace. The effect
of the first drop is seen in Plate 2. The sottish husband, with a pipe
hanging from his mouth, his kerchief awry, his clothes in disorder, sits
drowsy with drink, his children looking fearingly at him, while the wife
is giving a bundle of clothes to the servant girl, to pawn, "to supply
the bottle." The starved cat is licking an empty platter upon the table;
the cupboard door ajar discloses empty shelves. In the next plate "an
execution sweeps off the greater part of the furniture," but the drunken
man and wife huddle themselves before the fire, and "comfort themselves
with the bottle." There are Hogarthian touches, developing the story
throughout the series. In this plate the china cottage upon the
mantelpiece is broken, and the husband's battered hat upon a peg is the
only ornament to the bare walls. From the empty house the family repair
to the streets to beg, "and by this means they still supply the bottle."
In the fifth plate, "cold, want, and misery" have destroyed their
youngest child, and still "they console themselves with the bottle." A
little open coffin is in the room, and while the eldest girl weeps over
it, the father and mother drink, and weep also. A broken toy dog is upon
the mantelpiece near a candle, with a bottle for a candlestick. An old
shawl is fastened before the window with a fork. There are only a few
sticks in the fire. In the next scene the husband has his wife by the
throat; and his children and neighbours intervene.

"Fearful quarrels and brutal violence," says the artist-preacher, "are
the natural consequences of the frequent use of the bottle." Murder is
the next scene. The wife lies dead, with the doctor leaning over her,
and all the horrible _commeres_ who gather round death in the dark,
byways of great cities, are staring and talking. The murderer is in the
clutches of the police; the boy looks on aghast, holding his chin, and
trembling in his rags; the bottle, which has done the deed, is shivered
upon the floor and the fragments lie near a broken pipe, a ragged
slipper and a battered hat. The final scene is a mad-house. "The bottle
has done its work; it has destroyed the infant and the mother, the boy
and the girl left destitute and thrown on the streets, and has left the
father a hopeless maniac." The figure of the madman before the caged
fire is a very powerful bit of realism.

The moral of "The Bottle" was enforced by the poetic genius, Charles
Mackay. His "Gin-Fiend" sang to the scratching of Cruikshank's needle--

     "There watch'd another by the hearth,
     With sullen face and thin;
     She utter'd words of scorn and hate,
     To one that stagger'd in.
     Long had she watch'd; and when he came,
     His thoughts were bent on blood;
     He could not brook her taunting look,
     And he slew her where she stood.
     'And it's hip I' said the Gin-Fiend, 'hip, hurrah!
     My right good friend is he;
     He hath slain his wife, he hath given his life,
     And all for the love of me!'"

Regarded as a sample of Cruikshank's art power, these plates are
far below the level of his best. We do not perceive here the
master-craftsman. His dramatic force is evident in every plate. He tells
his story with the fulness and intensity which are in all his pictorial
narratives; but the drawing is without grace, and the types, with the
exception of the husband, are wanting in that strong individuality he
generally realized.

In a letter to Mr. Forster (September 2nd, 1847), Mr. Dickens describes
the impression "The Bottle" made on him:--

"At Canterbury yesterday, I bought George Cruikshank's 'Bottle.' I think
it very powerful indeed: the two last plates most admirable, except that
the boy and girl in the very last are too young, and the girl more
like a circus-phenomenon than that no-phenomenon she is intended to
represent. I question, however, whether anybody else living could have
done it so well. There is a woman in the last plate but one, garrulous
about the murder, with a child in her arms, that is as good as Hogarth.
Also the man who is stooping down, looking at the body. The philosophy
of the thing, as a great lesson, I think all wrong; because, to be
striking, and original too, the drinking should have begun in sorrow, or
poverty, or ignorance--the three things in which, in its awful aspect,
it _does_ begin. The design would thus have been a double-handed
sword--but too 'radical' for good old George, I suppose."

And yet such calamities as that which "old George" has drawn happen
every day; beginning not in sorrow, or poverty, or ignorance, but in
little yieldings to temptation, in apparently trivial and accidental
excesses. What constitutes intemperance? According to Dr. Alfred
Carpenter, any consumption of alcohol sufficient to furnish the blood
with one part of alcohol in five hundred of blood, is dangerous to
health, and therefore is an act of intemperance. A more moderate
indulgence, he says, is not yet proved to be deleterious. The late
Dr. Anstie put temperance in a different way. An average man or woman
cannot, according to him, take more than a couple of glasses of sherry
daily without injury. Dr. Carpenter has denounced the habitual use of
stimulants, even in a very diluted form, to enable the drinker to do
more work than he could get through without them, as unquestionably
injurious--and therefore an act of intemperance. There is not a
middle-aged man of education who has not come across the wrecks of lives
where the ruin was a gradual giving way to-the temptation of stimulants.

The police courts unfold daily stories of clerks and others, holding
positions of honour and of trust, who have first staggered out of the
straight path under the influence of drink. Cruikshank's beginning of
his drama is only too true to life; and I think he would have made a
mistake, that he would have weakened the tremendous force of his moral,
if he had put the excuse of sorrow, or poverty, or ignorance into
his opening scene. As his story, stands, it teaches humble and happy
households, in a rough text which all who run may read, to have a care
whenever the bottle appears on the scene; and to lose no opportunity of
impressing, upon the children the danger, of putting; the enemy near,
their mouths, who may steal away, not their brains only, but their heart
and soul.

"Coarsely designed and coarsely executed, yet very suggestive, very full
of that story-teller's power which was so much Hogarth's and his own,"
as Mr. Frederick Wedmore remarks, "Cruikshank's 'Bottle,' and the
'Drunkard's Children,' which immediately followed it, albeit executed
when the finer qualities of his genius were suffering decay, must always
be welcomed as admirable contributions to the _materiel_ of Temperance
advocacy." Cruikshank used to relate how, when his "Bottle" was
finished, and he was anxious to secure for this first Temperance sermon
the widest possible publicity, he carried the plates to Mr. William
Cash, then chairman of the National Temperance Society, for his
approval, and the support of his powerful Association. Mr. Cash,
although a Quaker, was a gentleman with a very sharp, humorous manner.
Having attentively examined the series, he turned upon the artist, and
asked him how he himself could ever have anything to do with using "The
Bottle," which, by his own showing, was the means of such dreadful evil?
Cruikshank, in his own forcible way, described how he was "completely
staggered" by this point-blank question. He said, when he had left Mr.
Cash, he could not rid himself of the impression that had been made upon
him. After a struggle, he did not get rid of it, but acted upon it, by
resolving to give his example as well as his art to the total
abstainers.

He was immediately rewarded by the extraordinary success which "The
Bottle" achieved. It was sold by tens of thousands, and was the talk of
the day. If it has not directly led to a tangible result, as Hogarth's
"Harlot's Progress" is said to have led to the foundation of the
Magdalen Hospital, it and the "Drunkard's Children," a poor sequel (but
then sequels are always poor), have had the effect of powerful, popular,
and permanent sermons against the monster evil of our time.

Not the least of the artist's rewards was the tribute to his genius it
inspired in Mr. Matthew Arnold, who wrote:--


     TO G. CRUIKSHANK,

     ON SEEING, IN THE COUNTRY, HIS PICTURE OF "THE BOTTLE."

     "Artist, whose hand, with horror wing'd hath torn
     From the rank life of towns this leaf! and flung
     The prodigy of full-blown crime among
     Valleys and men to middle fortune born,
     Not innocent, indeed, yet not forlorn--
     Say, what shall calm us when such guests intrude
     Like comets on the heavenly solitude?
     Shall breathless glades, cheer'd by shy Dian's horn,
     Cold-bubbling springs, or caves?--Not so!
     The soul Breasts her own griefs, and, urged too fiercely, says--
     'Why tremble? True, the nobleness of man
     May be effaced; man can control
     To pain, to death, the bent of his own days.
     Know thou the worst!
     So much, not more, he can. '"

[Illustration: 133]




CHAPTER III. GEORGE CRUIKSHANK AS A TEETOTALER.

George Cruikshank was an enthusiast in all things to which he gave his
mind. He did nothing in a halfhearted way. Whether preparing to address
a great Exeter Hall audience on the evils of drunkenness, or marching at
the head of his riflemen, or arraying himself in a table-cover to enact
the part of Lord Bateman; in small things as in great, he was ever at
fever-heat. He would have made a good actor, had he not been incapable
of a moment's repose; he would have been an admirable Temperance
advocate, had it been in him to give himself pause in order to think
over the heads of his discourse; he would have been a good volunteer
officer, had it been possible for him to sit quiet in his saddle. But he
seemed to be troubled with an excess of life. Life at fever-heat is
the dominant characteristic of all his work. The "quiet spaces" in his
etchings are rare.

Having been converted by his own "Bottle" to total abstinence from
fermented liquors, he could be nothing less than an earnest and a
vehement worker in the cause. He threw himself heart and soul into
it; and during the thirty remaining years of his life his zeal never
slackened, and he had never made sacrifices enough in it. His impulsive
advocacy often took ludicrous forms. He sometimes offended people by his
denunciations of even the most moderate drinkers, but he never made an
enemy by his _gaucherie_ or his downright phrases imported into quiet
circles, because the parity of his motive and the well-known impetuosity
of his nature excused him. I can remember, in the first year of his
total abstinence, meeting him at a ball given in Fitzroy Square, by Mr.
Joshua Mayhew, the father of Horace and the Brothers Mayhew. He danced
and was light-hearted with the youngest; but when at supper the wine
began to circulate, he stole round to the head of the table, and, laying
his hand upon the shoulder of the venerable host (who was a very haughty
and quick-tempered old gentleman), said, in a deep, warning voice, "Sir,
you are a dangerous man." Mr. Mayhew had a glass of wine in his hand,
and was about to drink a toast to the health of one of his sons,
when Cruikshank's hand fell upon his shoulder. "I look upon every
wine-drinker," Cruikshank added firmly, "as a dangerous man, sir." The
company, knowing the hot temper of their host, expected an explosion
of rage; but it was staunched by Horace Mayhew, who burst into a hearty
laugh, and told his father to go on, for "it was only dear old George."

In the same way, when dining at the Mansion House, Cruikshank, at the
passing of the loving-cup, would go through an extraordinary pantomime
before all the company, expressive of his horror of strong drinks. He
would shake his hand angrily at the Lord Mayor, and raise his arms with
horror while his neighbour quaffed of the cup. The company humoured
the eccentric old gentleman; for, in their hearts, they could not but
respect his downright earnestness. He lost no opportunity. Returning
home at the head of his volunteer corps, he showed his jaded officers,
who had freely taken beer, how fresh he was--on two oranges.

"Ah! you may laugh," he would say, when his friends bantered him about
his aggressive protests in society; "you may laugh, but I can tell you
this----the presence of the old jackdaw checked the drinking, if didn't
stop it, and I am very grateful to feel sure of that." * As Mr. Sala has
observed, "the veteran sticks bravely to his text." And well he might,
for his temperance renewed his youth. "He neither smoked tobacco nor
drank fermented liquors in his old age; but he was a hearty eater,
an early riser, and a vigorous walker and his reward was that which,
according to Gray, is only felt by boys at school--a perpetual
'sunshine of the breast.'" He was fond of showing this vigour renewed by
temperance, at every possible opportunity; for he very wisely regarded
it as his most forcible argument. It enabled him, in his old age, to
capture a burglar on his own premises. The story runs that when he was
following the burglar to the station, with the police, he drew him
under a lamp, and told him that he could see drink had brought him to
this--adding that he himself drank nothing but water. "I wish I'd ha'
known that," said the ruffian, "I'd ha' broken your head for you."
Cruikshank delighted to show an audience how he could hold a tumbler
full of water steady upon the palm of his outstretched hand. At eighty,
he was seen in costume at a fancy dress ball at Willis's Rooms, joining
heartily in the dance, and letting everybody know that it was "water
that did it."

     * Grace Stebbing's article on Cruikshank in the _Graphic_.

It was very difficult to obtain from him the toleration of tobacco smoke
in his company; for, after he had given up alcoholic stimulants, he
threw away his pipe. He would say to a man of letters whom he favoured,
laying his hand upon his arm, and turning those fierce eyes of his full
upon him, "I want you to give up drinking and smoking, and you tell me
that if you don't smoke you can't write. Now, I'll meet you half-way.
Give up the drink, and you may smoke---_just a little_." But, as a rule,
he was as stern in the matter of tobacco as in that of beer or gin. One
evening M. Legros, the distinguished French artist, lighted a cigarette
in his hall as he was leaving Mornington Place. "To that vice," said
"the inimitable George" in his deepest tone, "I was a slave for many
years, but now I am a free man."

To it also, it must be added, he owed one of his most imaginative and
delightful etchings,--"The Triumph, of Cupid,"--published in his "Table
Book."

His earnestness was extravagantly expressed in all things. As a furious
anti-Papist, he would draw aside and shake his coat when Sisters of
Charity or a Catholic priest passed him. "Do you see that fellow in
front?" he suddenly asked a friend with whom he was walking. It was a
workman quietly enjoying his pipe. "Do you know what I would do to him
if I were a man of fortune? I'd kick him! To think that any man should
be fool enough to place a tube between his lips, and go puff, puff,
puff!" This was his "counter blast." And he glared at the workman as he
passed on. He had himself been an inveterate smoker for more than forty
years!

On another occasion he drew sharply up before the windows of his old
wine merchant, and called out, "Give me back my thousand pounds!"

When the Crystal Palace was opened at Sydenham, Cruikshank, in his rage
that it had not been made a Temperance palace, drew some extravagant
drawings of the opening ceremony for Messrs. Cassell, one of which
represented the Archbishop of Canterbury bestowing his blessing upon a
public-house.

Dining one day at Grampian Lodge, Forest Sill, with his friend Dr.
Rogers, he suddenly began to tell the company that he had had a vision
the night before. Then he related it with much gesticulation, and with
dramatic effect.

He had seen two devils in council. One had said, "England is moral,
prosperous, happy--this will never do. How can we put an end to it? Her
crops are splendid; look, for instance, at her barley, her-" The
second devil interrupted: "I have an idea. Her barley, which makes such
splendid food, let us teach them to soak it, to sour it, to make it
ferment; in short, to turn it into a tempting poison."

"Agreed!" cried the first devil.

"Why," the second devil continued, "we will actually make them drink it
of their own accord; they shall lift the poison to their own lips with
their own hands."

"Ha! ha!" shouted the first devil; "and then of course, there will be
murder, robbery, violence, and misery all over the land."

"The devils have had their way," the old man added his keen eyes
glancing round the table to mark the effect of his vision.

He was indeed, as a writer called him, a "muscular teetotaler."

"In his time," a Temperance writer * records to his honour, "he must
have attended thousands of temperance meetings, and at these few men
were more welcome.

     * The Temperance Record, February 7th, 1878.

The style of his advocacy was peculiar, he passed from grave to gay with
facility, but he never lost sight of the great object he had in view.
He seemed for years, to be deeply impressed at the numerous murders
that were taking place, all of them, or nearly so, being in the last
instance, if not in the first, attributable to drink. He used to
exclaim, with deep fervour, 'Can nothing be done to stop these dreadful
murders?' The clear remedy of total abstinence from that drink which
was their inciting cause then came naturally from his lips; but though
individuals responded to his appeal, the general mass of the public
remained unmoved. Sometimes he would suggest a deputation to the House
of Lords. But though this idea was not acted upon, yet he lived to see
that august assembly collect evidence well fitted to be of service
to them, and also to the public at large. Mr. Cruikshank's powers of
mimicry were also very great, and often has he convulsed his audience
with his inimitable acting; but, at the same time, there was no
mistaking his deep earnestness, and the sincerity with which he
expressed the convictions of his heart.

He did his utmost, when the teetotalers had failed at the Crystal
Palace, to establish a teetotal palace in the old Surrey Zoological
Gardens; and he was drawn in state from the Hampstead Road to Walworth,
in a carriage and four, to open a bazaar in aid of the scheme. He even
prepared a design for the building. But although many went to cheer the
honest, earnest old man, few remained to invest, and the design fell
to the ground. It may have been some consolation to him and to his
Temperance friends to mark, afterwards, the services which the Crystal
Palace was destined to render to the cause of Temperance, for a drunkard
has hardly ever been seen under its shining roof.

Cruikshank could never convert his mother to his views. She lived with
him during the latter years of her life, and died under his roof, in
the care of a most reverent and attentive son.. She had always been a
careful, sober body, and would not be coerced, because her son could
not take his beer or toddy without committing excesses. She had been a
handsome woman in her days, a grandson records, and it was picturesque
to see the lame old lady, leaning upon her crutch, and wrapped in a
plaid,--with her shrivelled features and wild grey hair,--raise her
withered arm, and with the old fire declare that she would not surrender
her principles. A glass of beer with dinner, and a little toddy at
bedtime, she had always taken, and she took them to the end, and George
had to submit.

Addressing, on one occasion, a Temperance oration to a Bristol audience,
he appealed to his female hearers not to believe that "nourishing
stout" was necessary to nursing-mothers; and he pointed to himself as a
melancholy example, saying, "My mother first lifted the poisoned chalice
to my lips." His aged mother read this in the morning paper. Her wrath
was violent. "What!" she cried, "am I to be told publicly, at eighty
years of age, that I, who always begged and prayed him to be sober,
taught him to drink?" Her son did not return home for several days; but
he heard of his speech in no uncertain tones when he presented himself
to the old lady, who had, in his youth, often physically chastised him
for his excesses.

Perhaps the best specimen of his manner of laying his subject before an
audience is the speech which he delivered at the Grand Demonstration of
the National Temperance League, in the Guildhall, on the 19th of
November, 1864. It wants his by-play, his dramatic delivery, his
grotesque movements, and then the solemn sounds of his voice, to be
completely understood; but it is sufficiently original and suggestive as
reported:--

"My Lord Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen,---My worthy friend the doctor
has given you a very excellent discourse upon his own profession. It So
happens that as I was coming to this meeting I met with a gentleman who
had just been to consult his medical man; and finding I was coming to
this meeting, he laughed at all idea of abstaining from intoxicating
drinks. He told me he had been to see a very eminent member of the
medical profession. I asked him what was the result.

"He said the physician told him he wanted a stimulant and prescribed one.
I said, 'What did you give him:'

"He replied, 'Of course, I gave him the usual fee--a guinea.' I said, 'I
can show you how to save that guinea in future. If you will give me half
of it. I will give it to some good charity, and the other half you may
keep in your pocket.' He said, 'How is that?' I said, 'Instead of going
to the physician, go to the publican, and tell him what is the matter
with you, and he will prescribe the same thing; and if the landlord is
not in, say the same to the potboy, and he will do as well. Rely upon
it, they will prescribe exactly the same thing as the doctor, and the
effects will be the same. Now, I must say one word, if you please, to
defend a very eminent prince who has been mentioned here to-night. I am
sorry to say it happened to be my fate to hold up to ridicule the
Prince Regent--very often indeed; but he was not such a bad man as he is
represented to be. It must be recollected that if he committed excess in
the way of drinking, it was then the fashion for all the eminent persons
to get drunk. No man was considered a liberal man--no man was considered
a gentleman, in fact, unless he made his companions drunk; and
therefore, with all due respect to my friend Mr. Scott, who mentioned
the circumstance, it must be recollected that about half a century back
it was the fashion--it is a fearful thing, but it was the fashion--of
gentry to get drunk; therefore we ought to make allowances. But now,
my Lord Mayor, to come to this very serious question. This hall is the
place where the great City feasts are held, and the question is, is it
possible that there can be any grand entertainment given without mixing
up with it the intoxicating cup? What will be said? It is very well
for you, my lord, who are almost an abstainer yourself--very well for
you--but what will be said of another Lord Mayor who comes here and
gives a dinner without wine and beer? What will be said of him? He will
be called a shabby fellow; and the question is, whether the guests will
not all be melancholy. It will, perhaps, be somewhat in this style:
'Have a little more soup?' 'No, thank you.' 'More fish?' 'No, thank
you.' 'Bit of fowl?' 'No.' 'Venison?' 'No.' 'What, can't you eat any
more?' 'No, I don't like it: I want something to drink.' There is the
serious thing: what is to be done? There is one way of settling that
question. It is supposed that there can be no sociality, no comfort, no
enjoyment, without intoxicating drinks. Now, I recommend the next Lord
Mayor who may succeed our honoured chairman, if he be in favour of the
moderate use of these delightful drinks, to be so good as to ask the
present company to come to dinner. Wouldn't you enjoy yourselves? And
then, when we have had enough to eat, and want something to drink, here
you are (holding up a glass of water)--Mr. Chairman, your very good
health! Ladies and gentlemen, your good health! (drinking the toast.) We
should have a jolly time of it. (Loud and long-continued cheering.) Mr.
Morley says we will take the sherbet without the punch. That is the way
in which these things are looked at; but supposing that it is
impossible that any social enjoyment can be had without the use of these
stimulants, let us take another view of the question. I have had the
honour of dining here, and I have enjoyed myself very much, not only in
the time when I used to take wine myself--because I recollect there
was such a time as that--but when I have been a teetotaler I have been,
here, and enjoyed my dinner very much indeed, without any of these
drinks. But supposing we had this hall upon the occasion of the Lord
Mayor's feast with the most elegant people in the world (for I believe
of all the people in the world the British people are the best looking
and the best dressed): imagine the scene! The tables are set out in
the most splendid manner; everything looks grand and happy; but what
is going on outside? Ay! my friends, the most splendid monument in the
world where this drink is used in moderation as it is in this country,
may in the inside be a splendid monument of good order, taste, and
sobriety, but at the outside there is filth and dirt and crime through
drink. I say, suppose these social meetings cannot be enjoyed without
these drinks, let us look at the outside. Now, there are a certain
number of circumstances or acts committed in society, which are always
injurious, not only to the individual himself, but also to society at
large. Now, I do not mean to say that every teetotaler is an honest man.
There may be some dishonest fellows amongst them. I have heard of two
in the last thirty years. This reminds me, by-the-bye, of a teetotal
turnkey at Coldbath Fields. There were two youths brought into the
prison, who were teetotalers, and the other turnkeys jeered the teetotal
turnkey upon it. He said, 'It is true that there are two teetotalers
here, but they are here only for begging, whereas you have about fifteen
hundred brought in who drink, and they are most of them committed for
stealing.' There are a number of besetting sins connected with drinking,
such as robberies, brutal assaults, garotting, house-breaking, suicide,
and murder. By-the-bye, speaking of murder, there has been a very strong
feeling existing for many years, and still increasing, against the
punishment of death. I think it is a very horrible thing indeed to hang
anybody; but, my friends, do not forget that it is a still more horrible
thing for one to be murdered. Do not let us forget that. There was a
young man in the country a little while ago hanged for murder--quite a
young man. It was a sad thing indeed, no doubt, to see this poor fellow
gibbeted; but what was he hanged for? He had been drinking on the
Saturday night, and he murdered a young woman as she was going to church
on the Sunday morning. Do not forget that these horrible, detestable,
damnable crimes are committed under the influence of drink. We will
talk about doing away with the punishment of death after we have stopped
murders. I had the honour of speaking in the Mansion House when Mr.
Charles Pearson, the City solicitor, brought on the question about the
convicts; and I told the Lord Mayor then, that if we could do away
with intoxicating liquors altogether, we might wheel out that dreadful
instrument the gibbet into the Old Bailey, and make a bonfire of it. I
believe you will find, if you go into the question, that there is hardly
a murder committed in this country out of a hundred--I may say out of
a thousand--not ten out of ten thousand--but drink has something to
do with it. Remove the drink, and you will stop murder. But there is
a gentleman who ought to have been speaking instead of myself, and
therefore I will not detain you much longer; but I will say this, my
friends, and call your attention to it especially, that the teetotal
question has now been before the world for about thirty years, and
during that short time I challenge any one to point out any teetotaler
who has been committed for a brutal assault upon his wife, or for
garotting, or picking pockets, or house robbery, or murder. I challenge
the world to produce one single case wherein any real teetotaler has
been convicted of one of those crimes. Then, if this be so, what have we
to do but to spread this Temperance movement throughout the length and
breadth of the land? and then we should stop, if not all crimes, if not
all offences, still the great majority of them; and that is what we are
aiming at. And recollect this, my friends, that we are not a society
formed merely for the purpose of reclaiming the drunkard. It is a very
good thing to do so, and I am sorry to say that my time is so occupied
that I am almost in despair. I have six most dreadful cases in hand at
the present moment There is nobody to assist them. I could not go to the
brewer or distiller, and ask them to give me funds for the support of
these people whom they have rained; and why not? Because there is blood
upon the money. I would not have it. But I had to-day a letter imploring
me for help from the nephew of an old friend of my father. What am I
to do? I have a lady in the country at this moment, the wife of a
barrister, who is starving for want of help, and whose husband has been
ruined by drinking. My time is occupied, and my friends are gone, and
I am called upon for all I can afford. But, my friends, if you do away
with these drinks, you do away with these cases. But it is utterly
impossible to go into the evils arising out of these drinks in the time
I have to speak--they are so extensive; all I have to say is, 'Go on and
prosper!' and prosper we shall. I cannot sit down without saying that I
look upon this meeting to-night to be one of the grandest movements that
this cause has ever had. I say it from my heart, and think that those
gentlemen who have assisted in getting up this meeting deserve our best
thanks."

The idea of a temperance Lord Mayor's Banquet suggests, no doubt, many
vastly amusing incidents and episodes to the mind of the comic writer,
but honest-hearted George Cruikshank could not, and would not, in his
latter dav, see any element of fun in drunkenness, and he was quite in
earnest in recommending the next Lord Mayor to fill his loving-cup with
pump water. *

     *  Since Cruikshank delivered the above speech, a Temperance
     banquet has been held at the Mansion House.

The account he gave, moreover, of his trouble about the many people who
were seeking his assistance, was true of his experience year after year.
His doors were besieged. He was waylaid by petitioners for his known
bounty (the recklessness of which, as we have seen, Dickens reproved)
whenever he went abroad. A poor man himself, for ever in money troubles,
even to the end of his laborious life, his heart lay always open to a
tale of distress. He was never without "cases" on hand.

It has been remarked of his Temperance days, by one of his friendliest
critics, that his style suffered from the contraction of his ideas and
sympathies, "and it cannot be questioned that with the general public
his reputation declined in proportion to the increase of his popularity
among the teetotalers." He lost heavily, in a pecuniary sense, by his
Temperance advocacy. Publishers ceased to employ him. He remarked that,
for the last ten years of his life, he was without commissions. He had
refused none, he would say. He was willing to work, and he held that his
powers were unimpaired.

Temperance preacher; to them the inimitable George, the illustrator
of Boz, the kindly satirist, the creator of "Points of Humour," the
illustrator of Grimm, was dead.

And, firmly believing this, the brave old man held on in the rigid
course of duty he had laid down for himself. He had seen all the horrors
which lie behind drunkenness; in his early time he had himself been a
tavern hero; and he had dedicated the remainder of his life to the work
of warning the rising generation out of the path in which he himself had
stumbled.

"I come forth," he said, in one of his earliest temperance harangues,
"to set by my humble example the opinion of this unthinking world at
defiance."

But the public had come to regard him simply as a keen a sense of the
ridiculous as most men. I can see clearly what is ridiculous in others.
I am so sensitive myself, that I am quite alive to every situation,
and would not willingly place myself in a ridiculous one; and, I must
confess, that if to be a teetotaler was to be a milksop, if it was to
be a namby-pamby fellow, or a man making a fool of himself or of others,
then indeed I would not be one--certainly not; but if, on the contrary,
to be a teetotaler is to be a man that values himself, and tries by
every means in his power to benefit others; if to be a teetotaler is to
be a man who tries to save the thoughtless from destruction; if to be
a teetotaler is to be a man who does battle with false theories and bad
customs, then I am one. I have been a convert but a short time, not much
over twelve months. I only wish that I could say, with Dr. Gourley, that
I had never taken a glass of spirits in my life; I wish that I had acted
upon the principles of total abstinence only thirty years ago; for if
I had, I am convinced that at this time I should have been much better,
both in body and mind. I have experienced much benefit already, both
physically and mentally. I never did sneer at or scorn the question of
Temperance, yet I never thought that I should stand up as a teetotal
advocate; but I am proud that I have been put into the position in which
I am now placed.

Later on, still conscious of the disadvantage at which he was placing
himself as an artist, he said to another audience--.

"When I left off drinking wine altogether, and became a total abstainer,
I became a healthier and stronger man, more capable of meeting the heavy
responsibilities that were upon me, and for the following two years I
had my life renewed, and all the elasticity of my schoolboy days came
back to me. Domestic afflictions then came upon me, ending in death, and
my spirits and health were crushed down. In this extremity I applied
to my medical adviser. He said, 'Medicine is of no use to you; you
must drink wine again.' I refused, and my medical friend called in some
others of his profession; he told me they had had a consultation, the
result being that all of them agreed it was necessary I should drink
wine to restore my sinking constitution. I replied,

"'Doctor, I'll take your physic, but not your wine. Let me try everything
else first, and only when there is no other chance give me wine, because
I feel there is a great principle at stake in this matter.' I have said,
and I believe, wine is unnecessary, even as a medicine, and I do not
wish to do a single act which would tend to weaken or destroy the weight
and force of that conviction. And here I stand. I have not tasted the
vile and destroying enemy, and I am almost restored to health, without
having risked the violation of my principles. I call this a triumph; and
I stand here as an evidence that wine is totally unnecessary, even as a
medicine."

Much later, we find the preacher an octogenarian--albeit rudely buffeted
by the world, and well-nigh forgotten as a living artist--still true to
his noble text. "Alcoholic liquors," he exclaimed to an audience, little
more than two years before his death, "were recommended to keep up
strength! But what kept up his strength? He had not taken a drop of
wine, beer, or any alcoholic drink, for twenty-seven years, and he would
be eighty-three next September, if he lived till then. What was it,
then, that kept up his strength? Since he had given up drinking beer and
smoking, he had had a higher enjoyment of life, because all his nervous
system was in proper tone."

Cuthbert Bede, who knew Cruikshank intimately in his teetotal days, has
drawn this graphic picture of the Temperance advocate at home:--

"Though I had interchanged letters with Mr. George Cruikshank for
several years, it was not until early in the autumn of 1853 that I made
his personal acquaintance. He had asked me to write a serial story for a
projected publication to be illustrated by himself ; and, as it would
simplify matters if we could talk over the subject together, I went up
from the country to London to call upon him. He was then living in
Mornington Crescent, near to Regent's Park. Numerous portraits had made
me familiar with his personal appearance, so that I needed not to be
told who was the gentleman who so courteously received me downstairs,
and then took me upstairs to his comfortable studio, where he introduced
me to his wife. Some of our first conversation, indeed, was on the
subject of his portrait; for, among the pictures on his walls, I had
noticed the original of the portrait by Frank Stone, which was engraved
on steel for the Omnibus, and was certainly a far more flattering
representation of George Cruikshank than the caricaturist's sketches of
himself. I told him that I considered the best portrait of himself was
to be found in his own etching, 'The Reverie,' published in his Table-
Book, and in every respect a wonderfully fine specimen of his art and
genius. I also referred to his own account of 'My Portrait,' in the
_Omnibus_, in which, with his own pen and pencil, he portrayed himself,
and made comments on a curious description of himself that had been
given in a publication called 'Portraits of Public Characters'; how he
was said to be of the medium height, with a forehead of a prominently
receding shape, with a handsome pair of whiskers, and hair partaking of
a lightish hue; and, moreover, how the ludicrous and extraordinary
fancies with which his mind was constantly teeming often imparted a sort
of wildness to his look frighten from his presence those unacquainted
with him.

"He read these and similar passages to me, and was immensely tickled at
their egregious absurdity. In truth, his manner at once impressed me as
being peculiarly gentle, and kind, and genial. Instead of assuming any
airs of superiority, I found him possessed of all the humble modesty and
chivalrous courtesy of the truly great artist and thorough gentleman;
and although I was quite young, and he was in his sixty-first year, he
treated me as though I had been his equal, if not superior, in ability.
We had so much to talk about, and he had so much to show me, that my
first interview with George Cruikshank had been prolonged to nearly four
hours before I became aware how quickly the time had flown. The time had
then arrived for their luncheon, or early dinner; and as both Mr. and
Mrs. Cruikshank pressed me to stay, and I had by this time overlapped
the hour at which I had made another engagement, I readily and
peculiarity to his manner, which would suffice to consented to remain,
and we went downstairs to dinner. 'There will be nothing else than a leg
of mutton,' said Cruikshank. 'I happen to know that, for I came in with
it,' I replied; 'for as I knocked at the hall door the butcher's boy was
down in the area, delivering the leg of mutton to the cook.' Cruikshank
seemed to be greatly amused at this, for he laughed heartily, and said
to his wife, 'My dear, Mr. -------- came in with the mutton.' Something
in the occurrence seemed to mightily tickle his fancy, for more than
once he repeated the words to his wife, 'My dear, Mr. -------- came in
with the mutton!' It was while I was eating it that I terribly
forgot myself. The day was very sultry; it was five hours since I had
breakfasted; we had been busy talking, and I felt thirsty. So, while the
parlourmaid was handing something to me. I asked her to give me a glass
of beer. She replied, 'We have no beer, sir.' 'Then,' I said, 'please
to bring me the sherry.' 'There is no sherry, sir.' Whereupon my
host interposed, and laughingly explained that he could not allow the
introduction of any alcoholic liquor into his house; and that, while
I was his guest, I must content myself with drinking water. Then I
suddenly remembered that which I ought not to have forgotten, even for
a moment, that my host had devoted himself to teetotal, who, six years
before, had drawn the eight scenes of 'The Bottle,' and had thereby
struck a powerful blow at one of the greatest vices of the age.

"I duly apologized for my forgetfulness; and the incident naturally led
Cruikshank to dilate on that important theme, in furtherance of which he
so steadily devoted his great powers to the very end of his career,
with a persistent courage and devoted zeal that won for him the genuine
respect and admiration of those even who could not wholly agree with him
in details. I was one of those. I could travel with him, very willingly,
up to a certain point, after which our paths parted, and we 'agreed
to differ.' I could accompany him to temperance, but not to total
abstinence. During the remainder of the time that we occupied over
dinner, we scarce spoke on any other subject than that which gave ism,
and that I was sitting at the table of the artist rise to the scenes
of 'The Bottle,' 'The Drunkard's Children,' 'The Gin Trap,' 'The Gin
Juggernaut'--and, at a later period, his large oil-painting, 'The
Worship of Bacchus.'

"Our discussion on the subject was preserved with perfect good humour;
so much so, that I ventured to remind him that only a year or so before
he had been converted to teetotalism he had caricatured Father Mathew,
in an etching for the _Comic Almanac_ for 1844, representing him as an
old pump. I reminded my host that these were his sentiments for more
than fifty years of his life, and that he had never during that period
objected to the moderate use of alcoholic liquors, although he had
always vigorously lashed their gross abuse; and I pleaded that I had
not lived for half those years that I had named, and that I might be
pardoned for my forgetfulness in asking his servant for beer and wine.

"Then he told me how the crying sin of the age had sunk deep down into
his heart, especially when he had seen it flourishing, like an upas
tree, in all its foul deformity, in those courts and alleys into which
he was so often led in search of subjects for his pencil; and how the
design for 'The Bottle' had gradually grown upon him, and the necessity
for practising what he preached, which he found he could do only by
cutting himself adrift from all alcoholic drinks. He also explained how
his plans to disseminate the scenes of his 'Drunkard's Progress,' in
such a form and at such a low price that they should reach those
masses for whom he specially designed them, were hampered and well-nigh
frustrated, chiefly by the cost of engraving such large drawings on
wood; and how the new art of glyphography had come to his assistance,
and enabled him to draw the eight designs, and to sell them (with Dr.
Charles Mackay's explanatory poem) for a shilling--which in the year
1847 was an extraordinarily low price for such a production. 'You will
remember,' he said, 'how Maclise represented me seated on a beer-barrel,
getting my inspiration from pothouse scenes, and pencilling them on the
crown of my hat?' 'Yes, I remember: it was in the _Fraser_ gallery of
portraits.

And you have amply proved to the world since then that you can turn to
the best account, and for the public good, the people and incidents
that you saw in those places.' I told him that of 'The Bottle' and
'Drunkard's Children' series I preferred the one where the poor girl
commits suicide from Waterloo Bridge--the idea of the body falling from
a height being so vividly conveyed to the eye, as to impress one with
the conviction that we can really see the swift descent of that 'one
more unfortunate.'"

An instance of Cruikshank's earnestness in the Temperance cause happened
in May 1854. He had been invited to preside over a meeting of total
abstainers, to be held in Sadler's Wells Theatre, a place associated in
his mind with the glories of his friend Joe Grimaldi, the clown, and the
days when he was a frequenter of the clown's club, "The Crib," hard by.
The great Temperance advocate, J. B. Gough, was to address the audience.
Cruikshank introduced him in his own original way, delivering, as the
papers remarked, a speech full of piquant and incontrovertible truth.
But it was at the close of the orator's speech that the chairman proved
himself equal to the occasion. Seeing that the audience were under the
spell of Mr. Gough's eloquence, he rose and exhorted them at once
to come forward and sign the pledge. With this he advanced to the
footlights, bridged the orchestra with a few planks, and stood by to
receive the ladies who came forward in crowds, many of them leading
their children. So delighted was the artist with the number of converts
he led to the table to sign the pledge, that he drew the scene for the
_Illustrated London News_, with himself for central figure.

[Illustration: 168]

I remember attending another meeting in George Cruikshank's company. It
was a gathering of London pickpockets, called by Mr. Henry Mayhew,
when he was engaged upon his London Labour and London Poor inquiry. The
solemn, but still somewhat grotesque impressiveness of the Temperance
preacher, as he rose, while that dreadful company of keen-eyed vicious
lads were eating the plain Temperance supper which had been provided for
them, to bid them renounce the evils of their way, and as a beginning,
to shun the bottle and the beer-pot, dwelt long in my memory. "Man,"
said Lord Lytton, "has no majesty like earnestness." That night, honest,
whole-hearted Cruikshank, as with wild gesticulation he talked to "the
dear lads"--for the forlornest and wickedest waif was dear to him--was
clothed in majesty; and it cowed a man at hand, who acknowledged, within
his hearing, that he had smuggled something stronger than water into the
room.

[Illustration: 170]




CHAPTER IV. THE TRIUMPH OF BACCHUS.

Mr. Wedmore, in his critical sketch of Cruikshank, has described in a
few pregnant sentences, how in his later days the public fell away from
the great humourist and subtle observer:--

"As time went on apace, neither the passage of time itself, nor the hard
work which crowded the days of his maturity in art, nor the comparative
neglect of the later years, when Cruikshank, no longer quite in the
movement of the day, was solaced by visits in the Hampstead Road,
chiefly of a very few who were collectors of his work, or of some stray
humourist still faithful and confident in the achievement of so many
years ago. As time went on, Cruikshank wore well and slowly, so that it
was truly said of him that he looked as if he had once been very old and
then had forgotten it. Employed no longer in sketching and satirising
the society of which he was hardly any more a part, he betook himself,
a good deal by choice, to work more distinctly ambitious than any he had
attempted when his hand was really the strongest and his brain the
most fertile. He furnished the design for a monument to King Robert the
Bruce. He painted in oils, not only this or that moral lesson, but a
tale of heroism in humble life. No doubt the absence of the knowledge
of academical draughtsmanship told against him not less in 1871 than it
would have done half a century before, and no doubt the absence of any
capacity for the subtle modulations of colour--nay, the absence even of
sensitiveness to these--made his painting in oil a failure when judged
by the side even of quite every-day work by every-day artists. Thus it
was that no fresh honours came to him when he was still eager for them.
The popularity of the great days was a little forgotten by the public
in the presence of the failure of the most recent. And then again,
advertised poverty is never a helpful thing. We worship merit a little,
but success more, and success must have its stamp. The public of
Cruikshank narrowed. Of course critics and journalists--the men whose
business it is to keep in memory some work that the chance public
praises one day and forgets the next--knew that Cruikshank was great,
and how he had been great, and having in more than one notable instance
said so faithfully during his old age, said so again last month, when
he died. And of course, again, so much of his work having become rare,
collectors of it had arisen--curious and anxious seekers, to whose
interest we shall owe the preservation of many of his early and many
even of his riper things. For them, when Cruikshank's work was pretty
well accomplished, and 'finis' seemed about to be written to that
immense volume of production, Mr. G. W. Reid engaged on a task of
care--the great _catalogue raisonne_ in which, with here and there
errors not easily avoided, he has chronicled well-nigh five thousand
designs: 'the smiling offspring,' as Thackeray so admirably said
of them, 'the smiling offspring of painful labour.' But in the main
Cruikshank was forgotten, and the weekly smiles--feint though now
and again they needs must be, and of indulgence rather than
commendation--which are given by the English public to the efforts of
our youngest English humour, a little trivial and slight, had ceased to
be bestowed on that larger and more massive humourist who lingered from
the past he was part of."

This is very true, and is a very sad story skilfully told. Think what
would have become of the neglected or forgotten humourist, if, when the
mere laughing public had turned away from him to Leech and Doyle, and
Tenniel and Du Maurier, he had not been fired with the ardour of an
apostle in the cause he had taken up. His Almanac had failed for lack of
readers; and David Bogue had thrown up Cruikshank's Magazine, after the
second number--convinced that the artist had outlived his public. His
ambition to become a painter was mercifully renewed, with the renewal of
his health and mind, through temperance. Full of vigour he used to say,
"A painter should paint from his shoulder, sir." He became almost wholly
a serious man in his work, and appealed to a public in a new capacity.
He resolved, stimulated by the success of "The Bottle," to execute a
great picture that should remain behind him, a monument of his genius,
and an immortal Temperance lesson.

In the early ardour of his second youth he had braced himself to
supply, so far as he might, albeit he had reached his sixtieth year, the
deficiency in his art education, by working as a student at the Royal
Academy. He had, he believed, all his powers unimpaired; why then
should he not yet obtain the academical knowledge, of which he had been
deprived, as he had said bitterly, through the improvident habits of
his whisky-drinking father. Mr. Charles Landseer says: "He entered as
student at the Royal Academy, during my keepership, April 22nd, 1853;
but made very few drawings in the _Antique_, and never got into the
_Life_. He was placed upon the Turner Fund in 1866--L50 per annum. I
have heard that he made an application to Fuseli for admission to the
R.A., and was informed that the school was too full, but that he might
go and draw there if he could find a place." *

     * Letter from Charles Landseer to B. J., Feb. 18, 1878.

This is the brief record of George Cruikshank's relations with the
Academy. He was past the years when men learn. Time pressed too heavily
upon the elderly man to leave him patience for the slow progress from
the "Antique" to the "Life." He had been at the "Life" in his own
keen way since he was a boy; and he must be content to paint with the
imperfect but original knowledge which had sufficed for his etchings.

And so he turned to his easel, and painted in oils, with something of
his own inimitable power of concentration and dramatic story-telling,
such subjects as he had treated in earlier days with his etching-needle.
His "Tam o' Shanter," "Grimaldi the Clown Shaved by a Girl," "The
Runaway Knock," "The Fairy Ring," "Titania and Bottom the Weaver,"
"Dressing for the Day," "A New Situation," and "Disturbing the
Congregation," were exhibited at the Royal Academy or at the British
Institution; and were welcomed, for the fancy, the life, the humour that
were in them--although they were one and all crude or violent in tone,
and betrayed in every part a hand unpractised with the brush, and an
eye dead to the delicacies of colour. They were, in truth, such bits
of humour or fancy as the master humourist was wont in the old time
to throw off at the rate of two or three in a week--only laboriously
rendered in oils. The Runaway Knock, for instance, might be a plate in
the "Sketch-Book," or in "Points of Humour"--and the remark applies
to Grimaldi being Shaved by a Girl, and the Disturbing the
Congregation--which latter, to the artist's great delight, the Prince
Consort, who was one of Cruikshank's cordial admirers, bought. Some of
these fetched high prices. The Fairy Ring, the most imaginative, and as
a composition the best of Cruikshank's oil-paintings, painted in
1855, was a commission given to the artist by Mr. Henry Miller, of
Preston--the price being L800. * The fairy revel is full of exquisitely
suggestive bits. The canvas swarms with fairy life, and abounds with
fanciful episodes.

     * It is now in the possession of Captain Douglass Kennedy,
     of Summerfield, Kirkby-Lonsdale, Mr. Miller's son-in-law.

The grace and spirit with which the artist could treat fairy or elfin
life may be seen in scores of his earlier works. Look at this "Fairy
Revenge," from "Scott's Demonology," drawn in 1833.

[Illustration: 178]

"The Runaway Knock" is, as the reader will perceive, simply such a
bit of Cruikshankian humour as he had been wont to treat with his
etching-needle. It is full of life and excitement. The entire household,
to the pug puppy-dog, has been aroused; nor could the painter refrain
from throwing life into the carved stone head over the street-door.
Again, "Disturbing the Congregation" is an etching subject, elaborated.
A little boy, in church, has dropped his pegtop, and the awful eye of
the beadle (Cruikshank created the British beadle as a humorous figure)
is upon him. The Prince Consort, whom a genuine bit of humour delighted,
was glad to add this most characteristic Cruikshank to his collection.

Cruikshank's old friend, Clarkson Stanfield, first persuaded him to
trust himself to oils. In his tinted designs, he showed that sense
of colour which was everywhere manifest in the etchings of his best
time--in his designs to Ainsworth, for instance. The watercolour
drawings for his Walter Scott plates, again, are admirable. * But in
oil, it must be repeated, he failed utterly.

     * They were for a long time the property of Mr. Lumley, of
     Her Majesty's Theatre, and on the sale of his effects
     passed, fortunately, into the hands of Mr. Ellison, who
     bequeathed his collection to the South Kensington Museum.

The touch of the etcher remained. He was hard and crude. The first
painting he exhibited was "Bruce attacked by Assassins"--the Bruce upon
a burlesque horse smothered in drapery! It was exhibited at the Royal
Academy. His next picture was "Moses dressing for the Fair"--a subject
more within his power; but it was coarse, inharmonious, and sketchy. The
wonder was that Cruikshank could not perceive that he was on the
wrong road. So far, however, was he from suspecting this, that he was
constantly meditating great historical subjects; and actually "got
in" upon a spacious canvas the Battle of Agincourt. He even began a
scriptural subject, "Christ riding into Jerusalem." But the genius that
could realize a street or fairy mob * upon a surface no broader than the
palm of the hand, could not paint a battle-piece. Without his outline
he was all abroad. The sacred subject remained in the studio, with many
other canvases, to the end. It was his "Battle of a Gin Court," in his
"Sunday in London" that showed the master. He admitted, when it was
suggested to him, that the "etching-point feeling" was always in his
fingers, giving a "living" sensation to the brush, and that he never
could get rid of it. His Falstaff tormented by the Fairies, was, on
the whole, the painting he completed with most thorough satisfaction to
himself.

     * "Cruikshank's crowds give one exactly the impression of
     reality. They show a certain monotony, from the common
     impulse of the mob, yet they are full of characteristic
     figures, no two exactly alike. There is also all the due
     sense of air, and motion, and fluctuation about them. They
     are penetrable crowds, especially the Irish, which he
     delights to draw,--true _mobiles_,--ready to break out into
     new mischief, or disperse before the onslaught of the
     Saxon."--Francis Turner Palgrave.

Mr. Wedmore, dwelling on the shortcomings of biographers, complains that
where an artist is the subject they tell "not much of the work he had
planned but never executed; work, nevertheless, on which perhaps he
had set great store, and looked forward to completing, and 'purposes
unsure.' 'That weighed not as his work, yet swelled the man's amount.'

"You should see the comedies I have not written," said a pensive
playwright. Cruikshank was, throughout his life, disturbed by
unfulfilled dreams of great subjects, with which he felt his genius
could cope. He would have grappled with Milton, as we have seen, but
hard fate kept him tied to bread-and-cheese work, and to minor themes.
His "Pilgrim's Progress" remains unfinished, and, even so far as he
executed it, unpublished. *

     *  The plates are in the possession of Mr. Truman.

     "Ah! who shall lift that wand of magic power,
     And the lost clue regain?
     The unfinished window in Aladdin's tower,
     Unfinished must remain."

It would have gone sadly then, when the publishers could no longer find
profit in his work, when the public had turned from his old-fashioned
humour and fancy, to the fresher and more peaceful, albeit more
circumscribed and less earnest, genius of Leech, had he not been buoyed
up and comforted with the self-imposed mission, for which he had buckled
on new armour, resolved to die fighting in the good cause. And so while
his rival rode prosperously on the fashion of the hour, catching, in the
words of Herrick,

     "A winning wave, deserving note,
     In the tempestuous petticoat"--

he ordered a broad canvas to be carried to his modest studio in the
Hampstead Road, and sat himself patiently down--his morrow's bread
secured by the sympathetic admiration of a few real friends--to build
up that monument of his many-sided genius, his cartoon, composed in the
manner of his master Gillray's "Democracy, or a Sketch of the Life of
Bonaparte"--in a series of compartments.

The story of the Triumph of Bacchus is honourable to all parties
concerned. On the one hand we find the veteran artist eager to perform
an enduring work in support of the Temperance cause; and on the other a
knot of friends, also good servants of the cause, anxious to put him
in a position to labour in comfort. It has been said the National
Temperance League was the means of giving the great painting
and engraving to the world; but the truth is, that no temperance
association--as an association--took action in the matter. The many
earnest men who have this good cause at heart co-operated in several
ways in furtherance of the artist's plans; but these plans were actually
directed by a small independent committee, who held on to their task
through many troubles and some disagreements, until the plate was
completed, and the picture was finally made over to the nation.

When Cruikshank had drawn a rough sketch in oils of his design, he
invited a few friends to his house to consult with him as to ways and
means. The gentlemen who met as a committee were Sir Francis Crossley,
John Stewart--the art critic, Mr. Hugh Owen of the Poor Law Board, Mr.
John Taylor, and Mr. W. Tweedie, the publisher. The result of their
consultation was the adoption of a proposal submitted by Mr. Stewart,
who was a fervent admirer and devoted friend of the artist.

George Cruikshank undertook to produce his complete design in
water-colours, from which a steel etching was to be executed. The artist
assumed the entire pecuniary responsibility of the undertaking, on
the condition that his friends would supply him with what he called
"spending money," or money for his daily wants, while the engraving was
in progress. The advances of his supporters were to be refunded out of
the proceeds of the sale of the plate. On this arrangement Cruikshank
went to work with his usual vigour. The water-colour design was soon
completed, and placed in the hands of Mr. Mottram, the engraver--the
understanding being that the outline of every figure was to be etched
by Cruikshank himself. This laborious work he finally performed, but not
before serious and harmful delays had occurred.

It had been distinctly understood that the great oil painting--the
ultimate form which the design was to take--was not to be begun until
the engraving had been completed; but Cruikshank's impatience to be at
his _magnum opus_ led him to break through his agreement. A member of
the committee, on calling at his house one morning, found him before
the broad canvas, with the upper row of figures already sketched in. In
reply to remonstrances, he gave the reasonable explanation that no man
could etch all day long. The committee then agreed that he should work
as fast as was prudent at the engraving, and "for rest" take a turn
at the big picture. In order further to encourage him, an honorary
committee of about seventy gentlemen was formed, to promote the
subscription to the engraving. But so engrossed did Cruikshank become in
his oil-painting, that, although he knew that the delay in the print was
destroying the chances of a great subscription list, he never touched an
etching tool until the painting was finally lifted from the easel.

This work was to bring him, not only glory, but fortune. He was
confident that crowds would flock to see it He had visions of policemen
at the door of his gallery to keep off the tumultuous throng. The
advances of his friendly committee exceeded a thousand pounds; but in a
few weeks, he believed, the public, for whom he had been labouring since
the beginning of the century, would fill his coffers, and he would be
able to release himself from his obligations. Flushed with hope, he
wreathed some choice specimens of his early work about the _magnum
opus_, in a little gallery next to the Lyceum Theatre, in Wellington
Street, Strand; and threw open the doors, and summoned the world to
enter. But the world passed his door. *

     * It was a bitter pecuniary disappointment also. Cruikshank
     believed that he would have excelled as an actor, but his
     power amounted to nothing more than the realization of a
     burlesque brigand. He was violent, fierce in ridiculous
     excess, and extravagant in all his movements. He had always
     a yearning for the stage, and thought, as we have seen, of
     adopting it as a profession in his youth. He played with the
     Charles Dickens troupe in 1848 (Oliver Cob in "Every Man in
     his Humour," Doctor Camphor in "Love and Physic," and Pistol
     in "The Merry Wives of Windsor"), but he could not compare
     with such accomplished amateurs as Dickens and Mark Lemon.
     He never lost faith, however, in his power; and even late in
     life when he contemplated--to compensate for his pecuniary
     disappointment with his Triumph of Bacchus--a benefit at
     Drury Lane Theatre, he proposed to play Macbeth himself,
     saying to a friend, "I will show them how the dagger-scene
     _should_ be done.'"

On the 28th of April, 1863, he carried his painting, by command, to
Windsor Castle, for the inspection of the Queen; and he never tired of
talking gratefully and excitedly about the interview, acting with great
solemnity the sweeping bow he made to Her Majesty. But the Queen's
kindness failed to draw her subjects in the crowds the artist had
expected. Then his trusty friends organised a little _soiree_ in the
exhibition room on the 28th of August, and invited him to deliver a
lecture on his picture, which he did in his own original manner, giving
a reason for every group, almost every figure, upon his crowded canvas.
* Still the laggard public disappointed the expectant veteran, who
had cherished visions of a peaceful close for his life, won by this
extraordinary labour. Kind Thackeray came, with his grave face, and
looked through the little gallery, and went off to write one of his
charming essays, which appeared in the Times (May 15,1863). He said:--

     * See Appendix I.

"In a quiet little room in Exeter Hall a veteran lecturer is holding
forth all day upon a subject which moves his heart very strongly. His
text, on which he has preached before in many places, is still 'The
Bottle.' He divides his sermon into many hundreds of heads, and preaches
with the most prodigious emphasis and grotesque variety. He is for no
half measures. He will have no compromise with the odious god Bacchus;
the wicked idol is smashed like Bel and Dagon. He will empty into
the gutter all Master Bacchus's pipes, his barrels, quarter-casks,
demijohns, gallons, quarts, pints, gills, down to your very smallest
liqueur glasses of spirits or wine. He will show you how the church,
the bar, the army, the universities, the genteel world, the country
gentleman in his polite circle, the humble artisan in his, the rustic
ploughman in the fields, the misguided washerwoman over her suds and
tubs--how all ranks and conditions of men are deteriorated and corrupted
by the use of that abominable strong liquor: he will have patience with
it no longer. For upwards of half a century, he says, he has employed
pencil and pen against the vice of drunkenness, and in the vain attempt
to shut up drinking shops and to establish _moderate drinking as
a universal rule_; but for seventeen years he has discovered that
teetotalism, or the total abstaining from all intoxicating liquors,
was the only real remedy for the entire abolition of intemperance. His
thoughts working in this direction, one day this subject of 'the Worship
of Bacchus' flashed across his mind, and hence the origin of a work of
art measuring 13 ft. 4 in. by 7 ft. 8 in., which has occupied the author
no less than a year and a half.

"This sermon has the advantage over others, that you can take a chapter
at a time, as it were, and return and resume the good homilist's
discourse at your leisure. What is your calling in life? In some part
of this vast tableau you will find it is _de te fabula_. In this
compartment the soldiers are drinking and fighting; in the next the
parsons are drinking 'Healths to the young Christian.' Here are the
publicans, filthily intoxicated with their own horrible liquors; yonder
is a masquerade supper, 'where drunken masquerade fiends drag down
columbines to drunkenness and ruin.' Near them are 'the public singers
chanting forth the praises of the "God of Wine."' 'Is it not marvellous
to think,' says Mr. Cruikshank in a little pamphlet, containing a
speech by him which is quite as original as the picture on which it
comments,--'Is it not marvellous what highly talented poetry and what
harmonious musical compositions have been produced, from time to time,
in praise of this imaginative, slippery, deceitful, dangerous myth?'

"'This myth,' the spectator may follow all through this most wonderful
and labyrinthine picture. In the nursery the doctor is handing a pot of
beer to mamma; the nurse is drinking beer; the little boy is crying for
beer; and the papa is drawing a cork, so that 'he and the doctor may
have a drop.' Here you have a group of women, victims of intemperance,
'tearing, biting, and mutilating one another.' Yonder are two of the
police carrying away _a drunken policeman_. Does not the mind reel and
stagger at the idea of this cumulated horror? And what is the wine which
yonder clergyman holds in his hand but the same kind of stuff which has
made the mother in the christening scene above 'so tipsy that she has
let her child fall out of her lap, while her idiotic husband points to
his helpless wife, and exclaims, "Ha, ha; she's dr-unk'"?"

And then Thackeray appealed to the public to come and be grateful to the
painter:--

"With what vigour, courage, good-humour, honesty, cheerfulness, have
this busy hand and needle plied for more than fifty years! From 1799, *
when about eight or nine years of age,' until yesterday, the artist has;
never taken rest. When you would think he might desire quiet, behold he
starts up lively as ever, and arms himself to do battle with the
demon drunkenness. With voice and paint-brush, with steel-plate and
wood-block, he assails 'that deceitful, slippery, dangerous myth!' To
wage war against some wrong has been his chief calling; and in lighter
moments to waken laughter, wonder, or sympathy. To elderly lovers of
fun, who can remember this century in its teens and its twenties, the
benefactions of this great humourist are as pleasant and well remembered
as papa's or uncle's 'tips' when they came to see the boys at school.
The sovereign then administered bought delights not to be purchased by
sovereigns of later coinage, tarts of incomparable sweetness which are
never to be equalled in these times, sausages whose savour is still
fragrant in the memory, books containing beautiful prints (sometimes
ravishingly coloured) signed with the magic initials of the incomparable
'G. Ck.' No doubt the young people of the present day have younger
artists to charm them; and many hundred thousand boys and girls are
admiring Mr. Leech, and will be grateful to him forty years hence, when
their heads are grey. These will not care for the Cruikshank drawings
and etchings as men do whose boyhood was delighted by them; but the
moderns can study the manners of the early century in the Cruikshank
etchings, as of the French Revolution period in Gillray, Woodward,
Bunbury."

Still the public, the paying public, held back.

Mr. Francis Turner Palgrave took up the Exhibition in the _Saturday
Review_, and thought it necessary to reintroduce Cruikshank to the
British public: "Old George Cruikshank has been old George Cruikshank,"
he said, "any time during the last thirty years to those whose nursery
days date so far back. Indeed, we have heard his illustrations to
_Grimm's Fairy Stories_ spoken of as the delight of their youth by some
whose childhood dates forty years ago, whilst the similar labour of
love which he has devoted to _Jack and the Beanstalk_ is the thumbed
and tattered darling of many who do not yet aspire to rank in the rising
generation. He must, in fact, be old George Cruikshank, we are afraid,
in the number of his years; yet our century has seen no better example
of that ever-youthfulness which is one of the most frequent and least
doubtful signs of genuine genius. That the name of Cruikshank deserves
to be coupled with this epithet has never been dubious to those who,
looking beyond certain mannerisms and limitations in his power as an
artist, can appreciate high gifts to move both tears and laughter,
exhibited on however small and unpretending a scale; or who can value
downright originality, expressing itself in its own manner, irrespective
of popular fashion; or who are aware what peculiar skill he has reached
as an etcher."

But the _opus Georgii_ had been scattered through modest ways, in
children's books, title-pages to forgotten music, ephemeral pamphlets,
mediocre works, or romances of passing popularity, as well as in the
pages of Fielding, Smollett, Grimm, Scott, and Dickens. Nearly thirty
years had passed over his head since he illustrated "Oliver Twist"; and
so the crowd passed by his sterling excellence, and, in the old fashion,
turned "to some loud trumpet-blowing hero of the hour."

[Illustration: 196]

I remember seeing him standing in his exhibition room. It was empty.
There was a wild, anxious look in his face, when he greeted me. While we
talked, he glanced once or twice at the door, when he heard any sound in
that direction. Were they coming at last, the tardy, laggard public for
whom he had been bravely toiling so many years? Here was his last mighty
labour against the wall, and all the world had been told that it was
there. His trusty friend Thackeray had hailed it in the _Times_. A great
committee of creditable men had combined to usher it with pomp into the
world. All who loved and honoured and admired him had spoken words of
encouragement. Yet it was near noon, and only a solitary visitor had
wandered into the room. Thackeray might well say, "How little do we
think of the extraordinary powers of this man, and how ungrateful we are
to him!"

I was reminded of a visit I had paid years before to a room in the
Egyptian Hall, where Haydon, wild and lowering, lingered by his
pictures, a solitary, almost heart-broken man. In a letter he said that
Douglas Jerrold was one of the two or three who answered his summons to
Piccadilly. But it was I, then a young art-student, who had begged my
father's ticket, and stood for him, in the empty Haydon gallery. It
was thus, with a sinking at the heart, that I went away from Wellington
Street.

In order to make the exhibition more attractive, Mr. John Taylor
suggested to Cruikshank that he should group around him a complete
collection of his art work of sixty years; his original water-colour
sketches of the Miser's Daughter, the Tower of London, the Irish
Rebellion, and indeed a selection from the rich store he had garnered in
his home, in the hope that he should be able to leave a complete record
of his long art-life as a legacy to his country.

[Illustration: 199]

This was the origin of the collection which was ultimately bought by
the Aquarium Company, and is now, unfortunately, huddled in a corner of a
gallery of their building.

From Wellington Street the Cruikshank exhibition was transported late in
1863 to Exeter Hall. All who knew the worth of Cruikshank's genius
went, and were delighted; but Cruikshank was made to see that the new
generation had turned irrevocably to other and less gifted favourites,
and that he had outlived his popularly with the multitude. * As one of
the committee remarks, "The public neither spake nor moved."

     * "The Triumph of Bacchus" was taken afterwards through the
     provinces; and although the provincials in many places gave
     it a heartier welcome than it had obtained in London, the
     upshot of the speculation was that the expenses of
     exhibition were barely covered.

And yet Cruikshank, although burdened with the pecuniary liability
which he had incurred, and which had continuously increased while the
exhibition was in progress, set himself down with heroic fortitude to
complete the etching. "Following the big picture painfully, wearily,"
one of the committee writes, "the etching was at last completed; but
the long delay had damped the ardour of subscribers. The engraving is a
noble work, unique as a steel etching in its great size and multiplicity
of figures. Each one is complete; nothing is scamped. Its power as a
teacher has yet to be fully felt."

Yet etching and picture brought only heart-aches to the artist. Both
were got through under the pressure of grave money complications. Now
the water-colour drawing had to be made over to Mr. Samuel Gurney, as an
equivalent for the L400 which he had contributed towards the "spending
money" fund; now the collection was pledged to another friend; now
the artist found himself deeper in the books of Mr. W. Tweedie, his
publisher; and now the plate and engravings were made over to the
"spending money" committee, to recoup them for their advances. There
were bickerings--nay, there were absolute quarrels, in the course of
these entanglements; for Cruikshank was an unmanageable business man,
and prone, as we have seen, to fall out even with his most devoted
friends. Still there was so much that was good and lovable in him, that
they bore with his foibles and his outbursts, and remained willing to
help the brave old man again. His admirer, Mr. Raskin, and his secretary
or representative, Mr. Howell, with others, got up a testimonial which
cast something approaching a thousand pounds into Cruikshank's lap, and
at the same time they offered him five guineas apiece for such little
thumb-nail water-colour drawings of fairies as he could throw off at
least by the half-dozen in the week. But Cruikshank was fevered with
mighty ideas, harassed by complicated monetary transactions, and at the
same time elated by dreams of a great national transaction which was
to put him clear of the world, and at ease in a serene light of steady
popularity. An art union of his works was talked about; but it fell
through. But no good end could be served by a minute account of
the projects and counterprojects which arose around the "Triumph of
Bacchus."

The painting and the etching consumed nearly three busy years of the
artist's life; and his pecuniary reward was exactly L2,053 7s. 6d. as
Mr. Tweedie's ledger shows.

Of the art merits of this great cartoon the critics have pronounced many
clashing opinions. "I think, on the whole," Mr. Sala says, "looking
at the amount of sheer labour in the picture, the well-nigh incredible
multiplicity of figures, and the extreme care with which the minutest
details have been delineated by a hand following the eye of a man past
threescore years and ten, the 'Triumph of Bacchus' must be regarded as a
phenomenon. Its pictorial merit is slight; but it possesses and commands
interest of a very different nature from that excited by a mere picture,
when we remember the painter's purpose, and the tremendous moral lesson
he sought to teach. It is an eloquent protest against the
drinking customs of society, and a no less eloquent--and terribly
ghastly--exposition of the evils wrought on that same society by the
vice of drunkenness."

If for no other reason than to do honour to George Cruikshank, it is
well that this monument of work by an earnest old man has found its way
to South Kensington, having been presented to the nation by a committee
of subscribers, one of whom contributed a cheque for L800. Here,
according to many Temperance authorities, it has ir made converts.
A member of the Cruikshank committee writes: "An actor one day stood
before the painting at South Kensington, gazing at it, and taking in its
sad history, till, bursting into tears, he left the museum, took a
cab direct for Mr. Cruikshank's house, and signed the pledge for three
years. Dr. Richardson told the other day of a clergyman who was
pulled up by the vestry scene. Though the public did not patronise the
exhibition, yet the warmest commendations of the picture have come from
non-abstainers, and for this cause I suspect that the argument of the
picture was to them a new idea never before fully considered."

Mr. John Stewart's estimate of his friend's work is technically the most
satisfactory verdict which has been written. "As a whole the 'Bacchus'
is easily described, although 'none but itself can be its parallel.'
It is the province of genius to make rules where there are none, but as
truth is a consistent whole, true genius bends the rule it makes into
harmony with those already in existence; and in nothing has the artist
been more successful than in combining his novel creation with the
recognised canons of art. This was a daring effort; and, however
hyper-criticism might carp or ignorance may sneer at details, nothing
but the feeling of a poet, which enables him to compose with a poet's
facility, could have sustained the effort so successfully. The general
composition contains all the elemental types of pictorial grouping,
generalised on the two axioms of balance and variety. So fully has the
artist carried out this subtle truth of art--because an essential truth
of nature--that it would not be difficult to point out every principle
Haydon could extract from the combined works of Raphael successfully
modified by Cruikshank to build up and support this picture. The
horizontal is represented by the groups in the immediate foreground; the
pyramidal by the Bacchus, Silenus, and Bacchante; the circular by
the publicans, and repeated by the widows and orphan children; the
perpendicular by the saloons of high life introduced on either side: and
these are repeated out and still out, till the art which produced them
is lost in the higher art necessary to hide the method of production.

"What is true of the picture as a whole is still more visible in the
individual groups. These, however, must be seen to be appreciated, for
they cannot be described in words, not even by George Cruikshank. But
this may be affirmed without hesitation, that no other artist in Britain
or in Europe could have produced the same variety of incident, action,
and expression--that is, the same amount and quality of thought, in the
same period of time--as Cruikshank has displayed in this 'Triumph of
Bacchus.' The number that could have done it at all is easily counted,
and they--artists like Frith--knowing most fully the difficulties, are
most enthusiastic in their admiration of the genius and devotion by
which Cruikshank has worked and conquered. True, the work wants
finish, but this want is most felt by those ignorant enough to confound
smoothness and prettiness with finish; but a lifetime would be too short
to finish such pictures up to their standard, and they should understand
that the artist never intended to finish after their fashion. His
objects were entirely different: first, to produce his thoughts in a
style that could be seen by an audience at a distance; and second, using
the work in oil as a basis and a guide for the etching and engraving
the more permanent work which is now in preparation. In the first the
success is greater than the greatest smoothness could have given, and
it would be as reasonable to blame Rembrandt for not finishing those
studies in oil he painted to etch from, as to blame Cruikshank for
following Rembrandt's example. With this 'Triumph of Bacchus,' as with
Yan Ryan's 'Hundred Guilders,' the etching--the print--is the true
completion of the work; while the picture is only a portion of the
preparatory means to the nobler and more enduring end and aim. It is
different with artists whose works, if engraved, must be translated from
paintings into prints by others--often by those with little sympathy for
the subject or the style in which it has been treated by the painter.
Such pictures, however highly finished, lose much that is valuable
in process of translation. With etchers like Rembrandt or Cruikshank,
however diverse their styles, they have this in common, that their
prints are more perfect than the pictures from which they are produced,
because the artist is perfecting his idea while elaborating his
plate. The shrewd old Dutch burgomasters, alive to this fact, secured
Rembrandt's most matured works by subscribing for impressions of his
plates, and the wisest admirers of Cruikshank's genius are following the
same course, not doubting that his finished etching of this great work
will be the most finished embodiment of his grand idea."

[Illustration: 208]




CHAPTER V. "FRAUDS ON THE FAIRIES" AND "WHOLE HOGS."


The works which George Cruikshank illustrated, and the enterprises on
which he entered during the thirty-years of his teetotal career,
would be enough to fill the life of an ordinary worker. After he had
contributed "The Bottle" and "The Drunkard's Children" to the Temperance
cause, he engaged with renewed ardour, if with failing fortunes, in his
old work of book illustration. For the Brothers Mayhew he illustrated
"The Greatest Plague in Life," "Whom to Marry and How to get Married,"
"The Magic of Kindness," and "The Adventures of Mr. and Mrs. Sandboys
during 'the World's Show' of 1851." In the first two are some etchings
full of the old spirit and the old quickness of observation. In the
"Magic of Kindness" are some charming fairy scenes, notably the "Genius
of Industry And "Whole Hogs."

"Turning the Forest into a Fleet," and in the "Adventures of the
Sandboys" is Cruikshank's famous plate of all the world going to Hyde
Park--a new rendering of his pictorial preface to the Omnibus. In this
we find that the hand had lost none of its cunning, and that the fancy
and the power of observation were undimmed.

[Illustration: 211]

About this time--that is, between 1849 and 1853--Cruikshank illustrated
two Christmas stories by Mrs. G-ore, "The Snowstorm" and "The
Inundation," in Angus B. Beach's "Clement Lorimer," * the "Songs of
the late Charles Dibdin," Frank Smedley's "Frank Fairleigh," and "Uncle
Tom's Cabin"--representing some seventy etchings, and as many wood
blocks. The "Frank Fairleigh" etchings introduced Cruikshank to Frank
Smedley, and led to a final venture in the magazine form, with which
David Bogue, the publisher, had resolved to test finally the hold the
artist still had on the public.

     * Mr. Wedmore, in his article on Cruikshank, says of one of
     the etchings in this book, "Miss Eske carried away during
     her Trance," that it is among the things that show him to
     have had "the imagination of tragedy."

Bogue had long been Cruikshank's fast friend and admirer, and was loth
to believe that his name had ceased to be an attraction to the British
public upon a title-page. Moreover, he had had some recent successes
with the "inimitable" George. In two years the "Sandboys," in which was
his amazingly minute "All the World going to see the Exhibition" and his
drawing of the transept, packed with myriads of people at the opening
ceremony (I remember standing by him while he sketched it from the
south-western gallery), had gone through four editions. But his recent
Fairy Library had been a failure. Dickens (in _Household Words_),
among others, had protested against teetotalism being introduced into
fairyland; and had, two years previously, even ridiculed what was called
Cruikshank's temperance fanaticism, in a paper called "Whole
Hogs." These attacks, no doubt, helped to put an end to the _George
Cruikshank's Fairy Library_, after he had illustrated with some
exquisitely dainty scenes, "Pass in Boots," "Hop o' my Thumb," u
Jack and the Beanstalk," and "Cinderella." * Cuthbert Bede, in a
"Reminiscence of Cruikshank" in _Notes and Queries_, remarks: "It was
very evident from that article, 'Frauds on the Fairies,' and also from
a previous one from the same pen, called 'Whole Hogs,' that Dickens
considered Cruikshank to be occasionally given over to the culture of
crotchets, and to the furious riding of favourite hobbies. But in all
these things it is indisputable that the great moral artist was firmly
persuaded that he was acting in the cause of suffering humanity, and
engaged upon some work for the amelioration of his fellow-creatures. And
whatever was the act, and however small and trivial it might appear in
the sight of the majority, Cruikshank threw himself into it heart and
soul, and, like everything else he put his hand to, he did it with all
his might."

     * These have been since published in a volume by Bell and
     Daldy, and by Routledge and Co.

To be driven from fairyland, which was the realm of his happiest dreams,
was a bitter disappointment, and he felt deeply the blow of the friend
who drove him forth from it.

[Illustration: 216]

Dickens had said of him and his fairies,--

"He is the only designer fairyland has had. Callot's imps, for all their
strangeness, are only of the earth, earthy. Fuseli's fairies belong
to the infernal regions; they are monstrous, lurid, and hideously
melancholy. Mr. Cruikshank alone has a true insight into the 'little
people.' They are something like men and women, and yet not flesh and
blood; they are laughing and mischievous, but why we know not. Mr.
Cruikshank, however, has had some dream or the other, or else a natural
mysterious instinct, or else some preternatural fairy revelation, which
has made him acquainted with the looks and ways of the fantastical
subjects of Oberon and Titania."

When this wizard of the etching-needle, some fifteen years after he had
drawn "the awful Jew," pretended to put forth a whole Fairy Library of
his own, the author of the Jew sat himself down and wrote:--

"We have lately observed, with pain, the intrusion of a 'Whole Hog' of
unwieldy dimensions into the fairy flower-garden. The rooting of the
animal among the roses would in itself have awakened in us nothing but
indignation; our pain arises from his being violently driven in by a
man of genius, our own beloved friend, Mr. George Cruikshank. That
incomparable artist is, of all men, the last who should lay his
exquisite hand on fairy text. In his own art he understands it so
perfectly, and illustrates it so beautifully, so humorously, so wisely,
that he should never lay down his etching-needle to 'edit' the Ogre,
to whom with that little instrument he can render such extraordinary
justice. But, to 'editing' Ogres, and Hop-o'-my-Thumbs, and their
families, our dear moralist has in a rash moment taken, as a means of
propagating the doctrines of Total Abstinence, Prohibition of the
Sale of Spirituous Liquors, Free Trade, and Popular Education. For the
introduction of these topics, he has altered the text of a fairy story;
and against his right to do any such thing we protest with all our might
and main. Of his likewise altering it to advertise that excellent series
of plates, 'The Bottle,' we say nothing more than that we foresee a new
and improved edition of 'Goody Two Shoes,' edited by E. Moses and Son;
of the 'Dervish' with the box of ointment, edited by Professor Holloway;
and of 'Jack and the Beanstalk,' edited by Mary Wedlake, the popular
authoress of 'Do you Bruise your Oats yet?'" Dickens goes on to point
out what would become of our great books if this kind of liberty were to
be tolerated. "Imagine a total abstinence edition of 'Robinson Crusoe,'
with the rum left out. Imagine a peace edition, with the gunpowder left
out, and the rum left in. Imagine a vegetarian edition, with the goat's
flesh left out. Imagine a Kentucky edition, to introduce a flogging
of that 'tarnal old nigger Friday, twice a week. Imagine an Aborigines
Protection Society edition, to deny the cannibalism and make Robinson
embrace the amiable savages whenever they landed. Robinson Crusoe would
be edited out of his island in a hundred years, and the island would be
swallowed up in the editorial ocean." Then follows a most humorous story
of "Cinderella," edited by a stump orator on Temperance, Ocean Penny
Postage:

"Frauds on the Fairies once permitted, we see little reason why they may
not come to this, and great reason why they may. The Vicar of Wakefield
was wisest when he was tired of being always wise. The world is too much
with us, early and late. Leave this precious old world, escape from it
alone."

Poor George Cruikshank dropped his pencil, and Cuthbert Bede has told us
how he found the artist, on an October day in 1853, still smarting from
the effects of Dickens's article. Cruikshank, however, was not the man
to feel a blow and sit down under it.

Bogue had resolved, as I have already stated, to test finally the extent
of Cruikshank's remaining popularity with a magazine that was to bear
his name, and that was to be edited by Mr. Frank Smedley, then a popular
writer of fiction. Cruikshank had no sooner an organ of his own, than he
buckled on his armour, and prepared for a lively assault upon the author
of the two _House-hold Words_ articles, In the second (and last) number
of George Cruikshank's magazine * (to which I have already referred) is
a letter from Hop-o'-my-Thumb to Charles Dickens, Esq., upon "Frauds on
the Fairies," "Whole Hogs," etc. It is in Cruikshank's homely style, but
the reader will see that it is not without several good home-thrusts. He
begins:--

"Right trusty, well-beloved, much-read, and admired Sir,--My attention
has lately been called to an article in _Household Words_, entitled
'Frauds on the Fairies,' in which I fancy I recognise your master hand
as the author--and in which article, as it appears to me, you have gone
a _leetle_ out of your way to find fault with our mutual friend George
Cruikshank, for the way in which he has edited 'Hop-o'-my-Thumb and
the Seven League Boots.' You may, perhaps, be surprised at receiving a
letter from so small an individual as myself; but, independently of the
deep debt of gratitude which I feel that I owe to that gentleman, for
the way in which he has edited my history, my anxiety to maintain the
honour and credit of the noble family to which I belong impels me to
take up my pen (made from the quill of a humming-bird), to endeavour to
justify the course adopted by my editor, and also to take the liberty
of setting you right upon one or two points in which you are entirely
mistaken.

"These may seem bold words, from such a mite as I am, to such a literary
giant as you are; but I have had to deal with giants in my time, and
I am not afraid of them, and I shall therefore take leave to tell you,
that although you may have held in your memory some of the remarkable
facts in my interesting history, yet that you were ignorant of the
general character of the whole; and the only way in which I can account
for a man of your remarkable acuteness having made such a great
mistake is, that you have suffered that extraordinary seven-league
boot imagination of yours to run away with you into your _own_ Fairy
Land,--and thus have given your _own_ colours to this history; and,
consequently, a credit and a character to the old editions which do not
belong to them."

Cruikshank then quotes passages from Dickens's article, and continues:
"Now this, which you call 'Frauds on the Fairies,' in my humble opinion,
might as well have been called 'Much Ado about Nothing'; for, had
my editor been altering the title of any standard literary work,
the writing of any man of mark--one of your own glorious books, for
example--then, indeed, you might have raised a hue and cry; but to
insist upon preserving the entire integrity of a fairy tale, which had
been and is constantly altering in the recitals, and in the printing of
various editions of various countries, and even counties, appears to my
little mind like shearing one of your own 'whole hogs,' where there is
'great cry and little wool.'"

Then Cruikshank asks where is tenderness and mercy in Tom Thumb's
father, when he induced his wife to take their seven children into the
forest to perish miserably of hunger, or to be devoured by wild beasts?
"My editor," Hop-o'-my-Thumb proceeds, "seeing that such a statement was
not only disgusting, but against nature, and consequently unfit for the
pure and parentloving minds of children, felt certain that any father
acting in such a manner must either be _mad or under the influence
of intoxicating liquor_, which is much the same thing, and therefore,
wishing to avoid any allusion to such an awful affliction as insanity,
has accounted for my father's unnatural conduct by attributing to
it that cause which marks its progress, daily and hourly, by acts of
unnatural brutality." Farther on, Hop-o'-my-Thumb, referring to the
little peculiarity of the young ogres "biting little children on purpose
to suck their blood," wants to know whether they are good things to be
nourished in a child's heart. "And I should also like to know," he adds,
"what there is so enchanting and captivating to '_young fancies_' in
this description of a father (ogre though he be) cutting the throats of
his own seven children? Is this the sort of stuff that helps to '_keep
us ever young_,' or give us that innocent delight which we may share
with children?" Having thanked Mr. Cruikshank for rescuing his family
character from the moral taints which former biographers had put upon
it, representing him to be, in the transaction of the seven-league boots
and the mother of the slaughtered children, "an _unfeeling, artful liar,
and a thief_," and his parents "_receivers of stolen goods_," he turns
upon Mr. Dickens for his attempt to throw ridicule upon the Temperance
question, and also his "evident contempt, and even hatred, against that
cause," as shown in his "Whole Hogs." Hop-o'my-Thumb hereupon valiantly
and defiantly remarks: "This is not the place, nor is it my purpose, now
to discuss the Temperance question, but I take the liberty of telling
you that it is a question which you evidently do not understand, for
if you did, your good heart and sanguine disposition would make you, if
possible, a more enthusiastic advocate than my editor."

About the good intentions of both artist and critic there cannot be
any doubt in any honest mind, Cruikshank had his parting thrust at his
assailant; he could not help that:--

"You are generally," he says to his friend Dickens, "most happy in
your titles; but, in this instance, the application seems singularly
inappropriate. The 'whole hog' should, by rights, belong to those
parties who patronise pork butchers; and the term as applied to the
peace people would be better used in regard to the Great Bear, or any
other war party; and surely, as to any allusion to the 'unclean animal,'
in connection with total abstinence, the term would more properly attach
to those who wallow in the mire, and destroy their intellects by the use
of intoxicating liquors, until they debase themselves to the level of
the porcine quadruped! And, as far as my editor is concerned, I consider
it a great act of injustice to mix him up with other questions, and with
which, _you know_, he has nothing whatever to do. I have therefore to
beg that in future you will not drive your 'whole hogs' against us, but
take them to some other market, or keep them to yourself, if you like;
but we'll none of 'em, and therefore I take this opportunity of driving
them back."

The controversy is closed with a capital cut of Hop-o'-my-Thumb driving
some prodigious porkers back to _Household Words_.

The first number of the magazine had warned the public that hobbies were
to be ridden regularly. One of the folded etchings was the first of
a series of "Tobacco Leaves," in which the habit of smoking was to be
attacked. The plate was a series of grotesque absurdities, in which a
moral was torn to tatters. Boys with hoops are smoking pipes; an adult
son is offering a "long day" and a spittoon in a drawing-room to his
venerable mother; a young gentleman is passing ladies in the street with
a cigar in his mouth, and under the picture is written, "No one but a
_very unthinking gentleman_ or a most contemptible snob or puppy would
smoke in the streets or public places, regardless who he may annoy with
his offensive tobacco smoke." In one corner of the plate a gentleman is
offering a cigar to his sister, saying, "Come, sister dear, soothe your
distressed feelings with a mild Havannah!" in the opposite corner a
lover on his knees is making a declaration in these words: "Dearest
(puff) Virginia (puff), I (puff) love you (puff) dearer (puff) than my
pipe (puff)." Virginia is listening, with a cigar in her hand.

Other hobbies were in preparation. Cothbert Bede, who was then in
constant communication with Cruikshank, was invited to co-operate in
them with his pen. "At one of our interviews at his house," he says,
"relative to his projected magazine, he showed me some wood-blocks, on
which were his own designs, and which he had already gone to the expense
of having carefully engraved by (if I remember rightly) Mr. T. Williams.
He then explained to me the nature of the designs and the special object
for which he had prepared them. I must continually have noticed (he
said) an evil that was patent to every one, both indoors and out of
doors, in the streets, and railway carriages, and omnibuses, and all
public vehicles. It was an evil not confined to the young or the old;
it was most injurious in its effects, and it only required the public
attention to be pointedly directed to it to have it stopped and put
down. This was what he desired to do with his pencil, and it was for
this that he sought the co-operation of my pen.

"Now, what does the reader imagine was this evil that had obtained such
a hold upon the nation?--It was nothing more or less than the habit of
ladies and gentlemen, and boys and girls, placing the handles of their
sticks, canes, parasols, or umbrellas to their mouths, and either
sucking them or tapping their teeth with them! Suiting the action to the
word, and acting the characters, Cruikshank showed me how the gent of
the period tried to make himself look excessively knowing by sucking the
ivory or bone handle of his cane; how the young lady, and even the
very little girl, made their morning calls, and sucked their parasol
handles--a sure sign of great _gaucherie_; how other ladies, even
elderly ones, who ought to know better, did the same in carriages and
omnibuses, thereby running the risk of having their teeth broken if the
vehicle gave a sudden lurch; and how even grave physicians carried
their gold or ivoryheaded canes up to their lips. (I here reminded Mr.
Cruikshank that if they did so it was in traditionary keeping with an
old custom dating from the days of the Great Plague of London, when
every doctor who carried 'fate and physic in his eye' had a cunningly
devised box for aromatic scents fixed on the top of his cane, so that he
might hold it under his nose whenever he visited an infectious case.)

"Cruikshank spoke most gravely on this 'hideous, abominable, and most
dangerous custom,' an evil that he was determined to try to put down,
and for this end he had prepared the designs that he showed to me, and
which had been already engraved. These illustrations he wished me
to work into letterpress, which should first appear in the projected
magazine, and should then be reprinted in the form of a small pamphlet.
He did not desire to make money by the publication of this pamphlet; on
the contrary, he intended to have many thousand copies printed at his
own expense, and to employ men to distribute them gratuitously to the
public. There were to be men posted outside every railway station in
London, and as each cab or carriage rolled from under the gateway,
one of the pamphlets was to be tossed into the vehicle. The omnibus
travellers were to be liberally dealt with in the same way, and by these
means Cruikshank was quite sanguine that the reform which he so much
desired would be effected in generation.

"I could not see in this a very promising subject my pen; but, as the
article was to make its first appearance in the new magazine, I agreed,
to write something in furtherance of the object that he had in mind, and
to incorporate the illustrations that he had prepared. After a while
I took Mr. Cruikshank the article that I had written. He was more than
disappointed with it--he was horrified. I had treated that grave and
earnest question in a light and jocular spirit! It would only amuse
instead of warn the reader! it would never do! and so on, with a great
deal of action of hands and head. I argued that it was more likely to
make the desired impression upon their minds, if they read what I had
written, than if they were presented with a grave sermon-like treatise
on the theme. But my arguments failed to move him, and he asked me
to write another, and far more serious, paper on the subject. This I
declined to do, and requested him to get some other author to carry out
his ideas.

"Whether he ever did so or not, I do not know. The collapse of the new
magazine in its early infancy prevented the appearance in that quarter
of George Cruikshank's tilt against stick and parasol sucking, and I am
not aware if the engraved blocks of which I have spoken were ever made
public. If any one is sufficiently curious to know the nature of the
manuscript that I submitted to Cruikshank, he may do so by referring to
_Motley_, by Cuthbert Bede, published by James Blackwood in 1855. There
he will find eight pages taken up by an article, illustrated by
myself, called 'Dental Dangers,' which is, _verbatim_, printed from
the manuscript that I had written for Mr. Cruikshank--which, however, I
called 'Take Care of your Teeth!'

"In that paper I spoke of a lady in an omnibus, whose set of false teeth
were projected into her opposite neighbour's lap through a sudden jolt
of the vehicle while she was sucking her parasol handle. This led me to
tell Cruikshank an anecdote that I had then recently heard, and which,
as it has not been in print, I may here narrate; for Cruikshank
laughed very heartily at it, and said that he should like to make an
illustration to it, and asked me if I could not write a paper on country
rectors and their adventures, in which it might be introduced, and which
he would further illustrate. Very likely this suggestion might have been
carried into effect if Mr. D. Bogue had carried on the magazine. As it
was, it was lost to the world."

Cuthbert Bede has also given us an account of Cruikshank's first
introduction to the editor of his unfortunate final magazine:--

"He told me that, as in my own case, he had not known Cruikshank
personally until this projected magazine brought them together, although
Cruikshank had illustrated 'Frank Fairleigh.' The great artist's first
call upon Smedley was made only a few days previous to my own; and
Smedley gave me the following account of it: 'He was shown into this
room, while I was sitting at that writing-desk by the window, I wheeled
my chair round (poor Smedley had to use a self-acting wheeled chair),
and advanced to meet him. Thus I had my back to the light, and he was
facing the window. He appeared so amazed at seeing me such a cripple as
I am, that he could not overcome his wonder, but kept exclaiming,
"Good God! I thought you could gallop about on horses!" and the like
expressions. I explained how it was; and we then proceeded to discuss
business details. It was a hot, sultry day, and Cruikshank had walked
fast; he was heated, and his face and forehead were very red. His hair
was blown about, and, instead of sitting quietly on a chair, he was
standing up and gesticulating wildly. I have a sense of the ludicrous,
and had the greatest difficulty to keep from laughing, or to look him
in the face. For all this time, in the very centre of his capacious and
very red forehead, there was a round something of ivory, not plain, but
carved in circles, and as big as a large button.

I wondered what it could be. Was it some Temperance badge? Was it some
emblem of office in some secret society, in which he held rank as a
Great Panjandrum with the little button atop? For the life of me I could
not divine what it was. And all the time he was holding me with his
glittering eye, and going through a whole pantomime of gesticulations.
Suddenly, and to my from his forehead, and dropped on the hearthrug at
his feet. Cruikshank looked at it with bewilderment, and said, "Wherever
did that come from?"

"From off your forehead," I replied. "From off my forehead!" he echoed,
as he rubbed it fiercely. "Yes," I said, "it has been there ever since
you entered the room." Cruikshank seized his hat, and looked into its
crown, when it appeared that the ivory circlet had dropped from, the
ventilating hole in the crown of the hat as Cruikshank had walked to my
house, and that it had found its way down to his forehead, where, what
with the heat of his head and the fragments of glue on the ivory, it
had become firmly fixed, and would perhaps have remained there for some
hours longer if he had not accompanied his conversation with so much
action When he found out the truth, and fully realized the absurdity of
the intense relief--for I was beginning to feel that I could not bear
the mystery much longer--the ivory badge fell situation, he burst into
such a hearty roar of laughter as I have not heard for many a day. This
was my first personal introduction to George Cruikshank.'"

Cuthbert Bede had also the advantage of seeing Cruikshank at work on
that plate of his magazine which will make its two numbers live longer
than many a serial which has lasted twenty years.

"When I first went into his studio,'' says Cuthbert Bede, "there were
many specimens of his work around him, oil paintings, etchings, and
wood-block drawings in various stages of execution. He seemed to take
a particular pleasure in showing me these, and in explaining their
designs. The chief work on which he was thus engaged was his wondrous
etching of 'The Comet of 1853,' which was to form the frontispiece for
the projected magazine. On account of its dimensions--the actual plate,
without the title, 'Passing Events, or the Tail of the Comet of 1853,'
being 15 1/4 by 7 inches--it had to appear as a folding plate. It was
crammed with hundreds of figures, giving, at one view, an epitome of the
leading events of the year--the Peace Conference, the war between
Russia and Turkey, the war in China, the Queen's review of the troops at
Chobham, the naval review at Portsmouth, Spirit Rapping, Table Turning,
the Derby Day, Betting, the City Corporation Commission, John Gough and
the Temperance Demonstration, the Nineveh Bulls, the Zulu Kaffirs and
Earthmen, the Anteater, Albert Smith's 'Mont Blanc,' Charles Kean's
'Sardanapalus,' Bribery and Corruption, the Australian Gold Discovery,
Mrs. Stowe and 'Uncle Tom,' the New York and Dublin Exhibitions, the
Vivarium, Guy Fawkes, Lord Mayor's Day, Wyld's Great Globe, Captain
McClure and the North-west Passage, Miss Cunningham's Seizure by the
Grand Duke of Tuscany, the Ceiling-walker, Smithfield Cattle Show,
Chiswick Flower Show, Christmas Merry-making, and the Pantomimes--these
are among the subjects that appear in the Comet's Tail, and the gradual
progress of which to its ultimate perfection I was so fortunate as to
see....

"The hundreds of tiny figures in this etching are shown with a
distinctness and power of characterisation unrivalled by any other
artist. I think that he surpassed Callot in this respect; and that no
one could approach George Cruikshank in his vigorous, life-like, and
picturesque delineation of surging crowds and packed masses of human
beings."

It was his wont to open a serial with a tour-de-force of this
description.

[Illustration: 238]

[Illustration: 239]




CHAPTER VI. A SLICE OF BREAD AND BUTTER.

George Cruikshank's habit of putting himself forward as the originator
of any work with which he was connected was never more amusingly
displayed than when, in March 1870, he made one of a deputation of the
National Education League to Mr. Gladstone. "I must say," he remarked on
this event, in his introduction to the second edition of his 'Slice of
Bread and Butter,' "that it afforded me much gratification to hear all
the suggestions which I had placed before the public so many years ago,
so eloquently and forcibly advocated upon this occasion."

It was a harmless assumption in this instance, to be freely forgiven in
the earnest old man who was still exerting himself to the utmost of
his ability for what he conceived to be the right way, in the cause of
popular education.

He had thrown his ideas into one of those whimsical forms, peculiar to
him. He was fond of illustrated pamphleteering, and the reclamation of
ragged children left out in the cruel streets hungry and half naked had
always been a subject near to his heart. His last effort in their behalf
he called "A Slice of Bread and Butter." On the title page we find one
of his bright little pictorial stories in wood. An outcast child
lies upon the pavement surrounded by a crowd of men, who are in eager
consultation as to the restorative which shall be administered. In
the distance is the parish church, but overhead swings the sign of the
Britannia, and the landlord, with a pipe in his mouth, is contemplating
the scene from the bar parlour. The story is told with all the old
completeness.

The crowd consists of "some worthy gentlemen, magistrates, and others,"
who, on their way "to the Town Hall on county business," have found
this forlorn boy upon the pavement leaning against the wall. As he was
neither begging nor stealing, and did not obstruct the pathway, he could
not be taken into custody. When asked what was the matter, he replied,
"I wants summut to eat." Then follows the learned consultation around
the starving boy:--

"Now the worthy magistrates and the other gentlemen--some of whom
were clergymen, and ministers, and lawyers--were all kind-hearted and
benevolent men as well as the doctor; and they all exclaimed, as with
one voice, upon hearing what the doctor said, 'Oh, dear me, how very
shocking!--let him have some food instantly!'

'Yes, yes!' cried one: 'here, officer! go into the Britannia, and get
him something to eat instantly.'

'I suppose,' said he, turning to the doctor, "a bit of plain bread and
butter wall be best for him in his present condition?' 'The very thing,'
he replied; and as the officer was about to run into the house to get
a bit of bread and butter, another gentleman of the party cried out,
'Stop! see that you bring _brown_ bread.' 'Pooh! pooh!' said another;
'it does not matter what sort of bread it is, but it must be _toasted_.'
'White or brown, or plain or toasted, it matters not much,' exclaimed
a fourth, 'provided there is plenty of _butter_ on it.' 'I object most
decidedly to the _butter_,' observed a very sedate gentleman. 'As to
that,' shouted out another, 'I consider the _butter as most essential_:
it is full of nourishment; and, besides, the poor boy might be choked by
cramming _dry_ bread down his throat without butter; but then we must
be careful that it be _salt_ butter.' 'No! no!' cried another; '_fresh_
butter, if you please, and as much as you please; but no _salt_.' 'You
are all wrong, my friends!--quite wrong!' vociferated another of the
party; 'depend upon it, that _dry_ toast is the best thing he can have.'
'Oh! oh! oh!' exclaimed all the other gentlemen; 'who ever heard of such
a thing as giving _dry toast_ to a starving child?' 'Who ever, indeed!'
chimed in another; 'it is quite ridiculous to toast the bread at all;
the poor child might die before it was ready! No! no! plain bread and
butter is best for him; but mind, if I have to pay my part towards it,
the bread must be _new_--yes, _new_ bread.'

'New bread!' exclaimed some of the party why, that's worse than all; for
if it does not stick in his throat, it will in his stomach, and perhaps
kill him. New bread is indigestible and most unwholesome stuff.' 'Well,
well; let it be plain stale bread and butter, but only the crumb of
the loaf, and I will pay my part willingly,' observed another. 'Crumb
without crust!' said one of the former speakers; 'why, the crust of the
loaf contains ten times more nourishment than the crumb, and I, for one,
will have nothing to do with it, nor pay a farthing towards it, unless
he has a good lump of crust.'

"Now during this contention, or

     'all this splutter About the toast and bread and butter,'

the poor boy seemed to be getting worse and worse, and at the same time
all these worthy gentlemen becoming more and more excited; some calling
out for 'Fancy bread,' some for 'French rolls,' others for 'German black
bread,' and all refusing to pay any part towards the bread and butter,
unless cut after their own fashion, when they were reminded by one of
the party that there was not the least necessity to trouble themselves
about paying for what the boy might have, as it could be charged to the
county. To which they all replied, rather sharply, that, as to that, if
they did not think it right to pay out of their own individual pockets,
neither did they think it right that the public money should be used
for purposes which they could not individually approve of. 'Gentlemen,
gentlemen,' cried the doctor, 'pray let the child have something. Is it
not dreadful to let this poor boy perish before our eyes, when there
are the means of relief within reach? For mercy's sake, let him have
something to keep him alive!' 'Well,' replied one of the magistrates
(who was chairman of the Sessions),'as you see he cannot have the bread
and butter, you must prescribe something else for him.

'Dear, dear me!' said the doctor, 'I am really shocked at such
inconsistency. Will you let him have a little brandy, then!' 'Oh yes
I' they all cried out together, 'let him have some brandy--by all means
give him some brandy!'"

The brandy made Ragged Jack drank; and presently, being still hungry, he
is tempted to steal a roll from a baker's shop, and dragged to the Town
Hall, where the magistrates, who had left him upon the pavement taking
brandy, give him a month's imprisonment, and detention in a reformatory
school.' The chaplain was kind to him, and said, "Yes, now that Jack was
a convicted thief, he had plenty of good wholesome bread and butter."
In the reformatory he was educated, and taught a trade, and sent to a
distant town where his antecedents would not be against him. On his way
he met his cousin, Tom Rag--"a boy as ragged and wretched as he used
to be himself." Tom wants to know how Jack has managed to get such nice
clothes and a basket of tools, that he may go and do likewise.

"Cousin Jack, who had been taught, and indeed now knew, that thieving
was a wicked thing to do, was sorely puzzled how to advise his friend in
this matter; for, having a great regard for Tommy, he wished to save him
from the miserable state in which he himself had once been--skulking and
wandering about the streets all day, picking up hits and scraps of food,
even out of the gutters like the dogs, and at night sleeping in the
corner, perhaps, of an open sheep-pen in the cattle-market, or crouching
from the drenching rain by the side of a doorway; and when he contrasted
that state of his existence with the comfort he had felt, and the
attention he had received whilst in the jail and the reformatory, he
knew not how to advise his poor cousin, knowing that poor Tom was, as he
himself had been, almost perishing for want of a little good wholesome
bread and butter, clean clothes, and a comfortable bed to lie in, which
he well knew poor Tom would have if he could be sent to jail, as he
had been. When he thought of all this he was sorely puzzled what to
recommend; but at last he said: 'Tom, you must not steal; so you had
better go a-begging, and perhaps you may be lucky enough to be sent to
jail for that, and then you will have everything done for you, as I have
had, and come out better than me; for nobody will be able to say that
you have been a thief. Yes; go and beg, Tom!

But if this don't answer, why, then, I suppose you _must_ go a-THIEVING,
as I did.'"

"It may be asked, Where were the parents of these poor boys all this
time? Well, they could tell you at the Britannia public-house, only they
don't like to talk about such disagreeable matters there. But the fact
is, Jack's father used to _use_ that house, and was once a decent sort
of man, and was at one time a 'moderate drinker'; but upon one occasion
he got mad drunk, and in that state of drunken insanity went home and
killed his wife, was sent to jail, and died there. Tom's father was
transported for committing some crime after he had 'been drinking' at
the Britannia; and Tom's mother took a little drop at first to _comfort
her_, and then drank herself to death." The foregoing will remind many
readers of the scheme of Mr. Jenkins's "Ginx's Baby."

But Cruikshank gives his views on popular education in his homely simple
way:--

"One of the great social questions of the day is the necessity and
importance of a general or national system of education for the humble
classes, upon such a comprehensive plan as shall give every child born
in the United Kingdom a certain amount of book knowledge, and also of
moral and religious training, as they are, or _ought_ to be, entitled
to as juvenile members of a civilized community--such training as may
prepare them to fill useful and honest positions in life, or, perhaps,
be the first step to those high stations so often filled by honest,
hardworking, mercantile men, or ingenious mechanics. Now, every thinking
and right-minded person will agree that this object is a most desirable
one, and that no innocent child should be so neglected as to be allowed
to grow up in a state of savage ignorance; and at the first blush
nothing seems more easily to be accomplished, in a wealthy and
intelligent country like ours, than to arrange such a general system as
is here alluded to, and to provide the ways and means. Well! all this
_would be_ simple and easily accomplished, but for one obstacle--namely,
the differences in the religious opinions of a portion of the adult
population. Yes, strange as it may appear,--nay, monstrous as it
is,--nevertheless these religious differences have been, and are now,
the only bar to the adoption of any wide and general system of secular
education."

"It is of course impossible to please all parties; but few persons, I
imagine, could surely object to a national system of education upon
the following plan:--In the first place, an Act of Parliament should
be passed, making it _imperative_ that every child should receive some
education, and where the parents are destitute or depraved, then that
the State shall take the position of the parents, and educate and train
up all the neglected and helpless children. In the second place:--In
the schools, let reading, writing, and arithmetic be taught (with
other branches of education, if possible, or required), and such
moral training as will teach a child the difference between Right and
Wrong--and here let the schoolmaster's duty cease, and that of the
ministers of religion begin. And in the third place:--Let it be the duty
of the clergyman, and ministers of all denominations, to instruct all
those children who belong to their particular church, chapel, or sect,
in the religious belief of their parents; but when the parents do not
attend any place of worship, or profess any particular creed--then, that
the clergy of the Established Church be allowed to instruct all such
children in the religion of the State. By such an arrangement as this,
it appears to me that if all the poor helpless children of the land were
schooled in the common elements of reading, writing, etc., for five days
in the week, and the clergy and ministers of all denominations were to
instruct these children one day in the six in the religion of the class
to which they belong (independent of the Sunday), that then all parties
might be satisfied, and a great objection done away with as to the great
general system which I here propose for secular instruction and moral
and religious training."

He goes on to remark that a reformatory may be wanted in any country,
under any circumstances, "but why should we have _Ragged_ Schools in
_rich_ England?" He proceeds to argue that there would be no need for
either Ragged Schools or Reformatories if the use of "strong drink" were
abolished; and he calls upon "the grown-up people not to allow innocent
children to starve and fall into evil ways, because they cannot agree
upon the mode of cutting a Slice op Bread and Butter." He adds: "But
as prevention is better than cure, I call upon all those who delight
in good works to aid the Temperance cause, which is, in truth, the only
radical cure for the evils complained of."

The tail-piece to this characteristic pamphlet--as charming as it is
characteristic--is a brightly-executed drawing on wood of Britannia
seated upon the British lion, couchant, with her arms about "her ragged
and reformatory pets."

Cruikshank's zeal for the cause to which he had devoted himself led him
to take delight in the illustration even of little Temperance pamphlets
and fly-sheets.

Ruskin had said, in his "Time and Tide, by Weare and Tyne" (1867), "It
is no more his business to etch diagrams of drunkenness than it is mine
at this moment to be writing these letters against anarchy." Yet just as
Mr. Ruskin has gone on with his letters, so Cruikshank went on with his
diagrams of drunkenness to the end.

In 1867, when Cruikshank brought out his "British Bee-Hive," with a
worker at a trade or profession in every cell, the estates of the realm
at the top, and the army and navy at the bottom, and called it "a penny
political picture for the people, with a few words upon Parliamentary
Reform, by their old friend George Cruikshank," he was opposed to the
Reform Bill, and advised the working-men to be content with the glorious
constitution as it stood, and keep away from Reform meetings, as
"revolutionary proceedings."

Perhaps the best of Cruikshank's pamphlets, taking the text and the
drawings together, is "The Glass and the New Crystal Palace," published
by John Cassell. It is thoroughly Cruikshankian, and in his most
vivacious mood: some of the illustrations--as the Spirit Level--a
drunkard at full length upon the pavement; the Social Villagers, with
Death for the host, and the villagers represented by their tombstones;
and the whisky after the goose, and the goose after the whisky, for
instance.

Think what would have become of the neglected or forgotten humourist,
if, when the mere laughing public had turned away from him to Leech and
Doyle, and Tenniel and Du Maurier, he had not been fired with the ardour
of an apostle in the cause he had taken up. His Almanac had failed for
lack of readers; and David Bogue had thrown up Cruikshank's magazine,
after the second number--convinced that the artist had outlived his
public. His ambition to become a painter was mercifully renewed, with
the renewal of his health and mind, through temperance. Full of vigour
he used to say, "A man should paint from his shoulder, sir." He became
almost wholly a serious man in his work, and appealed to the public in a
new capacity. He resolved, stimulated by the success of "The Bottle," to
paint a great picture that should remain behind him, a monument of his
genius, and an immortal temperance lesson. He was ready, and eager, to
give a helping hand in all directions to the last. In 1870, I asked
him to join my Committee, when I was a candidate for the Maryle-bone
division of the London School Board. I give his prompt answer as an
example of his clear head and hearty readiness in his old age to serve a
friend:--

"_October 27th_, 1870.

"Dear Blanchard Jerrold,--Your request would have been complied with
on the instant, but it so happens that a gentleman called upon me a few
days back with a message from friend Hepworth Dixon, asking me to allow
my name to be placed on _his_ Committee for this 'Educational Council,'
to which, of course, I assented.

"Now if _one_ man can have his name placed on _two_ Committees, then by
all means place my name on your Committee, but if not, then let me know
if there is any other way in which I can assist in this matter the man
who is a relative of, and who bears the name of two dear friends who
were always held in the highest esteem by,

"Yours truly,

"Geo. Cruikshank."

[Illustration; 255]




CHAPTER VII. CRUIKSHANK'S LAST TWENTY YEARS.

The most notable of George Cruikshank's book-work, after the failure
of bis magazine, was his "Life of Sir John Falstaff," * illustrating
a biography of the knight, written in Robert Brough's happiest manner.
Cruikshank's twenty Falstaff etchings are admirable examples of his
peculiar excellences as an etcher, and of his matured artistic faculty
of composition and observation.

     * Published by Messrs. Longman and Co., 1857.

In these plates are some of the brightest bits of his picturesqueness of
outline, his happy, sprightly treatment of light and shade, and of his
higher faculties as an artist, of which fate permitted him to give the
world only scattered fragmentary evidences. Thackeray said of him, that
he could draw an ancient gloomy market-place as well as Mr. Front or Mr.
Nash. What could be more picturesque, or daintier in the play of light,
or happier in the variety of the architecture, than the backgrounds of
the scenes where Sir John is arrested at the suit of Mrs. Quickly, or
when the knight not only persuades Mrs. Quickly to withdraw her action,
but also to lend him more money? Mr. F. Wedmore has called attention,
and with ample reason, to the exquisite pathos of the death of Falstaff,
"in which the face of one who has died 'a babbling of green fields,'
lies very calm, with the sign of gentle fancies but lately flown."

These plates were reissued in a "Library Shakspeare" published in parts
between 1871 and 1874, together with illustrations by Sir John Gilbert
(who, by the way, in his youth delighted in copying Cruikshank's
etchings and drawings on wood); but it is to be hoped that they may some
day be rewedded to Brough's biography, and reappear as the artist's last
important creation.

[Illustration: 258]

The twenty years which elapsed between the first issue of "Falstaff" and
the artist's death, albeit no idle years, have left not much completely
worthy of the best that had gone before. Cruikshank furnished etchings
to the "Life and Enterprises of Robert William Elliston, Comedian"
(1857), "Midnight Scenes and Social Photographs--revelations of
the Wynds and Dens of Glasgow" (1858), Mr. Alfred Cole's "Lorimer
Littlegood" (1858), "Stenelaus and Amylda, a Christmas Temperance
Tale" (1858), a frontispiece to Lowell's "Biglow Papers" (1859), Dudley
Costello's "Holiday with Hobgoblins" (1861), "The Bee and the Wasp; a
Fable in Verse" (1861), "A Discovery concerning Ghosts" (1863), Robert
Hunt's "Popular Romances of the West of England" (1865), the "Savage
Club Papers" (1867), "The Oak," a magazine, edited by his friend the
Rev. Charles Rogers (1868), "Coila's Whispers," by the Knight of Morar
(1869), "The Brownies," and other tales, by Juliana Horatia Ewing
(1870), "The True Legend of St. Dunstan and the Devil," by Edward
G. Flight (1871), "Lob-lie-by-the-Fire," and other tales, by Juliana
Horatia Ewing (1874). Then there are two works, the illustrations to
which proclaim the coming end. "Peeps at Life," and "Studies in my
Cell," by the London Hermit, published in 1875, are signed "George
Cruikshank, aged 83, 1875;" and in Mrs. Octavian Blewitt's "The Rose and
the Lily," is a frontispiece--George Cruikshank's last design--signed,
"Designed and etched by George Cruikshank, age 88, 1875." This plate is
here reproduced.

Not before 1869 did George Cruikshank publish his last political plate.

In 1867 he put forth "The British Bee-Hive," which was a rearrangement
of a design made in 1840. The artist drew a section of the hive,
displaying fifty-four cells, in which the various grades of
society--from the Queen to the costermonger--are shown, all supported by
the army, the navy, and the volunteers, and surmounted by the crown, the
royal standard, and the union jack. This was a protest against further
Parliamentary Reform; for, as it has been observed, Cruikshank was
something of a Radical and something of a Tory--but more of a Tory.
He afterwards issued this plate on a double sheet, inscribed "A Penny
Political Picture for the People, with a few words upon Parliamentary
Reform, by their old friend, George Cruikshank."

In the following year the old satirist drew a "Design for a Ritualist
High Church Tower and Steeple," which he dedicated to Dr. Pusey and the
Vicar of Bray. It was etched on glass by Hancock's process. The tower
of the church was a fool's cap and bells, with the Pope for weathercock.
The porch was a bull's head, with a procession of Ritualist fools
entering by the nostrils. The last, dated July 1869, is a satire upon
Miss Rye's proposition to export "gutter children" to America. "The
little dears," as the artist always called children, are being scooped
by a clergyman into a mud-cart, from the volunteers, and sur-royal
standard.

The satire was against those who had christened the little waifs and
strays of our streets "gutter children." The name jarred upon
Cruikshank's sensitive heart.

Mr. Wedmore, referring to the closing years of the great pictorial
moralist, remarks, "He continued to labour; some of his work being even
now but little known. * Early unpublished plates for the 'Pilgrim's
Progress' remain, amongst others, in the hands of Mr. Truman. Quite in
recent years" (it was in 1868) "he must have executed a private plate
for Mr. Frederick Locker, which shows that there were moments at least
in which the store of his fancy was not impoverished. No more ingenious
design could have been furnished to a collector than this of 'Fairy
Connoisseurs examining Mrs. Locker's treasures of Durer, Rembrandt,
etc.' For Mr. Ruskin, too, in 1866, there had been designed the 'Piper
of Hamelin,' leading the children mountain wards with the spell of his
wonderful music. And in 1870 a a frontispiece representing the fertile
Mr. Barham, surrounded by the creatures of his brain. And yet more
recent plates, the property of Mr. Bell, the publisher--one of the
'Family Window,' and one in 'Lob-lie-by-the-Fire'--show that Cruikshank
did not wholly outlive his talent. What he outlived was the social
conditions he had best comprehended. Dying as it were only yesterday,
he belongs so much to the past, because, though his period of production
did not seem long over, his time of receptiveness was gone by. As a
satirist, he belonged in spirit to another generation; we could not ask
him to grapple, at fourscore years, with the foibles of ours."

     * His "Bachelor's own Book; or, The Adventures of Mr.
     Lambkin, Gent," the story as well as the etchings being by
     Cruikshank, for instance.

This is a true account of him, to all who knew Cruikshank well in his
latter days.

Earnest, healthy, vigorous, and ambitious to the last; he could not
resign himself to live on the glory of the past He must be ever up and
doing--especially in the work that lay nearest his valiant heart.
He scattered his temperance work far and wide. "The Fruits of
Intemperance," published by John Cassell, about 1855, is a minor
design akin to that of the Triumph of Bacchus. The tree is covered with
medallion-shaped fruit, and on each medallion is a picture showing the
effects of intoxicating liquors. The roots of the tree are a bundle
of serpents, and the surrounding ground is covered with tombstones,
inscribed "early fruit." But Cruikshank never lost an opportunity of
preaching his moral. He made a drawing of "a drunken man knocking down
a drunken woman, in Oxford Street" on a Sunday afternoon; and another
of "a drunken ruffian knocking down a woman who carries a child," in
Farringdon Street. He illustrated the "Autobiography of a Thirsty Soul"
in the _Weekly Record_; and for the same paper he drew a publican's
quart measure, with a death's head in lieu of ale froth, two drunkards
babbling of the strengthening properties of beer by a "Noted Stout
House." In the _Band of Hope Review_ he illustrated a series, a parody
on "The House that Jack Built," called "the Gin Shop." He threw off
fly-leaves for Mr. Tweedie, as "A Man a Thing," "The House in Shadow,"
"The Loaf Lecture," "There is Poison in the Pot," "The Red Dragon,"
and "The Smokeless Chimney,"--the last of which he designed as a
contribution to the Cotton Famine Fund, during the American Civil War.
But it didn't pay. He was consoled, when publishers fell away from him
and his means of living became precarious by the steady friendship of
many admirers. He received a pension of L95 from the Crown, and one
of L50 from the Royal Academy. In 1875, an endeavour was made by Mr.
Charles Rogers to raise a second testimonial; but this effort finally
took the shape of a committee (of which his good friend Dr. B. W.
Richardson was chairman) to purchase the Cruikshank collection of
etchings and drawings for the nation and drawings for the nation--the
price put on it being L3,000--L500 more than the artist himself had
fixed.

After much trouble and many disappointments, the collections passed into
the possession of the Westminster Aquarium Company; Cruikshank receiving
in December, L2500--the price put upon it being what artist himself had
fixed; then receiving in 1876, L2,500, and a survivorship life-annuity
for himself and wife of about L35.

The closing years of George Cruikshank's life were harassed by a
controversy about a design he made and a statue he modelled of King
Robert the Bruce, to be erected by subscription at Bannockburn. The
consequence was a very lamentable quarrel, during which Cruikshank
claimed that he had been engaged by the committee to make the design,
* and that the statue modelled by Mr. Currie was originated by him--the
contrary being, according to the committee, the fact. Cruikshank, in
co-operation with Mr. Adams-Acton, produced a model; that is, Cruikshank
made a design, and then himself stood in the attitude of it as Mr.
Adams-Acton's model--the result being a statue, and one which found
favour with members of the committee. But money disputes put an end to
negotiations with Cruikshank. He had drawn L85 for expenses; his plan
involved in any case an outlay which the funds would not cover; and
finally, after many difficulties, the statue was committed to the care
of Mr. Currie.

     * In a letter to the Times (December 5th, 1877), he
     remarked: "As I am the artist who was first engaged by the
     Bruce Committee to make a design for a monumental statue of
     King Robert the Bruce, I was very much surprised, upon
     reading in the _Times_ of the 26th ult. the account of the
     unveiling of the Bruce statue at Stirling, to find that no
     statement was made as to my being the original designer,"
     etc.

But Cruikshank's share in the transaction, as set forth by himself, and
as addressed to the Scottish people in his eighty-fourth year, is too
remarkable an example of his vigour in old age to be omitted.

"An Address and Explanation to the Scottish People, by George
Cruikshank, with respect to the proposed Statue in Honour of King Robert
the Bruce.

"In the month of May 1870, several Scottish noblemen and gentlemen
formed themselves into a committee with the object of raising a fund
by subscription, for the purpose of having a statue of King Robert the
Bruce placed on "the field of Bannockburn," in honour of that hero,
and in memory of the great victory achieved by him and his army in that
field on the 24th of June, 1314.

"Some friends of mine, who were on this committee, invited me to be a
member thereof--which honour I was obliged to decline, as I could not
spare the time to attend the meetings; but, as 'The Bruce' was one of
my great heroes, I promised to give them all the assistance I could, and
suggested the attitude for the figure, which they all approved of, and
at their first meeting they decided that I should be requested to make
the design for the statue.

"I must here explain that, although I am an artist and designer, I am
not what is termed a _sculptor_; but it so happened that a friend of
mine, a brother artist, who _is_ a sculptor, chanced to see my design,
and was so pleased with it, that he volunteered to make a model of it,
which he did, acting upon my suggestions, and _from me_ as I stood in
the attitude and equipped in the armour.

"I also designed a pedestal; and when the model was completed, a cast in
plaster of Paris was taken, and exhibited in my studio to the committee,
and the noblemen, gentlemen, and friends who attended. All highly
approved of the design and the model, and the gentlemen gave most
flattering reports, for which I most sincerely thank them. After this I
had the very great honour of submitting the model for the inspection of
Her Most Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria at Windsor Castle.

"Several casts in plaster were taken from the model for exhibition
in London and Scotland, for the inspection of any one who might feel
disposed to subscribe; and the committee gave a commission to the
sculptor, Mr. John Adams-Acton, to execute a bronze statue of 'The
Bruce,' ten or twelve feet in height, to be placed on a rocky grey
granite pedestal twenty-two feet high; and all seemed to be going
on well, and the work was about to be commenced, when suddenly
the subscriptions all stopped at once! and this, no doubt, was in
consequence of the breaking out of the late war between France and
Germany, which terrible contest so entirely absorbed the public mind,
that 'The Bruce' was quite forgotten.

"This was, of course, a great disappointment to all connected with the
press, who had visited my studio, concerned in the movement, and the
matter since that time has been almost at a standstill; but I am happy
to say that a military officer has joined our ranks, and who now takes
the lead, and seems determined, if possible, to conquer and overcome
all difficulties. This is Major-General Sir James E. Alexander, C.B.,
of Westerton, Bridge of Allan, and who is chairman of the 'Bruce Local
Committee of Stirling.'

"I have now to mention another disappointment to myself and the
committee, which was, that the Odd Fellows of Stirling had erected a
large flagstaff (by permission of the owner of the land) on the very
spot where we had intended to have applied for permission to place the
statue; that being the site where the Scottish standard was fixed on
the day of the battle. This bit of ground being occupied, it was then
thought that the best place to have the statue would be on the esplanade
of Stirling Castle. Sir James Alexander thereupon applied to the
Secretary of State for War for a space on the esplanade for this
purpose, which request has most kindly been complied with.

"I must now explain to those who have not seen the original model that
Bruce is there represented as if he were looking down with pity on the
slain, and as if he were saying, '_The fight is o'er, the day is won: I
sheathe my sword._' But now that the site is quite different to what
was originally intended, it is necessary that the position of the
figure should be altered; and, as will be seen by the accompanying rough
sketch, the head is now elevated, and Bruce _is supposed to be looking
across the esplanade towards the field of Bannockburn_, which is a mile
and a half from Stirling Castle, and, as in the first model, Bruce has
sheathed his sword.

"With respect to the pedestal, I may just explain that on the front part
are the words 'King Robert the Bruce' in large letters, and following
this, in smaller letters, is 'Bannockburn, June 24, 1314.' Under this
line are two branches--one of laurel and the other of willow, emblems
of victory and sorrow for the slain. Then is stated, '_Erected by public
subscription in the reign of Victoria, Queen of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Ireland_. Between the words Victoria and
Queen is a circular wreath formed of the Rose, the Thistle, and the
Shamrock, in which circle are two hands joined, a male and female, as an
emblem of the union by marriage of the two royal families of England and
Scotland, and on one side of these royal families were the descendants
of 'the Bruce.'

"Nearly fifty years back I painted a picture of an incident in the life
of Bruce, exhibited in the British Institution, Pall Mall, London, and
was then careful to have the correct costume; but when making the design
for the statue, 'to make assurance doubly sure,' I got my friend Mr.
Bond, keeper of the Ancient Manuscripts at the British Museum, to let me
look over the MSS. of the time of Bruce, and then found that I had got
the correct costume. I think this is important; for should the statue be
erected, all those who might look at it would see just such a powerful
man as Bruce was, in the exact sort of armour and coat of mail that he
wore on the field of Bannockburn.

"The Bruce in his early progress met with many difficulties, all
of which, however, he overcame by his perseverance, and the 'Bruce
Committee' and myself are following his noble example in this respect;
and I trust that all the descendants of those 'Scots whom Bruce had
often led' will rally round the Major-General and his committee corps,
and assist them to place the statue of him who was the great commander
of the Scottish army at the battle of Bannockburn in this safe and
commanding position on the esplanade of Stirling.

"With regard to myself, as my ancestors were all natives of
Scotland--some Lowlanders and some Highlanders--I should indeed be
pleased to have my name associated with any national work of art that
might be placed in the land of my forefathers, and I should consider it
one of the greatest honours that could be conferred upon me if it could
be written on the pedestal that this monument in honour of King Robert
the Bruce was designed by the artist,

"George Cruikshank.

"_Hampstead Road, London, August_ 1874.

"P. S.--I am authorized to state that subscriptions may be remitted
to W. Christie, Esq., secretary to the Bruce Committee, Port Street,
Stirling; or to the treasurer, John A. Murrie, Esq., the manager of the
branch of the National Bank of Scotland at Stirling; and at London. And
I am given to understand that about fourteen or fifteen hundred pounds
are required, in addition to what is already in hand, in order to carry
out the work in the first style of art."

[Illustration: 274]

At the ceremony of unveiling Mr. Currie's statue in front of Stirling
Castle (November 24, 1877), Major-General Sir James Alexander, of
Westerton, in handing over the work to the Provost and Corporation
of Stirling, said, that as they could not get a bronze statue "under the
direction of an eminent artist, Mr. George Cruikshank, of London," they
had resolved to have one of durable stone.

This closing transaction of his life poor Cruikshank felt most bitterly;
and he charged his old friend Dr. Rogers, Sir James Alexander, and
all concerned in it, with having behaved in "a most dishonourable and
disgraceful manner." These were hot, ill-considered words, uttered in
the pain of a very trying disappointment: words to be forgotten over the
artist's grave.

Mr. Frederick Wedmore gives us a peep at him as he went about of late,
his heart still upon his sleeve as when he was young, in the days of the
Regency: "Many of us who did not know him at home have at least met him
about; for not only was he a familiar figure of the dreary quarter which
he inhabited--where the dingy squalor of St. Paneras touches on the
shabby respectability of Camden Town--but he travelled much in London,
and may well have been beheld handing his card to a stranger with whom
he had talked casually in a Metropolitan Railway carriage, or announcing
his personality to a privileged few who were invited to see in him
the convincing proof of the advantages of a union of genius with
water-drinking. He was an entirely honest man; and who is there that
would not forgive the little pleasurable vanities that he chose to allow
himself at the fag end of a life not over-prosperous--a career no one
had carefully made smooth, a career filled full of inventive work as
rich as Hogarth's and as genial as Dickens's?"

"Occasionally," Mr. Frederick Locker writes,* "he used to come to us and
tell us his troubles, and what was occupying him; but, like many other
interesting people, he did not talk about what would have been most
worth hearing. The last time I saw him he spoke of having known Tom
Hood (the elder) ** very well, but he did not tell as anything about him
worth remembering.

     * March 26th, 1878.

     ** When it was agreed that Cruikshank was to illustrate
     Hood's "Epping Hunt," author and artist, with two or three
     friends, spent a highly convivial day in the Forest. Hood
     and Cruikshank were fast friends, and sat up together very
     late of nights in Amwell Street--the wild humour and
     prodigious animal spirits being a delight to the quiet
     humourist, under whose form lay a serious poetic mind, and a
     tender heart.

Poor man, it was a bitterly cold morning last December, and he arrived
before breakfast, and stayed to breakfast. Mr. Austin Dobson was there;
and he told us the story of how he invented Old Fagin in the condemned
cell." Mr. Dobson says of him at this breakfast: "On the morning in
question (I think it must have been the 14th of December last, 1877),
Mr. Cruikshank came in; and I, who had not seen him more than once or
twice in my life, was only too eager to ask him all sorts of questions
about himself. Except that he was a little bent, he had no appearance
of age--certainly not of the advanced age he had reached. He was
very-bright and alert, and appeared to have an excellent memory for the
circumstances of his career."

He celebrated his silver wedding on the 8th of March, 1875, when his
house was crowded with his friends and admirers, who took tea with him.
Mr. S. O. Hall, his old friend, addressed a few words to the company,
which so affected Mrs. Cruikshank, that she fell weeping upon her
husband's neck. Mr. Walter Hamilton, who was present, remarks: "To
receive the congratulations of so many friends was a task which would
have fatigued and excited many a younger man than Mr. Cruikshank; but he
preserved his self-possession through it well, having a ready jest and a
smile for each and all; whilst Mrs. Cruikshank, who was fairly hedged
in on every side with bouquets, looked far too young to be one of the
principals in such a ceremony. A guard of honour from his old corps
attended to congratulate their late colonel. It was late in the
afternoon before Mr. Cruikshank withdrew for a few moments from the
crowded rooms, and as he went he whispered, laughingly, to the author,
'You are down on our list of visitors for the Golden Wedding.'"

"On the morning of the 1st of February," writes his young friend, Grace
Stebbing, ** "there was still living a bright, brave-spirited old man,
who had worked on untiringly almost to the end, even to within three
weeks of his death, when I, one of those privileged to claim his
friendship even from my infancy upwards, met him hurrying along the
streets with cheerful, eager aspect, to keep 'a business appointment.'"

     ** The Graphic, February 9th, 1878.

[Illustration: 279]


[Illustration: 280]




CHAPTER VIII. THE END.

George Cruikshank fell ill in the first month of 1878, and was attended
by his sympathetic and distinguished friend, Dr. B. W. Richardson.

He died at his house in the Hampstead Road, on the 1st of February. He
was buried temporarily--the Crypt of St. Paul's being under repair--at
Kensal Green. The only member of the Royal Academy who attended his
funeral was Charles Landseer, R.A., who was almost as old as Cruikshank.
But Messrs. Tenniel and Du Maurier were there, with poor W. Brunton, a
clever caricaturist, who was to fall in his youth. Cruikshank's friend,
George Augustus Sala, and Lord Houghton, were among his pall-bearers;
and in the group about the coffin were Edmund Yates, S. G. Ball, General
M'Murdo, and John Sheehan, the "Irish Whisky-drinker."

On the 29th of the following November, a hearse, followed by a
mourning-coach containing Mrs. George Cruikshank, conveyed the mortal
part of the illustrious artist to St. Paul's, and four sergeants of the
volunteer corps which he had commanded brought up the procession. The
coffin was silently lowered to its final resting-place immediately after
the afternoon service.

[Illustration: 281]







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Life Of George Cruikshank, Vol.
II. (of II), by Blanchard Jerrold

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE OF GEORGE CRUIKSHANK, II ***

***** This file should be named 44742.txt or 44742.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/4/7/4/44742/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

