Project Gutenberg's Margaret Brown's French Cookery Book, by Margaret Brown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Margaret Brown's French Cookery Book

Author: Margaret Brown

Release Date: February 15, 2014 [EBook #44915]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BROWN'S FRENCH COOKERY BOOK ***




Produced by Emmy and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet Archive)










Margaret Brown's French Cookery Book.





    MARGARET BROWN'S

    FRENCH COOKERY

    BOOK.


    Containing a Variety of Receipts, from the Plainest Cookery to the
    Most Elaborate French Dish.


    WASHINGTON, D. C.
    RUFUS H. DARBY, PUBLISHER.
    1886.





COPYRIGHTED: 1886.




CONTENTS.



    Asparagus Soup, 18
    Apple Chocolate, 99
    Apple Omelette, 76
    Apple Cake, 77
    Apple Stuffing, 78
    Apple Jam, 78
    Apple and Rice, 98
    Apple (red) in Jelly, 99
    Apple Charlotte, 37
    Apple Jelly, 100
    Apple Pot-pie, 112
    Artichokes, 102
    Apple Tarts, 110
    A Course for a Dinner of 12 persons, 11
    A Spring Lunch, 11
    A Spring Breakfast, 11

    Boned Turkey, 25
    Beefsteak Pudding, 47
    Boston Baked Plum Pudding, 47
    Biscuits, 65
    Biscuit Glace, 117
    Bread (No. 1), 66
    Bread (No. 2), 67
    Baked Apple Pudding, 76
    Beef a la Mode, 85
    Boned Turkey (roast), 25
    Bell Fritters, 27
    Boston Brown Bread, 112
    Bread and Butter Pudding, 106
    Boston Apple Pudding, 107
    Blanc-Mange, 115
    Beefsteak and Oysters, 103
    Baked Apple Dumplings, 78

    Celery Soup, 16
    Chicken a l'Italienne, 21
    Croquettes, fish, 21
    Croquettes, potato, 22
    Croquettes, lobster, 22
    Curry Chicken, 23
    Chicken Rissoles, 24
    Custard Fritters, 26
    Cold Veal and Ham Timbale, 23
    Chicken Pie a la Reine, 29
    Croquettes, 33
    Chicken Cutlets, 35
    Chicken Salad with Mayonnaise Sauce, 36
    Consomme, 37
    Cheese Souffle, 42
    Caper Sauce, 43
    Chromskies, 44
    Chicken Glace, 68
    Clam Chowder, 69
    Currant Jelly, 70
    Chow-Chow, 70
    Cocoanut Pudding, 72
    Chicken in Glace (whole), 82
    Christmas Plum Pudding, 88
    Clam Stew, 91
    Codfish Cakes, 92
    Crabs Dressed Cold, 94
    Charlotte des Pommes, 99
    Canvasback Ducks, 101
    Chickens (young), broiled, 86
    Calves' Foot Jelly, 68
    Corn Bread, 111
    Charlotte Russe, 65
    Chocolate Cream, 61
    Cream Cakes, 61
    Cabinet Pudding (No. 1), 50
    Cabinet Pudding (No. 2), 48
    Cabinet Pudding a la Francaise, 45
    Cream Sauce, 48
    Custard Pudding, 50
    Custard Sauce, 51
    Cottage Pudding, 52
    Custards, boiled, 53
    Clams, fried, 94
    Chocolate Transparent Icing, 119
    Crushed Strawberry Cream, 118
    Coffee Blanc Mange, 116
    Cheese Crackers, 114
    Corn Bread (No. 2), 66
    Cranberry Tarts, 110
    Clam Chowder (No. 2), 92

    Delicate Cake, 64
    Deviled Crabs, 83
    Duchesse Cake, 64
    Delmonico's Pudding, 88
    Deviled Fish, 95

    Easter Ham, 87
    Eggs, stuffed, 90
    Egg Potage, 90

    Fried Perch, 106
    French Vanilla Cream, 119
    Fruit Jelly, 114
    French Coffee, 116
    Frozen Peach Custard, 115
    Flemish Waffles, 109
    French Muffins, 111
    Fricasseed Chicken, 104
    Fish Turbot, 105
    Fish Cream a la Lait, 37
    Fish Pudding (No. 1), 45
    Fish Pudding (No. 2), 77
    Fillet of Chicken, 74
    Fish in Jelly, 95
    Fish in Batter, 95
    Fish Sandwiches, 96
    Fish Patties, 96
    Fish, scalloped, 96
    Fish, boiled, 97
    Fish, salted, 97
    Fish, curried, 97

    Green Corn Pudding, 49
    Ginger Cake, 58
    Goose Pork, 86
    German Waffles, 113
    Graham Muffins, 110
    Game Soup, 102

    Huckleberry Cake, 59
    Ham (whole boned), 81
    Hickory Nut Cake, 88
    Ham, 106

    Icing, transparent, 54
    Ice Cream, coffee, 54
    Ice Cream, Italien orange, 54
    Ice Cream, chocolate, 55

    Jumbles, 59
    Jury Pie, 74

    Kidneys, 105

    Lobster Soup, 17
    Lobster Fritters, 27
    Lark Pie, 28
    Lemon Cream Meringue Pie, 29
    Lobster Sauce (No. 1), 43
    Lobster Sauce (No. 2), 93
    Lobster Salad, 94
    Lemon Ice Cream, 119

    Mock Turtle Soup, 13
    Mock Mock Turtle, 14
    Mock Turtle (Southern), 15
    Marrow Bones, 23
    Mutton Cutlets, 31
    Mutton Cutlets with Chestnuts, 32
    Mushroom Catsup, 39
    Mustard Quickly Made, 40
    Mutton Chops, 42
    Mushroom Sauce, 44
    Mushroom Sauce (brown), 44
    Madelaines, 60
    Mince Pies, 64
    Mangoes, 71
    Meringue Pie, 72
    Mussels, stewed, 90
    Maigre Plum Pudding, 108
    Mock Goose, 104

    Noyeau Cordial, 117
    Nottingham Pudding, 108

    Ox Tail Soup, 13
    Oysters, fried, 18
    Oysters, fricasseed (No. 1), 19
    Oysters, scalloped, 20
    Oysters, pickled (No. 1), 20
    Oysters, fricasseed (No. 2), 21
    Omelette, 28
    Ox Tongue, 31
    Oyster Catsup, 40
    Ox Tongue Glace, 83
    Oysters, pickled (No. 2), 83
    Orange Pudding, 89
    Oysters, panned, 91
    Oysters, broiled, 91
    Oyster Chowder, 92
    Omelette, ordinary, 97
    Omelette, sardine, 98
    Omelette, bacon, 98
    Oysters a la poulette, 100
    Oysters, truffled, 100
    Oysters, stuffed and broiled, 101
    Oatmeal Cracknels, 113
    Oyster Sauce, 94
    Oysters, stewed, 102

    Pastry Cream, 16
    Pease Soup, plain, 17
    Pease Soup and Pickled Pork, 16
    Peach Sauce, 27
    Pate la Foie Gras, 35
    Peppers, stuffed, 41
    Plum Pudding Sauce, 43
    Plum Pudding (No. 1), 49
    Plum Pudding (No. 2), 50
    Princess Pudding, 52
    Pancakes, Swiss, 56
    Pancakes, German, 57
    Pancakes, Scotch, 57
    Pancakes, French, 57
    Puff Pudding, 73
    Puff Paste, 73
    Potato Pie, 75
    Potato Biscuits, 75
    Pudding a la Mode, 77
    Pudding a la Mariniere, 77
    Potato Pudding, 78
    Pudding a la Fecule des Pommes de Terre, 79
    Potatoes in Meat Puddings and Pies, 79
    Potatoes, stuffed, 79
    Potatoes, curried, 80
    Potatoes, souffle, 80
    Potatoes and Kidney, 81
    Potato Patties, 81
    Peach Marmalade, 84
    Peaches, brandied, 89
    Perch, fried, 106
    Pumpkin Pie, 58
    Peach Ice Cream, 118
    Pancakes and Fritters, 107
    Plain Bread Pudding, 109

    Quails, stuffed, 41
    Queen Cake, 60
    Quince Preserves, 85
    Quails, broiled, 87
    Quantity required for a Reception or Evening Party, 11

    Ragout of cold Veal, 28
    Rock Fish Cutlet, 34
    Rissoles, 34
    Rabbit Fricassee, 103
    Rice Pudding, 51
    Royal Wine Sauce, 51
    Roman Punch, 53
    Red Cabbage Pickle, 84
    Rabbit Fricassee, 87
    Red Currant Fruit Ice, 117
    Rice Muffins, 114

    Salmon, pickled, 89
    Saddle of Mutton, 30
    Salmon Fillets, 38
    Saddle of Venison, 38
    Stuffing for veal, turkey, duck, 40
    Snipe Pudding, 46
    Sultana Cake, 56
    Sponge Cake (white), 59
    Sponge Cake, 62
    Spice Cake, 62
    Scotch Cake, 62
    Shrewsbury Cake, 63
    Sponge Bread, 66
    Sweet Potato Pie (No. 1), 66
    Sweet Potato Pie (No. 2), 71
    Sweet Potato Pudding, 72
    Swiss Apple Pie, 76
    Snowball, 115
    Spring Fruit Pudding, 108
    Shad, boiled, 92
    Shad, baked, 93
    Steaks, 105
    Stewed Oysters, 102
    Soft Waffles, 109
    Sweet Potatoes, baked or roasted, 80

    Toutes Fruits Ice Cream, 118
    Tomato Soup, 18
    Terrapin, 24
    Timbales of Macaroni, 29
    Tomato Sauce, 44
    Tapioca Pudding, 50
    Tea Biscuits, 113
    Tongue, 106

    Veal (cold) and Ham Timbale, 103
    Vol-au-Vents, 32
    Vanilla Sauce, 48
    Vermicelli Pudding, 53
    Variegated Cake, 56
    Vanilla Cake, 63
    Vinegar Peaches, 70
    Venison Cutlets, 88

    Wine Sauce, 22
    Waffles, 27
    Walnut Catsup, 39
    Water Ice, raspberry, 55
    Water Ice, lemon, 55
    Water Ice, orange, 55
    Wine Cake, 63
    Waffles (No. 2), 65

    Yorkshire Pudding, 52
    Yeast, 69
    Yorkshire Pudding (No. 2), 111




PREFACE.


This book contains a variety of receipts, from the finest French dishes
to the most ordinary cooking. They are reliable, as nearly every one
has been used by me at different times. My experience in the work has
prompted me to issue this book, every part of which has been dictated
by me, and carefully written down by my friend, Louise A. Smith.


    MARGARET BROWN.





QUANTITY FOR A

RECEPTION OR EVENING PARTY

OF 225 PERSONS.


14 dozen Croquettes; 1 Boned Turkey; 8 quarts Terrapin.


    (Six turkeys, 2-1/2 chickens, 6 dozen stalks of celery,
    6 heads of lettuce, 3 half-pint bottles of olive oil are
    required for chicken salad; 2-1/2 dozen eggs for the
    dressing and garnishing. Parsley can also be used for
    garnishing the dishes.)

    [This quantity can be increased or lessened in proportion to
    the above number.]



FOR A SPRING LUNCH.

Little Neck clams or deviled crabs; patties; spring chickens; squabs;
pate de foie gras, or a bird glace; ices and fruits.


DINNER FOR 12 PERSONS.

Oysters (Blue Point), 5 or 6 on a plate; Julienne soup or puree of
chicken or asparagus, followed by a course of fish; patties, either
chicken or mushroom. For filet de boeuf, take 5 or 6 pounds fillet. In
the spring garnish this dish with mushrooms, or asparagus and French
potatoes; macaroni timbale; sweetbreads, larded and roasted, served
with pease; supreme of chicken; salad and crushed chunks; cheese
souffle; ices, fruits, coffee.


A SPRING BREAKFAST.

Oranges with scalloped peel; broiled fish cutlets and potato
croquettes; lamb chops and pease (French chops); vol-au-vents of
sweetbreads; broiled squabs; waffles and coffee; cheese, straws, ices.

[Illustration]




MARGARET BROWN'S FRENCH COOKERY BOOK.


No. 1.

OX TAIL SOUP.

Soak 3 tails in warm water. Put into a gallon stewpan 8 cloves, 2
onions, 1 teaspoonful each of allspice and black pepper, and the tails
cover with cold water. Skim often and carefully. Let simmer gently
until the meat is tender and leaves the bones easily. This will take 2
hours. When done take out the meat and cut it off the bones. Skim the
broth and strain it through a sieve. To thicken it put in flour and
butter, or 2 tablespoonfuls of the fat you have taken off the broth
into a clean stewpan, with as much flour as will make a paste. Stir
well over the fire; then pour in the broth slowly while stirring. Let
it simmer for one-half hour; skim, and strain through a sieve. Put in
the meat with a tablespoonful of mushroom catsup, a glass of wine;
season with salt.


No. 2.

MOCK TURTLE.

Get a calf's head with skin on, take out the brains, wash the head
several times in cold water, let it soak one hour in spring water,
then lay in a stewpan, and cover with cold water, and half a gallon
over. Take off the scum that rises as it warms. Let it boil for one
hour, take it up and, when almost cold, cut the head into pieces one
and a half inches, and the tongue into mouthfuls, or make a side dish
of tongue and brains. When the head is taken out put in the stock
meat, about 3 pounds of knuckle of veal, and as much beef, add all the
trimmings and bones of the head, skim it well, cover close, let it boil
5 hours (save 2 quarts of this for gravy sauce), strain it off and let
stand until morning; then take off the fat; set a large stewpan on the
fire, with half a pound of fresh butter, 12 ounces of sliced onions,
4 ounces of green sage; chop it a little; let these fry 1 hour, then
rub in one pound of flour, then add the broth by degrees until it is
as thick as cream. Season with 1/4 ounce of ground allspice, 1/2 ounce
of black pepper ground fine, salt to your taste the rind of a lemon
peeled thin. Let it simmer gently for 1-1/2 hours, strain through a
hair sieve. If it does not go through easily press a wooden spoon
against the sides of the sieve. Put it in a clean stewpan with the
head, and season it by putting to each gallon of soup 1/2 pint of wine,
2 tablespoonfuls of lemon juice. Let it simmer until the meat is tender
(from 1/2 hour to 1 hour). Take care it is not overdone. Stir often to
keep the meat from sticking to the pan. When the meat is quite tender
the soup is ready. A head of 20 pounds and 10 pounds of stock-meat will
make 10 quarts of soup, besides the 2 quarts of stock-meat set aside
for side dishes. If there is more meat on the head than you wish to use
make a ragout pie of some of it.


No. 3.

MOCK MOCK TURTLE.

Line the bottom of a 5-pint stewpan with 1 ounce of lean bacon or ham,
1-1/2 pounds lean gravy beef, a cow's heel, inner rind of a carrot, a
sprig of lemon thyme, winter savory, 3 sprigs of parsley, a few green
leaves of sweet basil, 2 onions, a large onion with 4 cloves stuck in
it, 18 grains of allspice, 18 grains of pepper. Pour on these 1 pint
of cold water, cover the stewpan and set it on a slow fire to boil
gently 1/4 hour. Watch it carefully, if need be, with the cover off,
until it gets a good brown color; then fill up the stewpan with boiling
water, and let it simmer for 2 hours. If you wish you can cut up some
of the meat into mouthfuls and put into the soup. To thicken it take
2 tablespoonfuls of flour, a ladleful of gravy, mix them and pour it
into the stewpan where the gravy is, let it simmer 1/2 hour longer.
Skim it and strain through a fine sieve. Cut the cow's heel in pieces 1
inch square. Squeeze the juice of a lemon, 1 tablespoonful of mushroom
catsup, 1 teaspoonful of salt, 1/2 teaspoonful of black pepper, a pinch
of grated nutmeg, a glass of Madeira or sherry wine, through a sieve
into the stewpan of soup; let simmer 5 minutes longer.


No. 4.

SOUTHERN MOCK TURTLE SOUP.

Wash a calf's head clean, put 2 gallons of water on it, set it to boil;
put in a hock of ham (smoked), weighing about 2 pounds, also thyme,
3 onions, 1 bunch of celery tops, 1 tablespoonful each of allspice
cloves, not ground; let it boil down slowly to 1-1/2 gallons. When
the head is done take it out, being careful to remove the brains and
tongue, then cut the meat into small pieces. Strain the soup; brown 1/2
pound of flour and make a batter of it to thicken the soup; grate 1/2
of a nutmeg in it, put in pepper and salt to taste; take a portion of
the brain and make it into small cakes, as you would fritters, fry them
in lard; take 1/2 pound of veal cutlets, and a small part of the ham,
chop up with a little parsley and onion, season with pepper and salt;
make small forcemeat balls, frying them in lard, having first rolled
them in eggs, then in breadcrumbs; put the forcemeat ball in the soup
just before dishing up, together with 1/2 pint of wine.


No. 5.

CELERY SOUP.

After splitting 6 heads of celery into pieces about 2 inches long, wash
them well, lay them on a hair sieve to drain, and put them in 3 quarts
of clear gravy soup in a gallon soup-pot; let it stew just enough to
make the celery tender, say about 1 hour; take off the scum if any
should rise, season with a little salt. Should you wish to make this
soup at a season when you could not get celery, use the celery seed,
say about 1/2 pint, put this in the soup 1/4 hour before it is done,
with a little sugar.


No. 6.

PEASE SOUP AND PICKLED PORK.

Take 2 pounds of the flank of pickled pork. Care must be taken that the
pork is not too salty, otherwise lay it in water the night before. Put
1 quart pease (split), 2 heads of cut celery, 2 onions peeled, 1 sprig
of sweet marjoram in 3 quarts of water; boil gently for 2 hours, then
put in the pork. Let this boil until it is done enough to eat. When
done wash it clean in hot water and place it on a dish, or else cut it
in mouthfuls and put in a tureen with the soup.


No. 7.

PLAIN PEASE SOUP.

One quart of split peas, 2 heads of celery; let them simmer gently in
broth or soft water (3 quarts) over a slow fire, stirring every now and
then to keep the pease from burning. Add more water should it boil away
or the soup get too thick. After boiling for 3 hours put them through
a coarse sieve, then through a fine one. Wash out your stewpan and
put the soup back into it, let it boil up once. Take off the scum if
any. Fry small square pieces of bread in hot lard until they become a
delicate brown; take them out and let them drain on a sheet of paper.
Send these up with the soup in one side dish and dry powdered mint or
sweet marjoram in another.


No. 8.

LOBSTER SOUP.

Take 3 fine, lively hen lobsters, boil them; when cold split the tails;
take out the fish, crack the claws, and cut the meat in mouthfuls; take
out the coral and soft part of the body, crush part of the coral in
a mortar; pick out the fish from the shell, beat part of it with the
coral; out of this make forcemeat balls, flavored with mace, nutmeg,
grated lemon peel, cayenne, and anchovy. Pound these, with the yolk of
an egg. Have ready 3 quarts of veal broth, bruise the small legs and
the shell, and put them into it to boil for 20 minutes, then strain. To
thicken the soup take the live spawn, crush it in the mortar, with a
little butter and flour, rub it through a sieve and add it to the soup
with the meat of the lobsters and the rest of the coral; let it simmer
gently for 10 minutes.


No. 9.

ASPARAGUS SOUP.

Take all the tender portion of three good-sized bunches of asparagus.
This will make 2 quarts of soup. Put a large saucepan half full of
water on the fire; when it boils put one-half of the asparagus in, with
a little salt; let it boil till done, then drain it off. Put in a clean
stewpan, with 3 quarts of plain veal or mutton broth, cover up close,
and stew one hour over a slow fire. Rub through a sieve, then cut the
other half of the asparagus in pieces one inch long, and send up in the
soup.


No. 10.

TOMATO SOUP OR MOCK HOCK SOUP.

One quart of tomatoes, put on fire and let boil; when done mash through
a sieve 3 tablespoonfuls of sugar, 1 teaspoonful nutmeg and mace
together, and put in tomatoes, 1 tablespoonful of butter, mixed with a
large tablespoonful of flour, stir all into the tomatoes, and put on
to boil again; stir till it boils. Quarter of an hour before serving
pour in 1 pint of milk. Pepper and salt to taste. Stir till it boils up
nicely. Put in 2 tablespoonfuls wine just before dishing up.


No. 11.

FRIED OYSTERS.

For this purpose each and every oyster should be as large, plump,
and fat--fresh, of course, not salt--as you can procure. Any small
ones will serve for sauces, croquettes, soups, etc. Drain off their
juice, put them in a bowl, cover them with ice water, let stand
a few minutes, then place them in a colander and drain them. Dry
between two thin, soft towels, without pressing them, and lay upon a
moulding-board, slightly coated with cracker-dust, finely sifted. Beat
up to a thick rich custard as many eggs and an equal measure of cream
as you need for moistening all the oysters, adding, at the last, a
saltspoonful of salt for every three eggs. Have ready a sufficiency of
finely-sifted bread crumbs prepared by rubbing the heart of a stale
loaf of white bread in a towel and pressing it through a sieve. Dip
the oysters, one by one, into the beaten egg and roll them in the
crumbs till covered in every part. By no means flatten them, but keep
them as round and plump as possible; lay them on napkins and keep in
a cool place for half an hour; again dip, roll in crumbs, and set
aside for another half hour. Now lay them on the wire stand, not quite
touching each other. Set the stand into a deep frying-pan nearly full
of whatever frying mixture you use, which must be boiling hot, and fry
quickly to a deep yellow color, but do not brown them, or they will be
tough and greasy. Lift the stand out of the pan, drain quickly, and
serve the oysters on a hot, white napkin, placed on a hot platter,
and garnish with sprigs of parsley or water cress, stuffed olives,
and small bits of lemon. The daintiest condiment of all is the French
mayonnaise sauce served with lettuce.


No. 12.

FRICASSEED OYSTERS.

Fifty oysters, 6 ounces butter, 3 tablespoonfuls flour, 3 saltspoonfuls
salt, 2 saltspoonfuls white pepper, 2 saltspoonfuls mace, 6 bay leaves,
1 quart cream, 4 yolks of eggs, 1 tea cupful bread crumbs. Put the
oysters, with their juice, into a stewpan on a quick fire; give one
boil, drain them, put them into a hot tureen, and set in a warm place.
Rub the butter, flour, and 3 teaspoonfuls of scalding cream to a fine
smooth paste, stir it quickly into the quart of cream in a bright
stewpan on a quick fire. Add the salt and spice, and stir till it no
longer thickens. Now put in the yolks of eggs, well beaten; stir till
smooth, strain the whole through a fine sieve upon the oysters. Cover
evenly with the crumbs and lightly brown in a quick oven.


No. 13.

SCALLOPED OYSTERS.

Half-gallon oysters for a three pint pudding dish; drain the oysters
well, 1 pint of bread-crumbs, and put pepper, salt, and a little
mustard, nutmeg or mace in the crumbs. Cover the bottom of dish with
the crumbs. Put a layer of oysters with a small piece of butter, then a
layer of crumbs. Continue this way till dish is full, then put 2 or 3
tablespoonfuls of cream on top. Put in a rather quick oven; let bake 20
minutes.


No. 14.

PICKLED OYSTERS.

Drain the oysters. To 1/2 gallon of pickled oysters, 1/2 pint cider
vinegar. Heat the vinegar boiling hot. Put in spice enough to flavor,
cloves, allspice and mace. Put the oysters in the hot liquor till they
get hot; put a little salt in them; scoop them out of the hot liquor
and put them right into the hot vinegar, and put in a covered dish and
set away to cool.


No. 15.

FRICASSEE OF OYSTERS.

Set 75 oysters on the fire with their liquor and an equal quantity of
chicken broth, 1 glass white wine, 2 blades mace; when they boil remove
from the fire, and then from the boiling braise, which return to the
fire; in a clean stewpan put a piece of butter the size of an egg,
1-1/2 teaspoonfuls of flour, stir 5 minutes then add the yolks of 5
eggs, 1 saltspoonful of white pepper and salt, 1 tablespoonful chopped
parsley; don't let it boil; make the oysters hot in it; use as directed.


No. 16.

CHICKEN A L'ITALIENNE.

Common butter, remains of chicken, 12 tomatoes, 1 cup broth, 2
tablespoonfuls onions chopped, a tablespoonful parsley, 1 saltspoonful
each of salt, white pepper, royal thyme, and summer savory, 1
tablespoonful of butter. Cut the remains of chicken into small pieces,
dip into the butter, and fry crisp in plenty of lard made hot for the
purpose; serve with tomato sauce.


No. 17.

FISH CROQUETTES.

Three-pound rock. Boil it till done; skin it and take bones out. Chop
fish up fine with 1 stalk of celery and 2 sprigs of parsley, 1 pint
milk, 2 tablespoonfuls flour, 1/4 pound butter. Mix butter and flour
together; boil the milk and pour it into the flour and butter, making
a rich sauce. Boil 1/2 pint oysters scalded, take the hearts out, cut
them up in small bits and put in the sauce. Put fish in the sauce and
keep stirring till it begins to boil. When done pour out on a platter
and let it get cold. Make croquettes in shape of pears or apples, roll
in beaten eggs and then in bread crumbs. Boil in a croquette kettle of
lard.

Serve these with French potatoes or Saratoga potatoes fried.


No. 18.

POTATO CROQUETTES.

Peel and boil 5 good-sized potatoes till mealy. Rub them fine with a
potato-masher; 1/2 tablespoonful butter, 2 eggs, pepper and salt mashed
well in the potatoes. After they are cool make them out into steeples.
Roll them in beaten egg, then in bread crumbs; boil them in hot lard.
Set them up around the dish.


No. 19.

LOBSTER CROQUETTES.

Two lobsters boiled done, picked and chopped fine; 1/4 loaf of bread
grated fine, little nutmeg, mace to taste, 1/4 pound of butter; mix all
with lobster and 1 egg; make lobster croquettes in pears or steeples,
put them in beaten eggs, then in bread crumbs. Boil in hot lard,
garnish with the claws and parsley.


No. 20.

WINE SAUCE FOR VENISON OR HARE.

Quarter pint of claret or port wine, and same quantity of plain mutton
gravy; 1 tablespoonful currant jelly. Let boil up once and send to
table in a sauce-boat.


No. 21.

MARROW BONES.

Saw the bones even so they will stand steadily; put a piece of paste
into the ends, set them upright in a saucepan, and boil till done. A
beef-marrow bone will take from 1 hour to 1-1/2 hours. Serve fresh
toasted bread with them.


No. 22.

CURRY CHICKEN.

Two young chickens, cut up in joints; place in stewpan a small piece of
butter, a little piece of onion and parsley, 1 pint of water. Let stew
slowly. When most done take 1 teacup of cream, take grease off the top
of the pot, pour in the cream; take the grease, mix it with 2 large
tablespoonfuls of flour; when the chicken begins to boil again put in
the flour moistened with the grease; put in a teaspoonful of curry and
a little salt. Boil some plain rice in a stewpan, when time to dish up
put the curry chicken in center of platter, and the boiled rice all
around the dish, and garnish with water-cresses and parsley.


No. 23.

COLD VEAL AND HAM TIMBALE.

Timbale paste, 1 pound corned ham, 2 pounds leg veal, 6 hard boiled
eggs, 1 teaspoonful each of royal celery, salt, and marjoram, 3 sprigs
parsley, white pepper, and salt to taste. Line the timbale mould with
the paste, first setting it on a greased baking pan; cut the ham and
veal into scallops, and the eggs into slices; with them make alternate
layers with the seasonings; when all are used, fill with water, wet the
exposed edges, and bake in moderate oven 2 hours; when cold open the
mould, and serve as may be desired.


No. 24.

RISSOLES OF CHICKENS.

CHROMSKY MIXTURE.

Roll out paste very thin, cut out with large biscuit cutter, wet the
edges, put a teaspoonful of the mixture on, fold the paste over it
pressing the two edges; fry in plenty of lard made hot for the purpose,
until the paste is cooked. Serve on a napkin.


No. 25.

TERRAPIN.

Take 2 diamond-backs, put them into hot, boiling water or lye. Let them
get entirely done; take them out and let them get cool a little; then
open them and take the dark skin off the feet; take out the meat from
the shell, the entrails, and the liver, being careful not to break the
gall, as it will render the dish unfit to eat; do not use the head;
take 1/4 pound of butter, a small piece of onion, teaspoonful of thyme.
Put these in the stewpan and let them get a little brown, putting in
also a tablespoonful of flour, 1/2 pint of cream, and 1/2 pint of milk.
Let all this boil to a rich sauce, then take it off the fire; grate a
little nutmeg, a pinch of ground allspice and cloves, cayenne pepper to
taste. Take one stalk of celery and chop it up very fine; put it with
the meat; put this in the stewpan of sauce 1/4 hour before dinner on a
fire; let it boil up for 5 or 10 minutes. Just before dishing up put
in a wineglass each of sherry and brandy. Sliders can be cooked in the
same way.


No. 26.

ROAST BONED TURKEY.

This must be boned, as stated in Boned Turkey, with this exception: The
bones must be left in all the lower extremities and in the pinions,
so that when placed in shape these bones will help to form it. Take a
stale loaf of bread, cut all the crust off; 1/2 pound of butter, 1 can
of mushrooms, chopped, pepper and salt, 1 teaspoonful of nutmeg. Chop
all this up fine; stuff every joint where the bone has been taken out
so that it will look plump; tie it up; put in a baking-pan; sift flour,
pepper and salt over it; place a little water in the pan to keep it
from burning; bake 1-1/2 hours in a slow oven; baste it with 1/2 pint
of Madeira wine in the oven; take the turkey out of the pan and make
the gravy with the essence. Make potato croquettes and set all around
the dish.


No. 27.

BONED TURKEY.

Split the turkey down the back, clear the back of meat, then take all
the meat off the wings without breaking the skin, then from the side
of the breast, afterwards from the thighs and legs. We have now taken
all the meat off in one piece, leaving only the carcass of bones. Now
take 2 pounds veal-cutlet, or large-sized chicken, or sausage-meat,
1/4 pound ham, a half-sized can truffles peeled and sliced in half, a
can of mushrooms sliced in half, 1 large stalk celery, 1 teaspoonful
thyme, a half of a small onion, a bunch of parsley; chop fine, except
the truffles and mushrooms; season with pepper and salt to taste.
Take all the dressing together and put it in the meat (which is all
in one piece) taken off the turkey; sew the back up; then sew this in
a bag, and boil gently. A small-sized turkey will take 2-1/2 hours; a
large-sized, 3 hours. Place the carcass in 1/2 gallon of water and
let boil till water is reduced to 3 pints; put in it pepper and salt
and a small piece of onion; then take off and strain. Melt 1 box of
gelatine in a cupful of water. When melted, put in the cool soup, with
the whites of 2 beaten eggs and 2 egg shells. Put it on the fire and
stir till it boils. Let boil 10 minutes, then strain through a flannel
bag. Take a small mould of jelly, garnish with eggs, parsley, beets,
and carrots, putting the jelly alternately between each till mould is
filled. When the turkey is done put it in a close pan and press it.
After getting perfectly cool, jelly with cool jelly, just cool enough
to spread until the turkey is entirely covered. Put the garnishing
moulds on the breast of turkey. Garnish dish with watercress, beets,
and carrots.


No. 28.

CUSTARD FRITTERS.

Half pint milk, 5 eggs, 1/2 cupful of sugar, 1 gill of cream, common
butter. Beat the milk, cream, sugar, and eggs together; strain, put
into a small bowl, set in saucepan with boiling water to reach half
way up the sides of the bowl; steam very gently until set--about 20
minutes--place on the ice until cold; cut into pieces 1-1/2 inches long
by 1 square; dip into common batter, and fry in plenty of hot lard, a
deep fawn color. Serve sprinkled with sugar.


No. 29.

PEACH SAUCE.

Place the peach juice from the can into a small saucepan, add an equal
volume of water, a little more sugar, and 8 or 10 raisins, boil this
10 minutes, strain, and just before serving add 8 drops of extract of
bitter almonds.


No. 30.

LOBSTER FRITTERS.

Common batter, 1 lobster, 1/2 cupful mushrooms, yolks of 4 eggs, 1
cupful of cream, 1 tablespoonful of butter, celery, salt, thyme, white
pepper, saltspoonful of parsley, and 1 tablespoonful of flour. Put the
lobster in 2 quarts of boiling water, with 1/2 cupful salt; boil 25
minutes; when cold remove the meat and fat; cut into small neat slices;
put the flour and butter on the fire in a small stewpan, stir with a
wooden spoon until it bubbles, then add the cream boiling, and the
seasoning; let it boil two minutes, add the yolks and lobster, and mix;
set it back to simmer 4 minutes; pour it out on a well greased dish,
and set it away to get firm by cooling; then cut into neat pieces, dip
in batter, and fry yellow in plenty of lard made hot for the purpose;
have a few nice branches of parsley, quite dry, and fry in the lard
just while you count 15 seconds. Serve on the fritters.


No. 31.

BELL FRITTERS.

Sift 1 pint of flour, pour boiling-hot water on it until it cooks
enough to have the consistency of a stiff batter. Let it get perfectly
cold. Take 5 eggs, 1 tablespoonful of butter, and put in it and beat
all up till it is as light as muffins. Grate in a little nutmeg. Boil
them in hot lard. Make wine sauce to serve with them.


No. 32.

WAFFLES.

With yeast make a thick batter over night. In the morning stir in 1
pint of flour, 3 eggs, 1 tablespoonful of butter, and a little nutmeg
and salt; let it raise again, and fry just before breakfast.


No. 33.

OMELETTE.

Five yolks of eggs, beaten light, and a little finely chopped celery.
Beat the whites to a stiff froth. Just before breakfast put in a 1/4
cup of milk, then pour the whites in with the yolks. Put in a buttered
frying-pan and fry.


No. 34.

RAGOUT OF COLD VEAL.

The neck, loin, or fillet of veal can be used. Cut the veal in cutlets.
Put in frying-pan a piece of butter; when hot, flour and fry the veal a
light brown. Take it out, and put 1 pint of boiling water in the pan;
give it a boil up for a minute and strain it into a basin, while you
make a thickening as follows: Melt an ounce of butter in a pan and mix
with it as much flour as will dry it up; stir it over the fire a few
minutes and gradually add to it the gravy you made in the frying-pan;
let them simmer together for ten minutes. Season with pepper, salt, a
little mace, 1 wine-glass of mushroom catsup or wine till the meat is
thoroughly warmed. Ready-boiled bacon, sliced, may be put in to warm
with the veal.


No. 35.

LARK PIE.

Pick clean 4 dozen larks, singe them; cut off the wings and legs, take
out the gizzards and place the larks on a dish. Cut 2 pounds veal
cutlets and 1 pound of ham into scallops. Fry these in a pan with a
little fresh butter, 1 can of mushrooms, some parsley, 1 small onion,
half a bay leaf, 1 sprig of thyme chopped fine; season with cayenne and
salt and the juice of lemon. To these add 1/4 pint of mushroom catsup
and the same quantity of rich gravy. Boil the whole for 3 minutes, then
place the veal and ham scallops, one upon the other, in the bottom
of the dish; put the larks neatly and closely to each other; upon
them pour over the sauce, and put mushrooms in the centre. Cover with
puff-paste. Bake pie 1-1/4 hours and serve.


No. 36.

CHICKEN PIE A LA REINE.

Paste, 1 plump tender chicken, 1/2 pound salt pork, 1/2 teaspoonful
each of celery, salt, and thyme, 4 sprigs parsley, white pepper and
salt to taste. Cut the chicken up in small joints, the pork in neat
scallops, and stew gently in 1-1/2 pints water until nearly cooked.
Line the edge of a pudding dish with the paste, make layers of the
chicken, pork, and seasonings; when used sprinkle over the chopped
parsley; fill with the gravy, cover, ornament, and wash over with milk,
and bake in steady oven 40 minutes.


No. 37.

LEMON CREAM MERINGUE PIE.

Having made the lemon cream pie, whip the 4 whites of eggs to a dry
froth; gently incorporate 1 cupful sugar; spread over the top of the
pie, and return to the oven to set; a fawn color.


No. 38.

TIMBALES OF MACARONI.

Take 2 quarts of water and boil 1 pound macaroni in it with 1/2 pound
butter, 8 pepper-corns, and a little salt. When done and cold, let
one-half of it drain upon a napkin. Butter the inside of a plain mould,
cut the macaroni into half-inch lengths, and cover the bottom of the
mould with these, placing them on end; cover this with a thick layer
of chicken forcemeat; line the sides of the mould in the same way,
smoothing the inside with the back of the spoon in hot water; fill the
cavity with a blanquette of fowl which has a thick sauce; cover the
whole with a layer of forcemeat as follows: Cut paper to fit the mould,
butter it, spread some forcemeat on it, dip a knife in hot water and
smooth the surface with it, take hold of the paper with both hands and
turn it upside down upon the timbale. Leave the paper on in such a way
that it can be easily removed when the forcemeat has steamed enough.
One and a half hours before dinner place the timbale in a stewpan twice
its size, upon a ring, to prevent it from touching the bottom, so that
the water in the stewpan which only reaches half-way up the mould, may
circulate freely under it. Place on the stove for an hour, then for 1/2
hour more put inside oven to let it get brown on top. When done, remove
paper from the timbale, and carefully lift the mould. Pour some supreme
sauce over it, and garnish with truffles and mushrooms.


No. 39.

SADDLE OF MUTTON.

Take a saddle of mutton, extract the spine bone carefully, trim the
tail end round, cut the flaps square, season the inner part with
pepper and salt, rolling up each flap so as to give a neat appearance,
tying a string around it several times. The mutton must be prepared
for braizing with carrots, onions, celery, cloves and mace; moisten
with a quantity of good stock so as to cover the mutton; place a
buttered paper and lid over all and set the braizing-pan on a moderate
fire. After boiling let it continue to braize or simmer for 4 hours,
carefully basting it; when done take it up and place in oven to dry
on a pan. Dish it up and garnish with carrots, turnips, cauliflowers,
French beans, cucumbers, asparagus heads, small new potatoes and green
pease. Pour some sauce around the mutton and send to the table.


No. 40.

OX-TONGUE.

Get a pickled tongue, run an iron skewer through from one end to the
other, tie a string from one end of skewer to the other, so as to
make it keep its shape; put the tongue on the fire in cold water; let
it boil gently for three hours, then take up, and after removing the
outward cuticle or skin, place in larder to cool; trim neatly, wrap
in a piece of buttered paper, put it in an oval stewpan with a little
broth; 3/4 of an hour before sending to table, put the tongue in oven
or on slow fire to get warmed through, then glaze it and dish it up
with some prepared spinach round it; pour a little sauce and serve.


No. 41.

MUTTON CUTLETS.

Trim the cutlets and arrange in circular order in a pan with a little
clarified butter; fry quickly so as to brown on both sides; before
quite done pour off the grease; add 1/2 pint of red wine (port or
claret), 1 can prepared mushrooms and same quantity small onions
previously simmered in a little butter over a slow fire till done;
season with a pinch of mignonette pepper, little salt, some grated
nutmeg, a teaspoonful pounded sugar; set the whole to boil on fire 2
minutes, add a spoonful of burnt sugar; allow the cutlets to simmer
very slowly for 20 minutes. The cutlets must be dished up closely in a
circle; add a half glass of red wine; boil the whole for 1 minute and
garnish the center with mushrooms; pour the sauce over the cutlets and
serve.


No. 42.

MUTTON CUTLETS WITH CHESTNUTS.

Dish up cutlets, as previously shown, garnish with chestnuts which
have been equally heated in a stewpan, so that the husk will easily
peel off; take the chestnuts with a little good broth and put in clean
stewpan; let simmer; when done pound in a mortar; put in a pan with a
little sugar, nutmeg, 1/2 pint of cream; reduce the pulp, rub through a
sieve, put in stewpan, let it get hot, mix in some butter, pour round
cutlets some thin sauce.


No. 43.

VOL-AU-VENTS.

[Quantity for 2 vol-au-vents].

Paste--One pound of butter, 1 pound of flour; divide butter in 4
parts, rub 1/4 in flour, mix with hand, with a little water, then put
on pastry board; roll out and put the second 1/4 of butter in layers
over this paste; fold and roll it, and add the other two quarters in
the same way; keep 1 hour on ice to cool; roll and cut this paste in
4 parts; roll 1/4 for the top and 1/4 for the bottom of pie. These
must be cut out oval shape; cut the pieces and ends left of the paste
into flower shapes and leaves to garnish the sides of the 2 layers of
pie. The remaining 2 quarters are for another vol-au-vent fixed in the
same way. Cut out the center of top cover and fill in with flowers and
leaves made of pastry. Put in a hot oven and let it bake 3/4 of an
hour. While baking this paste will rise and puff out in form like a
cylinder. While hot take off this flowered center-piece on top of the
pie, and from this opening scrape out all the insides, leaving nothing
but a hollow cylinder of crust. Put in 1/2 dozen real sweetbreads,
parboiled and skinned; 1 dozen truffles, peeled and sliced; 1/2 can of
mushrooms cut in half. Make a sauce of 1 tablespoonful of butter, 1 of
flour, 1/2 pint of cream, 1 pint milk; rub butter and flour together,
boil milk and cream, and make a rich sauce of butter and flour,
milk and cream, all mixed together; cook in this sauce sweetbreads,
truffles, mushrooms, 1/2 teaspoonful of nutmeg, white pepper and salt
each 1 teaspoonful; put in together; stir while boiling; boil 20
minutes. When ready for dinner fill up paste and serve with truffles,
mushrooms, and sweetbreads while hot. Send sauce-boat full of sauce to
the table with the paste.


No. 44.

CROQUETTES.

Take a medium-sized chicken, boil it, a pair of sweetbreads, and 1/2
box of mushrooms, 1 small can of truffles, 1 stalk of celery, a small
onion, a few sprigs of parsley; chop all very fine; bring to a boil
a sauce made of 1 pint of milk and chicken water 1/2 pint, a large
tablespoonful of butter, 2 tablespoonfuls of flour, then beat 2 eggs in
the sauce after cooling; season to taste with pepper, salt, and nutmeg;
add the chopped chicken; put on to boil and stir 15 minutes; pour into
platters to cool; then roll in the shape of pears or eggs; roll them in
a beaten egg and then in bread crumbs; stick in a rib bone at the end
of the pear shapes; boil them in hot lard a delicate brown; then lay on
a napkin in a platter and garnish with parsley. Set them up on a dish
in oval form.


No. 45.

ROCK-FISH CUTLET.

[Can be made from any fish.]

Take a rock-fish, after washing it clean cut it down the back-bone,
take out the back-bone, cut the ribs off, then cut the fish in square
pieces. Take the skin off of them, lard them with small pieces of
truffles, which have been skinned and sliced, the slices being cut in
three-quarters. Then take a sharp-pointed knife and thrust them into
the fish. Salt the fish and put in a cool place for 1 hour. A half
hour before dinner take a medium-sized dripping-pan, put in 1/2 pint
of milk and a tablespoonful of butter; lay all the pieces of fish
separate in this pan with the truffle side up, put a press on them to
keep them straight, set on top of stove for 1/4 hour. When done, take
1/2 pint milk, together with what milk is in the pan, 2 tablespoonfuls
of flour, 1 teaspoonful of white pepper, 1 tablespoonful of butter; mix
the butter and flour together till they come to a cream, then pour the
hot milk on to make rich sauce. Put in this sauce 1 dozen mushrooms and
what truffles are left; cut mushrooms in four quarters. Take up fish
and lap it around your dish. Boil French potatoes and put them in the
centre of dish; garnish the dish with parsley and sliced lemon.


No. 46.

RISSOLES.

Puff paste--Chop the breast of a chicken same as making croquettes.
After boiling it take out 2 teaspoonfuls of the mixture, then roll the
paste out very thin; take a biscuit-cutter and cut the paste; take
the 2 teaspoonfuls of chicken-mixture and a beaten egg and wet the
edge of the cut paste, also wet it all over the top, and roll them in
vermicelli. Boil them till brown in hot lard. Serve on a napkin laid on
a dish garnished with water-cresses.

[See receipt for making croquettes.]


No. 47.

CHICKEN CUTLETS.

[Quantity for one chicken.]

Boil the chicken sufficiently to eat; take it out and let it get cold;
take all the white meat and chop up very fine with mushrooms and a
celery stalk; take 1/4 pound of butter, 2 full tablespoonfuls of flour,
2 yolks and 1 white of eggs, 1/2 pint of milk, 1/2 teacup of mushroom
water, into which a little nutmeg has been grated, 1/2 pint of cream.
Mix the butter and flour together, boil the milk and cream and mushroom
water, into which put the butter and flour; this will make a rich
sauce, which is seasoned to taste. When cooled a little add the beaten
eggs; add chicken, stir up, making a rich paste; boil 15 minutes, stir
while boiling, pour out in a platter, let get cold; make in shape of
mutton cutlets or chops, take the ribs and put in for stems; then roll
cutlets in beaten egg into which bread has been grated, put into hot
lard and fry a delicate brown. Garnish with French pease and parsley,
or mushrooms and parsley. Serve hot.


No. 48.

PATE-LA-FOIE-GRAS.

Make a soup of strong bouillon; let it boil for two hours; put in a
few sprigs of thyme, one of onion, and a small bunch of celery tops;
when done, let cool, and skim grease off. To every 1/2 pint jar of
Pate-la-foie-gras, mix three pints of boullion; take a half box of
gelatine melted in a teacup of bouillon; beat the white of one egg,
and 2 egg-shells (not very light) in bouillon while cool, stir the
melted gelatine till it begins to boil, say for about 10 minutes, add
the pepper and salt. After boiling about 10 minutes strain through a
flannel bag; put on ice, but do not let it get very cold. Put in a
jelly mould a layer of jelly, cut mushrooms into stars and half-moons
and lay on the layer of jelly, then a slice of Pate-la-foie-gras,
next a layer of jelly, cut truffles into small pieces in the shape of
flowers or diamonds, and lay on the layers of jelly; continue till the
mould is filled, then put on ice; garnish to fancy.


No. 49.

CHICKEN SALAD WITH MAYONNAISE SAUCE.

One pair of chickens, boil them done; let get cold, skin them, and cut
up in small dices; 2 dozen stalks of celery; cut up 4 white heads of
lettuce, medium size; 1 of the white hard heads must be cut up with
the celery and chicken. Take a teacupful of sweet oil, 1/4 teacupful
of vinegar, a light half teaspoonful of red pepper, salt to taste, 1
teaspoonful of mustard, 1 medium-sized tablespoonful Worcestershire
sauce; mix that all up together with the chicken and celery; let the
celery be perfectly dry. Take a medium-sized Irish potato, boil it
done, squeeze it through a fine sieve; put in it a teaspoonful of
mustard, cayenne pepper to taste, 2 yolks of raw eggs and 2 boiled ones
mashed up very fine. Now beat the potatoes and eggs well up together,
add half teacupful of vinegar, a little at a time, and the contents of
3 half pints of olive oil; work it one way till it becomes perfectly
stiff and light; put it in ice-box 1 hour and let get cold. When you
dish up put salad on dish, put the sweet oil dressing all over the top
as an icing. Boil red beets and carrots, cut them into diamonds, roses,
etc., and garnish the salad with it and sprigs of parsley; take the
other three heads of lettuce, cut in four quarters, take one-quarter
and put in center of salad, and put the others around the dish with
parsley.


No. 50.

APPLE CHARLOTTE.

Take 6 large apples and chop very fine, grate the inside of a stale
loaf of bread into crumbs, grate half a nutmeg, take a three-pint tin
pudding-pan, line it thickly with thin-sliced buttered bread, a layer
of bread crumbs, a layer of apples, and a layer of butter, composed of
small pieces; continue to add till the pan is packed very tight--make
the last layer of butter and sugar. Bake in a moderately hot oven two
hours; serve with cream sauce. Put sugar in every layer.


No. 51.

CONSUMME.

Take a pint of consomme, with 3 well-beaten eggs in it, and a little
salt, and pour it into a baking dish; put it in oven and let it bake 15
minutes. This will bake brown like a cake. Try with a knife-blade; if
done the knife will be clear. Put it to cool, and then take the top and
bottom crust off, cut the middle into diamonds and put them in tureen,
and then pour over them the soup.


No. 52.

FISH CREAM A LA LAIT.

Take any kind of large white fish, 4 pounds to a three-pint
pudding-pan; wash the fish in cold water, put on to boil, and let get
cool. Take off the skin and flake the meat off the bones with a fork;
parboil a pint of oysters; when done put to cool, then take out the
hearts; boil half pint of milk and half pint of cream, beat up 2
tablespoonfuls of flour and 1 of butter to a light cream, which must be
stirred into the boiling milk and cream; this will make a rich sauce;
season with pepper and salt to taste. Take off the sauce when done and
stir in fish and oysters, then put in a pudding-dish and put a layer of
bread crumbs on top; over the bread crumbs put flakes of butter. Put
in oven and let bake 20 minutes; make potato croquettes and lay on the
dish, which must be garnished with parsley; serve hot.


No. 53.

SALMON FILLETS.

Take 5 pounds of salmon, cut it down the back, and take out the
fillets. Lard it very close with thin strips of lard, put on with
larding-needle. Put on gridiron, broil it; put butter, pepper, and
salt on when broiling. After it is done, take 1 quart of oysters to
one dish of fillets; drain the oysters of all liquor; fricassee them.
Take 1 teacupful of cream, 1 tablespoonful of flour, 1 tablespoonful of
butter, put in a little mace to season, and make a sauce; then put in
the oysters, and let it boil up once to get done. Pour in 1 wine-glass
of wine. Take your fish, lap the ends over each other on the dish;
pour your oysters in center. Take 1 scoop French potatoes, and put
four piles around the dish. These potatoes must be boiled in lard and
seasoned to taste.


No. 54.

SADDLE OF VENISON.

[12 pounds.]

Take the top skin off. Take portion of fat out, skewer it pretty round;
let it cook 3/4 of an hour; cut it down in the back, take out the
fillets, slice them, pepper and salt them, and put them back. Make a
sauce of 1 cup of sugar, 1/2 cup of vinegar, 2 teacups of tomatoes,
the essence out of the venison, 1 teaspoonful of nutmeg, 1/2 teacup of
wine. Serve it with the venison. Make potato croquettes to put around
the dish.


No. 55.

MUSHROOM CATSUP.

Full grown mushrooms are preferred. Put a layer of these in a deep
earthen pan, and sprinkle them with salt; then another layer of
mushrooms and more salt, and so on alternately salt and mushrooms. Let
them remain 2 or 3 hours, by which time the salt will have gone all
through the mushrooms, and make them easy to break; then pound them in
a mortar or mash them well with your hands, and let them remain for a
couple of days, not longer, stirring them up and mashing them well each
day; then pour them in a stone jar, and to each quart add 1-1/2 ounces
of whole black pepper, 1/2 ounce of allspice; stop the jar very close,
and set it in a stewpan of boiling water; let it boil for 2 hours. Take
out the jar, and clear the juice of settlings by pouring through a hair
sieve into a clean stewpan; let it boil gently for 1/2 hour. Keep in a
dry, cool place; cork tightly or it will spoil.


No. 56.

WALNUT CATSUP.

Take 6 half sieves of green walnut shells, put them in a tub, mix
well with common salt (from 2 to 3 pounds), let it stand for 6 days,
frequently beating and mashing them; after a while the shells will
become soft and pulpy. Pushing the shells up one side of the tub and
tipping the tub a little, the liquor will run to the other side. This
will be nice and clear. Take it out; repeat the above process until
no more liquor can be obtained. You will get in all about 6 quarts.
Let this simmer in an iron boiler as long as any scum rises. Bruise
1/4 pound of ginger, 1/4 pound of allspice, 2 ounces of long pepper, 2
ounces of cloves, put these in the liquor and boil slowly for 1/2 hour.
When bottled put an equal quantity of spice in each bottle. When corked
let the bottle be well filled up. Cork tightly, seal them over and put
in a cool and dry place for 1 year.


No. 57.

MUSTARD QUICKLY MADE.

Mix very gradually and rub together in a mortar 1 ounce flour of
mustard, 3 tablespoonfuls of milk or cream, 1/2 teaspoonful of salt,
and same of sugar; rub together until smooth.


No. 57.

STUFFING FOR VEAL, TURKEY OR DUCK.

One-quarter pound of beef suet, 1/4 pound of bread crumbs, 1 bunch
of parsley, 1-1/2 bunches of sweet marjoram or lemon thyme, a little
grated lemon and onion chopped as fine as possible, a little pepper and
salt; pound together with the yolk and white of 2 eggs, and secure it
in the veal with a skewer, or sew it with a needle and thread.


No. 58.

OYSTER CATSUP.

Take fine, fresh oysters, wash them in their own liquor; skim it; pound
them in a marble mortar; to 1 pint of oysters add 1 pint of sherry
wine; boil them up; add 1 ounce of salt, 2 tablespoonfuls of pounded
mace, and 1 tablespoonful of cayenne pepper; let it boil up again,
skim it and rub it through a sieve, and when cold bottle it, cork it
well and seal it up.


No. 59.

STUFFED PEPPERS.

One dozen green peppers; take out all the seed after cutting a
piece off the top; lay them into cold water for 1-1/2 hours; 1 pair
sweetbreads, parboiled and skinned; 1 can mushrooms, 1 stalk of celery,
1 clove of garlic; chop up all fine; 1/2 loaf bread without crust.
Grate up fine pepper and salt, a little nutmeg, 1/2 pound butter. Mix
all up well; stuff the peppers with it. Put a piece of fat pork in your
dripping pan; set the peppers up in the fat. Before putting in the oven
put a little butter, melted, over them and sprinkle them with flour.
When they commence to bake pour a little water in the pan and baste
them well. Let it bake 1/2 hour in a steady oven. Cucumbers can be
stuffed in the same way.


No. 60.

STUFFED QUAILS.

Take 1/2 or 1 dozen quails. Take the bone out same as in boned turkey.
Put in mushrooms, truffles, bread crumbs. Make this stuffing moist with
butter and pepper and salt. Be sure to stuff them tightly; tie them up,
but do not take the feet off. Take a piece of larding pork and tie it
on each bird's breast so as to keep it in shape. Then bake them in a
baking pan, flour them and baste them. When done make a little sauce of
currant jelly, 1 glass of wine, and the gravy from the birds. Lay the
birds on a piece of buttered toast. Garnish the dish with cresses.


No. 61.

MUTTON-CHOPS.

Take 1 dozen mutton chops. Take the bone out of the chop; shape it as
it was before the bone was taken out. Pepper and salt them; place them
in beaten egg and then in bread crumbs. Put them in a skillet of hot
lard; fry a delicate brown. Half peck of spinach, picked and clean,
must be put into boiling water. Let it boil ten minutes. Place in cold
water in a pan; after getting cool squeeze perfectly dry. Chop very
fine; mix a tablespoonful of flour in it, 1 tablespoonful butter, gravy
of any kind, or colored water of burnt sugar. Place in a stewpan with
pepper and salt and a little nutmeg. Cover closely for 10 minutes to
cook, and then for 5 minutes more with cover off. Be careful not to let
it burn. Put the spinach in the centre of dish and set the chops up all
around it. Boil 3 eggs; cut them in quarters and put around the dish.


No. 62.

CHEESE SOUFFLEES.

Take 3 tablespoonfuls flour, 1 of butter, a little chicken water or
clear boiling water; cream the flour and butter together, pour chicken
soup or boiling water over this till about the consistency of paste;
take off the fire, let get cold, then put in fine-grated cheese (or
English cheese), at the same time put in 5 yolks of eggs beaten up well
in the batter, a little cayenne pepper and a little salt; beat the
whites into a stiff froth; set them into a cool place, also the batter,
but separately. When you send the dinner in beat the whites in with
the batter and cook in moulds or paper cups or pudding-dish; let cook
as speedily as possible and send directly to the table; must be served
hot.


No. 63.

PLUM-PUDDING SAUCE.

Take a glass of sherry, 1/2 glass of brandy or essence of punch, 2
teaspoonfuls of pounded lump sugar, a little grated lemon peel; put all
these in a 1/4 pint of thick melted butter, grating nutmeg on top.


No. 64.

CAPER SAUCE.

One tablespoonful of capers and 2 tablespoonfuls of vinegar. To prepare
the capers mince 1/3 of them very fine, divide the rest in halves; put
them in a 1/4 pint of melted butter or thickened gravy; stir them the
same way as the melted butter or it will oil. A few leaves of parsley
minced fine can be added to the sauce; keep the caper bottle corked
closely; do not use any of the liquor; if the capers are not well
covered with it they will spoil. This sauce is used with a boiled leg
of mutton.


No. 65.

LOBSTER SAUCE.

Choose a fine hen lobster; let it be fresh; boil it; pick out the spawn
and red coral in a mortar; add 1/2 ounce of butter, pound smooth, rub
through a hair sieve with back of wooden spoon, cut lobster meat in
small squares, put pounded spawn into as much melted butter as will do,
and stir it together till mixed; now put in lobster meat and warm it on
the fire; do not let it boil, as that will deprive it of its red color.
Some use veal or beef gravy instead of melted butter.


No. 66.

MUSHROOM SAUCE.

Pick and peel 1/2 pint of mushrooms; wash clean and put in saucepan
with 1/2 pint veal gravy or milk, a little pepper and salt, 1 ounce of
butter rubbed with a tablespoonful of flour; stir them together and set
them over a gentle fire and stew slowly till tender; skim and strain it.


No. 67.

MUSHROOM SAUCE--BROWN.

Put the mushrooms into 1/2 pint beef gravy, thicken with flour and
butter and proceed as above.


No. 68.

TOMATO SAUCE.

Place on the fire the tomatoes, washed broth, onion, parsley, and
seasonings; boil to a pulp about 35 minutes; rub through a fine sieve;
return to the fire, make it hot, stir in the butter and serve.


No. 69.

CHROMSKIES.

Two cupfuls chicken, 1/2 cupful mushrooms, 1/2 cupful ham, yolks of
2 eggs, 1 small onion, 2 tablespoonfuls of chopped parsley, 1 level
teaspoonful each of royal powder, celery, salt, and thyme, large pinch
of salt, 1-1/2 tablespoonfuls of butter, and 2 of flour, 1 cupful of
broth. Cut the onion fine, fry it in the stewpan with the butter; when
of a deep yellow add the flour, stir 2 minutes; add the broth boiling,
the seasonings, and yolks; stir 4 minutes longer; add the fowl, ham,
and mushrooms cut in small neat dice; set away to get firm by cooling;
cut in neat pieces, dip in common butter, and fry in plenty of hot lard
5 minutes.


No. 70.

CABINET PUDDING A LA FRANCAISE.

Take 1/2 pound of lady-fingers and scrape the crust off; then butter
them; take a fluted pudding mould, buttering it well, stick the
lady-fingers up all around it. One-fourth pound candied cherries, 1/4
pound citron, 1/4 pound raisins, with seeds picked out, 1/4 pound
currants washed clean, 1/2 dozen macaroni. Take the scrapings and
balance of lady-fingers, leaving out 8 for the top, and put all the
fruit into these dry crumbs. Put all in the mould, with a layer of
butter. Just before you put it on to boil take 5 whites and 7 yolks of
7 eggs, 1 quart of milk, make a custard, sweetened to taste. Pour it
over the cake and fruit in the mould. Boil slowly 2-1/2 hours. Take
a tumbler of Jamaica rum, 1 tumbler milk, 2 eggs, and make a sauce.
Stir till it almost comes to a boil and serve hot. Take the 2 whites
of eggs, left of the 7 eggs used previously, and beat them very light,
and put on top of pudding when taken out of mould. Drop a few candied
cherries on top. Serve hot.


No. 71.

FISH PUDDING.

Three pounds of rock, boil it not quite done enough to serve; take
it out; let it get cool; then take all the skin off; take the fish
from the bones in fine pieces, not mashed up; 1/2 can of truffles; 1
can of mushrooms; peel the truffles; cut the largest size truffles
and mushrooms into rose and star shapes with little cutters; take a
3-pint pudding mould fluted and grease it well, setting the shapes
all around the mould; cut most of the mushrooms with a little parsley
very fine and put with the fish; the truffles must be cut up and put
in the sauce; 1/2 pint of milk, a full tablespoonful of flour, medium
size tablespoonful of butter; mix the flour and butter together; put
the milk on to boil; then pour it into the flour and butter; then pour
all on the fish; put pepper and salt in it; put fish in a mould; cover
it up tight and place it in a pot of boiling water two-thirds up the
sides of the mould and let it steam 1/2 hour; take 1/2 pint of cream
and mushroom water; put it on the fire to boil; rub up a tablespoonful
each of flour and butter; mix all together, putting in the balance of
the truffles and mushrooms, and let all boil 10 or 15 minutes; season
with pepper and salt; 1 quart of scoop French potatoes; boil them done
in salt and water; when done put through a colander. When it is time to
serve the fish pudding pour the fish out into the platter and pour the
potatoes around the dish; serve the gravy in a sauce-bowl.


No. 72.

SNIPE PUDDING.

Pick 8 fine, fat, fresh snipes; singe them; cut in halves; take out the
gizzards and reserve the trail for further use; season the snipes with
pepper, salt, lemon juice, and set aside till wanted; peel half of an
onion; cut in thin slices, and fry in a stewpan with a little butter;
when browned throw in a tablespoonful of flour; stir together on the
fire for 3 minutes; add a handful of chopped mushrooms and parsley, a
small bay-leaf, a sprig of thyme, a little mace, and a small silver
onion; put in 1 pint of claret; stir the whole upon the fire, and when
boiled 10 minutes add the trail and a small piece of breakfast bacon;
let the sauce boil 3 minutes longer, and rub through the sieve upon
the snipes; line a pudding-basin with suet-paste; fill it up with what
has been prepared, and when covered with paste well fastened around the
edge let it steam in a covered stewpan for 2-1/2 hours; when done turn
out of basin with care; pour a rich brown game gravy under it and serve.


No. 73.

BEEFSTEAK PUDDING.

Paste, 2-1/2 pounds round steak, 1 level teaspoonful each of celery
salt, thyme, and marjoram, 1 small onion, salt and white pepper to
taste, 4 sprigs parsley. Line a well-buttered pudding mould with the
paste, wet the edges, make a layer of beef, cut in neat scallops,
sprinkle with the onion and parsley minced fine and mixed on a plate
with celery salt, thyme, marjoram, salt and pepper, then another layer
of beef, and seasoning, and so on until each is used; fill up with cold
water, cover it with paste, place a buttered paper over it and set in a
saucepan with boiling water to reach two-thirds up the outside of the
mould; steam it thus 2-1/2 hours, turn carefully out on a dish, pour
over it any gravy that may be at hand, made hot and flavored with any
kind of sauce piquante.


No. 74.

BOSTON BAKED PLUM PUDDING.

One-and-one-half cupfuls beef suet freed of skin and chopped very fine,
1-1/2 cupfuls raisins stoned, 1-1/2 cupfuls currants washed and picked,
1 cupful brown sugar, 2 cupfuls flour, 1 teaspoonful baking powder,
4 eggs, 1 cupful milk, 1/2 cupful citron chopped, pinch of salt, 1
tablespoonful extract of nutmeg, 1 glass of brandy. Put all these
ingredients in a bowl, the eggs as they drop from the shell, the flour
sifted with the powder and the brandy; mix into a rather short batter;
pour into a well-buttered clean cake tin and bake in a steady oven two
hours. Serve with vanilla sauce.


No. 75.

VANILLA SAUCE.

Put 1/2 pint milk in a small saucepan over the fire; when scalding hot
add the yolks of 3 eggs, stir until it is as thick as boiled custard;
add, when taken from the fire and cooled, 1 tablespoonful extract
vanilla and whites of two eggs whipped stiff.


No. 76.

CABINET PUDDING, 2.

Four English muffins or rolls, 1/2 pint milk, 1 pint cream, 4 eggs
and 4 yolks, 1 cupful sugar; 1/2 cupful almonds blanched, by pouring
boiling water on them until the skins slip off easily, and cut into
shreds; 1 cupful each dried cherries, apricots, green gages, or any
other preserved, whole, or panned fruits; 1 glass noyeau. Well butter
a mould; make a layer of muffins cut very thin, then of fruit, the
almonds, and so on, until all the ingredients are used; beat the milk,
cream, sugar, eggs, and noyeau together; pour over the contents of
mould, and let it stay, before baking, at least half an hour; then set
it in a saucepan with boiling water to reach two-thirds up the mould;
steam it thus one hour; turn it out on a dish carefully and serve with
cream sauce.


No. 77.

CREAM SAUCE.

Bring 2/3 pint of cream slowly to boil; set in stewpan of boiling
water; when it reaches the boiling point, add the sugar; then pour it
slowly on the whipped whites of eggs in a bowl; add 1 teaspoonful Royal
extract vanilla, and use.


No. 78.

GREEN-CORN PUDDING.

Eight ears corn, 1 large teaspoonful butter, 1/2 cupful sugar, pinch of
salt, 2 eggs, 1 pint of milk, 1 teaspoonful Royal extract of vanilla.
Split each row on the cob lengthways; cut off the rounded point,
and with the handle of the spoon push out the eyes and cream into a
bowl; add to the milk, hot, the eggs, well beaten, the sugar, butter,
and extract; pour it into a buttered dish, and bake 40 minutes in a
moderate oven.


No. 79.

PLUM PUDDING.

Two cupfuls raisins, 2 cupfuls currants, 2 cupfuls suet, 1/2 cupful
almonds blanched, 2 cupfuls flour, 2 cupfuls grated Royal sugar muffins
or bread; 1/2 cupful each of citron, orange and lemon peel; 8 eggs, 1
cupful sugar, 1/2 cupful cream, 1 gill each of wine and brandy, large
pinch salt, 1 tablespoonful Royal extract of nutmeg, 1 teaspoonful
Royal baking-powder. Put in a large bowl the raisins seeded, the
currants washed and picked, the suet chopped very fine, the almonds cut
fine, the citron, orange and lemon peels chopped, the lemon, sugar,
wine, brandy, and cream; lastly, add the flour, sifted, with the
powder, and mix all well together; put in a large, well-buttered mould,
set in a saucepan with boiling water to reach one-half up the sides of
the mould, and steam it thus five hours; turn out on its dish carefully
and serve with hot brandy sauce.


No. 80.

TAPIOCA PUDDING.

One cupful tapioca, soaked in 1 quart cold water over night, 1 cupful
sugar, 1-1/2 pints milk, and 4 eggs.


No. 81.

CABINET PUDDING, 1.

Half pound of stale sponge cake, 1/2 cup of raisins, 1/2 can of
peaches, 4 eggs, and 1-1/2 pints of milk. Butter a plain oval mould;
lay in some of the stale cake, 1/3 of the raisins, stoned, 1/3 of the
peaches; make two layers of the remainder of the cake, raisins, and
peaches; cover with a very thin slice of bread, then pour over the
milk, beaten with eggs and sugar; set in a sauce pan with boiling
water, to reach two-thirds up the side of the mould; steam it 3/4 of an
hour, and turn out carefully on a dish. Serve with peach sauce.


No. 82.

CUSTARD PUDDING.

One and a half pints of milk, 4 eggs, 1 cupful of sugar, 2 teaspoonfuls
Royal extract of vanilla. Beat the eggs and sugar together; dilute with
the milk and extract; pour into a buttered pudding dish, set in the
oven in a dripping-pan two-thirds full of boiling water; bake until
firm, about 40 minutes, in a moderate oven.


No. 83.

PLUM PUDDING.

Two cupfuls each of stoned raisins and currants, washed and picked,
beef-suet chopped fine, and coffee sugar, 3 cupfuls of grated
English muffins or bread, 8 eggs 1 cupful each, chopped citron and
almonds, blanched by pouring boiling water over them till the skins
slip off easily, and 1 lemon peel, and a pinch of salt. Mix all these
ingredients in a large bowl, put in a well-buttered mould, set in a
saucepan with boiling water to reach two-thirds up its sides, steam it
thus 5 hours; turn it out carefully on its dish, and serve with brandy
poured over it, and brandy sauce in a bowl. When about to serve on the
table, the brandy should be set on fire.


No. 84.

RICE PUDDING.

One cupful of rice, 1 quart of milk, 4 eggs, 1 tablespoonful of butter,
1 cupful of sugar, and a pinch of salt. Boil the rice in 1 pint of milk
until tender, then remove it from the fire; add the eggs, sugar, salt,
and milk, beaten together, and mix; pour into a pudding dish, break the
butter in small pieces on the surface, and bake in a steady oven 30
minutes. Serve with brandy sauce.


No. 85.

CUSTARD SAUCE.

One pint of milk, yolks of 4 eggs, 1/2 cupful sugar. Set on the fire,
and stir until thick.


No. 86.

ROYAL WINE SAUCE.

Bring slowly to the boiling point 1/2 pint of wine, then add to it
the yolks of 4 eggs, and 1 cupful of sugar; whip it on the fire until
it is in a state of high froth, and a little thick; remove and use as
directed.


No. 87.

PRINCESS PUDDING.

Two-thirds of a cupful of butter, 1 cupful of sugar, 1 large cupful of
flour, 3 eggs, 1/2 teaspoonful Royal baking powder, and a small glass
of brandy. Rub to a smooth cream butter and sugar, add the eggs, one at
a time, beating a few minutes between; add the flour, sifted, with the
powder and the brandy; put into a mould, well buttered; set in saucepan
with boiling water to reach half up its sides; steam it thus 1-1/2
hours, turn on its dish carefully, and serve with lemon sauce.


No. 88.

YORKSHIRE PUDDING.

Three-quarters of pint of flour, 3 eggs, 1-1/2 pints of milk, a pinch
of salt, 1-1/2 teaspoonfuls of Royal baking powder. Sift the flour and
powder together, add eggs, beaten, with the milk; stir quickly into a
rather thinner batter than for griddle cakes; pour it into a dripping
pan, plentifully spread with cold beef drippings; bake in oven 25
minutes. Serve with roast beef.


No. 89.

COTTAGE PUDDING.

Make a sponge cake--about a 1/2-pound mould sponge cake; 1/4 pound
almonds, blanch them. When the cake is done stick these almonds all
over it. Pour 1/2 pint sherry wine all over it. Cover it up and set
it away till time to serve. Take 1 quart of milk, boil it, 7 yolks of
eggs; mix with sugar to taste essence of lemon or vanilla. When the
milk boils pour it on the eggs. Pour it in a saucepan and just let
it come almost to a boil, so as to thicken it. Take it off the fire
and set in an ice-box to let it get cold. Beat the whites of eggs to
a stiff froth; put in it while beating a little apple, raspberry, or
currant jelly, or any kind of preserve. When ready to serve pour the
custard on the cake and put the icing all over the custard.


No. 90.

VERMICELLI PUDDING.

Boil 1 pint of milk with lemon peel and cinnamon, sweeten with loaf
sugar, strain through a sieve, adding 1/4 pound of vermicelli; boil 10
minutes, put in the yolks of 5 eggs and the whites of 3 eggs. Mix well
together and steam 1-1/4 hours. Bake 1/2 hour.


No. 91.

BOILED CUSTARDS.

Put 1 quart of new milk in a stewpan, with the peel of a lemon cut very
thin, a little grated nutmeg, a bay or laurel leaf, small stick of
cinnamon. Set over a quick fire. Don't let it boil over. When boiled
set off on one side of stove. Let simmer 10 minutes. Break the yolks of
8 eggs and the whites of 4 eggs in a basin; beat them well; then pour
in the milk, a little at a time, stirring as quickly as possible so the
eggs will not curdle. Set on the fire again, stirring it. Let boil up
once; pass it through a fine sieve. When cold add brandy or white wine.
Serve up in glasses or cups. Custards for baking have a little nutmeg
grated over them. Bake 15 or 20 minutes.


No. 92.

ROMAN PUNCH.

Make 2 quarts of lemonade, rich with the pure juice of lemon and add
to this 1 tablespoonful of the extract of lemon; work this well and
freeze; just before serving up and for each quart of the ice 1/2 pint
of cognac and 1/2 pint Jamaica rum. Mix well and serve in high glasses,
as this makes what is called a semi or half ice. It is usually served
at dinners as a coup d'milieu.


No. 93.

TRANSPARENT ICING.

Place 1 pound pulverized white sugar in a basin with 1/2 pint
water. Boil to the consistency of mucilage, then rub the sugar with
a wooden spatula against the sides of the pans until it assumes a
milky appearance. Stir in 2 tablespoonfuls extract vanilla; mix well
together. Pour this while hot over the top of cake so as to completely
cover it.


No. 94.

COFFEE ICE CREAM.

One quart best cream, 1/2 pint of strong Mocha coffee, 14 ounces
white pulverized sugar, 8 yolks eggs. Mix these ingredients in a
porcelain-lined basin; place on fire to thicken; rub through a hair
sieve into a basin; put into freezer and freeze.


No. 95.

ITALIEN ORANGE ICE CREAM.

One and one-half pints best cream, 12 ounces white pulverized sugar,
the juice of 6 oranges, and 2 teaspoonfuls orange extract, the yolks of
8 eggs, and a pinch of salt. Mix these ingredients in a porcelain-lined
basin, and stir over fire until the composition begins to thicken; rub
and pass the cream through a hair sieve; put into freezer and finish.


No. 96.

RASPBERRY WATER ICE.

Press sufficient raspberries through a hair sieve to give 3 pints of
juice. Add 1 pound pulverized white sugar and the juice of 1 lemon.
Place in freezer and freeze.


No. 97.

CHOCOLATE ICE CREAM.

Three pints best cream, 12 ounces pulverized white sugar, 4 whole eggs,
a tablespoonful extract vanilla, a pint rich cream whipped, 6 ounces
chocolate; dissolve in a small quantity of milk to a smooth paste; now
mix it with the cream, sugar, eggs and extract. Place all on the fire
and stir until it begins to thicken; strain through a hair sieve, place
in freezer, and when nearly frozen stir in lightly the whipped cream.


No. 98.

LEMON WATER ICE.

Juice of 6 lemons, 2 teaspoonfuls extract lemon, 1 quart water, 1 pound
granulated sugar, 1 gill rich sweet cream; add all together and strain.
Freeze same as ice cream.


No. 99.

ORANGE WATER ICE.

Juice of 6 oranges, 2 teaspoonfuls extract orange, juice of 1 lemon, 1
quart water, 1 pound granulated sugar, 1 gill rich sweet cream; add all
together and strain. Freeze same as ice cream.


No. 100.

SULTANA CAKE.

Two cupfuls butter, 1-1/2 cupfuls sugar, 6 eggs, 1/2 cupful thick
cream, 1-1/2 pints flour, 1 teaspoonful of baking powder, 4 cupfuls
sultana raisins, 1/2 cupful of chopped citron. Rub the butter and sugar
to a very light cream; add the eggs, 2 at a time, beating 5 minutes
between each addition; add the flour, sifted with the powder, the
cream, raisins, and citron. Mix into a rather firm batter, put into a
paper-lined cake-tin, and bake in a moderate oven 1-1/4 hours. When
removed from the oven carefully spread a little transparent icing.


No. 101.

VARIEGATED CAKES.

One cup powdered sugar, 1/2 cup of butter creamed with the sugar, 1/2
cup of milk, 4 eggs, the whites whipped only, whipped light; 2-1/2
cups of prepared flour, bitter almond flavoring, spinach juice, and
cochineal, cream, butter and sugar; add the milk, flavoring, whites
and flour. Divide the latter into three parts. Bruise and pound a few
leaves of spinach in thin muslin bags until you can express the juice.
Put a few drops of this into one portion of the batter; color another
with cochineal, leaving the third white. Put a little of each into
small round pans or cups, giving a little stir to each color as you
add the next. This will vein the cakes prettily. Put the white between
the pink and green that the tints may show better. If you can get
pistachionuts to pound up for the green the cakes will be much nicer.
Ice on sides and top.


No. 102.

SWISS PANCAKES.

One-half cupful butter, 1/2 cupful sugar, 1-1/2 cupfuls flour, 1
teaspoonful baking powder, 1 large apple peeled, cored, and minced
fine, 1/2 pint milk, 1/2 pint cream, 1 teaspoonful each extract of
nutmeg and cinnamon, 4 eggs. Sift the flour with the powder, add to
it the butter, melted, the sugar and eggs beaten together and diluted
with the milk, cream, and extracts. Have a piece of butter melted in a
small round frying-pan, pour in it about 1/2 cupful of butter; turn the
frying-pan round that the batter may cover it; fry on one side only.
Serve them piled one on the other, with sugar strewed between the cakes.


No. 103.

GERMAN PANCAKES.

Proceed as directed for Swiss pancakes, spreading pastry cream between
each, and serve with currant jelly sauce.


No. 104.

SCOTCH PANCAKES.

One pint of milk, 2 tablespoonfuls butter, 4 eggs, 2/3 cupful of flour,
1 tablespoonful baking-powder; a pinch of salt; sift the flour, salt,
and powder together, add the milk, eggs, and butter melted; mix into
a thin batter; have a small round frying-pan, with a little butter
melted in it; pour in 1/2 cupful of batter; turn the pan round to cover
it with the batter; place on a sharp fire to brown; then hold it up
in front of the fire, and the pancake will rise up; spread each with
marmalade or jelly, roll it up and serve with sliced lemon and sugar.


No. 105.

FRENCH PANCAKES.

Six tablespoonfuls of flour, 1 quart of milk, 5 eggs, 1 teaspoonful
baking-powder, 1 tablespoonful of butter, two tablespoonfuls of sugar,
nutmeg to taste; mix the flour, eggs, butter, sugar and 1 pint of milk
together so as to make a thick batter; pour in the other pint of milk,
add the powder and serve with either wine or cream sauce.


No. 106.

PUMPKIN PIE.

Paste, 1 pint of stewed pumpkin, 3 eggs, 1-1/2 pints of milk, 2
teaspoonfuls of ginger, 1 teaspoonful each nutmeg, cloves, cinnamon,
and mace, a pinch of salt and 1 cupful of sugar. Stew the pumpkin as
follows: Cut a pumpkin of a deep color, firm and close in texture, in
half; remove the seeds, but do not peel it; cut in small slices, and
put in a shallow stewpan with about 1/2 cupful of water; cover very
light, and as soon as steam forms set it where it will not burn; when
the pumpkin is tender turn off the liquor and set it back on the stove
to steam-dry; then measure out, after straining, one pint; add the
milk boiling, the sugar mixed with the spices and salt, and mix well
together; add the eggs beaten last; line a pie-plate, well greased,
with the paste; make a thick rim round the edge, pour in the prepared
pumpkin, and bake in quick, steady oven about 30 minutes till the pie
is firm in the center.


No. 107.

GINGER CAKE.

Three-fourths of a cupful of butter, 2 cupfuls of sugar, 4 eggs, 1-1/2
teaspoonfuls of baking-powder, 1-1/2 pints of flour, 1 cupful of milk,
1 tablespoonful of extract of ginger; rub the butter and sugar to a
light cream, add the eggs 2 at a time, beating 5 minutes between; add
the flour sifted with the powder, the milk and extract; mix into a
smooth, medium batter; bake in a cake tin in a rather hot oven 40
minutes.


No. 108.

HUCKLEBERRY CAKE.

One cupful of butter, 2 cupfuls of brown sugar, 4 eggs, 1-1/2 pints
of flour, 2 teaspoonfuls of baking powder, 2 cupfuls of huckleberries
washed and picked, 1 teaspoonful each of extract cloves, cinnamon,
and allspice, one cupful of milk; rub the butter and sugar to a light
cream; add the eggs 2 at a time, beating 5 minutes between; add flour
sifted with the powder, huckleberries, extracts and mix; mix in a
batter; put into a paper-lined cake tin, bake in a quick oven 50
minutes.


No. 109.

JUMBLES.

One and one-half cupfuls of butter, 2 cupfuls of sugar, 6 eggs, 1-1/2
pints of flour, 1/2 cupful of cornstarch, 1 teaspoonful of baking
powder, 1 teaspoonful of extract of lemon, 1/2 cupful of chopped
peanuts mixed with 1/2 cupful of granulated sugar; beat the butter
and sugar smooth; add the beaten eggs, the flour, the cornstarch, and
powder sifted together, and the extract; flour the board; roll out the
dough rather thin; cut out with biscuit cutter; roll in the chopped
peanuts and sugar; lay on greased baking tin; bake in rather hot oven 8
to 10 minutes.


No. 110.

WHITE SPONGE CAKE.

Whites of 8 eggs, 1 cupful of sugar, 1/2 cupful of flour, 1/2 of
cornstarch, 1 teaspoonful of baking powder, 1 teaspoonful of extract
of rose; sift the flour, cornstarch, sugar, and powder together; add it
to the whites of the eggs whipped to a dry froth, and the extract, mix
gently but thoroughly; bake in a cake-mould well buttered, in a quick
oven 30 minutes.


No. 111.

MADELAINES.

One cupful of butter, 1 cupful of sugar, 3 eggs, 1-1/2 cupfuls
of flour, 1/2 teaspoonful of baking powder, 1 glass of brandy, 1
teaspoonful of the extract of cinnamon, slightly melt the butter in a
cake bowl; add the sugar and eggs; stir a few minutes; add the flour,
sifted, with the powder, the extract, and the brandy; mix into a batter
that will almost run; bake in well-greased muffin-pans in a moderate
oven 20 minutes; pour on the top of each a little transparent icing to
cover, and add a few colored comfits.


No. 112.

QUEEN CAKE.

Two cupfuls of butter, 2-1/2 cupfuls of sugar, 1-1/2 pints of flour, 8
eggs, 1/2 teaspoonful baking powder, 1 wineglass each of wine, brandy,
and cream, 1/2 teaspoonful of the extract of nutmeg, rose, and lemon, 1
cupful of dried currants washed and picked, 1 cupful of raisins, stoned
and cut in two; 1 cupful of citron cut in small, thin slices; rub the
butter and sugar to a very light cream; add the eggs, 2 at a time,
beating 5 minutes between each addition; add the flour, sifted, with
the powder, the raisins, currants, wine, brandy, cream, citron, and
extracts; mix into a consistent batter, and bake carefully in a papered
cake-tin in a moderate, steady oven 1-1/2 hours.


No. 113.

CREAM CAKES.

Ten eggs, 1/2 cupful of butter, 3/4 pound of flour, 1 pint of water,
1-1/2 pints of milk, 3 large tablespoonfuls of cornstarch, 2 cupfuls
of sugar, yolks of 5 eggs, 1 large tablespoonful of good butter, and 2
teaspoonfuls of the extract of vanilla; set the water on the fire in a
stewpan with the butter; as soon as it boils stir in the sifted flour
with a wooden spoon; stir vigorously until it leaves the bottom and
sides of the pan when removed from the fire, and beat in the eggs one
at a time; place this batter into a pointed canvas bag having a nozzle
at the small end; press out the batter in the shape of fingers on a
greased baking tin a little distance apart; bake in a steady brick oven
20 minutes; when cold cut the sides and fill with pastry cream.


No. 114.

PASTRY CREAM.

Bring the milk to a boil with the sugar; add the starch dissolved in a
little water; as soon as it reboils take from the fire; beat in the egg
yolks; return to the fire 2 minutes to set the eggs; add the extract
and butter; when cold use it.


No. 115.

CHOCOLATE CREAM.

Set on the fire 1 gill of water, 1-1/2 cupfuls sugar, 1/2 cup of grated
chocolate, in a small saucepan; boil till it gets thick and looks
velvety; then take off the fire, and add the whites of 2 eggs, without
beating: use it hot, covering the top and sides of the cake. As it
cools it grows firm.


No. 116.

SPONGE CAKE, No. 2.

Six eggs, 3 cupfuls sugar, 4 cupfuls flour, 2 teaspoonfuls
baking-powder, 1 cupful cold water, pinch of salt, 1 teaspoonful
extract of lemon. Beat the eggs and sugar together 5 minutes; add the
flour, sifted, with the salt and powder, the water and extract; bake
in a shallow square cake-pan, in a quick, steady oven, 35 minutes;
when removed from the oven, ice it with clear icing, made of 1 cupful
sugar, 1 tablespoonful lemon juice, and whites of 2 eggs; mix together,
smooth, and pour over cake. If the cake is not hot enough to dry it,
place it in the mouth of a moderately warm oven.


No. 117.

SPICE CAKE.

One cupful butter, 2 cupfuls sugar, 3 cupfuls flour, 1 teaspoonful
baking-powder, 2 eggs, 1 cupful milk, 1/2 cupful each of raisins
stoned, currants washed and picked; 1 teaspoonful each of extract of
nutmeg, cloves, and cinnamon. Rub the butter and sugar to a light white
cream; add the eggs, 1 at a time, beating a few minutes between each;
add the flour, sifted, with the powder, the milk, fruit, and extracts;
mix into a smooth, rather firm, batter; put into a paper-lined cake-tin
and bake in a steady oven 30 minutes.


No. 118.

SCOTCH CAKE.

One and a half cupfuls butter, 2-1/2 cupfuls sugar, 8 eggs, 1-1/2 pints
flour, 1/2 teaspoonful baking-powder, 3 cupfuls raisins, stoned, 1
tablespoonful extract of lemon. Rub the butter and sugar to a light
white cream; add the eggs, 2 at a time, beating 5 minutes between
each addition; add the flour, sifted, with the powder, the raisins and
extract; mix into a smooth, consistent batter; put in a paper-lined
square shallow cake-pan, and bake in a moderate oven 1 hour.


No. 119.

SHREWSBURY CAKE.

One cupful of butter, 3 cupfuls of sugar, 1-1/2 pints of flour, 3 eggs,
1 teaspoonful of baking powder, 1 cupful of milk. Rub the butter and
sugar to a smooth, white cream, add the eggs, 1 at a time, beating
5 minutes between each; add the flour, sifted, with the powder and
the extract; mix into a medium batter, bake in a cake mould well and
carefully greased, in a quick oven over 40 minutes.


No. 120.

VANILLA CAKE.

One and one half cupfuls of butter, 2 cupfuls of sugar, 6 yolks of
eggs, 1 pint of flour, 1-1/2 teaspoonfuls of baking powder, 1 cupful of
cream, 1 tablespoonful of extract of vanilla. Rub the butter and sugar
to a very light cream; add the egg yolks and cream, flour, sifted, with
the powder and the extract; mix into a firm but smooth batter; bake in
a shallow, square pan in a fairly hot oven, 35 minutes.


No. 121.

WINE CAKE.

One and one-half cupfuls of butter, 2 cupfuls of sugar, 2 cupfuls of
flour, 1/2 teaspoonful of baking powder, 1 gill of wine, 3 eggs. Rub
the butter and sugar to a light cream; add the eggs, 1 at a time,
beating 5 minutes between each; add the flour, sifted, with the
powder and the wine; mix into a medium firm batter; bake in a shallow,
square cake pan in moderate oven 40 minutes; when taken from the oven
carefully ice with the transparent icing.


No. 122.

DELICATE CAKE.

One and one-half cupfuls of butter, 1-1/2 cupfuls of sugar, whites of
five eggs, 2-1/2 pints of flour, 1-1/2 teaspoonfuls of baking powder,
1 cupful of milk, 1 teaspoonful of extract of peach. Rub the butter
and sugar to a light cream; add the egg whites, 1 at a time, beating
a few minutes between each; add the flour, sifted, with the powder,
then the extract and milk; mix into a rather thin batter; pour into a
paper-lined tin, and bake in a rather hot but steady oven 50 minutes.


No. 123.

DUCHESSE CAKE.

One and one-half cupful butter, 1 cupful sugar, 6 eggs, 1 teaspoonful
baking powder, 1 pint flour, 1 teaspoonful extract cinnamon. Rub the
butter and sugar to a light cream, add the eggs, 2 at a time, beating
10 minutes between each addition. Sift together flour and powder, add
to the butter, etc., with the extracts; mix into a medium thick batter,
and bake in small shallow square pans, lined with thin white paper, in
a steady oven 30 minutes. When they are taken from the oven ice them.


No. 124.

MINCE PIES.

Mince-meat--Two pounds meat, 1 pound raisins, 1 pound currants, 1/2
pound citron, 1 pound chopped apples, 1 pound suet. Chop all up fine,
except 1/2 each of currants and raisins. Put in 1 stick of preserved
ginger or cherries, 1/2 pint brandy, 1/2 pint wine, nutmeg, ground
allspice, ground cinnamon, mace to taste, sugar, and 1/2 pint cider.
Make pie-crust or puff-paste.


No. 125.

CHARLOTTE RUSSE.

One quart charlotte mould, 1/4 pound lady-fingers; line the mould
with them; let the mould be dry. One quart cream sweetened to taste,
flavored with pineapple, lemon, or other flavor, 1/4 box gelatine
dissolved in a little of the cream, cream whipped to a light, stiff
froth. Set an extra pan on the ice and put all the whipped cream in
it, then stir in gelatine. Put it in the mould, cover the top with
lady-fingers, and set on ice to cool.


No. 126.

WAFFLES.

One pint flour, 1/2 yeast cake; make a batter over night with warm milk
and set it to rise. In the morning beat light 3 eggs, 1 tablespoonful
sugar, nutmeg to taste, 1 tablespoonful melted butter. Stir and put to
rise till time to bake. Bake in moulds and sift a little powdered sugar
over them and send to table.


No. 127.

BISCUITS.

One quart flour, 1 tablespoonful yeast powder, 1 tablespoonful butter
or lard. Mix all together with milk; add 1-1/2 teaspoonfuls of salt.
Make your biscuits quick and bake in a hot oven.


No. 128.

CORN BREAD.

One pint meal, 1/2 pint hot water, 1/2 pint milk, mixed; 1
tablespoonful butter, yolks of 3 eggs, 1 teaspoonful yeast powder. Mix
all together to a stiff batter. When ready to bake beat to a stiff
froth the whites of the eggs, put it in, and put in baking mould in a
hot oven.


No. 129.

SPONGE BREAD.

Take 2 Irish potatoes, boil them, mash fine when done, put into them
2 tablespoonfuls of flour, pour in the water the potatoes were boiled
in, pour in the yeast, and let it rise. Make your bread up over night,
either light bread or rolls. Your oven must bake even and steady or
your bread will not be light.


No. 130.

SWEET POTATO PIE.

Boil 1 large sweet potato for 2 pies; mash through a wire sieve, 3
eggs, the yolks of which must be beaten up with the potato, sugar to
taste, a little grated lemon peel, little nutmeg and cinnamon; grate
all up together; 1 teacupful of milk, 1 tablespoonful of melted butter;
when ready to make the pies beat the white to a stiff froth and stir
in. Make the paste as directed in vol-au-vents.


No. 131.

HOW TO MAKE GOOD BREAD.

Sift your flour into your mixing-pan, warming it a little in cold
weather, and make a hole in the center, and into this hole pour your
sponge and stir the whole to the consistency of cake, and then let it
stand in a warm place until it rises and becomes very light; then knead
it thoroughly from all sides, adding flour as needed, and when it will
not stick to your fingers or the side of the pan, set it aside until it
rises again; then make it into five or six loaves, put them into your
baking pans, and set them away in a warm place until it raises nicely,
and then put it into the oven and bake it. A little experimenting will
soon make you an efficient baker.


No. 132.

LIGHT BREAD.

Three pints of flour, half yeast cake dissolved in warm water,
tablespoonful each of salt, lard, and white sugar, 1-1/2 pints of
potato water (warm), work hard, and let rise over night. In the morning
mould and let rise again half an hour before baking; if too stiff add
a little warm water, as it is better if made up rather soft. It will
rise sooner and keep fresh longer. Always sift your flour before using,
warming a little in cold weather; sifting twice gets more air between
the particles. Do not have the oven too hot.


No. 133.

HOW TO MAKE GOOD YEAST.

Take 6 large sound potatoes, 1 gallon of water, and 2 ordinary handfuls
of hops; put the potatoes, after peeling them, into the water, tie
the hops into a bag, and boil all together till the potatoes are soft
enough to mash easily; throw the hops away, put a cupful of flour in
a large dish, take the potatoes out of the water, mash them through a
colander, and mix them well with the flour; then pour the water used in
boiling the potatoes over them, and mix the whole thoroughly; let the
mixture stand till about milkwarm, and then add about a cent's worth
of baker's yeast or an yeast cake, or a cupful of dry yeast, and after
stirring it again set the whole, away over night; in the morning add
a half cup of sugar, a half cup of salt, and a small tablespoonful of
ginger; put the whole in a two gallon jug, and use a cupful of this
yeast at a baking for five or six ordinary-sized loaves. When you
make your next lot of yeast use a cupful of this yeast instead of the
baker's or other yeast called for above.


No. 134.

CALVES'-FEET JELLY.

Get 4 calves' feet at the butcher's, cut them in two, and take away
the fat from between the claws, wash them well in luke-warm water; put
them in a large stewpan, and cover them with water. When the liquor
boils, skim well and let it boil gently 6 or 7 hours, so as to reduce
the quantity to 2 quarts; then strain through a sieve and skim off all
the oily substance. If not in a hurry it is better to boil the calves'
feet the day before you make the jelly, as it will skim better when
perfectly cold, and the liquor part becomes firm. Put the liquor in a
stewpan to melt, with a lump of sugar, the peel of 2 lemons, the juice
of 6, and 6 whites and shells of eggs; beat together, with a bottle of
sherry or Madeira. Stir the whole together till on a boil, then set on
side of stove, and let simmer 1/4 hour, and strain through a jelly-bag.
Then pour back in bag again and strain till it is as bright and clear
as rock-water. Put jelly in moulds to get firm and cold. If made in
warm weather ice is required.


No. 135.

CHICKEN GLACEE.

Bone a chicken, stuff it with truffles, mushrooms, slight, 1/4 pound
ham, 1/2 pound veal, a little sweet marjoram and thyme, and a very
small onion. Take the meat and one-half of the mushrooms and chop them
up fine, and the other half cut in slices, and also the truffles must
be peeled and cut in slices. Let the truffles be in a quarter size can.
Mix all this together, and season with pepper and salt, then stuff it
in the chicken. Put it in a bag tied up tightly, and let it boil 2
hours. Now take the carcass and giblets and boil them to make stock
of. Make about 3 pints. Skim all the grease off top, take it off the
stove, and let it get cold. Take one package of gelatine and put it in
soup; after melting it clarify it with the white of an egg. Season with
pepper and salt and a little nutmeg. Let it boil ten minutes, strain
through a flannel bag, and set aside to cool. Take the chicken, put a
heavy press on it, and let it get cold. Take a jelly mould and line it
with boiled egg, mushrooms, and truffles, cut into stars and flower
shapes; then a layer of jelly, then a layer of sliced chicken, till the
mould is full. Set away in ice-box to get cold. Garnish the dish when
ready to use with water-cresses or parsley.


No. 136.

CLAM CHOWDER.

Three pints of clams; scald them and take the hearts out; 1 pint
tomatoes, boil and strain them through sieve, putting a tablespoonful
of sugar in them; tablespoonful fine chopped onion, and a teaspoonful
thyme, a small stalk of celery, chopped fine, 1/4 pound butter and 2
two tablespoonfuls of flour, mixed in a stewpan; this must be placed
together with the liquor from the clams, thyme, celery, onions,
tomatoes, and 1/2 pint of cream. Let all boil together; season with
pepper and salt, mace, and nutmeg to taste. Just before dishing up put
in the clams. Let it boil up once.


No. 137.

CURRANT JELLY.

One peck of currants, put into a kettle, mashed; let boil up ten
minutes; strain a few at a time through a cloth till all the juice is
out; 1 pint of juice to 1 pound of sugar; put in preserving kettle,
notice the hour it comes to a boil; let it boil 20 minutes, skimming
all the time; put into glasses and place out in the hot sun, uncovered,
for three days, then cover over with pieces of paper wet with brandy.
Set away in a dry place.


No. 138.

VINEGAR PEACHES.

One peck Heath peaches (cling-stones) peeled over night; sprinkle 1
pound of sugar over them; in the morning drain off, put in 1/2 pint of
cider vinegar, let vinegar and juice boil together, putting in a few
peaches at a time, letting them boil just enough so that you can stick
a straw through the peaches (15 minutes), have your jars sitting in hot
water on the stove; put in your peaches as they get done; when the jars
are full pour the syrup over them, then fasten them up while on the
stove; let stay 15 minutes.


No. 139.

TOMATO CHOW-CHOW.

Fifty cucumbers, 50 green tomatoes, 2 dozen white onions, cut them up
in slices over night, sprinkle with salt; in the morning place them
in a colander and drain them dry; 1 pint of vinegar, 1/2 pound of
brown sugar, 1 teaspoonful of tamarack, 1 teaspoonful black pepper, 1
tablespoonful each of allspice and cloves, 1/2 dozen leaves of mace.
Put all these in a pot and let them come to a boil; after boiling take
them out and put them in a jar covered up tightly.


No. 140.

MANGOES.

Take a mango, cut it, take all the seeds out, put in salt and water
for 5 days, let them stay 1 day and night in clear water, drain them
and stuff them with the following: Chop a hard head of cabbage,
horseradish, mustard seed, garlic, a few cloves; and stuff each one,
then tie on the piece taken off to make an opening to take the seeds
out. Boil sufficient vinegar to cover them, putting cloves and allspice
in the vinegar; pour this over them in the jars; continue boiling the
vinegar, pouring it off and on the mangoes for three days; then fasten
up for use.


No. 141.

SWEET POTATO PIE.

Boil 2 good-sized sweet potatoes, weighing about a pound; strain and
mash through a sieve; 1 tablespoonful of butter must be put in them;
sweeten to taste; 1 pint of boiling milk, 5 yolks of eggs, must be
well beaten into the potatoes; stir the hot milk in on them. Grate in
a little lemon peel; nutmeg to taste; put in 1 teaspoonful essence of
lemon; beat up the whites of eggs into the potatoes, make a puff paste,
roll out and make pies without tops.

Custard pies can be made in the same way, leaving out the potatoes.

In lemon pies use same quantity of ingredients as above, using 3
lemons.


No. 142.

MERINGUE PIE.

One cup of sugar, yolks of 3 eggs, 1-1/2 cups of milk, 2 teaspoonfuls
of corn starch, juice and grated peel of 1 lemon. Beat the yolks light
and add the sugar, rub the cornstarch in with milk, and add that, and
then the lemon, and beat well together. Line some pans with a rich
paste, and then fill with the custard, and bake. When done take the
whites of 3 eggs and beat them with a tablespoonful of sugar to a stiff
froth, which spread over the top, and brown in the oven.


No. 143.

SWEET POTATO PUDDING.

Half pound of butter, 1/2 pound of sugar, 5 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls
of brandy, same of rose-water; add 1 pound of sweet potatoes, boiled
and mashed fine, with a pinch of salt and a little milk to make it
moist. Beat the butter and eggs and sugar till light, to which add the
potatoes, a small quantity at a time; whisk the eggs till thick, and
stir in gradually; then add the brandy and rose-water. Mix all well
together, and set aside in a cool place for awhile. This is enough for
3 or 4 puddings, soup-plate size. Line your plates with a nice paste,
fill and bake in a quick oven. Nutmeg or cinnamon can be substituted
for the rose-water if desired.


No. 144.

COCOANUT PUDDING.

Half pound of sugar, 1/2 pound of butter, 1/2 pound of grated cocoanut,
the whites of 6 eggs, 1 tablespoonful of rose-water, 2 tablespoonfuls
of brandy; beat the sugar and butter to a cream, whisk the whites
of the eggs till they are stiff, which beat into the butter and
sugar; stir the whole together and add gradually the nut, brandy, and
rose-water; do not beat it. This will make two full-sized puddings.
Line your plates with rich paste; fill and bake in a quick oven.


No. 145.

PUFF PUDDING.

Mix 2 cups of flour with 2/3 of a cup of butter, and 2 cups of sugar.
Dissolve 3 teaspoonfuls of good baking powder in 1 cup of milk and 1
teaspoonful of essence of lemon and half a nutmeg. Take 4 eggs--keep
the whites of 2 for frosting--and beat the others thoroughly; then mix
all together, and bake in a quick oven. When done frost the top with
the reserved whites, well beaten, with a small quantity of powdered
sugar.


No. 146.

PUFF PASTE.

Take 1 pound of best quality of flour, sifted, 1 pound of good, firm,
sweet butter or lard, or equal parts of each; divide the shortening
into quarters; take one quarter and chop it fine, and mix it with the
flour with a knife, as the warmth from the hands will make the butter
soft; then with a small quantity of cold water make into a stiff dough;
flour the board, turn out the paste, dredge with flour, and roll thin;
then cut another quarter of the shortening into thin slices, and lay on
the paste, dredge with flour, fold over the sides, forming a square;
then roll again and add another quarter of the shortening, and so
continue till all the shortening is rolled in. Handle as little as
possible. When done, roll about half inch thick, cut into quarters,
place on a plate, and set aside in a cool place for 2 hours. Take
only as much as you want for one crust, dredge the board, and roll
out, making it thinner at the middle than on the edges, which should
be one quarter of an inch thick; grease the pans, lay on the paste,
pressing it lightly into form, and trim the edge with a knife; put in
the filling, cover with another paste as before, trim and ornament the
edges, if desired, and bake in a quick oven.


No. 147.

FILLET OF CHICKENS.

Take the breasts of 4 chickens (tender). This is sufficient for twelve
persons. Take 4 fillets out of each chicken; then cut them into a shape
something like the breastbone of a chicken; take the skin off, flatten
them with a mallet; butter a skillet; lay them close together in it;
then pour 1/2 pint of milk and 1/2 pint of stock over them; put a
weight over them and let them simmer till tender; after they are done,
slice some mushrooms and truffles and put one of each, forming a row,
on each breast; round them on a platter, then take the essence and put
1/2 pint of cream in it, making a rich sauce; 3/4 of a pint of spinach;
take all the stems off and parboil the leaves; take them out of the hot
water and put them into cold water; then squeeze them dry out of this
and chop very fine; 1 tablespoonful each of flour and butter and mix
them up into the chopped spinach; 1 teacup of stock is poured over this
and thoroughly mixed in it; pepper, salt, grated nutmeg; then put it on
the fire, stewing slowly for 20 minutes; boil hard three eggs; cut in
slices; put spinach in the center of the dish, chicken around it; pour
sauce all round; put sliced egg around the spinach; serve hot.


No. 148.

JURY PIE.

Steam and boil some mealy potatoes; then mash them with some butter
or cream; season to taste and place a layer at the bottom of a pie
dish; upon this put a layer of fine-chopped cold meat or any kind of
fish well seasoned; then another layer of potatoes and more chopped
meat, alternately, till the dish is filled; smooth down the top; strew
breadcrumbs upon it and bake till well browned. This will make a nice
little dish. Chopped pickles may be added. Should you use fish instead
of meat, first beat it up in raw egg. It will taste better. Dressed
spinach, tomatoes, asparagus tops may be used in place of meat, but
there should be more potatoes than anything else in the pie.


No. 149.

POTATO PIE.

Four large potatoes boiled and mashed with butter and cream; 1/2 pound
of butcher's meat; 1/4 pound of ham or bacon cut small or chopped;
hard boiled eggs; season it and cover with a light crust; bake 3/4 of
an hour. Uncooked potatoes may be used in slices; put first a layer of
them, then a layer of meat or fish; add butter, and season with onion,
catsup or pickles; pour over two beaten eggs; lay on upper crust; bake
1 hour.


No. 150.

POTATO BISCUITS.

Peel and steam 4 good-sized potatoes; mash them and pour in a mortar;
moisten with a little raw egg; then add loaf sugar to make them sweet;
beat the whites of 4 eggs to a snow and mix with the potatoes; add a
tablespoonful of orange flower water; place on paper so as to form
either round or oblong biscuits; bake slowly till of a fine color;
remove paper when done.


No. 151.

BAKED APPLE PUDDING.

Put in a well-buttered pan a layer of breadcrumbs, then a layer of
apples cut small; a sprinkling of grocer's currants, some brown sugar;
repeat this process till pan is full; then pour over melted butter;
finish by putting breadcrumbs on top. Bake 1 hour.


No. 152.

APPLE OMELETTE.

Peel apples; take out cores; cut them in thin slices and dip in brandy,
and dust over finely-grated lemon peel; put in frying-pan of boiling
lard; shake a few minutes over a lively fire, and take them up; beat
some eggs; sweeten to taste; stir in the fruit and fry. When done,
double up the omelette, dust it with sifted sugar, and, if possible,
glaze it.


No. 153.

SWISS APPLE PIE.

Peel, core, and quarter some apples. Boil the peel and the cores with
a few cloves in 1/2 pint of water, and sugar enough to sweeten it. Lay
the apples in a pie-dish, mixing with them 1/4 pound grocer's currants
which have been washed and dried in a cloth. Add to the liquor a glass
of red wine and the grated rinds and juice of two lemons. Put this over
the apples; slice in 2 ounces of butter; line the edges and top with
light tart paste; bake 1 hour. When done, sift powdered loaf sugar on
crust.


No. 154.

PUDDING A LA MODE.

Take 1/2 dozen good-sized apples; peel, core, and cut into quarters;
boil in very little water till soft; mash them to a pulp, with grated
rind and juice of a lemon; beat up the yolks of 4 and the whites of 2
eggs; add 2 sponge-cakes soaked in raisin-wine, 6 ounces of butter just
melted over the fire; mix the whole together. Line the pudding-dish
with a light butter-paste. Bake 1 hour, and turn out to serve.


No. 155.

APPLE CAKE.

Take 1 pound pulped apples, 1 pound flour, 1/2 pound sugar, 1/2 pound
melted butter, powdered cinnamon, 6 eggs well beaten and strained, 2
ounces candied citron-chips, and 4 spoonfuls ale-yeast. Knead it well,
let rise, put in mould, and bake in quick oven. After cake has risen,
add currants if needed.


No. 156.

PUDDING A LA MARINIERE.

Half pound each of flour and beef-suet, 1/4 pound currants, and 4 eggs.
Mix it into a paste with a little water, and roll it out flat; then
empty a small preserving-pot of apple-jam in the middle; fasten up to
make a round pudding; tie in cloth; boil 1 hour.


No. 157.

FISH PUDDING.

Line a small dish with a thin, yet rich, paste, and fill with small
collops of boned fish, with bruised bay-leaf, chopped parsley, onion,
pepper, fish-sauce. Put on top crust, tie in cloth, and boil according
to size of pudding.


No. 158.

APPLE STUFFING.

Take a good half pound of the pulp of tart apples, which have either
been baked or scalded; add 2 ounces of bread crumbs, some powdered
sage, onion, and season it with cayenne pepper. This is a fine stuffing
for roast geese, ducks, pork, etc.


No. 159.

APPLE JAM.

Pare and core 2 dozen full-grown apples; put in a saucepan with water
enough to cover them; boil to a pulp, mash with a spoon till smooth,
and to every pint of fruit put half pound of white sugar; boil again 1
hour; skim, if necessary. When cold put in preserving jars.


No. 160.

BAKED APPLE DUMPLINGS.

Make a rich paste with butter and flour, peel some apples, stick 3 or
4 cloves in each, and cover the fruit entirely with paste. If the oven
is too hot they will burn outside. When done sift fine white sugar over
and serve hot.


No. 161.

POTATO PUDDING.

Boil 1 pound of potatoes, mash while hot, stir in 3 ounces fresh
butter, 2 ounces of pounded loaf sugar, rind and juice of half a lemon,
and a little cream; butter a dish, lay all into it, and bake 30 minutes
in a moderately hot oven; the yolks of 4 raw eggs may be added, and
brandy or Madeira used instead of lemon juice--or 1 pound of currants
can be added. This pudding can be boiled or baked; if boiled serve with
wine sauce, if baked use thin puff paste to line and cover dish.


No. 162.

PUDDING A LA FECULE DES POMMES DE TERRE.

Bruise a couple of bay leaves and boil them in 1 pint of water or milk;
mix two dessertspoonfuls of potato flour and powdered loaf sugar; when
smooth pour over them the hot liquid, stirring all the time. Put in a
buttered dish, bake quarter of an hour in a hot oven; when done pour
over a half pint of cream. If to be eaten cold pour on fresh cream
before sending up; strew crushed loaf sugar on top.


No. 163.

POTATOES IN MEAT PUDDINGS AND PIES.

It has been found that there is a general improvement in meat puddings
and pies when potatoes are used with them. They seem to take away much
of the overrichness and renders them much more palatable.


No. 164.

STUFFED POTATOES.

Wash and peel five large-sized potatoes, scoop them out hollow from one
end to the other, and fill this opening with sausage or forcemeat, then
dip the potatoes in melted butter and put them on a baking-dish. Let
them bake in a moderately hot oven about 30 or 40 minutes; serve just
as soon as done. You can use sauce with them if you choose.


No. 165.

CURRIED POTATOES.

Curry the potatoes by slicing them, raw or cold boiled, frying them in
butter; mixing curry powder in gravy, stewing them a little. Little
pieces of ham should be stuck over the surface of the potatoes when put
on a dish. Lemon juice or pickles can be added.


No. 166.

SWEET POTATOES BAKED OR ROASTED.

Peel and put on a roaster beneath the meat or in a dripping-pan,
besides turning them now and then so as to brown evenly. Place them in
the oven when the meat is nearly done, so that both may be served and
ready at the same time.


No. 167.

POTATO SOUFFLEE.

One pint cream, boiled; mix 2 tablespoonfuls of potato flour with the
yolks of 4 eggs, add 1 ounce butter, 2 ounces powdered loaf sugar,
lemon peel; pour cream over all. Put in a stewpan on the fire; keep
stirring and take off just as it comes to a boil. Let it get cold,
then mix in it 6 yolks of eggs; beat 6 whites to a snow, stir them in
lightly, place on dish and put in oven till properly risen. Serve in
same dish; can be flavored with chocolate.


No. 168.

POTATOES AND KIDNEY.

Take a sheep's kidney, or piece of calf's liver of same size, chop and
season with salt, spices, and a few herbs, chopped; add 2 ounces fresh
butter in small pieces, chop 4 good-sized potatoes (raw), washed and
peeled, and mix with the meat. Put all on baking-dish, sift crumbs over
it, bake 3/4 hour in slow oven. Serve on same dish. A little onion may
be added.


No. 169.

POTATO PATTIES.

Butter the pans, strew breadcrumbs over the insides and fill with
nicely mashed potatoes flavored with mushroom catsup, grated lemon
peel, savory herbs, chopped; add olive oil or fresh butter, sift over
more breadcrumbs; place in oven till brown, take out of pans and serve.
Very thin puff paste may line the pans instead of the breadcrumbs.


No. 170.

WHOLE BONED HAM.

Take a ham, split it down on the inside, not through the skin, as
that must not be broken; but cut it down on the side that goes next
to the dish. Take out all the bone. One can mushrooms, half-sized can
truffles, 1 small clove of garlic, 2 stalks celery, teaspoonful of
thyme; chop this all up, not very fine, and put this stuffing where
the bone has been taken out; sew the ham up and put it in a close bag
so it will keep its shape. Put in the pot 1 dozen cloves and let ham
boil slowly 3 hours; when done put in a close pan to press till very
cold. Take skin off; 1-1/2 pints of ham water, 1-1/2 pints of any soup
stock, 1 box gelatine dissolved in a cup of cold water; put all these
together, add pepper and salt, beat up whites and shells of 2 eggs and
put in the stock and ham water to clear it. Put all on the fire and
stir till it boils; do not allow any fat to come on it; skim it well;
strain the jelly through a flannel bag after boiling 10 minutes. If you
have no ham mould take some jelly, cut in diamond shape, and put around
the dish, and the rest cut fine and put all over the ham. Garnish your
dish with carrots, beets cut into flower forms, parsley, a little here
and there on either side of the ham.


No. 171.

WHOLE CHICKEN IN GLACEE.

Take out all the bones in a medium-sized chicken; 1/4 pound ham, 1/2
pound veal, 1/2 can mushrooms, 1/4 can truffles, small piece of onion,
a little thyme and parsley. Chop the meat, parsley, thyme, celery, very
fine together. Cut the mushrooms in slices; skin the truffles and cut
them and put these into the chopped meat; pepper and salt to taste.
Where the bones have been taken out stuff tightly with this stuffing;
pepper and salt to taste. Tie it in a bag tightly. When done press it
over night under a heavy press. Next morning take it out; cut off each
end and put it into either a melon mould or charlotte mould. Now take
3 pints of the chicken water, skim off all the grease, put salt and
pepper and nutmeg in it. Melt 1 box of gelatine in cold water; take 2
whites of eggs with their shells and put all in chicken water. Put on
fire; stir it; let it boil 10 minutes. Strain through a flannel bag.
Let it get nearly cold--enough to be dipped up with a spoon. Boil hard
2 eggs; cut the eggs in 6 slices; 1 sprig of parsley in center of egg
and put at 4 sides of the chicken with parsley turned down. Pour the
jelly all over it; put in ice-box to get cold. Turn it out of mould and
garnish dish with water-cresses or celery, frizzed. Duck in glacee can
be put up in the same way.


No. 172.

DEVILED CRABS.

Take 1-1/2 dozen crabs; boil them done; pick them carefully out of
shell; take 1/2 dozen crackers; 1 pint of milk is poured over the
crackers, mashed fine. Strain the crackers through a fine sieve. Beat
up 3 eggs light, and put into the strained crackers salt and cayenne
pepper (strong); nutmeg to taste. Now put the crab meat in this. Wash
the crab shells clean and wipe perfectly dry. One and one-half dozen
will make 1 dozen crabs. Brown to a handsome shade 2 crackers. Mash
them fine and put them through a sieve. Put a tablespoonful of wine in
the crab meat. Fill the shells; over each crab sift some of this brown
cracker dust. Ten minutes before the time for serving put in a quick
oven. Lay a napkin on your dish; put them on the napkin and lay parsley
round them. Serve perfectly hot.


No. 173.

OX TONGUE GLACEE.

Put the tongue to soak over night. Steady boil for 2-1/2 hours. Take
out of pot and take root off of it before it gets cold. Then let it get
cool. Skin it and cut it in slices. Make the jelly as directed to make
chicken jelly. Let it get cool enough to work. Take 2 jelly moulds;
put a layer of jelly just stiff enough on the bottom of moulds; then
a layer of tongue; then a layer of jelly and continue till moulds are
full. This quantity will fill the two moulds. Put on ice and let it get
cold. This is served with salad with Mayonnaise dressing.


No. 174.

PICKLED OYSTERS.

Take 50 large oysters, 1/2 pint of the liquor, 1/2 pint of vinegar, 1
tablespoonful of allspice and cloves mixed, 1/2 dozen leaves of mace,
salt to taste, cayenne pepper. Put the liquor and vinegar on the fire.
As soon as this boils drop a few oysters in at a time and let them
stay just long enough to curl, not over two minutes. Put the oysters,
as soon as taken out, in a jar. When all have been taken out, pour the
liquor on them and cover up tightly.


No. 175.

RED CABBAGE PICKLE.

Cut the cabbage up in slices, sprinkle salt over it, for 3 days set it
in the sun or warm place; 1/2 pint of vinegar and 1/2 gallon of water
put on to boil together; pour this on the cabbage and let it soak for
1 day. When it feels crisp and the salt is out, take 2 tablespoonfuls
each of mustard and celery seed, horseradish grated, 1 tablespoonful of
brown sugar, pepper and salt to taste, 1 quart of vinegar, teaspoonful
tamarack, 3 small white onions cut up fine. Mix all together and put in
a pot and then pour the boiling vinegar, with sugar and tamarack, over
the cabbage. Then fasten up in jars tightly, and in a few weeks this
will be ready for use.


No. 176.

PEACH MARMALADE.

Take soft peaches. One-half pound of peaches to 1/2 pound of sugar.
Peel the peaches over night and sprinkle the sugar over them. The
peaches must not be cling-stone. Next morning pour all the juice off
and put the juice in a kettle and let it get hot, then put in the
peaches, nutmeg, cloves, allspice to taste. When it boils, stir and
mash them up well. Let boil slowly for 1-1/2 hours. When thick enough,
put into pots, without covering them, till next day. Put a little
brandy over them and seal up tightly.


No. 177.

QUINCE PRESERVES.

One peck quinces; peel, core, and weigh them. It will require just
so many pounds of sugar. Put on the peelings of the quinces and let
them boil perfectly done. Then put the preserves in and the rind of
4 lemons. Let all boil 1/4 hour, till soft enough to allow a straw
to pass partly through them. One-half pint of water (quite clean and
clear) to 1 pound of sugar; make a syrup and let it commence to boil;
skim it and then put in the fruit. Let the fruit boil 1/2 hour exactly;
then take out the fruit and lay on a dish. Let your syrup boil steadily
3/4 hour longer. Put your jars in hot water on the stove. Put the fruit
in them clear of syrup. Then pour in the syrup and stop the jars up
tightly while standing in the boiling water. Let them stand in 1/4 hour.


No. 178.

BEEF A LA MODE.

Take 10 pounds of beef, tie it up perfectly round with strings and
skewers; take a tablespoonful of butter and put it in a pot large
enough to hold the beef, put the meat in it and let it come to a light
brown; 1 bunch of carrots, 1/2 bunch of thyme; cut the carrots up into
large quarters; 3 turnips cut into 4 quarters, 3 onions peeled and
stuck full of cloves, 1/2 bunch each of parsley and celery tops; cover
the meat in the pot with water, and put in all the vegetables; let them
boil slowly 1 hour with salt and pepper; make the liquor as thick as
gravy, then let it boil 1-1/2 hours longer; put in two medium-sized
pickles sliced in four quarters; before dishing up put in wine-glass
of wine; when ready to go to the table put the vegetables all around
the dish, and send the sauce up in a sauce-bowl; if the meat should be
tough let it boil 1 hour longer.


No. 179.

GOOSE PORK.

Take a fresh ham, score the skin nicely; take the inside of a loaf of
bread, 1/2 can of mushrooms, 1 onion, 1/2 bunch of parsley, not quite
1/2 bunch of thyme, nearly 1/2 bunch of sage; cut the parsley and
onion very fine, also the mushrooms; rub the thyme and sage together
very fine; 1 tablespoonful of butter must be put in the breadcrumbs,
and all the above must be mixed up well with it; make 5 or 6 pockets
in the ham, stuff this dressing tightly in them, tie a string around
them to keep the dressing in, put pepper and salt on it and dust over a
little flour. Put the ham in a dressing-pan in an oven, baking slowly
for 4 hours. Be sure to baste and dust it well with flour until done.
When done take all fat off of gravy, which if not thick enough must be
thickened. Boil rice enough to garnish the dish with, boiling in half
milk and half water; when done let it get cool, beat 2 eggs, pepper and
salt, a little of the mushroom water, 1 tablespoonful of sugar; put
these in rice, roll out in croquettes, put them first in beaten egg and
then in breadcrumbs; fry a light brown. Make apple sauce and serve with
it.


No. 180.

YOUNG BROILED CHICKENS.

Take spring chickens, dress them well, split them down the back, broil
without burning, baste with butter and cream, replace on gridiron and
let broil a little more, and the essence left from basting will be the
gravy to put over them. Season with salt and pepper. When done, cut in
4 parts; place in a dish and garnish with parsley. Serve with salad
with Mayonnaise dressing.


No. 181.

BROILED QUAILS.

Take quails and serve as the spring chicken, only use currant jelly
with the cream and butter. Serve as above.


No. 182.

FRICASSEE RABBIT.

Clean a rabbit, cut in 4 quarters, pepper, salt and flour it, fry a
delicate brown, dust flour in frying-pan; cut in it, very fine, 1 small
onion, and parsley, 1/2 pint each of milk and and cream, and pour in
frying-pan; then put rabbit in to stay 1/4 hour. Boil rice dry and put
it round the dish with rabbit and gravy in the center.


No. 183.

EASTER HAM.

Take a smoked ham, make pockets in it; take 1/4 peck cabbage sprouts,
1 bunch celery, chop them up fine. Skin the ham and stuff the pockets
with the above, then put the skin on again. The pockets should not be
cut till the skin is taken off, because that must be kept whole. Tie up
in a bag which fits the ham, let 2-1/2 hours be the time for boiling
it; when done, take out of bag, take off the skin, stick in top of the
ham 2 dozen cloves. Baste with a little melted sugar and sift some fine
breadcrumbs over it; put in oven to get a light brown. Serve it with
cabbage sprouts or cauliflower.


No. 184.

VENISON CUTLETS.

Give the cutlets the shape of a ham; broil them on a gridiron. Take 1
tumbler currant jelly, 1 tablespoonful butter, 1 wineglass of wine,
salt and pepper to taste and make a hot sauce. Heat the dish to put the
cutlets on, and pour the sauce over them. Serve hot. Serve Saratoga
potatoes with it, placing them in center of dish.


No. 185.

HICKORY-NUT CAKE.

Mix 4 cups flour, 2 of sugar, 1 of butter, 2 teaspoonfuls cream tartar,
all together; dissolve 1 teaspoonful of carbonate of soda in a cup of
milk and mix this with the first. Add 1 pint of nut meats.


No. 186.

DELMONICO'S PUDDING.

One quart milk with 1/2 teaspoonful salt; set this on the fire to boil;
mix 3 tablespoonfuls of corn-starch with a little cold milk and stir
in just before the milk boils. Boil 5 minutes. To 6 tablespoonfuls,
sugar beat the yolks of 3 eggs and add any flavoring extract; pour the
corn-starch, while hot, into this, then whip the whites of 3 eggs and
drop it on top of pudding in form of kisses, and brown in the oven.


No. 187.

CHRISTMAS PLUM PUDDING.

Chop fine 1/2 pound beef suet. Stone and chop 1 pound raisins; wash and
pick 1 pound currants. Soak the crumbs of a small loaf of bread in 1
pint of milk; when it has taken up all the milk, add to it the raisins,
currants, and suet, 2 eggs well beaten, a tablespoonful of sugar, a
wineglassful of brandy, the grating of 1 nutmeg, and other spices if
desired. Boil 4 hours. For a sauce, beat 1/4 pound butter to a cream
with 1/2 pound powdered sugar and flavor with brandy.


No. 188.

ORANGE PUDDING.

Make the same as lemon pudding, using orange instead of lemon.


No. 189.

PICKLED SALMON.

Boil a 6 or 7 pound salmon done; put it into an earthen jar, after
taking all the bones out without breaking it; put pepper and salt
on it; 1 pint of vinegar, 1 teaspoonful allspice, 2 dozen grains of
cloves, 1/2 dozen grains of black pepper, little red pepper; put all
these in the vinegar and let come to a boil. Put in also 3 leaves of
mace. Pour it all over the salmon and cover over tight. If made in the
morning it will be fit to eat in the evening. Sturgeon can be made in
the same way.


No. 190.

BRANDIED PEACHES.

Take 9 pounds of Heath peaches, 7 pounds of loaf sugar, 1 quart of
white brandy. Have a strong lye, hot, but not boiling, over the fire.
Throw half a dozen peaches into it at a time; let them remain 4
minutes; take them out again and put them into cold water. Continue
this till all are done. Then, with a coarse towel, rub them till
perfectly smooth, and put them into another vessel of cold water. Make
a syrup of the sugar with 2 pints of water and 1/2 the white of an egg.
Skim the syrup perfectly clear. Take the peaches out of the water, wipe
them dry, put them in the syrup, and boil them till a straw will pass
through them, then take them out to cool. Boil the syrup 1/4 hour; then
put in the brandy while hot and mix thoroughly. Having placed your
peaches in glass jars, pour the syrup over them while hot, and when
cold paste paper over them to protect them. Will be fit for use in 3
months.


No. 191.

STUFFED EGGS.

Cut 10 hard-boiled eggs in half lengthwise, take out the yolks, pound
them in a mortar, add breadcrumbs soaked in milk and 1/4 pound fresh
butter. Pound all together; add a little chopped onion, parsley,
bruised pepper, and grated nutmeg; mix it with the yolks of two raw
eggs; fill the halved whites with this forcemeat; lay the remainder at
the bottom of dish and place the stuffed eggs around it. Put in an oven
and brown nicely.


No. 192.

EGG POTAGE.

Beat the yolks of 10 eggs and half their bulk of rich gravy. When
frothed, turn out on a plate and place them over a saucepan of
boiling water till the eggs are well set and form a cream. Cut this
in neat strips, place them in a tureen of savory consomme, and serve
immediately.


No. 193.

STEWED MUSSELS.

Boil them from the shell; take the beard out and put them in the
stewpan with some of the liquor in which they were boiled, strain it on
them; add some cream or milk, a bit of butter, pepper, and salt; dredge
over flour; stir with spoon; let simmer for 10 minutes. Serve hot, with
toast.


No. 194.

PANNED OYSTERS.

Take 50 large oysters; rinse clean and let drain; put in stewpan with
1/4 pound of butter, salt, red and black pepper to season. Put pan over
fire, stirring while cooking. When oysters begin to shrink, take off of
fire and serve at once in a covered dish well heated.


No. 195.

STEWED CLAMS.

Take 50 large sand clams from their shells; put them in their own
liquor and water in equal parts nearly to cover them; put them in a
stewpan over a gentle fire for 1/2 hour; take off all scum; add I
teacup butter, in which is worked 1 tablespoonful of flour, and pepper
to taste. Cover stewpan and let simmer 15 minutes longer. Pour over
toast. Milk can be used for water. Will taste better.


No. 196.

BROILED OYSTERS.

Take out the largest; lay them on a napkin to dry; then dip each in
flour or cracker dust, or first in beaten egg; have a gridiron of
coarse wire put over a bright fire; lay oysters on it; when one side is
done turn over the other; put butter on a hot plate; sprinkle a little
pepper over, and lay oysters on; serve with crackers.


No. 197.

CLAM CHOWDER.

Butter a basin and line it with grated breadcrumbs or soaked crackers;
sprinkle pepper and bits of butter and finely-chopped parsley; put in a
double layer of clams; season with pepper and bits of butter; another
layer of soaked crackers; turn a plate over the basin and bake in a hot
oven for 3/4 of an hour; use 1/2 pound of soda biscuit, and 1/4 of a
pound of butter for 50 clams.


No. 198.

BROILED SHAD.

Split fish in two; lay on gridiron over hot fire; broil gently; put
the inside to the fire first; have a dish ready with 1/4 of a pound of
sweet butter in it; also, 1 teaspoonful each of salt and pepper worked
in it; when the fish is done on both sides lay on a dish; turn it often
in the butter; cover over, and set dish where it will be hot till
wanted.


No. 199.

CODFISH CAKES.

Boil soaked cod; chop it fine; put to it an equal quantity of potatoes
boiled and mashed; moisten with beaten eggs or milk; a bit of butter
and a little pepper; lay out in form of small round cakes; flour
outside and fry in hot lard till brown; let lard be boiling hot when
cakes are put in; brown both sides.


No. 200.

OYSTER CHOWDER.

Butter a two-quart tin basin; cover with soaked crackers, bits of
butter; put in a double layer of oysters; sprinkle fine pepper over,
finely chopped parsley; then put a layer of soaked crackers and bits
of butter, as before; then another layer of oysters and seasoning, and
lastly soaked crackers and butter and 1 pint of oyster liquor and milk
or water.


No. 201.

BAKED SHAD.

Clean the shad; cut off the head; split it half way down the back;
scrape inside clean. To make stuffing, cut 2 slices of baker's bread;
spread each with butter and sprinkle on pepper and salt, pounded sage;
moisten it with hot water; fill the inside of the fish with this; tie
a cord around it to keep stuffing in; dredge outside with flour; stick
bits of butter all over outside; mix one teaspoonful each of salt and
pepper over surface; then lay fish on muffin ring in dripping pan; put
in 1 pint of water to taste with; if this is used up while baking, add
more hot water; bake 1 hour in quick oven; baste often. When the fish
is done there should be 1/2 pint of gravy in pan; if not, add more hot
water; dredge in a full teaspoonful of flour with a bit of butter,
a lemon sliced thin; stir this smooth, then pour in gravy-boat; lay
slices of lemon over fish and serve with mashed potatoes.


No. 202.

LOBSTER SAUCE.

Pick out the meat, boil down the shell, use the liquor for making the
sauce with minced lobster, and buttered rolled flour. The berries may
be used uncrushed.


No. 203.

OYSTER SAUCE.

Open the oysters, strain the liquor, put it in saucepan with butter
rolled in flour; when melted add the oysters and a little cream. As
soon as it boils add lemon juice; beaten mace and white pepper may be
used.


No. 204.

SOFT CLAMS FRIED.

Take them from the shell, wash them in plenty of water, lay on a napkin
to dry. Roll in flour very thickly; have a frying-pan one-third full
of hot lard, a tablespoonful of salt to 1 pound of lard; lay the clams
in with a fork one at a time; lay close together, and fry gently till
brown on one side, then turn them over and let the other side brown.
Place in hot dish ready for table.


No. 205.

CRABS DRESSED COLD.

Pick out all the flesh, mix it with oil, vinegar, cayenne pepper, and
some yolks of hard boiled eggs; put all this in the shell, then on a
dish with fresh herbs and lettuce around it--fresh water-cresses will
do to decorate with.


No. 206.

LOBSTER SALAD.

Pick out all the flesh from the lobster, taking care of the coral,
if any; cut up the meat, not very small, put it in a salad dish,
add anchovy, a few olives, chopped pickles, quartered hard boiled
eggs, lettuce torn but not cut up; just before serving pour over the
dressing; stew coral on top; sliced cucumber and an onion might be
added.

The dressing is prepared in this way: Beat well the yolks of two fresh
eggs and stir in one half teaspoonful of salt, 4 teaspoonfuls of mixed
mustard, a pinch of cayenne pepper; add olive oil a little at a time,
stirring all the while with a silver fork till it becomes stiff and
flaky--it requires a half pint of oil--add 2 tablespoonfuls of vinegar;
don't pour in more than a teaspoonful of oil at once. This quantity of
dressing will do for 5 or 6 pounds of lobster.


No. 207.

FISH IN JELLY.

Make jelly by boiling down fish of any kind or calves' feet; clear it
with white of egg, and pour a little milk in a mould. When jelly is
set, put the prepared fish on it, and pour in more jelly till the mould
is filled. When congealed, put a hot cloth round it for a little while,
and turn it out on a dish. Serve for supper or luncheon.


No. 208.

DEVILED FISH.

Any kind of fish will do. Soak it for half an hour in vinegar, catsup,
or any stock sauce. Drain and boil them, and serve with horseradish or
mustard-sauce. You may roll your fish in curry powder if you wish.


No. 209.

FISH IN BATTER.

Rub some slices of fish in spices or shred herbs; then dip in batter,
and fry brown.


No. 210.

FISH SANDWICHES.

Butter both sides of slices of bread. Upon half of their number lay
thin fillets of anchovy, sardine, smoked salmon, or any other fish;
sprinkle seasoning on top, and put the other slices on them. Lay the
sandwiches on a dish, and place in oven till brown. The soft roe of
shad or herring spread between bread and butter is good.


No. 211.

FISH PATTIES.

Use light paste. Have the large oysters. Make them hot by putting them
in cream or a little butter, mixed with oyster liquor and delicate
seasoning. Thicken with yolk of egg, and put in crust already baked in
patty-pans. Take flesh from the tail part of cray-fish or lobsters; cut
in slices. For salmon patties scrape the flesh with a knife, season
with cayenne pepper; mix with a little butter or cream and yolk of egg,
and shake it gently over the fire till done. Eels must be stewed in
gravy, and the meat pounded in a mortar together with a little parsley
and butter, and seasoning; warm it up with a glass of wine, and place
in patty-crusts.


No. 212.

FISH SCALLOPED.

Beard the oysters and scallops; halve or quarter them; pack them in
scallop-shells or small tins. Lay pieces of butter on them, and bake
till brown on top. Serve them in the shells. Thin slices of salmon,
pike, or turbot serve in same way. Squeeze lemon-juice over, to serve.


No. 213.

FISH, BOILED.

Place the fish in salted water, cold, if the fish is large, and hot if
small sized. In the latter case, 2 or 3 minutes in boiling water will
be enough; and a sheep's-head of 4 or 5 pounds will not require more
than 10 minutes from the time the water boils. Use a strainer to place
fish in saucepan. Salmon and all dark-fleshed fish require more boiling
than white-fleshed kinds. Vinegar must be rubbed on the outside of fish
before it is boiled; this keeps the skin from cracking. Serve boiled
fish upon a napkin.


No. 214.

FISH, SALTED.

If your are to salt your fish never wash or wet it, but split open the
larger fish, and remove the heads and intestines of the others, after
scraping them; then pack them in a pickle-tub with finely powdered salt
between each layer. The fish must be well covered on the top with salt.


No. 215.

FISH, CURRIED

A curry of lobster, shrimps, prawns, or crayfish is easily prepared.
Take enough of the meat of either and rub it in curry powder. Have
boiling gravy ready in a saucepan to make sauce for fish; when it boils
take it off the fire, and add bits of butter and beaten yolks of egg to
thicken with.


No. 216.

ORDINARY OMELETTE.

Beat and strain your eggs, season them, and add 1 tablespoonful of
water, milk, or stock to every 6 eggs. Let some butter or oil get
hot in a frying-pan, and pour in the eggs. When omelette is set and
of a pale brown color on the underside, take it up, fold it together
lightly, and serve hot. Do not turn omelettes in the pan.


No. 217.

SARDINE OMELETTE.

Bone the preserved fish, cut in dice pieces, toss it in olive oil;
prepare the eggs in the usual way, season them and pour them up on the
fish in the pan; or, fry the eggs separately and place the fish on the
omelette when it is ready.


No. 218.

BACON OMELETTE.

Mince some cold boiled bacon, and mix it with eggs which are spiced
and well beaten, or take raw bacon, chop it, put in frying-pan till
browned, then pour beaten eggs on it, or else place some bacon on eggs
just poured in frying-pan. When set, fold the omelette and serve with
tomato sauce in the dish.


No. 219.

APPLES AND RICE.

Boil 1/2 pound rice in 1 quart of new milk. At the same time put some
preserved apples in the oven to get hot. When the rice is done arrange
it around a dish; put the preserve in the center; dust some sugar over
it, and garnish the rice with slices of candied lemon peel. Before
serving lay some pieces of fresh butter upon it. Must be eaten warm.


No. 220.

CHARLOTTE DES POMMES.

Peel and slice some apples; take a loaf of fine white bread; free it of
crust and cut it in thin slices well buttered. Fit them in a mould well
buttered, and put in a layer of apples sprinkled with grated lemon;
peel and sweeten them with brown sugar. Next place a slice of bread and
butter till mould is full; squeeze in the juice of two lemons, and bake
it for 1 hour. Turn it out and serve as you would cake.


No. 221.

RED APPLES IN JELLY.

Nice formed apples in a stewpan with water to cover them. Add a
spoonful of powdered cochineal, and simmer gently. When done put in
dessert dish; add white sugar and juice of 2 lemons for a syrup. When
boiled to a jelly put it in the apples. Decorate dish with lemon-peel
cut in slices.


No. 222.

APPLE CHOCOLATE.

Boil in 1 quart of new milk 1 pound scraped French chocolate and 6
ounces of white sugar. Beat the yolks of 6 eggs and the whites of 2.
When the chocolate has come to a boil, take off of fire; add the eggs,
stirring well. At the bottom of a deep dish place a good layer of
pulped apple, sweetened to taste; season with cinnamon. Pour chocolate
over it and place the dish on a saucepan of boiling water. When the
cream is set firmly it is done. Sift powdered sugar over it, and glaze
with a red hot shovel.


No. 223.

APPLE JELLY.

Peel and core fine flavored apples; cut in large pieces and boil in
very little water. When done put through a hair sieve; press them so as
to get all the juice. For every quart of jelly take 1 pound of white
sugar; boil it in the water which was used for the fruit, and skin it.
Add the juice of the apples with the juice of four oranges squeezed
into each quart. Boil 1/2 hour and keep it ready for use.


No. 224.

OYSTERS A LA POULETTE.

Put 25 oysters or one quart on the fire in their own liquor. The moment
it begins to boil turn it into a hot dish through a colander. Leave
the oysters in the colander. Put into the saucepan 2 ounces of butter,
and when it bubbles sprinkle 1 ounce of sifted flour; let it cook a
minute without taking color; stir it well with a wire egg-whisk; then
add, mixing in well, a cupful of the oyster liquor; take it from the
fire; mix in the yolks of 2 eggs, a little salt, and a very little red
pepper, 1 teaspoonful of lemon juice, 1 grating of nutmeg. Beat it
well, and then return it to the fire to set the eggs, without allowing
it to boil; then put the oysters in.


No 225.

TRUFFLED OYSTERS.

Four dozen large oysters, 1 can of truffles, 6 ounces of chicken, 3
ounces of fat salt pork, 5 eggs, flour, toast, red pepper. Mince and
then pound to a paste the chicken and salt pork, add red pepper, a
pinch of salt, and the truffles cut fine and mixed in; lay the oysters
out on the napkin, insert a penknife at the edge and split each oyster
up and down inside without making the opening too large, then push in
the forcemeat. As the oysters are stuffed lay them in flour and then
dip in beaten egg and drop a few at a time in hot lard, and fry three
or four minutes. The lard should be deep enough to immerse them. When
they are golden brown take them up, drain on paper and put on toast.


No. 226.

PHILADELPHIA STYLE OF COOKING CANVASBACK DUCK.

Draw the duck and sew up the incision tightly and closely, leaving one
opening; through this fill the interior with red currant jelly and good
port wine. Sew up and close the opening and roast the duck 20 minutes
in a hot oven; by this process the jelly, the wine, and the natural
juices off the duck combine and permeate the flesh, giving a most
delicious result.


No. 227.

BROILED STUFFED OYSTERS.

Grate the yolks of hard-boiled eggs, 4 or 5 to every dozen of the
largest oysters; mince half as much salt pork and mix in black pepper,
chopped parsley, add a raw egg, the yolk to make a paste; split the
inside by moving a penknife up and down without making a very large
opening at the edge; add the stuffing, dip them in fine breadcrumbs,
then into melted butter on a plate, then into breadcrumbs again, and
broil them over a clear fire.


No. 228.

GAME SOUP.

Take all the meat off the breasts of any cold birds left from
preceding day. Pound it in a mortar, beating to pieces the legs and
bones, and boil them in some broth for an hour. Boil 6 turnips, mash
them and strain through cloth with the pounded meat. Strain the broth
and put a little of it at a time into the sieve to help you strain
all of it through. Put soup kettle near the fire, but do not let it
boil. When ready to dish your dinner, have 6 yolks of eggs mixed with
1/2 pint of cream; strain through a sieve; put soup on fire, and when
coming to a boil put in eggs and stir well with wooden spoon. Do not
let it boil, lest it curdle.


No. 229.

ARTICHOKES.

Soak them in cold water, wash them well, and put them in plenty of
boiling water, with a handful of salt, and let them boil gently till
they are tender, which will take 1-1/2 to 2 hours. To know when they
are done, draw out a leaf. Trim them and drain them on a sieve. Send up
melted butter with them, which some put into small cups so that each
guest may have one.


No. 230.

STEWED OYSTERS.

Large oysters will do for stewing. Stew a couple of dozen in their own
liquor. When coming to a boil, skim well, take them up, beard them,
strain the liquor through a sieve, and lay the oysters on a dish.
Put an ounce of butter in a stewpan; when melted, put to it as much
flour as will dry it up, the liquor of the oysters, 3 tablespoonfuls
of milk or cream, a little white pepper, salt, a little catsup,
chopped parsley, grated lemon peel and juice. Let it boil up for a
couple of minutes till it is smooth, then take it off the fire, put in
the oysters, and let them get warm. Line the sides and bottom of a
hash-dish with bread sippets and pour your oysters and sauce into it.


No. 231.

FRICASSEED RABBIT.

Take a fine, fat rabbit, clean it well, salt and pepper it, put it in
hot lard to fry to a pretty delicate brown; when done take out, pour
out a portion of the grease, and cut up three onions, thicken with
three tablespoonfuls of flour, stir well, pour on water enough to cover
the rabbit, which is now put back in the skillet; cover it over and let
boil for 3/4 of an hour. Just before serving cut up a little parsley
and put in; serve it with either roasted or fried potatoes.


No. 232.

COLD VEAL AND HAM TIMBALES.

Timbale paste, 1 pound of corned bacon, 2 pounds of leg veal, 6 hard
boiled eggs, 1 teaspoonful each of celery salt and marjoram, 3 sprigs
of parsley, white pepper and salt to taste; line the timbale mould with
the paste, first setting it on a greased baking-pan; cut the ham and
veal into scallops and the eggs into slices; with them make alternate
layers with the seasonings; when all are used fill with water, wet the
exposed edges of the paste cover, ornament the edges, and bake in a
moderate oven 2 hours; when cold open the mould and serve as may be
desired.


No. 233.

BEEFSTEAK AND OYSTERS.

Take a tender sirloin steak, put it in a hot skillet, let it fry 15
minutes; when done take the hearts out of 1 quart of oysters, and
put the oysters in the skillet where the steak came out, sprinkle a
little flour over them, a small piece of butter, a little of the oyster
liquor, enough to make a nice gravy; season to taste and a little
nutmeg. Put steak on platter, pour this oyster gravy over them, and
serve hot.


No. 234.

FRICASSEED CHICKEN.

ONE PAIR.

Cut a chicken in quarters, make a rich gravy of 1 pint of milk, 1 pint
of water or oyster liquor, 3 tablespoonfuls of flour, a little butter
mixed in the flour; after the chicken nearly boils in the milk and
water, then put in the flour mixed with the butter; put in a few sprigs
of parsley; let all boil till done. Boil some rice in a saucepan so as
not to break up the grains; put the chicken when done on the platter,
put the rice all round dish, pour the gravy in the center all over the
chicken, and serve hot.


No. 235.

ROASTED LEG OF PORK, CALLED MOCK GOOSE.

Parboil it; take off the skin; then put it down to roast; baste it
with butter, and make a powder of finely minced or dried powdered
sage, black pepper, salt, and some breadcrumbs rubbed together through
a colander. Add to this some finely minced onion; sprinkle it with
this when almost roasted. Put 1/2 pint made gravy into the dish, and
goose-stuffing under the knuckle-skin, or garnish the dish with balls
of it fried or boiled.


No. 236.

KIDNEYS.

Cut them lengthwise, score them, sprinkle some pepper and salt on them,
and run a wire skewer through them to keep them from curling on the
gridiron, that they may broil evenly. Broil them over a clear fire,
turning them often till done. This will take about 10 or 12 minutes if
you have a brisk fire, or fry them in butter, and make a gravy in the
pan after taking the kidneys out by putting in a teaspoonful of flour;
as soon as it looks brown, put in as much water as will make gravy. It
will take 5 minutes more to fry them than to broil them. A few parsley
leaves chopped fine, and mixed with a little butter, pepper, and salt,
may be put on each kidney.


No. 237.

STEAKS.

Cut the steaks rather thinner than for broiling. Put some butter into a
frying-pan, and when it is hot lay in the steaks and keep turning them
till they are done enough. By this means the meat will be more equally
dressed and more evenly browned, and will be found to be much more
relishing.


No. 238.

FISH TURBOT.

Boil a 5-pound of any firm fish not quite done; take it out and pick
all bones out of it; then make a cream sauce for it. Having taken the
hearts out of 1 pint of oysters, put them in the cream sauce; also 1/2
pint milk, 2 tablespoonfuls flour, 1 tablespoonful butter, 2 yolks
of eggs. Let all boil together; then put the fish in it; season with
pepper and salt to taste; put into a pudding-dish. Chop up a stalk of
celery very fine, and put in it; sift some breadcrumbs over it, with
small bits of butter. Put in oven and let bake 3/4 hour. Garnish dish
with fried oysters or fried potatoes.


No. 239.

TONGUE.

Tongue requires more cooking than a ham. One that has been salted and
dried should be put to soak 24 hours before wanted, in plenty of water;
a green one from the pickle needs soaking only a few hours. Put the
tongue into plenty of cold water and let it be 1 hour gradually warming
and give it from 3-1/2 to 4 hours very slow simmering according to size.


No. 240.

HAM.

Give it plenty of water-room, and put it in while the water is cold;
let it heat gradually and let it be on the fire 1-1/2 hours before it
comes to a boil; let it be well skimmed and keep it simmering very
gently. A middle-sized ham will take from 4 to 5 hours according to its
thickness.


No. 241.

FRIED PERCH.

Wipe the fish well, wipe them on a dry cloth, flour them lightly all
over, and fry them 10 minutes in hot lard or drippings; lay them on a
hair sieve. Send them up on a hot dish garnished with sprigs of parsley.


No. 242.

BREAD AND BUTTER PUDDING.

Have ready a quart dish; wash and pick 2 ounces of currants; strew a
few at bottom of dish; cut about 4 layers of very thin bread and butter
and between each layer strew some currants. Then break 4 eggs in a
basin, leaving out 1 white; beat them well and add 4 ounces of sugar
and a nutmeg; stir it well together with a pint of new milk; pour it
over about 10 minutes before you put it in the oven. Bake 3/4 hour.


No. 243.

PANCAKES AND FRITTERS.

Break 3 eggs in a basin, beat them up with a little nutmeg and salt;
put to them 4-1/2 ounces of flour and a little milk; beat to a smooth
batter. Add, by degrees, milk enough to make the thickness of cream.
Frying pan must be about the size of a pudding-plate and very clean
or they will stick; make it hot and to each pancake put in a piece of
butter as large as a walnut; when it is melted pour in the batter to
cover the bottom of pan; make them the thickness of a half-dollar; fry
a light brown on both sides.

Apple fritters can be made in the same way by adding 1 spoonful more of
flour. Peel your apples and cut them in thick slices, take out core,
dip them in the batter, fry in hot lard. Put on sieve to drain; grate
loaf sugar over them.


No. 244.

BOSTON APPLE PUDDING.

Peel 1-1/2 dozen good apples, take out cores, cut them small, put in
stewpan that will just hold them with a little water, cinnamon, 2
cloves, and the peel of a lemon; stew over a slow fire till soft, then
sweeten with moist sugar, and pass it through a fine sieve. Add to it
the yolks of 4 eggs and 1 white, 1/4 pound butter, half a nutmeg, a
grated lemon peel, and juice of 1 lemon; beat all together; line inside
of pie-dish with good paste; put in the pudding and bake half an hour.


No. 245.

SPRING FRUIT PUDDING.

Peel and wash 4 dozen sticks of rhubarb; put in stewpan with the
pudding, a lemon, a little cinnamon, and enough moist sugar to make it
sweet; set it over a fire and reduce it to a marmalade; pass through
a hair sieve and go on as directed in the above receipt, leaving out
lemon juice, as the rhubarb is acid enough.


No. 246.

NOTTINGHAM PUDDING.

Peel 6 apples, core them but leave the apples whole; fill up where you
took out the core, with sugar. Place them in a pie-dish and pour over
them a nice, light batter, prepared as for batter pudding; bake an hour
in moderate oven.


No. 247.

MAIGRE PLUM PUDDING.

Simmer 1/2 pint of milk with 2 blades of mace, and a roll of lemon peel
for 10 minutes, then strain it into a basin, set it away to get cold,
then beat 3 eggs in a basin with 3 ounces of loaf sugar and the third
of a nutmeg, then add 3 ounces of flour, beat it well together, and
add the milk by degrees. Put in 3 ounces of fresh butter broken into
small bits and 3 ounces of breadcrumbs, 3 ounces of currants washed
and picked clean, 3 ounces of raisins stoned and chopped; stir it well
together, butter a mould, put it in, and tie a cloth tight over it;
boil 2-1/2 hours, serve it with melted butter, 2 tablespoonfuls of
brandy, and a little loaf sugar.


No. 248.

PLAIN BREAD PUDDING.

Put 5 ounces of breadcrumbs in a basin, pour 3/4 pints of boiling milk
over them, put a plate on the top to keep in the steam, let stand 20
minutes; then beat up quite smooth with it 2 ounces of sugar, and a
saltspoon of nutmeg; break 4 eggs on a plate, leaving out 1 white, beat
them well and add them to the pudding; stir it well together, and put
it in a mould that has been well buttered and floured; tie a cloth over
it and boil one hour.


No. 249.

FLEMISH WAFFLES.

One and one-half pints of flour, 1/2 teaspoonful of salt, 2
tablespoonfuls of sugar, 3 tablespoonfuls of butter, 1-1/2 teaspoonfuls
of baking powder, 4 eggs, 1/2 pint of thin cream, 1 teaspoonful each
of the extract of cinnamon and vanilla; rub the butter and sugar to
a cream, add the eggs one at a time, beating 3 or 4 minutes between
each addition; sift flour, salt, and powder together, add these to the
butter, etc., with the vanilla, cinnamon, and thin cream. Mix into
batter as for griddle cakes, have waffle-iron hot and well greased,
pour in batter enough to fill it two-thirds full, shut it up, and turn
it over immediately; be careful not to get the iron too hot, as the
waffles will only take from 4 to 5 minutes to cook. When done sift
sugar over them and serve at once on a napkin.


No. 250.

SOFT WAFFLES.

One quart of flour, 1/2 teaspoonful of salt, 1 teaspoonful of sugar,
2 teaspoonfuls of baking powder, 1 large tablespoonful of butter,
2 eggs, 1-1/2 pints of milk. Sift flour, powder, and salt together,
rub in the butter cold, add the beaten eggs, mix into batter, have
waffle-iron hot and well greased each time; fill two-thirds full and
close it up; when brown turn over, sift sugar on them and serve hot.


No. 251.

CRANBERRY TART.

Pick and wash some cranberries in several waters, put them in a dish
with the juice of half a lemon, quarter of a pound of loaf sugar
crushed to 1 quart of cranberries; cover it with puff paste and bake it
three-quarters of an hour. If tart paste is used take it from the oven
five minutes before it is done and ice it; return it to the oven, and
send to the table cold.


No. 252.

APPLE TART.

Pare, core, and quarter some apples; make an apple pie; then when pie
is done cut out the whole of the center, leaving the edges; when cold
pour on the apple some rich boiled custard, and placed round it some
small leaves of puff paste of a light color.


No. 253.

GRAHAM MUFFINS.

One quart of Graham flour, 1 tablespoonful of brown sugar, 1
teaspoonful of salt, 3 teaspoonfuls of baking powder, 1 egg, and 1 pint
of milk; sift the flour, sugar, salt, and powder together; add the
beaten egg and milk, mix into a batter, fill cold well-greased muffin
pans two-thirds full; bake 15 minutes in hot oven.


No. 254.

YORKSHIRE PUDDING.

[Under Roast Beef.]

This pudding is to accompany a sirloin of beef, loin of veal, or any
fat, juicy joint. Six tablespoonfuls of flour, 3 eggs, 1 tablespoonful
of salt, 1 pint of milk so as to make a tolerably stiff batter, a
little stiffer than for pancakes; beat it up well--it must not be
lumpy; put a dish under the meat and let the drippings drop into it
till it is quite hot and well greased, then pour in the batter; when
the upper surface is brown and set, then turn it over that both sides
may brown alike. If you wish it to cut firm and the pudding an inch
thick, it will take two hours at a good fire.


No. 255.

CORN BREAD.

One pound of cornmeal well sifted, mixed with boiling water or milk to
the consistency of a moderate batter; then beat 4 eggs, putting the
yolks in the batter, and the whites must be beaten up to a froth and
put in just before baking; salt to taste; put in a baking-pan and bake
quickly in a hot oven; a tablespoonful of butter or lard is also mixed
with the meal.


No. 256.

FRENCH MUFFINS.

One and a half pints flour, 1 cupful honey, 1/2 teaspoonful salt, 2
teaspoonfuls baking-powder, 2 tablespoonfuls butter, 3 eggs, and little
over 1/2 pint of milk or thin cream. Sift together the flour, salt,
and powder; rub in the butter, cold; add the beaten eggs, milk or thin
cream, and honey. Mix smoothly into a batter as for pound cake; about
half fill sponge-cake tins, cold and carefully greased, and bake in
good, steady oven 7 or 8 minutes.


No. 257.

BOSTON BROWN BREAD.

One half pint of flour, 1 pint cornmeal, 1/2 pint rye flour, 2
potatoes, 1 teaspoonful salt, 1 tablespoonful brown sugar, 2
teaspoonfuls baking-powder, 1/2 pint water. Sift the flour, cornmeal,
rye flour, sugar, salt, and powder together. Peel, wash, and well boil
two mealy potatoes; rub them through a sieve, thinning with water. When
cold, use it to mix the flour, etc., into a batter like cake. Pour it
into a greased mould, with a cover; place it in a saucepan half full
of boiling water, when the loaf will simmer 1 hour without letting the
water get into it. Remove, then take off the cover, and finish cooking
it by baking in a fairly hot oven 30 minutes.


No. 258.

APPLE POT-PIE.

Fourteen apples peeled, cored, and sliced; 1-1/2 pints flour, 1
teaspoonful baking-powder, 1 cupful sugar, 1/2 cupful butter, 1 cupful
milk, large pinch of salt. Sift the flour with the powder and salt;
rub in the butter, cold; add the milk, and mix into a dough as for
tea-biscuits; with it line a shallow stewpan to within two inches of
the bottom. Pour in 1-1/2 cupfuls water, the apples and sugar; wet
the edges, and cover with the rest of the dough; then place it in a
moderate oven till the apples are cooked; then remove it from the oven;
cut the top crust in four equal parts; dish the apples; lay on them the
pieces of side crust cut in diamonds, and the pieces of top crust on a
plate. Serve with cream.


No. 259.

OATMEAL CRACKNELS.

One and a half pints fine oatmeal, 1/2 pint Graham flour, 1 teaspoonful
salt, 1 teaspoonful baking-powder, 1 pint of milk. Mix oatmeal and
milk; let it stand, to swell, 5 hours in a cold place. Sift together
the Graham flour, salt, and powder. Add it to the oatmeal; mix into a
smooth dough. Flour the board with cornmeal; turn out dough, and roll
1/4 inch thick; cut it out with cutter; lay them on greased baking
tins; wash over with milk, and bake 10 minutes in moderate oven.


No. 260.

GERMAN WAFFLES.

One quart of flour, 1/2 teaspoonful salt, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, 2
tablespoonfuls baking-powder, 2 tablespoonfuls lard, the rind of 1
lemon grated, 1 teaspoonful extract of cinnamon, 4 eggs, 1 pint thin
cream. Sift flour, sugar, salt, and powder together; rub in lard,
cold; add the beaten eggs, lemon rind, extract, and milk. Mix into
smooth batter, rather thick. Bake in hot waffle-iron. Serve with sugar
flavored with lemon.


No. 261.

TEA BISCUITS.

One quart of flour, 1 teaspoonful salt, 1/2 teaspoonful sugar, 2
teaspoonfuls baking-powder, 1 teaspoonful lard, 1 pint milk. Sift
together flour, salt, powder, sugar; rub in lard, cold; add the milk,
and form into a smooth, consistent dough. Flour the board; turn out the
dough; roll it out to the thickness of 3/4 of an inch; cut with a small
round cutter; lay them close together on a greased baking-tin; wash
over with milk. Bake in hot oven 20 minutes.


No. 262.

RICE MUFFINS.

Two cupfuls of cold boiled rice, 1 pint of flour, 1 teaspoonful of
salt, 1 tablespoonful of sugar, 1-1/2 teaspoonfuls of baking powder,
1/2 pint of milk, 3 eggs; thin out the rice with the milk and beaten
eggs; sift the flour, sugar, salt and powder together; add the rice;
mix into a smooth batter; fill muffin pans two-thirds full, having
carefully greased them; bake 15 minutes in a hot oven.


No. 263.

CHEESE CRACKERS.

One and a half pints of flour, 1/2 pint of cornmeal, 1 teaspoonful
of salt, 1 teaspoonful of baking-powder, 1 tablespoonful of butter,
little more than 1/2 pint of milk; sift together flour, cornmeal, salt
and powder; rub in the butter cold; add the milk; mix into a smooth,
rather firm dough; flour the board; turn out the dough; give it a roll
or two quickly, and roll it to the thickness of a quarter of an inch;
cut out with a large round cutter; glaze the top as you would pies, and
sprinkle cheese and cayenne pepper over top and bake ten minutes in hot
oven; cheese straws can be made nearly the same way out of puff paste
cut thin about 1/4 of a yard long.


No. 264.

FRUIT JELLY.

Two pints of water; 1/2 pint of milk, and 1 gill of wine, 1 gill of
lemon juice, the peel of 3 lemons, 1 pound of sugar, whites of 3 eggs
beaten, not stiff, and stir in the above; melt and put in this 1 paper
of gelatine; put on the fire and stir till it begins to boil; then
stop for 10 minutes; take off; strain through a flannel bag, place in
pan till cool enough to dip up with a spoon; peel and quarter in layers
1 orange; put a slim layer of jelly in bottom of mould; on this put
6 pieces of orange; now cover with jelly; second layer, drop 7 or 8
candied cherries on the top of layer in mould, another layer of jelly;
then 5 or 6 Malaga grapes between them; 5 or 6 blanched almonds, a
layer of jelly; on this candied cherries and almonds between them; then
fill mould up with jelly; put on ice.


No. 265.

FROZEN PEACH CUSTARD.

One quart of milk; 5 yolks of eggs, 3 whites; boil milk; make a custard
of it; sweeten to taste; cut in thin slices soft peaches; put peaches
in custard when cold; freeze it for use; this can be moulded in form of
a brick.


No. 266.

SNOWBALL.

Six apples, peeled and cored, 1/2 pound of rice washed well; put apples
in pudding cloth; pour rice on top; leave room to swell; boil in pot
1-1/2 hours; make wine sauce for it; this is a dinner dish.


No. 267.

BLANC-MANGE.

Take 1 package of gelatine, divide it in half; take 3 half pints of
milk, 3 yolks of eggs; put on the milk to boil and make a custard of
it; season to taste with lemon; melt one half of the gelatine, and
melt it in 1/2 teacup of cold milk; then stir it in custard when done;
take another 3 half pints of milk; let it boil; season with vanilla;
sweeten to taste; melt the remaining half of the gelatine in a little
milk and stir it in this last custard while it is hot; put out to cool
enough, so it will mould; then take the first custard made and put in
the mould, then on top of that in the same mould the last custard made;
place on ice to cool; eat with whipped cream, seasoned with lemon or
vanilla.


No. 268.

COFFEE BLANC-MANGE.

Take and divide 1 package of gelatine in half; take 1 pint of milk,
1/2 pint of coffee and let it boil; melt one half of the gelatine in
a little milk; stir it in the boiled milk; now take 3 half pints of
milk, stir in 2 tablespoonfuls of chocolate and boil it; take the
remaining half of the gelatine, melt it in a little milk; stir it in
the chocolate; let it get cold before putting in the mould; then put
in the mould the portion made first, then the second portion on top of
this; set away to cool; eat with whipped cream.


No. 269.

FRENCH COFFEE.

Three pints of water to 1 cup of ground coffee. Put the coffee grounds
in a bowl, pour over it about 1/2 pint of cold water, and let stand for
15 minutes; bring remaining 2-1/2 pints water to a boil. Take coffee
in bowl, strain through a fine sieve, then take a French coffee pot,
put coffee grounds in strainer at top of French pot, leaving the water
in the bowl. Then take the boiling water and pour over the coffee very
slowly; then set the coffee pot on the stove for five minutes; must
not boil. Take off and pour in the cold water from the bowl that coffee
was first soaked in to settle. Serve in another pot. The French have
the reputation of making the best coffee. Use 3 parts Java and 1 part
Mocha.


No. 270.

BISCUIT GLACE.

One and a half pints of cream, 12 ounces sugar, 8 yolks of eggs, 1
tablespoonful extract of vanilla; take 6 ounces crisp macaroons, pound
in a mortar to dust; stir into the macaroon dust another tablespoonful
extract of vanilla. Mix the cream, sugar, eggs, and extract. Place
on the fire and stir this until it begins to thicken. Strain and rub
through a hair sieve into a basin; put in freezer, and when nearly
frozen mix in the macaroon dust and finish the freezing.


No. 271.

NOYEAU CORDIAL.

To 1 gallon of proof spirits add 3 pounds of loaf sugar and a
tablespoonful of extract of almonds. Mix well together, and allow to
stand 48 hours, covered closely; now strain through thick flannel and
bottle. This liquor is much improved by adding 1/2 pint of apricot or
peach juice.


No. 272.

RED CURRANT FRUIT-ICE.

Put 2 pints ripe currants, 1 pint red raspberries, 1/2 pint water in a
basin. Place on the fire and allow to simmer a few minutes, then strain
through a hair sieve. To this add 12 ounces of sugar and 1/2 pint of
water. Place all into a freezing-can and freeze.


No. 273.

TOUTES FRUITS ICE-CREAM.

Take 2 quarts richest cream and add to it 1 pound pulverized sugar and
4 whole eggs. Mix all together; place on the fire, stirring constantly,
and bring just to the boiling point; remove immediately and continue
to stir till nearly cold; flavor this with 1 tablespoonful of extract
of vanilla; place in freezer and freeze, after which mix thoroughly
into it 1 pound of preserved fruit in equal parts of peaches, apricots,
gages, cherries, pineapple, etc. All of these fruits are to be cut up
into small pieces and well mixed with the cream, frozen. Should you
wish to mould this ice, sprinkle it with a little carmine dissolved in
a teaspoonful of water with 2 drops of spirits of ammonia. Mix in this
color so that it will be streaky or in veins like marble.


No. 274.

CRUSHED STRAWBERRY ICE-CREAM.

Three pints best cream, 12 ounces pulverized white sugar, 2 whole
eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls extract of vanilla. Mix all together in a
porcelain-lined basin; place on the fire; stir constantly to the
boiling point. Remove and strain through a hair sieve. Place in a
freezer and freeze. Take 1 quart ripe strawberries, select, hull and
put in a bowl; add 6 ounces pulverized sugar, white, and crush all down
to a pulp; add this pulp to the frozen cream and mix in well. Now give
the freezer a few additional turns to harden.


No. 275.

PEACH ICE-CREAM.

One dozen best, ripest red-cheeked peaches; peel and stone; place in
china basin and crush with 6 ounces pulverized sugar. Take 1 quart best
cream, 8 ounces pulverized sugar, white, 2 whole eggs, 8 drops extract
almond. Place all on the fire till it reaches the boiling point. Remove
and strain. Place in freezer and freeze. When nearly frozen, stir in
the peach pulp. Give the freezer a few more turns to harden.


No. 276.

FRENCH VANILLA ICE-CREAM.

One quart of rich, sweet cream, 1/2 pound of granulated sugar, yolks of
6 eggs. Place the cream and sugar in a porcelain kettle on the fire,
and allow them to come to a boil; strain immediately through a hair
sieve, and having the eggs well beaten add them slowly to the cream and
sugar while hot, at the same time stirring rapidly. Place them on the
fire again and stir for a few minutes, then pour it into the freezer
and flavor with 1 tablespoonful of vanilla, and freeze.


No. 277.

LEMON ICE-CREAM.

One quart of best cream, 8 ounces of pulverized sugar, 3 whole eggs,
and a tablespoonful of the extract of lemon; place it on the fire, then
immediately remove and strain. When cold place in freezer and freeze.


No 278.

CHOCOLATE TRANSPARENT ICING.

Melt 3 ounces of fine chocolate with a small quantity of water in a pan
over the fire, stirring constantly until it becomes soft. Dilute this
with 1/2 gill of syrup and work till perfectly smooth, then add to the
boiled sugar as above.


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired. The text uses accents in the table
of contents but not in the text itself. For example, text uses Glace in
the table of contents and GLACEE in the text. This was retained. Text
also uses both "Italienne" and "Italien."

Page v, "Canvas-Back" changed to "Canvasback" (Canvasback Duck)

Page vi, "Mussles" changed to "Mussels" (Mussels, stewed)

Page vii, page number added for entry "Oysters, stewed."

Page vii, "Patte" changed to "Pate" (Patte la Foie Gras)

Page vii, "soufflee" changed to "souffle" (Potatoes, souffle)

Page 35, "boulion" changed to "boullion" (pints of boullion)

Page 36, "Pate-la-foi-gras" changed to "Pate-la-foie-gras" (slice of
Pate-la-foie-gras)

Page 38, "oyters" changed to "oysters" (quart of oysters to one)

Page 60, "wel lbuttered" changed to "well buttered" (cake-mould well
buttered)

Page 62, "smoothe" changed to "smooth" (smooth, and pour over cake)

Page 87, "ligth" changed to "light" (oven to get a light)

Page 90, "MUSSLES" changed to "MUSSELS" (STEWED MUSSELS)

Page 92, "gridion" changed to "gridiron" (on gridiron over hot)

Page 97, "will" changed to "well" (must be well covered)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Margaret Brown's French Cookery Book, by
Margaret Brown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BROWN'S FRENCH COOKERY BOOK ***

***** This file should be named 44915.txt or 44915.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/4/9/1/44915/

Produced by Emmy and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
