Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, February 22, 1881, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Harper's Young People, February 22, 1881
       An Illustrated Weekly

Author: Various

Release Date: February 16, 2014 [EBook #44927]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, FEB 22, 1881 ***




Produced by Annie R. McGuire








[Illustration: HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE
AN ILLUSTRATED WEEKLY.]

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. II.--NO. 69. PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK. PRICE FOUR
CENTS.

Tuesday, February 22, 1881. Copyright, 1881, by HARPER & BROTHERS. $1.50
per Year, in Advance.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: THE RACE ON THE TAPPAN ZEE.]

HOW THE PENNANT WAS WON.

AN ICE-BOAT STORY.

BY J. O. DAVIDSON.


Bump, bang, clatter, clatter.

"Eh! hello, who's there?" and Arthur jumps from his warm bed, and
starts, shivering, to open the window-shutter; but ere he can reach it,
another thump from without, and the rattle of a broken snow-ball on the
tin roof of the veranda greets his ears.

He gets the shutter open just as Joe Henderson is about to throw another
snow-ball, to knock at his door, as it were.

"Hello, Joe! what's up? Phew! ain't it cold!"

"Oh, Art, hurry up and dress, and come down," cries Joe. "I've splendid
news for you. The river is frozen clear to Tarrytown, and the ice-boats
from there are coming over to race with the Nyack boats to-day, and
Uncle Nye is going to enter his new yacht, the _Jack Frost_, in the
regatta, and says you and I may go along to help make up the crew. Won't
it be fun, though? There's an elegant breeze."

"I should say so," chattered Arthur, as he shivered before the window.
"But I'm afraid I can't go. I don't dare miss school, it's so near
examination-day."

"Oh, that's all right," cried Joe. "I stopped with a letter at Dominie
Switchell's on my way up, and he's laid up with another attack of
rheumatism, and can't teach school to-day. Ain't it glorious?"

"Elegant! Hooray! I'm with you!" shouted Arthur, as he disappeared from
the window. Hurrying on his clothes, and scarcely dipping his face in
the icy water, he completed a hasty toilet, bounded down stairs two
steps at a time, and tumbled over a chair that grandma had placed before
her door to trip up burglars.

"Oh dear, what's the matter?" cried a voice from the room, as grandma
opened the door and peeped into the hall.

"Why, Artie dear, how you frightened me! What is the cause of--"

"Ice-boat regatta to-day," shouted Artie, rubbing his ankle; "and
there's no school, and I'm going on the _Jack Frost_. Won't be back till
afternoon; keep my dinner hot, and--" The rest of the sentence was
inaudible to grandma, for the boy was down the back stairs and in the
kitchen, where, joined by Joe, he hurriedly ate the breakfast which
good-natured Julia quickly set before them, for she knew just how to
treat boys, having been a romping country girl herself.

In a few minutes the back door banged to, and our lads ran down the
slippery pathway toward the river, where the bright sails of the
Tarrytown fleet were already gliding toward the hither shore, as if in
challenge to a contest. A minute's steady trot brought the boys to the
steamboat dock where the ferry-boat lay frozen in. A number of graceful
ice-yachts were gliding hither and thither over the glassy surface,
while several near the wharf stood with sails flapping in the crisp,
freshening breeze, as numbers of men and boys hurried about making the
last preparations for the race, while shouts and halloos resounded on
all sides. An animated group was gathered about one large and very
stanch-looking boat.

"Oh, ain't she a beauty?" exclaimed Artie, as they ran and slid over the
ice toward her.

"Why, it's the _Jack Frost_!" replied Joe. "Look at her flag; and here
comes Uncle Nye, and Marc, and Charlie Haines, who built the boat."

"Good-morning, boys; just in time," called Mr. Nye. "It's a fine day for
our sport. Jump aboard now, and let's be off. Haines, you take the
windward runner; Joe, you stand by the peak halyards; Marc, you take the
jib sheets; while Artie minds the main, and I'll tend the helm. Now tuck
in the buffalo-robes. Are you all ready there forward?"

"Ay, ay, sir."

"Let go; steady now; there she fills;" and as the beautiful craft
gathered headway, and glided over the smooth ice, a cheer went up for
the new yacht. As they gained the open ice, several other racers ranged
alongside to test the speed of the new-comer.

"What boat is that, Charlie?" called Mr. Nye, pointing to a fine boat
close to.

"That's Mr. Snow's boat, the _Icicle_, sir; and here comes Mr.
Voorhees's flyer, the _Avalanche_. There's Mr. Smith's _Snow Squall_,
from Tarrytown. Look out, sir; here comes Mr. Hoff's boat, the _Marie_,
trying to cross our bows. But she can't do it."

In a few minutes the _Jack Frost_ had drawn away slightly from her
rivals; and putting about, Mr. Nye ran back, and brought the boat to a
stand-still near the dock.

"Oh, uncle, do you think we'll win the race?"

"I can not tell, of course, Joe, but Haines says she handles
beautifully, and we stand a good chance if nothing breaks."

"Is Artie there?" called a voice from the dock to Joe.

"Yes, Ed, he's here."

"Tell him that grandma sent him this muffler, and wants him to wrap well
up, and not catch--"

"There goes the signal to get ready!" exclaimed Charlie, as he jumped on
the windward runner; and they ran rapidly down to the starting-point,
where a long line of boats was drawn up like white-winged birds, their
sails trembling in the breeze.

"What is the course, sir?" asked Artie.

"From Hook Mountain to Piermont Dock, two miles out in mid-river, then
back to the Hook, three times--about thirty miles."

"There, Artie, there's the new pennant the young ladies offered as a
prize last year, and Tom Hackett and Jim Burger, from Tarrytown, won it
on the _Eagle_; but the boys say they didn't win it fairly, for they
started ahead of the rest, and crowded one of our boats into an ice
crack, and broke her runner."

"Now, boys, attention," ordered Mr. Nye, sharply. "Let her come into the
wind."

"Are you ready?" came a clear voice down the wind; and a pistol report
cracked on the air.

"Jib sheet--quick, Marc; more main sheet, Art; now sway down on the peak
halyards, Joe; lie close, Haines. That's it--all snug;" and they were
off on the race.

After our boys had attended to their duties, they had time to look about
at the rest of the fleet.

Away on either side stretched a line of swiftly moving yachts, white
sails flat as boards, flags fluttering, the wind humming through the
rigging, while their glittering runners cut feathery flakes of
glistening ice in their tracks.

"Oh, ain't it too bad!" cried Joe. "The _Eagle_ and _Icicle_ are both
ahead of us."

"Never mind, boys; it's early in the race yet. Wait till we get on a
wind," replied Haines. "Now watch the turning-point, sir; don't let the
_Snow Squall_ get inside of us; ready, about," and the three leading
boats turned the stake together.

"Phew! how we fly!" cried Art. "Isn't she a hummer?"

"I wonder why they call a boat _Jack_, and then call it 'she,' as if it
were a girl?" queried Joe.

"Give it up," replied Marc.

"Because they require so much rigging," promptly responded Mr. Nye.

"Oh, uncle, that's not fair," cried Joe; "you knew the answer before."

"Well, I've two daughters, and ought to," replied Mr. Nye; and they all
joined in his jolly laugh.

"Look out for the crack ahead!" shouted Charlie, as they rushed by a
split in the ice. "Ready, about!" away they went on the other tack; and
so the exciting race went on. Now one boat would be ahead, again another
would dart by and take the lead, but some had fallen so hopelessly in
the rear, that only a half-dozen remained in the race, and of these it
was hard to tell which was the swiftest.

"I'm afraid we're going to have a snow-squall, sir," shouted Charlie.
"There's a black cloud coming over the Hook Mountain."

"Let it come; I think the heavier it blows, the better for us," replied
Mr. Nye.

The race was now three-quarters run, and everything must be decided in a
few minutes. The squall had come over the Hook, darkening the heavens,
and the gale made the boats dart along with lightning speed.

"The _Marie_ is ahead of us," exclaimed Charlie Haines, peering into the
flying snow. "Hello, something's the matter with her! Boat ahoy! Sheer
off, or you'll run into us. Steady, boys," and a phantom shape rushed
out of the mist and darted across their wake with peak halyard parted
and the mainsail thundering in the wind.

The snow now hid everything in a wild whirl of mist.

"Here comes the _Eagle_, sir," as another yacht appeared close aboard in
the gloom, with her flag streaming wildly on the gale.

"Keep off! keep off!" roared Charlie Haines to Tom Hackett, who was
steering the rival yacht.

"Clear the track!" came back the answer, in angry tones.

"Keep on your course, Mr. Nye!" yelled Charlie. "You have the right of
way, and he dare not run us down."

Scarcely had he spoken when Hackett altered his boat's course.

"Luff, sir, luff!" shouted Charlie Haines, and with a light touch of the
helm, Mr. Nye avoided the collision. Not entirely, though, for the
_Eagle_ caught her jib-stay under her rival's main-boom; a sharp snap
followed, a heavy lurch, and the _Eagle_, devoid of her jib, whirled
about and upset, throwing her crew along the ice.

"Served them right!" exclaimed Haines. "They tried to crowd us out of
our course, but got upset themselves. Now, boys, hold on tight."

A terrific gust of wind and snow drove them swiftly on; it blew so hard,
that the windward runner, with Charlie clinging to it, was lifted high
in the air, and it seemed as though the boat must capsize.

"Shall we drop the peak?" called Mr. Nye. "I hardly think she'll stand
it."

"Yes, she will, sir," answered Charlie. "Hold hard, _every one_!" and a
moment later he added, "Hurrah! I see the stake ahead," and a burst of
sunshine through the clouds revealed the flag close by.

Several other boats now emerged from the squall, but much of their
canvas was shivering, and most of their peaks had been dropped before
the fury of the gale.

It was no use trying to recover their lost ground, and our friends on
the _Jack Frost_ darted by the flag, winners of the race by several
seconds, and also of the champion pennant of the Tappan Zee.




BITS OF ADVICE.

BY AUNT MARJORIE PRECEPT.

GOING TO A PARTY.


I remember that when I was quite young going to a party was nearly as
much a trial to me as a pleasure. Being diffident, I dreaded entering
the room, and encountering the eyes of the people already assembled
there; and once fairly in, I was overshadowed all the evening by the
dreadful necessity of, by-and-by, retiring. Besides, I felt a sense of
responsibility which was very oppressive, and was so afraid of not doing
or saying what was expected of me, that I moved and acted awkwardly, and
no doubt looked perfectly miserable.

Perhaps some of you may have had experiences similar to mine. Now let me
tell you that I have lived to laugh at my foolish shyness, and to be
very sorry for boys and girls who suffer from the same thing. When you
are invited to a company, the first thing in order is to reply to the
invitation. This is _polite_, whether you accept or decline, and it is
_imperative_ if you decline. Send your answer as soon as possible, in
some such simple phrase as this: "Harold," or "Florence, thanks Mrs.
---- for her kind invitation for Thursday evening, and accepts it with
pleasure," or "declines it with real regret," as the case may be.
Arrived at your friend's house, you will be directed to the proper place
for the removal of your wraps, and the arrangement of your toilet, and
then you have only to proceed to the parlor, where your hostess will
relieve you from embarrassment by meeting you at once. She is, of
course, the first person whom you are to greet. Having spoken to her,
you are at liberty to find other friends. Do not think that people are
looking at you, or noticing your dress or your looks. They are doing
nothing of the kind. Engage heartily in whatever amusement is provided
for the occasion, but do not put yourself needlessly forward. If spoken
to, reply modestly but intelligently, even though for the moment there
may be a hush in the room. If you really wish to enjoy yourself, seek
out somebody who seems to be more a stranger than yourself, and try to
do something for his or her pleasure. Forget that you are not acquainted
with everybody, and remember that it is your duty to help your hostess
in making her party a success. Should your greatest enemy be present,
you must of course be perfectly civil and agreeable in your manner to
him, for in your friend's house you are both under a flag of truce.

When you say good-night to your entertainers, be sure to thank them for
the pleasure you have had. Do not stay too late, but avoid being the
first to go; or, if you must leave early, do it as quietly as possible,
lest your withdrawal should be the signal for others to leave, thus
breaking up the party too soon.




POPPING CORN.

BY GEORGE COOPER.


  This is the way we drop the corn--
  Drop the corn to pop the corn:
  Shower the tiny lumps of gold,
  All that our heaping hands can hold;
  Listen awhile, and blithe and bold,
        Pip! pop-corn!

  This is the way we shake the corn--
  Shake the corn to wake the corn:
  Rattle the pan, and then behold!
  What are the tiny lumps of gold?
  Pretty wee white lambs in the fold!
        Tip-top corn!




THE WEEPING-WILLOW.

BY BENSON J. LOSSING.


You have seen and admired the weeping-willow tree--the _Salix
babylonica_--upon which the captive Hebrews hung their harps when they
sat down "by the rivers of Babylon" and "wept when they remembered
Zion." It is a native of the garden of Eden, and not of America, and I
will tell you how it emigrated to this country.

More than a hundred and fifty years ago a London merchant lost his
fortune. He went to Smyrna, a sea-side city in Asia Minor, to recover
it. Alexander Pope, one of the great poets of England, was the
merchant's warm friend, and sympathized with him in his misfortunes.

Soon after the merchant arrived in Smyrna, he sent to Pope, as a
present, a box of dried figs. At that time the poet had built a
beautiful villa at Twickenham, on the bank of the river Thames, and was
adorning it with trees, shrubbery, and flowering plants.

On opening the box of figs Pope discovered in it a small twig of a tree.
It was a stranger to him. As it came from the East, he planted the twig
in the ground near the edge of the river, close by his villa. The spot
accidentally chosen for the planting was favorable to its growth, for
the twig was from a weeping-willow tree--possibly from the bank of one
of "the rivers of Babylon"--which flourishes best along the borders of
water-courses.

This little twig grew vigorously, and in a few years it became a large
tree, spreading wide its branches and drooping, graceful sprays, and
winning the admiration of the poet's friends as well as of strangers. It
became the ancestor of all the weeping-willows in England.

There was rebellion in the English-American colonies in 1775. British
troops were sent to Boston to put down the insurrection. Their leaders
expected to end it in a few weeks after their arrival. Some young
officers brought fishing-tackle with them, to enable them to enjoy sport
after the brief war. Others came to settle on the confiscated lands of
the "rebels."

Among the latter was a young officer on the staff of General Howe. He
brought with him, wrapped in oiled silk, a twig from Pope's
weeping-willow at Twickenham, which he intended to plant on some stream
watering his American estate.

Washington commanded an army before Boston, which kept the British
imprisoned in that city a long time against their will. On his staff was
his step-son, John Parke Custis, who frequently went to the British
head-quarters, under the protection of a flag, with dispatches for
General Howe. He became acquainted with the young officer who had the
willow twig, and they became friends.

Instead of "crushing the rebellion in six weeks," the British army at
Boston, at the end of an imprisonment of nine months, were glad to fly,
by sea, for life and liberty, to Halifax. Long before that flight, the
British subaltern, satisfied that he should never have an estate in
America to adorn, gave his carefully preserved willow twig to young
Custis, who planted it at Abingdon, his estate in Virginia, where it
grew and flourished, and became the parent of all the weeping-willows in
the United States.

Some time after the war, General Horatio Gates, of the Revolution,
settled on the "Rose Hill Farm," on New York Island, and at the entrance
to a lane which led from a country road to his house he planted a twig
from the vigorous willow at Abingdon, which he had brought with him.
That country road is now the Third Avenue, and the lane is Twenty-second
Street. Gates's mansion, built of wood, and two stories in height, stood
near the corner of Twenty-seventh Street and Second Avenue, where I saw
it consumed by fire in 1845. The tree which grew from the twig planted
at the entrance to Gates's lane remained until comparatively a few years
ago. It stood on the northeast corner of Third Avenue and Twenty-second
Street. It was a direct descendant, in the third generation, of Pope's
willow, planted at Twickenham about 1722.




[Illustration: INDIAN CHILDREN PLAYING "BUFFALO."--DRAWN BY W. M. CARY.]

THE GAME OF "BUFFALO."


In inventing games, and playing them heartily too, the Indian children
of the western plains are fully as active as their little white brothers
and sisters of the east.

One of the favorite games among the boys of the great Sioux nation is
that of "Buffalo," a game that may be played by any number; but while as
many as choose may act as hunters, only two, and they the largest and
strongest, can be buffaloes. These two procure a couple of buffalo-robes
as nearly perfect as possible, and, going a short distance from camp,
put them on, get down on their hands and knees, and pretend to be
feeding. Then the hunters, each armed with a bow and a quiver of
blunt-headed arrows, creep cautiously toward their game, taking pains to
keep on the leeward side of the feeding animals.

Taking advantage of every hummock and tuft of grass to conceal their
approach, the hunters finally get within bow-shot of the make-believe
buffaloes. At a signal a flight of arrows is discharged at the hairy
monsters, and they in turn, apparently maddened by the pain of their
wounds, charge upon the hunters, bellowing with rage, and knocking down
with their heads any whom they happen to overtake.

Finally the buffaloes are supposed to be killed; they roll over and lie
perfectly still, while the hunters, with loud rejoicings, remove their
skins, which they bear in triumph to camp. Then all, hunters and
buffaloes, unite in a wild dance in imitation of their fathers when they
return from a successful hunt, and the game is ended.




[Begun in No. 58 of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, December 7.]

TOBY TYLER;

OR, TEN WEEKS WITH A CIRCUS.

BY JAMES OTIS.

CHAPTER XI.

A STORMY NIGHT.


When Toby awoke, it was nearly dark, and the bustle around him told very
plainly that the time for the departure was near at hand. He rubbed his
eyes just enough to make sure that he was thoroughly awake, and then
jumped down from his rather lofty bed, and ran around to the door of the
cage to assure himself that Mr. Stubbs was safe. This done, his
preparations for the journey were made.

Now Toby noticed that each one of the drivers was clad in rubber
clothing, and, after listening for a moment, he learned the cause of
their water-proof garments. It was raining very hard, and Toby thought
with dismay of the long ride that he would have to take on the top of
the monkeys' cage, with no protection whatever save that afforded by his
ordinary clothing.

While he was standing by the side of the wagon, wondering how he should
get along, old Ben came in. The water was pouring from his clothes in
little rivulets, and he afforded most unmistakable evidence of the damp
state of the weather.

"It's a nasty night, my boy," said the old driver, in much the same
cheery tone that he would have used had he been informing Toby that it
was a beautiful moonlight evening.

"I guess I'll get wet," said Toby, ruefully, as he looked up at the
lofty seat which he was to occupy.

"Bless me!" said Ben, as if the thought had just come to him, "it won't
do for you to ride outside on a night like this. You wait here, an' I'll
see what I can do for you."

The old man hurried off to the other end of the tent, and almost before
Toby thought he had time to go as far as the ring, he returned.

"It's all right," he said, and this time in a gruff voice, as if he were
announcing some misfortune; "you're to ride in the women's wagon. Come
with me."

Toby followed without a question, though he was wholly at a loss to
understand what the "women's wagon" was, for he had never seen anything
which looked like one.

He soon learned, however, when old Ben stopped in front--or rather at
the end--of a long covered wagon that looked like an omnibus, except
that it was considerably longer, and the seats inside were divided by
arms, padded to make them comfortable to lean against.

"Here's the boy," said Ben, as he lifted Toby up on the step, gave him a
gentle push to intimate that he was to get inside, and then left him.

As Toby stepped inside he saw that the wagon was nearly full of women
and children, and fearing lest he should take a seat that belonged to
some one else, he stood in the middle of the wagon, not knowing what to
do.

"Why don't you sit down, little boy?" asked one of the ladies, after
Toby had remained standing nearly five minutes, and the wagon was about
to start.

"Well," said Toby, with some hesitation, as he looked around at the two
or three empty seats that remained, "I didn't want to get in anybody
else's place, an' I didn't know where to sit."

"Come right here," said the lady, as she pointed to a seat by the side
of a little girl who did not look any older than Toby; "the lady who
usually occupies that seat will not be here to-night, and you can have
it."

"Thank you, marm," said Toby, as he sat timidly down on the edge of the
seat, hardly daring to sit back comfortably, and feeling very awkward
meanwhile, but congratulating himself on being thus protected from the
pouring rain.

The wagon started, and as each one talked with her neighbor, Toby felt a
most dismal sense of loneliness, and almost wished that he was riding on
the monkey cart with Ben, where he could have some one to talk with. He
gradually pushed himself back into a more comfortable position, and then
had an opportunity of seeing more plainly the young girl who rode by his
side.

She was quite as young as Toby, and small of her age; but there was an
old look on her face, that made the boy think of her as quite an old
woman cut down to fit children's clothes. Toby had looked at her so long
and earnestly, that she observed him, and asked, "What is your name?"

"Toby Tyler."

"What do you do in the circus?"

"Sell candy for Mr. Lord."

"Oh, I thought you was a new member of the company."

Toby knew by the tone of her voice that he had fallen considerably in
her estimation by not being one of the performers, and it was some
little time before he ventured to speak; then he asked, timidly, "What
do you do?"

"I ride one of the horses with mother."

"Are you the little girl that comes out with the lady an' four horses?"
asked Toby, in awe that he should be conversing with so famous a person.

"Yes, I am. Don't I do it nicely?"

"Why, you're a perfect little--little--fairy!" exclaimed Toby, after
hesitating a moment to find some word which would exactly express his
idea.

This praise seemed to please the young lady, and in a short time the two
became very good friends, even if Toby did not occupy a more exalted
position than that of candy-seller. She had learned from him all about
the accident to the monkey cage, and Mr. Stubbs, and in return had told
him that her name was Ella Mason, though on the bills she was called
Mademoiselle Jeannette.

[Illustration: TOBY IN THE "WOMEN'S WAGON."]

For several hours the two children sat talking together, and then
Mademoiselle Jeannette curled herself up on the seat, with her head in
her mother's lap, and went to sleep.

Toby had resolved to keep awake and watch her, for he was quite struck
with admiration at her face, but sleep got the better of him in less
than five minutes after he had made such a resolution, and he sat
bolt-upright, with his little round head nodding and bobbing, until it
seemed almost certain that he would shake it off.

When Toby awoke, the wagon was drawn up by the side of the road, the sun
was shining brightly, preparations were being made for the entree into
town, and the harsh voice of Mr. Job Lord was shouting his name in a
tone that boded no good for the owner of it when he should make his
appearance.

Toby would have hesitated before meeting his angry employer, but that he
knew it would only make matters worse for him when he did show himself,
and he mentally braced himself for the trouble which he knew was coming.
The little girl whose acquaintance he had made the night previous was
still sleeping, and wishing to say good-by to her in some way without
awakening her, he stooped down and gently kissed the skirt of her dress.
Then he went out to meet his master.

Mr. Lord was thoroughly in a rage when Toby left the wagon, and he saw
the boy just as he stepped to the ground. The angry man gave one quick
glance around, to make sure that none of Toby's friends were in sight,
and then he caught him by the coat collar, and commenced to whip him
severely with the small rubber cane that he usually carried.

Mr. Job Lord lifted the poor boy entirely clear from the ground, and
each blow that he struck could be heard nearly the entire length of the
circus train.

"You've been makin' so many acquaintances here that you hain't willin'
to do any work," he said, savagely, as he redoubled the force of his
blows.

"Oh, please stop! please stop!" shrieked the poor boy in his agony.
"I'll do everything you tell me to, if you won't strike me again."

This piteous appeal seemed to have no effect upon the cruel man, and he
continued to whip the boy, despite his cries and entreaties, until his
arm fairly ached from the exertion, and Toby's body was crossed and
recrossed with the livid marks of the cane.

"Now let's see whether you'll 'tend to your work or not," said the man,
as he flung Toby from him with such force that the boy staggered,
reeled, and nearly fell into the little brook that flowed by the
road-side. "I'll make you understand that all the friends you've whined
around in this show can't save you from a lickin' when I get ready to
give you one. Now go an' do your work that ought to have been done an
hour ago."

Mr. Lord walked away with the proud consciousness of a man who has
achieved some great victory, and Toby was limping painfully along toward
the cart that was used in conveying Mr. Lord's stock in trade, when he
felt a tiny hand slip into his, and heard a childish voice say:

"Don't cry, Toby. Some time, when I get big enough, I'll make Mr. Lord
sorry that he whipped you as he did; and I'm big enough now to tell him
just what kind of a man I think he is."

Looking around, Toby saw his little acquaintance of the evening
previous, and he tried to force back the big tears that were rolling
down his cheeks, as he said, in a voice choked with grief, "You're awful
good, an' I don't mind the lickin' when you say you're sorry for me. I
s'pose I deserve it for runnin' away from Uncle Dan'l."

"Did it hurt you much?" she asked, feelingly.

"It did when he was doin' it," replied Toby, manfully, "but it don't a
bit now that you've come."

"Then I'll go and talk to that Mr. Lord, and I'll come and see you again
after we get into town," said the little miss, as she hurried away to
tell the candy vender what she thought of him.

That day, as on all others since he had been with the circus, Toby went
to his work with a heavy heart, and time and time again did he count the
money which had been given him by kind-hearted strangers, to see whether
he had enough to warrant his attempting to run away. Three dollars and
twenty-five cents was the total amount of his treasure, and large as
that sum appeared to him, he could not satisfy himself that he had
sufficient to enable him to get back to the home which he had so
wickedly left. Whenever he thought of this home, of the Uncle Daniel who
had, in charity, cared for him--a motherless, fatherless boy--and of
returning to it, with not even as much right as the Prodigal Son, of
whom he had heard Uncle Daniel tell, his heart sank within him, and he
doubted whether he would be allowed to remain if he should be so
fortunate as ever to reach Guilford again.

This day passed, so far as Toby was concerned, very much as had the
others; he could not satisfy either of his employers, try as hard as he
might, and, as usual, he met with two or three kindly disposed people,
who added to the fund that he was accumulating for his second venture of
running away, by little gifts of money, each one of which gladdened his
heart, and made his troubles a trifle less hard to bear.

During that entire week one day was very much like another. Each day he
added something to his fund, and each night it seemed to him that he was
one day nearer the freedom for which he so ardently longed.

The skeleton, the fat lady, old Ben, the Albino Children, little Ella,
and even the sword-swallower, each gave him a kindly word as they passed
him while he was at his work, or saw him as the preparations for the
grand entree were being made.

The time had passed slowly to Toby, and yet Sunday came again, as
Sundays always come; and on this day old Ben hunted him up, made him
wash his face and hands until they fairly shone from very cleanliness,
and then took him with him to church. Toby was surprised to find that it
was really a pleasant thing to be able to go to church after being
deprived of it, and he was more light-hearted than he had been since he
left Guilford when he returned to the tent at noon.

The skeleton had invited him to another dinner party; but Toby had
declined the invitation, agreeing to present himself in time for supper
instead. He hardly cared to go through the ordeal of another state
dinner, and, besides, he wanted to go off to the woods with the old
monkey, where he could enjoy the silence of the forest, which ever
seemed like a friend to him, because it reminded him of home.

Taking the monkey with him as usual, he inquired the nearest way to some
grove, and without waiting for dinner, started off for an afternoon's
quiet enjoyment.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




THE STORY OF THE DIGITS, AND WHAT THEY REPRESENT.


  1 is the lord of the manor,
  2 is his swan-like bride,
  3 is his gentle daughter,
  And 4 is the pony to ride;
  5 is young Jack, so nimble,
  6 is the careful maid,
  7 the priest so humble,
  And 8 is the church where he staid;
  9 is the palace castle,
  And 10 the poor around--
  This is the story of Numbers,
  While the whirl of Time goes round.




THE TALL PINE.

A STORY FOR WASHINGTON'S BIRTHDAY.

BY KATE UPSON CLARK.


"The tall pine" grew upon the backbone of Bald Mountain, a mighty spur
of the Green Mountain range, and from nearly every point for miles
around the great tree could be seen standing out clear and distinct
against the sky, and towering, like Saul, head and shoulders above its
brethren.

It happened that upon a certain Fourth of July, years ago, the eloquent
orator of the day, in dilating upon the grandeur of his country and her
great men, particularly that greatest of all, George Washington, turned,
in a sudden fit of inspiration, and pointed to the tall pine.

"As yonder magnificent tree, fellow-citizens," said the grandiloquent
speaker, "uplifts itself above all the giants of the surrounding forest,
so, friends and fellow-citizens, does the character of George Washington
uplift itself above all others upon the page of history."

These words were received with great applause, and the tall pine was
ever after known in the neighborhood as "George Washington."

The land upon which "George Washington" stood was owned by a crabbed old
farmer named Hardaker. Mr. Hardaker had a contract for supplying the
Fitchburg Railroad with wood, and, winter by winter, was gradually
stripping his share of Bald Mountain of all its beautiful trees. This
made good places to go blackberrying, but hurt the appearance of the
hill-side very much. People wondered how Mr. Hardaker could be so "mean"
as to cut everything down so, all at once. He did not need the money
particularly, and his motive was just "clear greed"--or so the neighbors
said.

At last he neared the vicinity of the tall pine; and as February
advanced he announced, with a loud laugh at his own wit, that he was
going to "celebrate Washington's Birthday by cutting down 'George
Washington' himself with his little hatchet."

This created no little excitement throughout the town, and everybody
protested.

"Oh, I wouldn't, Mr. Hardaker," said Mr. Prouty, the village minister;
"it has been a landmark here for many years, and it is really, as things
have come to be, an object lesson in history to all the children and
youth around."

"Humph!" said the old farmer, crossly. "I ain't a-settin' up landmarks
for folks, or a-givin' objec' lessons. I pay taxes for all that sort of
thing to be did in the schools--awful big taxes, too. _I_ can't raise
the money to pay 'em without cuttin' timber pretty stiddy. I calc'late
there's--wa'al, a thousan' foot o' lumber in that ar pine, an' I can't
afford to leave it stan' no longer."

The old farmer scowled and shook himself as he walked away. He was
evidently more "sot" than ever on cutting down "George Washington."

There was a bright boy in town, the son of a Mr. Farnsworth, and named,
like so many other bright American boys, after the father of his
country. As might have been expected of a boy with such a name, Master
George Washington Farnsworth had been brought up to think very highly of
his namesake, and all of the Farnsworth family were justly indignant
when the news of Farmer Hardaker's intention reached them.

"I declare," said his sister Grace, "it almost seems like killing a real
person."

"Well," said her mother, thoughtfully, "you can't expect to find much
sentiment in a grasping, narrow-minded man like Mr. Hardaker. There
isn't any use in saying much about it, but it is too bad to do it--on
his birthday, too. I'm really ashamed to be so 'worked up,' but it seems
as if a tree like that might be allowed to stand till it died a natural
death."

  "The bolt that strikes the towering cedar dead
  Glides harmless o'er the hazel's lowly head.'"

quoted Grace.

"Cedars and hazels alike fall before Farmer Hardaker's rapacious axe,"
said her mother, smiling. "I fancy that he doesn't skip anything,
judging from the looks of the poor, shorn mountain-side. It's too bad!"

But, day by day, Farmer Hardaker's ox-sleds, unheeding the
expostulations of the entire population, climbed the steep, and came
back loaded with the carcasses of "George Washington's" sturdy
neighbors. He was getting very near to "George" himself.

"I say, boys," said George Farnsworth to his school-mates, as they were
sliding at recess, a few days after he had overheard the conversation
between his mother and sister--"I say, ain't it pretty mean of old
Hardaker to cut down 'George Washington'?"

"It is that," said several of the boys, heartily, and they turned and
looked up to the stately tree, which stood in silent grandeur, as ever
since they could remember, and appealed speechlessly to them all.

"He says," continued George, "that he is going to celebrate Washington's
birthday by cutting it down with his little hatchet."

The other boys laughed, but George kept sober.

"It's rather funny," he said, slowly; "but can't we manage to save it
some way?"

The general opinion seemed to be--borrowed from their friends at home,
probably--that it couldn't be done, until at last Tom Dermot said,
speculatively,

"Maybe he'd sell it?"

"Maybe he would," said George, brightening up. "You know my name's
George Washington, boys, and I'm bound to save the dear old gentleman if
I can."

"I don't see why he couldn't sell it standing as well as cut up,"
continued Tom--"only, if he would, it wouldn't do us any good. We
haven't got any money."

"Maybe we could raise some," said George, bravely. "Wonder how he'd sell
it?"

"Dear enough, I presume; but we might ask him."

The upshot of this conversation was that, after school, George
Farnsworth persuaded his father to let him and Tom Dermot, feeling
pretty important, you may be sure, take his horse and sleigh to go over
and talk with Mr. Hardaker upon the subject of selling "George
Washington" standing.

"Thirty dollars," said the gruff old fellow, who was very angry at the
remarks which had been made at his expense, and who had vowed that he
would cut the tree down now, whatever happened.

"I won't leave the plaguey thing up for a cent less than thirty
dollars."

"I'm afraid we can't raise a sum like that between now and day after
to-morrow," said George, looking at Tom in some dismay.

"Then I'll cut it down," roared Mr. Hardaker; and seeing what a rage he
was in, the boys discreetly took their leave. They amused themselves on
the way home by singing, as loud as they possibly could,

  "Woodman, spare that tree,
    Touch not a single bough."

"Father," said George, when they reached home, "he says thirty
dollars--not a cent less."

Mr. Farnsworth gave a long whistle.

"Pretty dear," he said, smiling, "but I'm glad you have shown so much
interest. I'd almost give five dollars myself to save the old tree."

"Would you, father--would you?"

"But I don't want to encourage Hardaker in such extortion as that."

"But you know he's mad, father--that's why he sets the price so high. He
thinks now that we can't raise the money, and so he can cut the tree
down."

"Yes, I don't see any way to save it."

But George would not give it up, and pleaded his cause so well that his
father finally told him that if he and Tom could raise the other
twenty-five dollars in time, he would really give him five dollars.

The boys started out that evening in fine spirits to "solicit" for
"George Washington." The enthusiasm over the historical "Old South
Church" in Boston never ran higher. Mr. Prouty gave them one dollar, and
Mr. Steele, the school-master, another. Everybody gave them something.
It was astonishing to see how many friends the old tree had.

When school was out the next day, George and Tom started again for
Farmer Hardaker's. They were feeling pretty well, for George had in his
pocket a deed of the tree, drawn up by the village lawyer, and needing
only the signatures of Farmer Hardaker and witnesses to make it valid,
and thirty dollars in good current money.

They managed to catch their man just as he was starting for the station
with a load of chestnut wood for ties.

"Mr. Hardaker," said George, politely, springing from the sleigh, and
approaching the old man, "would you mind stepping into the house a
minute, and signing a deed for me?"

"Signing a deed?" said Farmer Hardaker, opening eyes and mouth very
wide.

"Yes, sir," went on George, courteously. "You said that you would sell
us the tall pine for thirty dollars, and I have brought you the money,
and a deed of the purchase for you to sign."

"The mischief you have!" said the old fellow, crossly, but with his eyes
twinkling a little at the sight of the money, which George judiciously
exposed just then. "Wa'al, I s'pose I'll have to give in."

So the money was handed over, and the rest done in good shape, and the
boys went home feeling better than they had ever felt before in their
lives.

One or two who hadn't had a chance to contribute to the "fund" went up
to the top of the mountain on the 22d of February with their mite. It
was a silver plate, on which were inscribed these words (you may have
seen them before):

  GEORGE WASHINGTON:

  First in War, first in Peace, and first in the Hearts of his Countrymen.

And that very plate, only tarnished a little by wind and weather, may be
seen upon the mighty trunk of "George Washington" to this day.




[Illustration: COASTING SKETCHES.--DRAWN BY F. S. CHURCH.]




[Illustration: FEEDING THE LOVE-BIRDS.]

"ROMEO AND JULIET."

BY F. W. ROBINSON.


"When my good uncle Benjamin sent home his presents for the children I
am afraid there was less harmony in the family--that is, amongst my
brothers and sisters--than one might have expected. The presents were
many, the choice was embarrassing, and tastes did not agree. Tom was the
bother--Tom always has been the bother, I am sorry to add. Without Tom I
think we could have got along pretty well, and arranged our differences
by degrees, and with the help of mamma and the governess, and perhaps
papa to be called in if wanted very much. But Tom--though he is my own
brother, and I love him dearly, particularly when he is good, which
occurs on his birthday, and sometimes on half-holidays--was very
aggravating. I don't remember when Tom was more aggravating, except when
he was getting over the measles, and bit his nurse in the arm. Tom was
greatly excited over the presents, and said they were all for him--Uncle
Benjamin being his godfather--until papa explained the case, and read
aloud uncle's letter to us.

"Let the dear children take it in turns to choose, according to their
respective ages," wrote uncle.

Maggie was the eldest, and chose the "love-birds," two pretty little
dears like baby paroquets, green balls of wool with red noses--crimson
beaks, papa calls them. We were all anxious about the love-birds: they
were something alive, and to be petted and made much of. It was
discovered, however, that Tom wanted the love-birds; it was his second
choice, and he had set his heart upon them. And having set his heart
upon them, Tom sat down and howled when Maggie had made her selection.
There was no pacifying Tom--there never is, Bella says, and so does
Charlie--and Tom stamped and raved and sobbed, and would not have
anything else but the love-birds "if he died for it," he said. He was
quieter when papa came in, and withdrew his threat of poisoning the
birds if they became Maggie's property, and apologized behind the cuff
of his jacket to his sister, and with his mouth full of cloth. Tom's
apology having been graciously accepted, it remained to be seen if Tom's
grief could be in any way appeased; and after some whispering between
Maggie and mamma, in which I fancied I heard the words "pantomime next
Christmas," it was finally settled that Maggie should be consoled by a
box of paints, and Tom should have the birds. I don't think I could have
agreed to that myself, although I don't quite know what mamma might have
promised me; but I was content with my big doll, and I thought that when
Tom was at school we should all be able to see the love-birds and feed
them just as well as their owner. But we did not tell Tom this, or he
might have sold the birds, or taken them to school in his pocket; for
Tom was a very cross-grained brother when he liked, and was rather a
trouble to mamma and papa. I was never a trouble--I was a good girl, and
they called me "Pet."

Tom did not get tired of his present so soon as we expected. He was the
whole day without getting tired, although a little shaken in the evening
by an offer of his friend Walker--who came from school with
five-and-twenty other friends to see the birds--to "swap" with him for
ten white mice and a Jew's-harp. He was very fond of the birds, and he
christened them Romeo and Juliet, because they were love-birds too, and
we should hear all about them when we were a little older. Well, I hoped
they loved each other better than Tom's birds, for presently Tom saw,
and we all saw, that considering our Romeo and Juliet _were_ love-birds,
their behavior was far from conveying that idea to any one who studied
them. They were quarrelsome in the extreme, which pleased Tom, who
"liked to see them fight," he said; and as they were always fighting, he
got a great deal of pleasure from Uncle Benjamin's present.

No, Romeo and Juliet gave no impression of love and happiness to any of
us. Juliet was very spiteful, and even when huddled against Romeo for
warmth would suddenly jerk her head round and try to peck his eye out.
But Romeo was always on guard, having mistrusted Juliet from the first
hours of his introduction to her; he was a bird who had seen the world,
and thoroughly understood the character of his mate. Juliet was
untrustworthy and malicious, and Romeo always kept his eye on her--the
eye which she wanted to peck out especially. At feeding-time their
conduct was the worst. We took it in turns to feed the birds, Tom, who
loved them very much, having quite forgotten to feed them after the
first four-and-twenty hours, and sister Maggie, who was always
tender-hearted, took great pains over them, and tried hard to teach them
better manners, especially at meal-times. Alone, each bird was as good
as gold, but it was seldom that Juliet would allow Romeo to take any
food out of a spoon without seizing the advantage of his being off guard
to have a savage peck at him somewhere; and I am sorry to say that Romeo
was almost as bad, and there were times when so many feathers of Juliet
were found at the bottom of the cage, that we were afraid that in some
rash moment of revenge he would pluck her like a goose.

This constant quarrelling and fighting, not to mention hours and days of
incessant screaming, was a source of much anxiety to Maggie, and Bella,
and Charlie, and Tottie, and me. Tom, as I have said before, liked it
all very much, which we were sorry to see; but then Tom is a big boy,
and fond of fighting. He is going to boarding-school next term, where
papa says they will take the nonsense out of him, he hopes. I wonder how
they will get it out, for there is a great deal in him, we all think. I
have asked Tom, but he doesn't know. We told papa and mamma about the
unhappy lives of Romeo and Juliet, and they were very much surprised.
They had always understood that love-birds were most engaging and
amiable creatures; and what unhappy difference of opinion could have led
Juliet to regard Romeo with such complete contempt, or to induce Romeo
to despise Juliet and try to hurt her--just as Juliet availed herself of
every chance to do some mortal injury to Romeo--was a mystery which even
our good, wise parents could not solve.

There came a time when there was great grief to us all. Tom had left the
cage door open one day; the window was open, and Romeo, tired of his
cage, of Juliet's hen-pecking, and of us, took advantage of Tom's
carelessness and flew away to the outer world. We were all very sorry;
even Juliet was very sorry, and sat in one corner of the big cage and
moped, oh! so dreadfully, for the loss of her poor mate. Which mamma
told us was a moral to us little ones to be contented and happy in each
other's company; for no one could tell, not even Juliet, how painful it
was to miss somebody forever to whom one had been unkind, or said or
done harsh things, and what a bitter memory it would leave behind!

We thought so too, and we pitied poor Juliet very much, and were
distressed that she lost her appetite, and that even lump-sugar was
hardly to her taste. Yes, she was fretting for Romeo. There was no one
to love now, or no one to peck; we were not quite certain which regret
was uppermost in Juliet's mind. But we were sure that Juliet took
Romeo's desertion of her very much to heart. And where was Romeo, who,
after all, was our favorite? What had become of him? Had he found
another home--another Juliet, perhaps? papa suggested, or was he
wandering about the world, and being badly treated by other birds? or
coming rapidly to ruin in the society of disreputable sparrows?

We offered a reward for him. Even Tom was distressed at the loss of him.
"He was such a plucky little chap," Tom said; and Tom came home full of
grief that afternoon, because John Simmonds had told him that somebody
else had told him that he, the somebody else, had caught the bird and
made a pie of him, to try how he would taste. Which was a wicked story
of John Simmonds, for the very next day a gentleman in a corduroy suit
splashed with whitewash, and smelling very strongly of paint and putty,
called with Romeo in a little bag, and waited in the hall for the reward
that had been offered. We all ran out to welcome back the truant, and
papa was as glad as any of us, I am sure.

How we kissed and fondled poor Romeo, and what a grand procession of the
family it was into the drawing-room to see the old companions reunited,
and watch the joy of Juliet at the return of the loved one! I remember
the man with the paper cap followed us, as papa had not paid him, in his
excitement, and stood looking over our shoulders, as interested as
ourselves. Juliet fluttered her wings and uttered what we took for a cry
of joyful welcome, and Romeo was sent fluttering into the cage to rejoin
his long-lost mate.

Alas! the meeting was not an affectionate one after all, or some little
mistake had occurred, or Juliet was short-sighted and took Romeo for a
stranger; for Juliet went straight at Romeo, and once more made every
effort to peck his eye out, whilst Romeo, resenting the affront, or
bewildered by emerging from his paper bag to daylight, flew wildly about
the cage, and tried desperately to stretch Juliet a corpse at the bottom
of it. We were aroused and alarmed--we shed many tears. Tottie screamed.

A husky voice behind us said at this juncture: "Ah, that's the worst of
putting two Romeos in one cage, sir. It never answers--one of 'em's sure
to kill the other."

"Two Romeos!" exclaimed papa. "Do you mean to say that Juliet
isn't--isn't a female?"

"Bless your heart, sir, no."

"Good gracious! what a mistake of Uncle Benjamin's, to be sure!"

We have separated Romeo from Juliet now, and there is peace in the house
at last. I am not quite certain there is a moral to this story, unless
it is, "Do not judge by appearances," or proves that people who can not
agree together are much better apart.




SEA-BREEZES.

BESSIE MAYNARD TO HER DOLL.


  BERLIN, _December_, 1880.

Yes, we are really in Europe at last, my Clytie. So much has happened
since I wrote last, that I don't know where to begin; and I shouldn't
have a nidear what I had written about if I didn't keep a "mimete" of my
letters, as papa says, in a little memberandum-book he gave me.

Everything I put down in it he calls an "entry." Funny to have a
book full of _entries_, isn't it? Well, this is the last one;
"Steamer--seasick--got over it--fun with R. and N.--dance on deck--will
write next about Captain's birthday, etsetterer."

But now the birthday seems ages ago, and all that I can say about it is
that the Captain was forty-five years old and we had a neligant time,
with all sorts of things for dinner, and a birthday cake as big as a
flower bed, with forty-five colored tapers, and every single slice had
one or more presents in it, so we all got something. The Captain found
in his piece a gold ring and a china Cupid, and a donkey with great long
ears and his mouth wide open. Mamma had a stone cigar, and papa a
_thimble_; and in my slice was the teentiest tontiest china doll not
more than half an inch long. I keep her in a cradle made of a pecan-nut,
and she's the cunningest child you ever saw. I've named her "Wee Tot,"
for the little girl who writes sometimes in my YOUNG PEOPLE's
Post-office Box.

A week after the birthday we derived at Bremen, and I was awfully sorry
to leave the steamer, for it seemed almost like home. We had to say
good-by to everybody, and it was real sad.

Papa, mamma, and I came away by ourselves, Cousin Frank and Cousin
Carrie (and oh, Clytie, she is just _perfeckly eligant_!) went some
other roundabout way from Bremen, and the Peytons are going to Paris
first; but by-and-by our party will come together again, and we shall
proberly live in the same house, or at least in the same place, for the
winter.

_We_ are at Aunt Mary's now. She lives here in Berlin, and is mamma's
auntie as well as mine. She _used_ to live in Cambridge when she was a
little girl, and was dear great-grandma's truly baby once! I never saw
her before, but I love her already. Uncle Max has gray hair, and wears
speckertles, and carries a cane, and so I suppose he's _old_, but he
plays with us children, and you can't help laughing just to hear _him_
laugh, and he sings funny songs to us, and he doesn't _seem_ any older
than Randolph. He keeps us having a good time from morning till night;
and guess how many children there are. But you never _could_ guess.
There's _eight_ right here in the house, and all of them belong to Uncle
Max and Aunt Mary.

Gretchen and Wilhelm are quite grown up, but Ilsie wears short dresses,
and her hair in two long braids; Lisbet isn't any taller than I; Karl is
eight years old, Fritz is six, and cunning little Max and Marie are
three-year-old twins.

The nursery is the jolliest room in the house. The floor is bare, and
polished like glass. The stove reaches almost to the ceiling, and is
made of white porcelain covered all over with the prettiest little baby
figures. They are raised 'way up, you know, and their arras are as round
and fat as a real doll's. Some of them are playing tag, some are in
swings or wading in brooks, and all round the top of the stove is a row
of little angels. Wouldn't you like to see a stove like that? In the
bay-window there are lots of plants, and three cages full of
canary-birds, besides another cage, 'most as big as a bureau, for the
parrot. He is gray, with red tips to his wings, and a green collar round
his neck, and he calls all the children's names, and says "Guten
Morgen," "Gute Nacht," "Schlafe wohl," "Wie geht's" (Good-morning,
Good-night, Sleep well, How do you do?), and he sings and whistles, and
is just as happy as the rest of the family.

And now tell me, was Jack's nose really broken, or only cracked, as we
hoped when I came away, and did the glue-liniment do him any good? I
_long_ to know if poor little Mopsy can use her arm yet, or does she
still wear it in a sling? Do they all mind you, Clytie, and is Leonora
getting over her vain and silly ways? Don't fail to suppress upon her
that "handsome _is_ that handsome _does_," and of all things, don't
allow her to be imperent to the others.

Give my love to George Washington and Lafayette, and tell them that of
all the soldier-dolls on parade in the shops here (and there are whole
regiments of them), I haven't seen one I would change for them. Papa
says, "In military bearing they are equal to any we find here," and I
agree with him. It is a great compliment, too, for Germany is full of
soldiers.

Lisbet is calling me to go with her in the little goat-phaeton for a
drive in the park. The next time I write I will tell you about this
cunning little phaeton.

Gute Nacht--traeume suess, as they say here. It means just what I say to
you at home, Good-night and pleasant dreams.

  Your loving mamma,
  BESSIE MAYNARD.

P.S.--Please tell Cousin Fanny, who reads my letters to you, that I do
wish she would be your meanuensis, and write to me for you. If she looks
close in your eyes, she can see what you will want to say, even if you
do not speak, and a letter from you would be _such_ a comfort to your
anxious mamma.




A SAILOR'S WIFE.


There have been heroines as well as heroes on the sea, and of these Mrs.
Annie Wilson is certainly one. When she was fourteen years of age, she
married the captain of a vessel sailing from Boston, and for seven years
accompanied him on his voyages around the world, without accident.

But in 1872 the ship encountered a terrible storm off the banks of
Newfoundland. The captain was knocked down and his shoulder was broken
by the fall of one of the masts. The first mate and several of the crew
were also disabled, and the second mate was so frightened that he could
not give any orders. The captain was carried down, lashed on a door,
into the cabin; and when his wife saw him rendered helpless in this way,
instead of yielding to useless lamentations, she only thought of what
she could do to supply his place. She rushed on deck, and called the men
around her.

"Boys, our lives are in danger," she said; "but stick to me, and do what
I tell you. I'll take you into port all right."

She set them to work to clear away the wreck; they manned the pumps; and
when the gale had subsided a little, they rigged up a jury-mast, under
their new captain's orders, set sail again, and in twenty-one days the
ship was safely anchored at St. Thomas.

After the necessary repairs had been made there, and as her husband was
still quite helpless, the brave woman worked the ship to Liverpool, and
made the voyage in thirty days. After this, she settled down in New
York, and for seven years has supported her crippled husband and her
child by working as a clerk in a dry-goods store in this city.

A few months ago her husband died, and Secretary Sherman has appointed
her to the post of inspectress in the New York Custom-house.




[Begun in Harper's YOUNG PEOPLE No. 66, February 1.]

PHIL'S FAIRIES.

BY MRS. W. J. HAYS,

AUTHOR OF "PRINCESS IDLEWAYS," ETC.

CHAPTER IV.

A PROMISE OF BETTER TIMES.


When Phil was alone again, he waited impatiently for the long twilight
to end in darkness, and the stars to come out. It seemed a very long
time. Once in a while a faint murmur came from his harp, but it was a
mere breathing of sound, and he turned restlessly in his chair. Then he
closed his eyes and waited again, and his waiting was rewarded by a
small voice in his ear whispering,

"Here we are, here we are."

"Oh," said Phil, "I thought you never would come again."

[Illustration: PHIL'S DREAM.]

"Tut, tut, child, you must not be so doubtful," said the little voice
again, and the starry coronet gleamed in his eyes.

"I have brought you some sweet odors of wild flowers, and spicy breath
of pine and hemlock, for I thought you needed a tonic."

Phil smelled something exquisite as she spoke, but all he said was,

"What is a tonic?"

"Something the doctors give when children are pale and thin, and do not
have enough fresh air. I don't pretend to know what it means, but I
often go to see sick children in hospitals, and so I hear about such
things."

"Hark! is that my wind harp?--why, it sounds like water dropping and
gurgling over stones."

"It is the song of a mountain brook that my friends are singing as they
dance over your harp. Look!"

Phil looked, and saw the flock of fairies like white butterflies
swarming again over his harp, and heard the soft sweet singing which
kept time to their steps.

"Oh, how beautiful! how beautiful!" said Phil.

"When you hear a brook singing, you must remember us," said the fairy.

"Indeed I will; but I am afraid I shall never hear one: only the hoarse
cries of the street and the rumbling of wagons come to me here."

"Ah, better times are coming; then you will not need us."

Phil lay still in his chair, listening intently; the white figures
glanced in shadowy indistinctness across the window, only the starry ray
from each little brow lighting their dance. They swept up and down, and
swayed like flowers in a breeze, and still the little clear notes of
their song fell like dripping water in cool cascades. Now it flowed
smoothly and softly, again it seemed to dash and foam among pebbly
nooks.

"Does it rest you? Are you better?" asked the one little fairy who did
all the talking.

"Oh, so much!" said Phil.

After a while the song stopped, and the fairies drew all together in a
cluster, and were quite still.

"What does that mean?" asked Phil.

"They are disturbed; there is a storm coming. We shall have to return."

"I am so sorry! I wanted to know more about you, and to see what you
wear."

"Mortals must not approach us too nearly. We may draw near to you. See,
I will stand before you."

"You seem to be all moon-shine," said Phil.

"Yes," said the fairy, laughing merrily; "these robes of ours are of
mountain mist, spangled with star-dust so fine that it makes us only
glisten. We have to wear the lightest sort of fabric, so that we are not
hindered in our long flights."

"Do you know flower fairies?"

"Yes; but we are of a very different race. I suppose you thought we
dressed in rose leaves and rode on bumble-bees; but we do not; we are
more--now for a long word--more ethereal." And again the fairy laughed.

"Ether means air," said Phil, quite proudly. "Do you know any fairy
stories?" he asked.

"Yes; shall I tell you one next time I come?"

"Oh do, please. So you _will_ come again."

"Yes, if I can. Now I must go. I thought I heard distant thunder. We
must fly so fast!--so fast! Good-by, good-by."

There was a long rumbling of thunder far off in the distance, and a
cooler air in the hot, close room. Phil lay and dreamed, wondering how
long it took the wind fairies to reach their home. Then the sweet spicy
odors came to him again, and he lifted the languid flowers Miss Schuyler
had brought him, and put them in his glass of water.

He dreamed of fair green fields and meadows, of silent lakes bordered
with rushes, out of which sprang wild fowl slowly flapping their broad
wings; of forests thick and dark, where on fallen trees the green moss
had grown in velvet softness; of mountains lifting their purple tops
into the fleecy clouds, and of long shady country roads winding in and
out and about the hills; of lanes bordered with blackberry bushes and
sumac, clematis and wild rose; of dewy nooks full of ferns; of the songs
of birds and the chirp of insects; and it seemed to him that he must put
some of all this beauty into some shape of his own creation--picture or
poem, song or speech; and then came a sudden sharp twinge of pain, and
the brightness faded, and the room was dark, and he was hungry, and only
poor little Phil, sick and sad and weary and poor.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




PINAFORE RHYMES.


[Illustration]

  Here is a chorus
    Of boys and girls,
  Wee little darlings,
    Dear little pearls.
  Hear their sweet voices,
    Like tinkling chimes,
  Merrily singing
    Pinafore rhymes.

  Mothers and sisters,
    Cousins and aunts,
  Listen delighted
    To their little chants.
  Here they are printed,
    So you may see
  What they are singing
    So merrily.

[Illustration]

  Annie, Mary, and Kate,
  Each busy with pencil and slate,
    Three pretty pictures are making;
    Just see the pains they are taking,
  So eager, and still, and sedate!

  But now it is growing quite late,
  They put away pencil and slate;
    And because they've been good in their classes,
    They get some nice bread and molasses,
  And swing on the garden gate.

[Illustration]

  Your servant, madam! I must say
  The bathing's very bad to-day;
  The water never was so wet,
  And colder, too, than ever yet;
  I'm sure 'tis down to five degrees,
  And I'm afraid you'd surely freeze.
  A shark and sword-fish, too, have come,
  And made themselves too much at home;
  And just now, on the bath-house stair,
  A water-witch sat combing her hair.
  You can try it, madam, if you please,
  But if they don't eat you up, you'll freeze.

[Illustration]

  Cuckoo!
  Where are you?
  I've been hunting all about,
  And I wish you would come out!
  Have you hid in the big fire-place,
  Or the clock, or the porcelain vase,
  Or flown to the top of the house,
  Or crawled into his hole with the mouse?
  It's awful mean to hide away,
  When I want you to go out and play!

  Boo! here I am, my little sis;
  Now give me the sweetest, nicest kiss!

[Illustration]

  Oh, such a funny dream I had when I was fast asleep;
  I saw a lot of baby tots out of their cradles leap;
  They threw away their rattles and their little ivory rings,
  And joined their little hands to dance, the darling little things!

  "Hurrah! hurrah!" they gayly sang; "we're on a jolly strike;
  The nurse's rule is over now, and we do what we like;
  We'll go to bed just when we please, and sit up at the table,
  And eat whatever old folks do, as long as we are able.

  "And if the nurses fret and scold, we'll put them all to bed,
  And tell them not to make a noise, as they have often said;
  They'll be afraid of getting whipped, and will not dare to peep."
  And that's the funny dream I had when I was fast asleep.




[Illustration: OUR POST-OFFICE BOX.]


  EUREKA, NEVADA.

     There are lots of silver mines near here. One day we went into the
     tunnel in Uncle Dick's mine. We all had candles--oh, it was so
     dark!--and I got some pretty specimens my own self. We rode almost
     fifty miles that same day, and had our dinner on the grass, near
     some springs. I thought it was ever so nice.

      There are furnaces here where the silver, gold, and lead are
      "cooked" out of the ore. Papa sometimes takes us there, and I
      always want to stay longer, although the noise of the machinery
      almost makes my head crazy.

      We used to have some periwinkles and some bugs in a glass jar, and
      lovely water-cresses growing, too. Mamma put the jar under the
      faucet every morning, and let the water run slowly to freshen it
      without disturbing "the family." The periwinkles ate the cress,
      and the bugs ate each other, until there was only one left; then
      he began to dine on the periwinkles; so we planted them all out in
      the ditch.

      I am a little boy five years old, and my mamma wrote this for me.
      Brother and I take YOUNG PEOPLE. We save them all, and we think
      everything of them.

  GEORGIE B. C.

       *       *       *       *       *

  CROSS VILLAGE, MICHIGAN.

     I love _Young People_ very much. We live near old Fort Mackinac,
     where the Indians once played a game of ball to mislead the white
     men, and then surprised and took the fort, killing nearly all the
     troops.

      There are many Indians living here now. They are mostly of the
      Ottawa tribe. We live in an old Indian "garden." I have found an
      ancient tomahawk, a hoe, and a ladle.

      I am seven years old, and I can read in the Fourth Reader.

  E. CLAIR S.

       *       *       *       *       *

  DOUGLAS CITY, CALIFORNIA.

     I live up in the mountains of Northern California, in Trinity
     County. Although this place is called a city, it is only a small
     town. There are a great many Portuguese families living here, but
     only a few Americans.

      I go to school eight months in the year. Last year I attended
      school at Honolulu, Sandwich Islands. I enjoyed my stay there very
      much. I lived with my uncle. I was introduced to King Kalakaua and
      Queen Kapiolani, and I had a good opportunity of seeing the
      manners and customs of the people.

  SADIE T.

       *       *       *       *       *

  PORTLAND, OREGON.

     We think there is no paper that can excel YOUNG PEOPLE. There are
     seven of us children. We have a few curiosities. We have two vases
     made of lava from Herculaneum.

      There were two British barks lost on the coast here.

      I am nine years old, and am a constant reader of YOUNG PEOPLE.

  HENRY BISMARCK. T.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BALTIMORE, MARYLAND.

     We boys are having splendid coasting here. In the park near my home
     great numbers of boys and girls coast on the hills, and in many of
     the streets the boys coast four or five blocks without stopping.

      I am going to have two very small alligators, which I can handle
      and play with, and I have a pet lizard, which I have kept in a
      glass globe for a year.

  COLEMAN C. A.

       *       *       *       *       *

  NACOOCHEE, GEORGIA.

     I have read every story, letter, and advertisement in YOUNG PEOPLE
     ever since it was published. I think it is the best paper printed
     for young folks. The exchange department is the grandest of all. I
     commenced with a few Indian arrow-heads, and now I have a good
     collection of minerals, shells, and curiosities of various kinds,
     and am constantly receiving letters from new exchanges. The
     "wiggles," too, are very interesting. There is nothing that gives
     me so much pleasure as making "wiggles" or packing boxes of
     curiosities to send off.

      Many good wishes to YOUNG PEOPLE, and may it ever be as bright and
      beautiful as now!

  JOHN R. G.

       *       *       *       *       *

  FACTORY POINT, VERMONT.

     I wrote a letter to YOUNG PEOPLE a little while ago, when I was at
     grandpa's. My papa came after me, but I am very lonely now, for my
     little playmate, my dear little sister Annie, died of diphtheria
     while I was gone. I used to read the stories in YOUNG PEOPLE to
     her. I have a little dog, and I used to play lots with him, but I
     do not feel like playing any more.

  CHARLIE C.

       *       *       *       *       *

  CARROLL, OHIO.

     I read all the letters in the Post-office Box every week with so
     much pleasure that I can hardly wait till my paper comes. Mamma
     gave it to me for a Christmas present.

      My papa is agent at Crow Agency, Montana, and mamma and my brother
      and sister are there with him. I live with my uncle, and I go to
      school every day. Last spring papa was here, and he brought six
      Indians with him. They were very large Indians. One of them
      weighed two hundred and sixty-five pounds, and was over six feet
      tall.

  DANIEL M. K.

       *       *       *       *       *

  GETTYSBURG, PENNSYLVANIA.

     We have had sleighing here for a long time, and first-rate
     coasting. All the hills around the town are crowded every night,
     and we coast by torch-light. I have two good sleds of my own.

  DAVIE B.

       *       *       *       *       *

  NYACK-ON-THE-HUDSON, NEW YORK.

     I live in the country, and I have very nice times. There has been
     skating on the Hudson River almost all winter. We have very fine
     hills here. I have a pair of bobs. As many as seven boys can get on
     it, and it goes very fast indeed. I hope it will snow more, and
     make the coasting better.

  WILLIE G.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I have been taking YOUNG PEOPLE for a year, and I think it is the
     best paper ever published.

      I have a pet monkey named Jacko. He is up to all sorts of tricks.
      He will put wood on the fire, and put on the tea-kettle.

      I would like to exchange minerals, for ocean curiosities.

      The snow here is six feet deep.

  E. G. KELLY,
  816 East Eighth Street, Leadville, Colorado.

       *       *       *       *       *

  FORT WAYNE, INDIANA, _January_ 30, 1881.

     I wish to inform my correspondents that I have no more curiosities
     to exchange at present. I have sent for some more, but it will be
     some time before I get them.

  WILLIAM C. MCCONNELL.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I was born on the Island of Curacao, in the Dutch West Indies, and
     I can get many stamps from there and from the United States of
     Colombia, which I would like to exchange for others with readers of
     YOUNG PEOPLE in the United States or Canada.

  J. DESOLA,
  1051 Lexington Avenue, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *

  WASHINGTON COURT-HOUSE, OHIO.

     I have had over twenty applications for my arrow-head, and could
     only answer one. If I can get any more arrow-heads, I will send
     word to my correspondents.

  EMMER EDWARDS.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I have just begun a collection of stones, and have only a very few.
     I have three white flints, which I thought were petrified birds'
     eggs at first, which I would like to exchange for ocean
     curiosities. I expect to receive some better flints in a few weeks.
     I am nine years old.

  BERTHA BOOTH,
  Anamosa, Jones County, Iowa.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I want to tell YOUNG PEOPLE what a pleasant winter we are having in
     the Sierra Nevada Mountains, three thousand feet above the sea. We
     have no snow. I found willow "pussies" on the 18th of January, and
     sister Bell found some spring flowers two days later.

      Our dog Rover went hunting, and came home with his nose full of
      porcupine quills. Papa had a hard time pulling them out, it hurt
      Rover so badly.

      I do not go to school in the winter. I study at home. I study
      language lessons, arithmetic, botany, spelling, and geography. I
      am eight years old. I want to take YOUNG PEOPLE always.

      I will exchange minerals from the mines, for shells or any other
      curiosities, with any readers of the Post-office Box.

  LOU R. KEEP, Smiths Hill,
  East Branch of Feather River, California.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I would like to exchange stamps of the United States Treasury and
     State Departments, postmarks, and Canadian and foreign postage
     stamps, for rare stamps and postmarks, or for specimens of ores,
     minerals, or shells. Correspondents will please label specimens.

      I am ten years old.

  WILLIE M. BLOSS,
  U. S. Consulate-General, Montreal, Canada.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I would like to exchange a pair of new nickle-plated club skates,
     which I do not need, as I have another pair, for any other similar
     article.

  W. J. H.,
  343 Fifth Avenue, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *

  LUCKNOW, _November_ 30, 1880.

     MY DEAR YOUNG PEOPLE,--When I last wrote to you, it was in the
     midst of the hot season; now it is a little cooler, but not much,
     and we have been through dreadful times since then. Though I don't
     often write to the Post-office Box, I love dearly to read all the
     letters the children send to it.

      Our baby wasn't very well in the dreadful hot weather, and so
      mamma and I had to take him to the hills, where it is cool and
      nice. Of course we took his nurse and the khansaman (housekeeper)
      too; the rest of the help we get there, because we keep house just
      the same as here. Papa couldn't go, because the paper has to be
      printed, if it is hot, and they can't get it ready without him, so
      we went alone to Naina Tal. Mamma says Tal means lake, and Naina
      is the name of a goddess that people thought (in the old days, you
      know, when they had goddesses) presided over the lake.

      All through the rainy season, which begins the last of July, it
      had rained much more than usual; and one night the men around were
      up all night, turning the course of a stream that had swollen so
      they were afraid it would carry away some of the houses. So mamma
      was a little afraid to stay, and we were going home, and had
      engaged our dandies (a little like a kind of chair) and men to
      carry them, and were going to start the next Tuesday. It began to
      rain Thursday afternoon. It was the 16th of September, I remember,
      because baby was a year old that very day, and he had a new dress
      and lots of toys, and was just as cunning as he could be. But it
      rained hard all night, and the next day it was so dark mamma had
      to sit close to the window to see to write to papa. I never saw it
      rain so hard right straight along in my life, and I asked mamma if
      she didn't think it must look like the flood, and she said,
      Perhaps. After a while I went to bed and to sleep; but some time
      in the night mamma came and woke us all up, and said the room was
      filling with water. She dressed me, and nurse dressed baby; then
      the other people in the house came in, and mamma was so scared she
      didn't know what she was doing, and rolled up all her clothes and
      shoes and stockings in the bedding. The windows and doors were
      burst in, and we had to try to get somewhere, but even mamma
      didn't know where to go. But one of the men carried me, and nurse
      took baby; and the stones hurt poor mamma's bare feet so that two
      of the jhampanis carried her, and in the pouring rain we went to
      find Mr. Buck's house. We finally reached there, and had hardly
      dried ourselves before it was light, and the men thought that
      house would go too; so we all made another trip, this time to the
      chapel, and still it rained as hard as it could pour. I told
      mother I really thought it was another flood, and we'd better try
      to get up higher. But she said the higher we went, the worse it
      would be; if we could only get off this dreadful hill, we might be
      safe. Then I said again something about the flood, for I couldn't
      get it out of my head, it all looked so like the picture in the
      big Bible--people going about wringing their hands, and trying to
      get somewhere safe, men carrying children, half-dressed women, and
      all the while the rain pouring down as if it never would stop.
      Mamma stood stock-still, and took hold of me. "I tell you, child,"
      she said, "God has promised--_promised_, do you hear?--never to
      drown the world again." So I said no more, and really felt better;
      for if everybody was not drowned, there might be a chance for us.
      We stood on the chapel veranda watching Mr. Cheney and Mr. Fleming
      trying to turn the course of one stream away from Mr. Cheney's
      house, when a great mass of stones, sand, and water took them off
      their feet quick as a flash. Mr. Cheney caught hold of the low
      roof of his house, and Mr. Fleming caught him, and they were saved
      from being carried over the side of the hill. We had hardly time
      to catch our breath, and not time to say a word, when the trees
      began to tremble, and loose rocks to shake, and in another minute
      the whole hill-side rushed past us, and the hotel, assembly-rooms,
      shops, and stores were carried right into Naina Tal. More than one
      hundred and fifty people were carried with them--some that we
      knew, and had laughed and talked with only yesterday--without time
      for one word to anybody, rushed straight to death. Oh, it was
      terrible! Our fence was taken, too, and we could not stop to
      think, for we had to plan to go somewhere. I never cried one word.
      I only opened my eyes wider, and looked at mamma. She was just as
      pale as anything, and I heard her say, "I _can't_--I _can't_ die
      this way!" I never thought; I only kept saying to myself, "God
      won't let there be a flood. He won't let it." Then Mr. Cheney came
      and said we must go. So we started down the Mall. Mamma took hold
      of my hand, but finally one of the men snatched me up and carried
      me; and when we came to a broad stream, I heard mamma say, "Jat
      Ram" (he is one of our jhampanis that carry us about the hill),
      "give me your hand." "Get on my back, Mem Sahib," he said; and
      mamma was in too much of a hurry to think, and hung on to him any
      way. I wanted to laugh, she looked so funny; but somehow there
      wasn't any laugh in me. Finally we came to a house, and went in;
      it was a Mr. Kelley's. We were dreadful tired--nothing to eat, and
      up all night. The men thought we were as safe there as anywhere we
      could get, so we dried ourselves. Pretty soon--about eight--we had
      dinner. We were so faint we would have eaten, I think, if the rain
      had carried us away the next minute.

      It did not stop raining till Sunday night, and the next Thursday
      we started for home. Some of the bridges were gone, but we crossed
      over in boats, and Saturday morning got to Lucknow.

      Wasn't papa glad to see us! The Lal Bagh mission girls had been in
      and trimmed the house to welcome us, and we went over to the
      boarding-school to breakfast. Papa said "that it just poured
      sixty-six hours--almost three days--and in that time thirty-three
      inches of rain fell--almost three feet." Then he showed me on the
      wall how high that would be; and you just measure yourself, and
      you'll see such a lot of water washing down a mountain-side must
      do something.

      But I've been writing too long, so good-by.

  JENNIE ANDERSON.

     P.S.--Mamma says I ought to say, as nearly as they know now, forty
     white people and one hundred and fifty natives were killed.

       *       *       *       *       *

     We would like to exchange beryl, mica crystals, and garnets from
     Connecticut, or shells, coral, and sea-beans from Florida or
     California, for fine specimens of minerals, particularly from Lake
     Superior or Northern New York. Our collection is a good one, and
     we would like good exchanges. We have also some curiosities, and
     could arrange exchanges for several different things.

  WILLIE R. CORSON and CHARLES E. BRAINARD,
  137 Washington Street, Hartford, Conn.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following exchanges are also desired by correspondents:

     Sea-beach pebbles from New Jersey, or stamps, for ocean
     curiosities, minerals, foreign postage stamps, or anything suitable
     for a museum; or a New Zealand stamp and five kinds of English
     stamps, for an Indian arrow-head.

  CLARENCE R. WILLIAMS, 4811 Hancock Street,
  Germantown, Philadelphia, Penn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postmarks or stamps, for birds' eggs, Indian arrow-heads, or
     relics. Correspondents will please label all specimens distinctly.

  ERNEST OSBORNE,
  761 De Kalb Avenue, Brooklyn, L. I.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Stamps.

  WINTHROP VAUGHAN,
  P. O. Box 432, Brookline, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

     An ounce of sand or a stone from Ohio, for the same from any other
     State.

  J. PUJOLS,
  16 New Street, Cleveland, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postmarks and stamps, for stamps. Fifteen postmarks, for one stamp.

  GEORGE N. PRENTISS,
  Watertown, Wisconsin.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Birds' eggs.

  WINDSOR F. WHITE,
  1581 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postage stamps.

  S. WEATHERBE,
  Glass Lock Box 107, Charlottetown,
  Prince Edward Island, Canada.

       *       *       *       *       *

     A United States copper cent of 1802, for any ocean curiosity.

  FRANK P. HUESTED,
  183 Madison Avenue, Albany, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

     An opossum to exchange.

  JOE BISSELL,
  P. O. Box 957, Pittsburgh, Penn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postage stamps.

  EDWIN S. KETCHUM,
  Care of Ketchum Wagon Company,
  Marshalltown, Iowa.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Mexican stamps and rare specimens of Mexican shells, for rare
     stamps from Ecuador, Peru, Guatemala, Finland, Iceland, or
     Philippine Islands.

  HARRY L. BRIGGS,
  48 Chester Park, Boston, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postage stamps.

  G. M. WOODCOCK,
  Care of William H. Lyon & Co.,
  483 and 485 Broadway, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postmarks.

  K. MCKENSIE,
  12 Garden Street, Cambridge, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Cocoons of the silk-worm, for birds' eggs.

  NELLIE BRAINARD,
  265 Broad Street, Newark, N. J.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Shells, alligators' teeth, ocean curiosities, and stamps, for rare
     stamps, Indian relics, or minerals.

  GEORGE W. MCELHOSE,
  24 Brill Street, Newark, N. J.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postmarks.

  W. H. CHAPMAN,
  Lock Box 40, Penn Yan, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postage stamps.

  FRED L. CAMP,
  188 Lefferts Place, Brooklyn, L. I.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Flints, for birds' eggs or postage stamps.

  ELIJAH G. B.,
  522 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Stamps, for coins or eggs. Correspondents will please label the
     eggs.

  CHARLES C. KALBFLEISCH,
  8 West Forty-ninth Street, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Five birds' eggs, for twenty-five foreign postage stamps. No
     duplicates.

  TRUMAN LEWIS,
  P. O. Box 197, Waterbury, Conn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postage stamps, for stamps or relics.

  EZRA C. HARWOOD,
  68 West Broadway, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Revenue stamps and postmarks, for stamps and minerals.

  E. H. SMITH,
  Care of E. I. Smith, Corner of Woodward and
  Jefferson Avenues, Detroit, Mich.

       *       *       *       *       *

     A stone from Illinois, for one from any other State.

  CHARLIE F. HAVEN,
  New Lenox, Will County, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *

     California sea-weeds, acorn barnacles from the sea, some curious
     egg cases of a shell-fish, two flint arrow-heads, or some
     interesting objects for a microscope, for postage stamps from Asia,
     Africa, South and Central America, Mexico, the West Indies, or
     United States twelve, fifteen, or thirty cent, or any department
     stamps.

  HUMPHREY NOYES,
  Community, Madison County, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

     A three-cent Canadian stamp, for one from Cuba; or an Austrian
     stamp, for one from Italy.

  JAMES P. HOLDRIDGE,
  69 South Hamilton Street, Poughkeepsie, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

     A collection of California sea-weeds, for specimens of wood from
     different States, or for United States minor coins.

  F. M. ELLIOT,
  Evanston, Cook County, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. P. J.--The Yellowstone River flows in a northerly direction out of
Yellowstone Lake, and after a course of about 1300 miles, during which
it descends about 7000 feet, it reaches the Missouri. The lake is one of
the most beautiful sheets of water in the world, twenty-two miles in
length, and from twelve to fifteen in breadth. Its elevation above the
level of the sea is 7788 feet, and its greatest depth is 300 feet. Only
four other lakes are known to have a greater elevation--lakes Titicaca
and Uros, in Peru and Bolivia, which are respectively 12,874 and 12,359
feet above the level of the sea, and lakes Manasarowar and Rakas-Tal, in
Tibet, which lie at the great height of 15,000 feet. The Upper and Lower
Falls of the Yellowstone are wonderfully beautiful. They are not more
than a quarter of a mile apart. Before reaching the first fall the river
flows through a grassy valley with a calm, steady current, until it
plunges over a ledge 140 feet in height. The second fall is more than
350 feet high. Over this precipice the river plunges in snow-white foam
and spray. From the foot of the falls rises a dense and heavy mist, and
no one can approach within several hundred yards without being drenched
to the skin. On the west side the wall of rock is covered to the height
of about 300 feet with a dense carpet of mosses, grasses, and other
vegetation, of the most vivid green. There is nowhere in the world a
more beautiful scene than that which is presented by this remarkable
fall, although Niagara is more impressive on account of the volume of
water which pours over the precipice.

       *       *       *       *       *

MARY B.--Among the most celebrated poems of Robert Burns are "Tam o'
Shanter" (about which an article was printed in the Post-office Box in
No. 56), "The Cotter's Saturday Night," "To a Mouse," "Highland Mary,"
"John Anderson," "To a Mountain Daisy," "The Twa Dogs," "The Banks o'
Doon," "Mary Morison," "Bruce's Address," "John Barleycorn," and "For a'
That, and a' That." The best piece for speaking is "Bruce's Address,"
which can be found in almost every collection of poetry.

       *       *       *       *       *

MARGARETTA B.--The fifteen decisive battles of the world to which Mr.
Herbert Spencer referred are probably those which are described in a
volume bearing that title, written by Mr. E. S. Creasy, of England, and
published in this country by Harper & Brothers. They are the battle of
Marathon, the defeat of the Athenians at Syracuse (B.C. 413), the battle
of Arbela, the battle of the Metaurus, the victory of Arminius over the
Roman Legions under Varus, the battle of Chalons, the battle of Tours,
the battle of Hastings, Joan of Arc's victory over the English at
Orleans, the defeat of the Spanish Armada, the battle of Blenheim, the
battle of Pultowa, victory of the Americans over Burgoyne at Saratoga,
the battle of Valmy, and Waterloo. These are called "decisive" battles
because, in the words of the historian Hallam, "a contrary event would
have essentially varied the drama of the world in all its subsequent
scenes."

       *       *       *       *       *

FREDDIE L. F.--Directions for making an AEolian harp were given in the
Post-office Box of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE No. 23, Vol. I.

       *       *       *       *       *

S. S.--The rare issues of United States cents are of 1799, 1793, 1804,
1809, 1811, 1795, 1796, 1808, 1805, and 1823. The above dates are rare
in the order given.

Many others are scarce; in fact, all before 1816, if in good condition,
are worth much more than their face value. Collectors should remember
that the value of all rare coins depends upon condition. A much-rubbed
specimen of a cent of 1799 might be dear at one dollar, while an
uncirculated cent of that date would readily find a market at thirty
dollars.

       *       *       *       *       *

READER OF "YOUNG PEOPLE."--The postage stamps exchanged by our young
correspondents are, as a rule, cancelled stamps cut from letters.

       *       *       *       *       *

Correct answers to puzzles have been sent by Walter Atcheson, May F. B.,
Bessie Comstock, Robson D. Caldwell, R. O. Chester, Mary E. DeWitt,
Carrie Edwards, Fannie Edwards, Jesse S. Godine, William and Isabel
Harris, Bessie R. Howell, Ralph B. Larkin, Thomas Lunham, Isobel L.
Jacob, "Little Goosey," H. P. Meikleham, O. A. Mueller, Percy McDermott,
Mary B. Nesmith, Maggie Osborne, William Olfenbuttel, Augusta Low Parke,
Will H. Rogers, Will Rochester, Carrie Sinnamon, James Shriver, "Starry
Flag," Nellie S., George Schilling, E. C. T., T. P. Tregnor, Woodville
Wrenshall, Chester Maxwell White, Willie F. Woolard, Lily, Charles, and
Fred W.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUZZLES FROM YOUNG CONTRIBUTORS.

No. 1.

HALF-SQUARE.

A country in Europe. To separate. Practical skill. A pronoun. A letter.

  PERCY.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 2.

ENIGMA.

  In little, not in grand.
  In soil, not in land.
  In going, not in come.
  In water, not in rum.
  In grain, not in hay.
  The whole a beast of prey.

  MARTIE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 3.

ZIGZAGS--(TO BOLUS).

  1  *  *  *  *
  *  2  *  *  *
  *  *  3  *  *
  *  *  *  4  *
  *  *  *  *  5
  *  *  *  6  *
  *  *  7  *  *
  *  8  *  *  *
  9  *  *  *  *
  * 10  *  *  *
  *  * 11  *  *
  *  *  * 12  *
  *  *  *  * 13

Across.--1. A bird. 2. Frolic. 3. A bird. 4. Polite. 5. To exhaust. 6.
Refuse. 7. To allude. 8. A hard stone. 9. A fertile spot. 10. A weapon.
11. Caprice. 12. Scanty. 13. Rust.

Zigzags.--Something many readers of Young People will soon find.

  OWLET.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 4.

DIAMOND--(_To our Young Contributors_).

A letter. Equal value. A small surface. A universal remedy. A confused
medley. To regain. Doctrine. A fluid. A letter.

  BOLUS.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 5.

Charade--(_To Zelotes_).

  As long as we retain our breath
  My first is with us until death;
  But none amongst us--no, not one--
  May keep it till to-morrow's sun.

  My second, ever speeding fast,
  The same in future as in past;
  Forever onward still it goes,
  And with it brings both joys and woes.

  During my whole let's strive each day
  Some worthy action to display;
  And always deal with one another
  As faithful friend and loving brother.

  RIP VAN WINKLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANSWERS TO PUZZLES IN No. 66.

No. 1.

  C H E T I M A C H E S
    A M S T E R D A M
      C O N C H O S
        T O K I O
          U L M
            E
          I N N
        T I B E R
      A U G U S T A
    R I O G R A N D E
  R E S T I G O U C H E

No. 2.

Mouse.

No. 3.

1. Hippopotamus. 2. Earwig. 3. Field-fare. 4. Vampire.

No. 4.

  O P A L   E T T A
  P I N E   T E A R
  A N N A   T A K E
  L E A D   A R E S

No. 5.

Charity.




HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE.


SINGLE COPIES, 4 cents; ONE SUBSCRIPTION, one year, $1.50; FIVE
SUBSCRIPTIONS, one year, $7.00--_payable in advance, postage free_.

The Volumes of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE commence with the first Number in
November of each year.

Subscriptions may begin with any Number. When no time is specified, it
will be understood that the subscriber desires to commence with the
Number issued after the receipt of the order.

Remittances should be made by POST-OFFICE MONEY-ORDER OR DRAFT, to avoid
risk of loss.

  HARPER & BROTHERS,
  Franklin Square, N. Y.




[Illustration]

THE GAME OF KANGAROO.

BY FRANK BELLEW.


This is an entirely new game, invented and designed especially for
HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, and we hope our readers will enjoy playing it.
The game can be played by two or more persons; and if convenient, they
should have a marker, or umpire, whose decision is in all cases final.

In the first place, each player should provide himself with a small
strip of India rubber of about one or two inches in length; those
elastic bands which are sold at every stationery store are the thing's
to use; one of these cut in two will make an excellent pair of
Kangaroos. Now if you twist one of these pieces of rubber up like a
cord, and roll it into a kind of ball, and then place it on the table,
it will immediately give a spring (that is to say, it will nine times
out of ten), and sometimes a second spring, and then it will begin to
squirm and roll over, until finally it stops. This piece of rubber is
called the Kangaroo. The players can make their Kangaroos of any length
they like, so that they be of the same thickness. Indeed, they may be of
any size or form the players see fit, provided they all agree on the
matter.

The way the game is played is this. You roll up your Kangaroo, and when
you are ready, you place it on the black spot in the centre of the Pen,
and as you let go you cry "Tip!" Then your Kangaroo jumps. If he does
not jump out of the Pen, you lose 5. If he jumps into any of the spaces
marked with numbers, you score the number marked in that space. If he
hops on the line between two spaces, you count both numbers; but if he
hops on the line of the Pen and a number, you only count half the
number. If he hops or squirms into two or three numbers, you score for
each one he touches. If he gets in Grasshopper, you score 20; if into
Bullfrog, you score 30; and if into Kangaroo, 40. But if he gets into or
only touches Dumpling, you lose 50. If he jumps off the board, it counts
nothing.

As soon as you put your Kangaroo down, and cry "Tip!" your adversary
commences marking crosses on a piece of paper or a slate--like this, X X
X X X X X X--as fast as he can until you cry "Dead!" when he must stop;
each of these crosses counts him 1. You, of course, watch your Kangaroo
to see if he is likely to take another jump and give you a fresh count,
and you only cry "Dead!" when you think he has no more life in him. If
he jumps after you have cried "Dead!" you can count nothing for whatever
he has made by the extra jump.

The umpire keeps the score of both players, and after each has thrown
ten times, the score is added up, and whoever has the highest number
wins the game.

Some attention must be paid to the making of the Kangaroo. The rubber
must be slightly warm, so that it will hold together just enough to make
two or three springs, if possible; but it must not be too warm, or it
will stick together and not jump at all.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Harper's Young People, February 22,
1881, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, FEB 22, 1881 ***

***** This file should be named 44927.txt or 44927.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/4/9/2/44927/

Produced by Annie R. McGuire

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
