The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Normans, by Sarah Orne Jewett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Normans
       told chiefly in relation to their conquest of England

Author: Sarah Orne Jewett

Release Date: February 15, 2014 [EBook #44920]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NORMANS ***




Produced by RichardW, sp1nd and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)






TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE:

Original spelling and grammar has mostly been retained. Figures were
moved from within paragraphs to between paragraphs. Footnotes were
re-indexed and moved to the ends of the corresponding paragraphs. The
original page numbers are embedded in square brackets, e.g. "[Pg135]".

TXT Versions only: Text that was originally italicized is in this
version marked before and after with /solidus characters/. Small caps
text is converted to all uppercase. The notation "^{n}" means that n
is superscript. Bold text is "surrounded by double angle quotation
marks". In this Latin-1 version, the oe and OE ligatures are
indicated by [oe] and [OE], respectively.

More details are located in the TRANSCRIBER'S ENDNOTE.




 THE NORMANS




 [Illustration:/Frontispiece./ BIRTHPLACE OF WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR.
    FALAISE.]




 THE STORY OF THE NATIONS

 THE NORMANS

 TOLD CHIEFLY IN RELATION TO THEIR CONQUEST
 OF ENGLAND

 BY
 SARAH ORNE JEWETT

 NEW YORK
 G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS
 LONDON: T. FISHER UNWIN
 1898




 COPYRIGHT, 1886
 BY
 G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS

 The Knickerbocker Press, New York




 TO
 MY DEAR GRANDFATHER
 DOCTOR WILLIAM PERRY, OF EXETER




 [Illustration: EUROPE
   AT THE CLOSE OF THE 11^{TH} CENTURY]




 [Illustration]




 CONTENTS.


 I.
                                                                  PAGE

 THE MEN OF THE DRAGON SHIPS                                      1-29

 The ancient Northmen, 1-3 -- Manner of life, 4-6 -- Hall-life
 and hospitality, 7 -- Sagamen, 8 -- Sea-kings and vikings,
 9 -- Charlemagne and the vikings, 11 -- Viking voyages and
 settlements, 12-22 -- The Northmen in France, 23-27 -- Modern
 inheritance from the Northmen, 28.


 II.

 ROLF THE GANGER                                                 30-51

 Harold Haarfager, 30 -- Jarl Roegnwald, 32 -- Rolf's outlawry,
 33 -- Charles the Simple, 35 -- The Archbishop of Rouen, 37 --
 Hasting, 38 -- Siege of Bayeux, 40 -- Rolf's character, 41 --
 The founding of Normandy, 43 -- The king's grant, 45 -- Rolf's
 christening, 46 -- Law and order, 48 -- Rolf's death, 50.


 III.

 WILLIAM LONGSWORD                                               52-65

 French influences; Charlemagne; Charles the Fat, 52-54 --
 Feudalism, 55 -- The Franks, 55 -- Norman loyalty to France,
 57 -- Longsword's politics, 60 -- The Bayeux Northmen, 61 --
 Longsword's love of the cloister, 63 -- Longsword's character,
 64.


 IV.

 RICHARD THE FEARLESS                                            66-89

 Longsword's son, 66 -- A Norman castle, 67 -- News of
 Longsword's death, 69 -- His funeral, 70 -- Richard made duke,
 70 -- The guardianship of Louis of France, 72 -- Detention of
 Richard and escape from Laon, 73-75 -- Hugh of Paris, 76 --
 Louis at Rouen, 77 -- Norman plots, 80 -- Harold Blaatand, 81 --
 Normandy against France, 82 -- Independence of Normandy, 84 --
 Normandy and England, 85 -- Gerberga, 85 -- Alliance with Hugh of
 Paris; with Hugh Capet, 86-88 -- Death of Richard, 89.


 V.

 DUKE RICHARD THE GOOD                                          90-114

 Richard the Good's succession, 90 -- French influences, 91 --
 Lack of records, 91 -- Prosperity of the duchy, 92 -- Richard's
 love of courtliness and splendor, 92 -- Wrongs of the common
 people; their complaint, 93-95 -- Raoul of Ivry, 96 -- The
 Flemish colony; the Falaise fair; Richard's brother William,
 97, 98 -- Robert of France, 99 -- Richard's marriage, 101 --
 AEthelred the Unready, 102 -- The Danes in England, 103 -- Emma of
 Normandy, 105; Trouble with Burgundy, 107 -- The lands of Dreux,
 109 -- The Count-Bishop of Chalons, 110; Norman chroniclers, 112
 -- Ermenoldus; the third Richard and his murder, 112-114.


 VI.

 ROBERT THE MAGNIFICENT                                        115-129

 Power and wealth of Normandy, 115 -- The English princes, 118
 -- Cnut of England and Queen Emma, 119 -- Robert's lavishness;
 Baldwin of Flanders, 120-122 -- The tanner's daughter, 122 --
 Norman pride and Robert's defiance of public opinion, 124 --
 Robert's pilgrimage to Jerusalem, 125 -- His death at Nicaea, 129.


 VII.

 THE NORMANS IN ITALY                                          130-148

 Hasting the pirate, 130 -- Early Norman colonies in the south
 of Europe, 132 -- The Norman character, 134 -- Tancred de
 Hauteville, 135 -- Serlon de Hauteville, 136 -- Sicily, 139 --
 Pope Leo the Tenth, 140 -- Robert Guiscard, 141 -- Rapid progress
 of the Norman-Italian States and their prosperity, 142 -- Norman
 architecture in Sicily, 145.


 VIII.

 THE YOUTH OF WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR                            149-170

 Typical character of William, 149 -- Loneliness of his
 childhood, 151 -- William de Talvas, 152 -- The feudal system,
 153 -- Christianity and knighthood, 156 -- Ceremonies at the
 making of a knight, 157 -- The oaths of knighthood, 161 -- The
 Truce of God, 166-170.


 IX.

 ACROSS THE CHANNEL                                            171-194

 Changes in England, 171 -- AEthelred, 172 -- The Danegelt, 173
 -- The Danes again, 175 -- Swegen, 177 -- Cnut, 178 -- Eadmund
 Ironside, 180 -- Cnut's pilgrimage, 181 -- Godwine, 184 -- Eadward
 the Confessor, 187 -- The Dover quarrel, 189 -- Normans in
 England, 192 -- Castles, 193.


 X.

 THE BATTLE OF VAL-ES-DUNES                                    195-214

 Roger de Toesny, 196 -- William's boyhood, 198 -- Escape from
 Valognes, 199 -- The Lord of Rye, 200 -- Guy of Burgundy, 201
 -- Rebellion, 202 -- Val-es-Dunes, 204 -- Ralph of Tesson, 206
 -- Neal of St. Saviour, 208 -- William's leniency, 211 -- His
 mastery, 213 -- The siege of Alencon, 213.


 XI.

 THE ABBEY OF BEC                                              215-231

 Cloistermen, 215 -- Soldiery and scholarship, 216 -- Building of
 religious houses, 218 -- Cathedrals, 220 -- Benedictines, 222 --
 Herluin and his abbey, 223 -- Lanfranc, 226 -- His influence in
 Normandy, 229.


 XII.

 MATILDA OF FLANDERS                                           232-254

 Flanders, 232 -- Objections to William's marriage, 234 --
 Marriage of William and Matilda at Eu, 236 -- Mauger, 237 --
 Rebuilding of churches, 239 -- William's early visit to England,
 242 -- Godwine's return, 244 -- His death, 245 -- Jealousy of
 France, 246 -- The French invasion of Normandy, 247 -- Battle of
 Mortemer, 248 -- The curfew bell, 251 -- Battle of Varaville, 252
 -- Harold of England's visit, 254.


 XIII.

 HAROLD THE ENGLISHMAN                                         255-274

 Causes and effects of war, 255 -- Relations of William and
 Harold, 256 -- Harold's unfitness as a leader of the English,
 257 -- His shipwreck on the coast of Ponthieu, 260 -- William's
 palace in Rouen, 261 -- News of Harold's imprisonment by Guy of
 Ponthieu, 262 -- Harold's release, 264 -- His life in Normandy,
 265 -- His oath, 267 -- Eadward's last illness, 269 -- Harold
 named as successor, 272.


 XIV.

 NEWS FROM ENGLAND                                             275-294

 Harold made king, 275 -- William hears the news, 276 -- The
 Normans begin to plan for war, 278 -- William's embassy, 280
 -- The council at Lillebonne, 280 -- The barons hold back, 282
 -- Lanfranc's influence at Rome, 286 -- Tostig, 287 -- Harold's
 army, 290 -- Harold Hardrada, 291 -- The battle of Stamford
 Bridge, 293.


 XV.

 THE BATTLE OF HASTINGS                                        295-311

 Normandy makes ready for war, 295 -- The army at St. Valery,
 297 -- William crosses the Channel, 298 -- The camp at Hastings,
 300 -- Harold of England, 302 -- Senlac, 304 -- The battle array,
 306 -- The great fight, 308 -- The Norman victory, 310.


 XVI.

 WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR                                         312-344

 Norman characteristics, 312 -- William's coronation, 314 --
 His plan of government, 316 -- Return to Normandy, 320 -- Caen,
 322 -- The Bayeux tapestry, 323 -- Matilda crowned queen, 325
 -- Difficulties of government, 327 -- The English forests, 330
 -- Decay of learning in Eadward's time, 331 -- William's laws
 against slavery, 332 -- His son Robert, 333 -- The queen's death,
 335 -- Odo's plot, 335 -- William's injury at Mantes, 337 -- His
 illness and death, 339 -- Description from /Roman de Rou/, 341.


 XVII.

 KINGDOM AND DUKEDOM                                           345-358

 William Rufus, 345 -- Robert of Normandy, 346 -- William Rufus
 in England, 349 -- Duke Robert goes on pilgrimage, 351 -- Murder
 of William Rufus, 353 -- Henry Beauclerc seizes the English
 crown, 355 -- Death of Prince William, 358.


 XVIII.

 CONCLUSION                                                    359-366

 Development of Norman character, 360 -- Northern influences,
 362 -- The great inheritance, 365.

 [Illustration]


 [Illustration]




 LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                                                  PAGE

 BIRTHPLACE OF WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. FALAISE.          /Frontispiece/

 MAP--EUROPE AT CLOSE OF ELEVENTH CENTURY                             1

 IRON SPEAR AND CHISEL                                               5

 VIKING SHIP                                                        13

 VIKING                                                             17

 NORSE BUCKLE                                                       21

 NORWEGIAN FIORD                                                    31

 FLAILS AS MILITARY WEAPONS                                         77

 ABBEY CHURCH OF ST. OUEN. (ROUEN)                                  87

 QUEEN EMMA OR AELFGIFU                                             105

 NORMAN COSTUMES                                                   117

 ROBERT, DUKE OF NORMANDY, CARRIED IN A LITTER TO JERUSALEM        127

 NORMAN PLOUGHMAN                                                  153

 ARMING A KNIGHT                                                   157

 CONFERRING KNIGHTHOOD ON THE FIELD OF BATTLE                      167

 KING CNUT                                                         179

 DOORWAY OF CATHEDRAL, CHARTRES                                    217

 CANTERBURY CATHEDRAL                                              221

 CRYPT OF MOUNT ST. MICHEL                                         241

 NORMAN ARCHER                                                     253

 GUY, COUNT OF PONTHIEU                                            259

 MOUNT ST. MICHEL                                                  263

 OLD HOUSES, DOL                                                   265

 FUNERAL OF EADWARD THE CONFESSOR                                  273

 STIGAND, ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY                                 277

 MAP--NORMANDY IN 1066                                              281

 MAP--ENGLAND                                                       289

 NORMAN VESSEL                                                     297

 WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR                                             301

 NORMAN MINSTREL                                                   305

 SOLDIER IN CLOAK                                                  309

 DEATH OF HAROLD                                                   325

 NORMAN LADY                                                       326

 BATTLE-AXES                                                       329

 ODO, BISHOP OF BAYEUX                                             335


The ten illustrations in this volume which are from designs by Thomas
Macquoid, have been reproduced (through the courtesy of Messrs. Chatto
& Windus) from Mrs. Macquoid's "Pictures and Legends from Normandy
and Brittany," the American edition of which was published by G. P.
Putnam's Sons.

 [Illustration]




               DUKES OF THE NORMANS.

                      ROLF,
             First Duke of the Normans,
                   r. 911-927.
                        |
                     WILLIAM
                    LONGSWORD,
                   r. 927-943.
                        |
                     RICHARD
                  THE FEARLESS,
                   r. 943-996.
                        |
                  +-----+------+
                  |            |
               RICHARD        EMMA,
              THE GOOD,    m. 1. AEthelred II.
            r. 996-1026.     of England;
                  |        m. 2. Cnut of England
                  |          and Denmark.
                  |
          +-------+----------+
          |                  |
      RICHARD III.,        ROBERT
      r. 1026-1028.   THE MAGNIFICENT,
                        r. 1028-1035.
                             |
                           WILLIAM
                        THE CONQUEROR,
                        r. 1035-1087.
                             |
    +-------------------+----+--------+---------------+
    |                   |             |               |
 ROBERT II.,          WILLIAM       HENRY I.,     ADELA,
 r. 1087-1096          RUFUS,      r. 1106-1135.  m. Stephen,
 (from 1096 to 1100  r. 1096-1100.    |           Count of Blois
 the Duchy was                  MATILDA      |
 held by his                       m. GEOFFRY       STEPHEN
 brother William),                 COUNT OF        OF BLOIS,
 and 1100-1106                       ANJOU          s. 1135.
 (when he was                         AND
 overthrown at                       MAINE
 Tinchebrai by his               (who won the
 brother Henry).                  Duchy from
                                    Stephen).
                                       |
                                    HENRY II.,
                                invested with the
                                   Duchy, 1150,
                                     d. 1189.
                                       |
                           +-----------+-------+
                           |                   |
                        RICHARD              JOHN,
                      THE LION-HEART,      r. 1199-1204
                        r. 1189-1199.     (when Normandy
                                           was conquered
                                            by France).

[Pg001]

 [Illustration]




THE STORY OF THE NORMANS.




I.

THE MEN OF THE DRAGON SHIPS.

 "Far as the breeze can bear, the billows foam,
 Survey our empire and behold our home."--BYRON.


The gulf stream flows so near to the southern coast of Norway, and
to the Orkneys and Western Islands, that their climate is much less
severe than might be supposed. Yet no one can help wondering why they
were formerly so much more populous than now, and why the people
who came westward even so long ago as the great Aryan migration,
did not persist in turning aside to the more fertile countries that
lay farther southward. In spite of all their disadvantages, the
Scandinavian peninsula, and the sterile islands of the northern seas,
were inhabited by men and women whose enterprise and intelligence
ranked them above their neighbors.

Now, with the modern ease of travel and transportation, these poorer
countries can be supplied from other parts of the world. And though
the [Pg002] summers of Norway are misty and dark and short, and it
is difficult to raise even a little hay on the bits of meadow among
the rocky mountain slopes, commerce can make up for all deficiencies.
In early times there was no commerce except that carried on by the
pirates--if we may dignify their undertakings by such a respectable
name,--and it was hardly possible to make a living from the soil alone.
The sand dunes of Denmark and the cliffs of Norway alike gave little
encouragement to tillers of the ground, yet, in defiance of all our
ideas of successful colonization, when the people of these countries
left them, it was at first only to form new settlements in such places
as Iceland, or the Faroe or Orkney islands and stormiest Hebrides. But
it does not take us long to discover that the ancient Northmen were
not farmers, but hunters and fishermen. It had grown more and more
difficult to find food along the rivers and broad grassy wastes of
inland Europe, and pushing westward they had at last reached the place
where they could live beside waters that swarmed with fish and among
hills that sheltered plenty of game.

Besides this they had been obliged not only to make the long journey
by slow degrees, but to fight their way and to dispossess the people
who were already established. There is very little known of these
earlier dwellers in the east and north of Europe, except that they
were short of stature and dark-skinned, that they were cave dwellers,
and, in successive stages of development, used stone and bronze and
iron tools and weapons. Many relics of [Pg003] their home-life and
of their warfare have been discovered and preserved in museums, and
there are evidences of the descent of a small proportion of modern
Europeans from that remote ancestry. The Basques of the north of
Spain speak a different language and wear a different look from any
of the surrounding people, and even in Great Britain there are some
survivors of an older race of humanity, which the fairer-haired Celts
of Southern Europe and Teutons of Northern Europe have never been able
in the great natural war of races to wholly exterminate and supplant.
Many changes and minglings of the inhabitants of these countries,
long establishment of certain tribes, and favorable or unfavorable
conditions of existence have made the nations of Europe differ widely
from each other at the present day, but they are believed to have come
from a common stock, and certain words of the Sanscrit language can be
found repeated not only in Persian and Indian speech to-day, but in
English and Greek and Latin and German, and many dialects that have
been formed from these.

The tribes that settled in the North grew in time to have many
peculiarities of their own, and as their countries grew more and more
populous, they needed more things that could not easily be had, and a
fashion of plundering their neighbors began to prevail. Men were still
more or less beasts of prey. Invaders must be kept out, and at last
much of the industry of Scandinavia was connected with the carrying on
of an almost universal fighting and marauding. Ships must be built,
and there must be endless [Pg004] supplies of armor and weapons.
Stones were easily collected for missiles or made fit for arrows and
spear-heads, and metals were worked with great care. In Norway and
Sweden were the best places to find all these, and if the Northmen
planned to fight a great battle, they had to transport a huge quantity
of stones, iron, and bronze. It is easy to see why one day's battle
was almost always decisive in ancient times, for supplies could not
be quickly forwarded from point to point, and after the arrows were
all shot and the conquered were chased off the field, they had no
further means of offence except a hand-to-hand fight with those who
had won the right to pick up the fallen spears at their leisure. So,
too, an unexpected invasion was likely to prove successful; it was a
work of time to get ready for a battle, and when the Northmen swooped
down upon some shore town of Britain or Gaul, the unlucky citizens
were at their mercy. And while the Northmen had fish and game and were
mighty hunters, and their rocks and mines helped forward their warlike
enterprises, so the forests supplied them with ship timber, and they
gained renown as sailors wherever their fame extended.

There was a great difference, however, between the manner of life in
Norway and that of England or France. The Norwegian stone, however
useful for arrow-heads or axes, was not fit for building purposes.
There is hardly any clay there, either, to make bricks with, so that
wood has usually been the only material for houses. In the Southern
countries there had always been rude castles in which [Pg006] the
people could shelter themselves, but the Northmen could build no
castles that a torch could not destroy. They trusted much more to
their ships than to their houses, and some of their great captains
disdained to live on shore at all.

 [Illustration: IRON CHISEL FOUND IN AAMOT
   PARISH, OESTERDALEN.

   IRON POINT OF A SPEAR WITH INLAID WORK OF SILVER,
   FOUND AT NESNE, IN NORDLAND.]

There is something refreshing in the stories of old Norse life; of its
simplicity and freedom and childish zest. An old writer says that they
had "a hankering after pomp and pageantry," and by means of this they
came at last to doing things decently and in order, and to setting the
fashions for the rest of Europe. There was considerable dignity in the
manner of every-day life and housekeeping. Their houses were often
very large, even two hundred feet long, with the flaring fires on a
pavement in the middle of the floor, and the beds built next the walls
on three sides, sometimes hidden by wide tapestries or foreign cloth
that had been brought home in the viking ships. In front of the beds
were benches where each man had his seat and footstool, with his armor
and weapons hung high on the wall above. The master of the house had
a high seat on the north side in the middle of a long bench; opposite
was another bench for guests and strangers, while the women sat on
the third side. The roof was high, there were a few windows in it,
and those were covered by thin skins and let in but little light. The
smoke escaped through openings in the carved, soot-blackened roof, and
though in later times the rich men's houses were more like villages,
because they made groups of smaller buildings for store-houses, for
guest-rooms, or for workshops all around, [Pg007] still, the idea of
this primitive great hall or living-room has not even yet been lost.
The later copies of it in England and France that still remain are
most interesting; but what a fine sight it must have been at night
when the great fires blazed and the warriors sat on their benches in
solemn order, and the skalds recited their long sagas, of the host's
own bravery or the valiant deeds of his ancestors! Hospitality was
almost made chief among the virtues. There was a Norwegian woman named
Geirrid who went from Heligoland to Iceland and settled there. She
built her house directly across the public road, and used to sit in
the doorway on a little bench and invite all travellers to come in and
refresh themselves from a table that always stood ready, spread with
food. She was not the only one, either, who gave herself up to such an
exaggerated idea of the duties of a housekeeper.

When a distinguished company of guests was present, the pleasures of
the evening were made more important. Listening to the sagas was the
best entertainment that could be offered. "These productions were of
very ancient origin and entirely foreign to those countries where the
Latin language prevailed. They had little or nothing to do with either
chronology or general history; but were limited to the traditions of
some heroic families, relating their deeds and adventures in a style
that was always simple and sometimes poetic. These compositions, in
verse or prose, were the fruit of a wild Northern genius. They were
evolved without models, and disappeared at last without imitations;
and [Pg008] it is most remarkable that in the island of Iceland, of
which the name alone is sufficient hint of its frightful climate,
and where the very name of poet has almost become a wonder,--in this
very island the skalds (poets) have produced innumerable sagas and
other compositions during a space of time which covers the twelfth,
thirteenth, and fourteenth centuries."[1]

  [1] Depping: "Maritimes Voyages des Normands."

The court poets or those attached to great families were most
important persons, and were treated with great respect and honor. No
doubt, they often fell into the dangers of either flattery or scandal,
but they were noted for their simple truthfulness. We cannot help
feeling such an atmosphere in those sagas that still exist, but the
world has always been very indulgent towards poetry that captivates
the imagination. Doubtless, nobody expected that a skald should always
limit himself to the part of a literal narrator. They were the makers
and keepers of legends and literature in their own peculiar form of
history, and as to worldly position, ranked much higher than the later
minstrels and troubadours or trouveres who wandered about France.

When we remember the scarcity and value of parchment even in the
Christianized countries of the South, it is a great wonder that so
many sagas were written down and preserved; while there must have been
a vast number of others that existed only in tradition and in the
memories of those who learned them in each generation.

If we try to get the story of the Northmen from [Pg009] the French
or British chronicler, it is one long, dreary complaint of their
barbarous customs and their heathen religion. In England the monks,
shut up in their monasteries, could find nothing bad enough to say
about the marauders who ravaged the shores of the country and did so
much mischief. If we believe them, we shall mistake the Norwegians and
their companions for wild beasts and heathen savages. We must read
what was written in their own language, and then we shall have more
respect for the vikings and sea-kings, always distinguishing between
these two; for, while any peasant who wished could be a viking--a
sea-robber--a sea-king was a king indeed, and must be connected with
the royal race of the country. He received the title of king by right
as soon as he took command of a ship's crew, though he need not have
any land or kingdom. Vikings were merely pirates; they might be
peasants and vikings by turn, and won their name from the inlets, the
viks or wicks, where they harbored their ships. A sea-king must be a
viking, but naturally very few of the vikings were sea-kings.

When we turn from the monks' records, written in Latin, to the
accounts given of themselves by the Northmen, in their own languages,
we are surprised enough to find how these ferocious pagans, these
merciless men, who burnt the Southern churches and villages, and
plundered and killed those of the inhabitants whom they did not drag
away into slavery,--how these Northmen really surpassed their enemies
in literature, as much as in military achievements. Their laws and
government, their history [Pg010] and poetry and social customs, were
better than those of the Anglo-Saxons and the Franks.

If we stop to think about this, we see that it would be impossible
for a few hundred men to land from their great row-boats and subdue
wide tracts of country unless they were superior in mental power, and
gifted with astonishing quickness and bravery. The great leaders of
armies are not those who can lift the heaviest weights or strike the
hardest blow, but those who have the mind to plan and to organize
and discipline and, above all, to persevere and be ready to take
a dangerous risk. The countries to the southward were tamed and
spiritless, and bound down by church influence and superstition
until they had lost the energy and even the intellectual power of
their ancestors five centuries back. The Roman Empire had helped to
change the Englishmen and many of the Frenchmen of that time into
a population of slaves and laborers, with no property in the soil,
nothing to fight for but their own lives.

The viking had rights in his own country, and knew what it was to
enjoy those rights; if he could win more land, he would know how to
govern it, and he knew what he was fighting for and meant to win.
If we wonder why all this energy was spent on the high seas, and in
strange countries, there are two answers: first, that fighting was
the natural employment of the men, and that no right could be held
that could not be defended; but beside this, one form of their energy
was showing itself at home in rude attempts at literature. It is
surprising enough to find that both the quality and the quantity
[Pg011] of the old sagas far surpass all that can be found of either
Latin or English writing of that time in England. These sagas are all
in the familiar tongue, so that everybody could understand them, and
be amused or taught by them. They were not meant only for the monks
and the people who lived in cloisters. The legends of their ancestors'
beauty or bravery belonged to every man alike, and that made the
Norwegians one nation of men, working and sympathizing with each
other--not a mere herd of individuals.

The more that we know of the Northmen, the more we are convinced how
superior they were in their knowledge of the useful arts to the people
whom they conquered. There is a legend that when Charlemagne, in the
ninth century, saw some pirate ships cruising in the Mediterranean,
along the shores of which they had at last found their way, he
covered his face and burst into tears. He was not so much afraid
of their cruelty and barbarism as of their civilization. Nobody
knew better that none of the Christian countries under his rule had
ships or men that could make such a daring voyage. He knew that
they were skilful workers in wood and iron, and had learned to be
rope-makers and weavers; that they could make casks for their supply
of drinking-water, and understood how to prepare food for their long
cruises. All their swords and spears and bow-strings had to be made
and kept in good condition, and sheltered from the sea-spray.

It is interesting to remember that the Northmen's [Pg012] fleets were
not like a royal navy, though the king could claim the use of all the
war-ships when he needed them for the country's service. They were
fitted out by anybody who chose, private adventurers and peasants, all
along the rocky shores. They were not very grand affairs for the most
part, but they were all seaworthy, and must have had a good deal of
room for stowing all the things that were to be carried, beside the
vikings themselves. Sometimes there were transport vessels to take
the arms and the food and bring back the plunder. Perhaps most of
the peasants' boats were only thirty or forty feet long, but when we
remember how many hundreds used to put to sea after the small crops
were planted every summer, we cannot help knowing that there were a
great many men who knew how to build strong ships in Norway, and how
to fit them out sufficiently well, and man them and fight in them
afterward. You never hear of any fleets being fitted out in the French
and English harbors equalling these in numbers or efficiency.

 [Illustration: VIKING SHIP.]

When we picture the famous sea-kings' ships to ourselves, we do not
wonder that the Northmen were so proud of them, or that the skalds
were never tired of recounting their glories. There were two kinds of
vessels: the last-ships, that carried cargoes; and the long-ships, or
ships-of-war. Listen to the splendors of the "Long Serpent," which
was the largest ship ever built in Norway. A dragon-ship, to begin
with, because all the long ships had a dragon for a figure-head,
except the smallest of them, which were called cutters, and only
carried [Pg014] ten or twenty rowers on a side. The "Long Serpent"
had thirty-four rowers' benches on a side, and she was a hundred and
eleven feet long. Over the sides were hung the shining red and white
shields of the vikings, the gilded dragon's head towered high at the
prow, and at the stern a gilded tail went curling off over the head of
the steersman. Then, from the long body, the heavy oars swept forward
and back through the water, the double thirty-four of them, and as it
came down the fiord, the "Long Serpent" must have looked like some
enormous centipede creeping out of its den on an awful errand, and
heading out across the rough water toward its prey.

The crew used to sleep on the deck, and ship-tents were necessary for
shelter. There was no deep hold or comfortable cabin, for the ships
were built so that they could be easily hauled up on a sloping beach.
They had sails, and these were often made of gay colors, or striped
with red and blue and white cloths, and a great many years later than
this we hear of a crusader waiting long for a fair wind at the Straits
of the Dardanelles, so that he could set all his fine sails, and look
splendid as he went by the foreign shores.

To-day in Bergen harbor, in Norway, you are likely to see at least
one or two Norland ships that belong to the great fleet that bring
down furs and dried fish every year from Hammerfest and Trondhjem
and the North Cape. They do not carry the red and white shields, or
rows of long oars, but they are built with high prow and stern, and
spread a great [Pg015] square brown sail. You are tempted to think
that a belated company of vikings has just come into port after a long
cruise. These descendants of the long-ships and the last-ships look
little like peaceful merchantmen, as they go floating solemnly along
the calm waters of the Bergen-fiord.

The voyages were often disastrous in spite of much clever seamanship.
They knew nothing of the mariner's compass, and found their way
chiefly by the aid of the stars--inconstant pilots enough on such
foggy, stormy seas. They carried birds too, oftenest ravens, and
used to let them loose and follow them toward the nearest land. The
black raven was the vikings' favorite symbol for their flags, and
familiar enough it became in other harbors than their own. They were
bold, hardy fellows, and held fast to a rude code of honor and rank
of knighthood. To join the most renowned company of vikings in Harold
Haarfager's time, it was necessary that the champion should lift a
great stone that lay before the king's door, as first proof that he
was worth initiating. We are gravely told that this stone could not be
moved by the strength of twelve ordinary men.

They were obliged to take oath that they would not capture women and
children, or seek refuge during a tempest, or stop to dress their
wounds before a battle was over. Sometimes they were possessed by a
strange madness, caused either by a frenzy of rivalry and the wild
excitement of their rude sports or by intoxicating liquors or drugs,
when they foamed at the mouth and danced wildly about, swallowing
burning coals, uprooting the very rocks and trees, destroying [Pg016]
their own property, and striking indiscriminately at friends and
foes. This berserker rage seems to have been much applauded, and
gained the possessed viking a noble distinction in the eyes of his
companions. If a sea-king heard of a fair damsel anywhere along the
neighboring coast, he simply took ship in that direction, fought for
her, and carried her away in triumph with as many of her goods as he
was lucky enough to seize beside. Their very gods were gods of war
and destruction, though beside Thor, the thunderer, they worshipped
Balder, the fair-faced, the god of gentle speech and purity, with
Freyr, who rules over sunshine and growing things. Their hell was a
place of cold and darkness, and their heaven was to be a place where
fighting went on from sunrise until the time came to ride back to
Valhalla and feast together in the great hall. Those who died of old
age or sickness, instead of in battle, must go to hell. Odin, who was
chief of all the gods, made man, and gave him a soul which should
never perish, and Frigga, his wife, knew the fate of all men, but
never told her secrets.

 [Illustration: VIKING.]

The Northmen spread themselves at length over a great extent of
country. We can only wonder why, after their energy and valor led them
to found a thriving colony in Iceland and in Russia, to even venture
among the icebergs and perilous dismal coasts of Greenland, and from
thence downward to the pleasanter shores of New England, why they did
not seize these possessions and keep the credit of discovering and
settling America. What a change that would have made in the world's
history! Historians [Pg018] have been much perplexed at the fact of
Leif Ericson's lack of interest in the fertile Vinland, New England
now, which he visited in 986 and praised eloquently when he left it
to its fate. Vinland waited hundreds of years after that for the
hardy Icelander's kindred to come from old England to build their
houses and spend the rest of their lives upon its good corn-land and
among the shadows of its great pine-trees. There was room enough
for all Greenland, and to spare, but we cannot help suspecting that
the Northmen were not very good farmers, that they loved fighting
too well, and would rather go a thousand miles across a stormy sea
to plunder another man of his crops than to patiently raise their
own corn and wool and make an honest living at home. So, instead of
understanding what a good fortune it would be for their descendants,
if they seized and held the great western continent that stretched
westward from Vinland until it met another sea, they kept on with
their eastward raids, and the valleys of the Elbe and the Rhine, of
the Seine and Loire, made a famous hunting-ground for the dragon ships
to seek. The rich seaports and trading towns, the strongly walled
Roman cities, the venerated abbeys and cathedrals with their store of
wealth and provisions, were all equally exposed to the fury of such
attacks, and were soon stunned and desolated. What a horror must have
fallen upon a defenceless harbor-side when a fleet of the Northmen's
ships was seen sweeping in from sea at daybreak! What a smoke of
burning houses and shrieking of frightened people all day long; and
as [Pg019] the twilight fell and the few survivors of the assault
dared to creep out from their hiding-places to see the ruins of their
homes, and the ships putting out to sea again loaded deep with their
possessions!--we can hardly picture it to ourselves in these quiet days.

The people who lived in France were of another sort, but they often
knew how to defend themselves as well as the Northmen knew how to
attack. There are few early French records for us to read, for the
literature of that early day was almost wholly destroyed in the
religious houses and public buildings of France. Here and there a few
pages of a poem or of a biography or chronicle have been kept, but
from this very fact we can understand the miserable condition of the
country.

In the year 810 the Danish Norsemen, under their king, Gottfried,
overran Friesland, but the Emperor Charlemagne was too powerful for
them and drove them back. After his death they were ready to try
again, and because his huge kingdom had been divided under many
rulers, who were all fighting among themselves, the Danes were more
lucky, and after robbing Hamburg several times they ravaged the coasts
and finally settled themselves as comfortably as possible at the mouth
of the Loire in France. Soon they were not satisfied with going to
and fro along the seaboard, and took their smaller craft and voyaged
inland, swarming up the French rivers by hundreds, devastating the
country everywhere they went.

In 845 they went up the Seine to Paris, and plundered [Pg020] Paris
too, more than once; and forty years later, forty thousand of them,
led by a man named Siegfried, went up from Rouen with seven hundred
vessels and besieged the poor capital for ten months, until they were
bought off at the enormous price of the whole province of Burgundy.
See what power that was to put into the hands of the sea-kings' crews!
But no price was too dear, the people of Paris must have thought, to
get rid of such an army in the heart of Gaul. They could make whatever
terms they pleased by this time, and there is a tradition that a few
years afterward some bands of Danish rovers, who perhaps had gone to
take a look at Burgundy, pushed on farther and settled themselves in
Switzerland.

From the settlements they had made in the province of Aquitania, they
had long before this gone on to Spain, because the rich Spanish cities
were too tempting to be resisted. They had forced their way all along
the shore of the sea, and in at the gate of the Mediterranean; they
wasted and made havoc as they went, in Spain, Africa, and the Balearic
islands, and pushed their way up the Rhone to Valence. We can trace
them in Italy, where they burned the cities of Pisa and Lucca, and
even in Greece, where at last the pirate ships were turned about,
and set their sails for home. Think of those clumsy little ships out
on such a journey with their single masts and long oars! Think of
the stories that must have been told from town to town after these
strange, wild Northern foes had come and gone! They were like hawks
that came swooping down out of the sky, and though [Pg021] Spain and
Rome and Greece were well enough acquainted with wars, they must have
felt when the Northmen came, as we should feel if some wild beast from
the heart of the forest came biting and tearing its way through a city
street at noontime.

 [Illustration: NORSE BUCKLE WITH BYZANTINE DECORATION.]

The whole second half of the ninth century is taken up with the
histories of these invasions. We must follow for a while the progress
of events in Gaul, or France as we call it now, though it was made
up [Pg022] then of a number of smaller kingdoms. The result of the
great siege of Paris was only a settling of affairs with the Northmen
for the time being; one part of the country was delivered from them
at the expense of another. They could be bought off and bribed for a
time, but there was never to be any such thing as their going back
to their own country and letting France alone for good and all. But
as they gained at length whole tracts of country, instead of the
little wealth of a few men to take away in their ships as at first,
they began to settle down in their new lands and to become conquerors
and colonists instead of mere plunderers. Instead of continually
ravaging and attacking the kingdoms, they slowly became the owners
and occupiers of the conquered territory; they pushed their way from
point to point. At first, as you have seen already, they trusted to
their ships, and always left their wives and children at home in the
North countries, but as time went on, they brought their families with
them and made new homes, for which they would have to fight many a
battle yet. It would be no wonder if the women had become possessed
by a love for adventure too, and had insisted upon seeing the lands
from which the rich booty was brought to them, and that they had been
saying for a long time: "Show us the places where the grapes grow
and the fruit-trees bloom, where men build great houses and live in
them splendidly. We are tired of seeing only the long larchen beams
of their high roofs, and the purple and red and gold cloths, and the
red wine and yellow wheat that you bring away. Why should we not
go [Pg023] to live in that country, instead of your breaking it to
pieces, and going there so many of you, every year, only to be slain
as its enemies? We are tired of our sterile Norway and our great
Danish deserts of sand, of our cold winds and wet weather, and our
long winters that pass by so slowly while the fleets are gone. We
would rather see Seville and Paris themselves, than only their gold
and merchandise and the rafters of their churches that you bring home
for ship timber." One of the old ballads of love and valor lingers yet
that the women used to sing: "/Myklagard and the land of Spain lie
wide away o'er the lee/." There was room enough in those far countries
where the ships went--why then do they stay at home in Friesland and
Norway and Denmark, crowded and hungry kingdoms that they were, of the
wandering sea-kings?

As the years went on, the Northern lands themselves became more
peaceful, and the voyages of the pirates came to an end. Though the
Northmen still waged wars enough, they were Danes or Norwegians
against England and France, one realm against another, instead of
every man plundering for himself.

The kingdoms of France had been divided and weakened, and, while
we find a great many fine examples of resistance, and some great
victories over the Northmen, they were not pushed out and checked
altogether. Instead, they gradually changed into Frenchmen themselves,
different from other Frenchmen only in being more spirited, vigorous,
and alert. They inspired every new growth of the [Pg024] religion,
language, or manners, with their own splendid vitality. They were like
plants that have grown in dry, thin soil, transplanted to a richer
spot of ground, and sending out fresh shoots in the doubled moisture
and sunshine. And presently we shall find the Northman becoming the
Norman of history. As the Northman, almost the first thing we admire
about him is his character, his glorious energy; as the Norman, we see
that energy turned into better channels, and bringing a new element
into the progress of civilization.

The Northmen had come in great numbers to settle in Gaul, but they
were scattered about, and so it was easier to count themselves into
the population, instead of keeping themselves separate. Some of
these settlements were a good way inland, and everywhere they mixed
their language with the French for a time, but finally dropped it
almost altogether. In a very few years, comparatively speaking, they
were not Danes or Norwegians at all; they had forgotten their old
customs, and even their pagan gods of the Northern countries from
which their ancestors had come. At last we come to a time when we
begin to distinguish some of the chieftains and other brave men from
the crowd of their companions. The old chronicles of Scandinavia and
Denmark and Iceland cannot be relied upon like the histories of Greece
or Rome. The student who tries to discover when this man was born,
and that man died, from a saga, is apt to be disappointed. The more
he studies these histories of the sea-kings and their countries, the
more distinct picture he gets of a [Pg025] great crowd of men taking
their little ships every year and leaving the rocky, barren coasts
of their own country to go southward. As we have seen, France and
England and Flanders and Spain were all richer and more fruitful, and
they would go ashore, now at this harbor, now that, to steal all they
could, even the very land they trod upon. Now and then we hear the
name of some great man, a stronger and more daring sailor and fighter
than the rest. There is a dismal story of a year of famine in France,
when the north wind blew all through the weeks of a leafless spring,
the roots of the vines were frozen, and the fruit blossoms chilled
to the heart. The wild creatures of the forest, crazed with hunger,
ventured into the farms and villages, and the monks fasted more than
they thought best, and prayed the more heartily for succor in their
poverty. But down from the North came Ragnar Lodbrok, the great Danish
captain, with his stout-built vessels, "ten times twelve dragons of
the sea," and he and his men, in their shaggy fur garments, went
crashing through the ice of the French rivers, to make an easy prey
of the hungry Frenchmen--to conquer everywhere they went. And for one
Ragnar Lodbrok, read fifty or a hundred; for, though there are many
stories told about him, just as we think that we can picture him and
his black-sailed ships in our minds, we are told that this is only a
legend, and that there never was any Ragnar Lodbrok at all who was
taken by his enemies and thrown into a horrible dungeon filled with
vipers, to sing a gallant saga about his life and misdeeds. But if
there were no hero of [Pg026] this name, we put together little by
little from one hint and another legend a very good idea of those
quarrelsome times, when to be great it was necessary to be a pirate,
and to kill as many men and steal as much of their possession as one
possibly could. These Northmen set as bad an example as any traveller
since the world began. More than ninety times we can hear of them in
France and Spain and the north of Germany, and always burning and
ruining, not only the walled cities, but all the territory round
about. Shipload after shipload left their bones on foreign soil; again
and again companies of them were pushed out of France and England and
defeated, but from generation to generation the quarrels went on, and
we begin to wonder why the sea-coasts were not altogether deserted,
until we remember that the spirit of those days was warlike, and
that, while the people were plundered one year, they succeeded in
proving themselves masters the next, and so life was filled with hope
of military glory, and the tide of conquest swept now north, and now
south.

From the fjords of Norway a splendid, hardy race of young men were
pushing their boats to sea every year. Remember that their own country
was a very hard one to live in with its long, dark winters, its rainy,
short summers when the crops would not ripen, its rocky, mountainous
surface, and its natural poverty. Even now if it were not for the
fishing the Norwegian peasant people would find great trouble in
gaining food enough. In early days, when the tilling of the ground was
less understood, it must [Pg027] have been hard work tempting those
yellow-haired, eager young adventurers to stay at home, when they
could live on the sea in their rude, stanch little ships, as well as
on land; when they were told great stories of the sunshiny, fruitful
countries that lay to the south, where plenty of food and bright
clothes and gold and silver might be bought in the market of war for
the blows of their axes and the strength and courage of their right
arms. No wonder that it seemed a waste of time to stay at home in
Norway!

And as for the old men who had been to the fights and followed the
sea-kings and brought home treasures, we are sure that they were
always talking over their valiant deeds and successes, and urging
their sons and grandsons to go to the South. The women wished their
husbands and brothers to be as brave as the rest, while they cared
a great deal for the rich booty which was brought back from such
expeditions. What a hard thing it must have seemed to the boys who
were sick or lame or deformed, but who had all the desire for glory
that belonged to any of the vikings, and yet must stay at home with
the women!

When we think of all this, of the barren country, and the crowd of
people who lived in it, of the natural relish for a life of adventure,
and the hope of splendid riches and fame, what wonder that in all
these hundreds of years the Northmen followed their barbarous trade
and went a-ravaging, and finally took great pieces of the Southern
countries for their own and held them fast.

As we go on with this story of the Normans, you [Pg028] will watch
these followers of the sea-kings keeping always some trace of their
old habits and customs. Indeed you may know them yet. The Northmen
were vikings, always restless and on the move, stealing and fighting
their way as best they might, daring, adventurous. The Norman of the
twelfth century was a crusader. A madness to go crusading against
the Saracen possessed him, not alone for religion's sake or for the
holy city of Jerusalem, and so in all the ages since one excuse after
another has set the same wild blood leaping and made the Northern
blue eyes shine. Look where you may, you find Englishmen of the same
stamp--Sir Walter Raleigh and Lord Nelson, Stanley and Dr. Livingstone
and General Gordon, show the old sea-kings' courage and recklessness.
Snorro Sturleson's best saga has been followed by Drayton's "Battle of
Agincourt" and Tennyson's "Charge of the Light Brigade" and "Ballad
of Sir Richard Grenville." I venture to say that there is not an
English-speaking boy or girl who can hear that sea-king's ballad this
very day in peaceful England or America without a great thrill of
sympathy.

 "At Flores in the Azores Sir Richard Grenville lay,
 And a pinnace, like a fluttered bird, came flying from far away:
 'Spanish ships of war at sea! We have sighted fifty-three.'"----

Go and read that; the whole of the spirited story; but there is one
thing I ask you to remember first in all this long story of the
Normans: that however much it seems to you a long chapter of bloody
wars and miseries and treacheries that get to be almost [Pg029]
tiresome in their folly and brutality; however little profit it may
seem sometimes to read about the Norman wars, yet everywhere you will
catch a gleam of the glorious courage and steadfastness that have won
not only the petty principalities and dukedoms of those early days,
but the great English and American discoveries and inventions and
noble advancement of all the centuries since.

On the island of Vigr, in the Folden-fiord, the peasants still show
some rude hollows in the shore where the ships of Rolf-Ganger were
drawn up in winter, and whence he launched them to sail away to the
Hebrides and France--the beginning of as great changes as one man's
voyage ever wrought.

 [Illustration]

[Pg030]

 [Illustration]




II.

ROLF THE GANGER.

 "Far had I wandered from this northern shore,
    Far from the bare heights and the wintry seas,
    Dreaming of these
  No more."                             --A. F.


Toward the middle of the ninth century Harold Haarfager did great
things in Norway. There had always been a great number of petty kings
or jarls, who were sometimes at peace with each other, but oftener
at war, and at last this Harold was strong enough to conquer all the
rest and unite all the kingdoms under his own rule. It was by no means
an easy piece of business, for twelve years went by before it was
finished, and not only Norway itself, but the Orkneys, and Shetlands,
and Hebrides, and Man were conquered too, and the lawless vikings were
obliged to keep good order. The story was that the king had loved
a fair maiden of the North, called Gyda, but when he asked her to
marry him she had answered that she would not marry a jarl; let him
make himself a king like Gorm of Denmark! At this proud answer Harold
loved her more than ever, and vowed that he would never cut his hair
[Pg031] until he had conquered all the jarls and could claim Gyda's
hand.

 [Illustration: A NORWEGIAN FIORD.]

The flourishing shock of his yellow hair became renowned; we can
almost see it ourselves waving prosperously through his long series of
battles. When he was king at last he chose Jarl Roegnwald of [Pg032]
Moere to cut the shining locks because he was the most valiant and
best-beloved of all his tributaries.

Jarl Roegnwald had a family of sons who were noted men in their day.
One was called Turf-Einar, because he went to the Orkney islands and
discovered great deposits of peat of which he taught the forestless
people to make use, so that they and their descendants were grateful
and made him their chief hero. Another son was named Rolf, and he
was lord of three small islands far up toward the North. He followed
the respected profession of sea-robber, but though against foreign
countries it was the one profession for a jarl to follow, King Harold
was very stringent in his laws that no viking should attack any of his
own neighbors or do any mischief along the coasts of Norway. These
laws Rolf was not careful about keeping.

There was still another brother, who resented Haarfager's tyrannies
so much that he gathered a fine heroic company of vikings and more
peaceable citizens and went to Iceland and settled there. This
company came in time to be renowned as the beginners of one of the
most remarkable republics the world has ever known, with a unique
government by its aristocracy, and a natural development of literature
unsurpassed in any day. There, where there were no foreign customs to
influence or pervert, the Norse nature and genius had their perfect
flowering.

Rolf is said to have been so tall that he used to march afoot whenever
he happened to be ashore, rather than ride the little Norwegian
horses. He was nicknamed Gang-Roll (or Rolf), which means [Pg033]
Rolf the Walker, or Ganger. There are two legends which give the
reason why he came away from Norway--one that he killed his brother
in an unfortunate quarrel, and fled away to England, whither he was
directed by a vision or dream; that the English helped him to fit out
his ships and to sail away again toward France.

The other story, which seems more likely, makes it appear that the
king was very angry because Rolf plundered a Norwegian village when
he was coming home short of food from a long cruise in the Baltic
Sea. The peasants complained to Harold Haarfager, who happened to be
near, and he called the great Council of Justice and banished his old
favorite for life.

Whether these stories are true or not, at any rate Rolf came southward
an outlaw, and presently we hear of him in the Hebrides off the coast
of Scotland, where a company of Norwegians had settled after King
Harold's conquests. These men were mostly of high birth and great
ability, and welcomed the new-comer who had so lately been their
enemy. We are not surprised when we find that they banded together as
pirates and fitted out a famous expedition. Perhaps they did not find
living in the Hebrides very luxurious, and thought it necessary to
collect some merchandise and money, or some slaves to serve them, so
they fell back upon their familiar customs.

Rolf's vessels and theirs made a formidable fleet, but although they
agreed that there should not be any one chosen as captain, or admiral,
as we should [Pg034] say nowadays, we do not hear much of any of the
confederates except Rolf the Ganger, so we may be sure he was most
powerful and took command whether anybody was willing or not.

They came round the coast of Scotland, and made first for Holland,
but as all that part of the country had too often been devastated
and had become very poor, the ships were soon put to sea again. And
next we find them going up the River Seine in France, which was a
broader river then than it is now, and the highway toward Paris and
other cities, which always seemed to offer great temptations to the
vikings. Charles the Simple was king of France by right, but the only
likeness to his ancestor Charlemagne was in his name, and to that his
subjects had added the Simple, or the Fool, by which we can tell that
he was not a very independent or magnificent sort of monarch. The
limits of the kingdom of France, at that time, had just been placed
between the Loire and the Meuse, after many years of fighting between
the territories, and Charles was still contesting his right to the
crown. The wide empire of Charlemagne had not been divided at once
into distinct smaller kingdoms, but the heirs had each taken what
they could hold and fought for much else beside. Each pretended to be
the lawful king and was ready to hold all he could win. So there was
naturally little good-feeling between them, and not one could feel
sure that his neighbor would even help him to fight against a common
enemy. It was "Every one for himself, and devil take the hindmost!"
to quote the old proverb, which seldom has so literal an [Pg035]
application. King Charles the Simple, besides defending himself from
his outside enemies, was also much troubled by a pretender to the
crown, and was no doubt at his wit's end to know how to manage the
province of Neustria, lately so vexed by the foreign element within
its borders. It might be easy work for the troop of Northmen that had
followed Rolf. Besides the fact that they need not fear any alliance
against them, and had only Charles the Simple for their enemy, one of
his own enemies was quite likely to form a league with them against
him.

The fleet from the Hebrides had come to anchor on its way up the Seine
at a town called Jumieges, five leagues from Rouen. There was no army
near by to offer any hindrance, and the work of pillaging the country
was fairly begun without hindrance when the news of the incursion was
told in Rouen. There the people were in despair, for it was useless
to think of defending their broken walls; the city was already half
ruined from such invasions. At any hour they might find themselves
at the mercy of these new pirates. But in such dreadful dismay the
archbishop, a man of great courage and good sense, whom we must honor
heartily, took upon himself the perilous duty of going to the camp
and trying to save the city by making a treaty. He had heard stories
enough, we may be sure, of the cruel tortures of Christian priests by
these Northern pagans, who still believed in the gods Thor and Odin
and in Valhalla, and that the most fortunate thing, for a man's life
in the next world, was that he should die in battle in this world.
[Pg036]

There was already a great difference in the hopes and plans of the
Northmen: they listened to the archbishop instead of killing him at
once, and Rolf and his companions treated him and his interpreter
with some sort of courtesy. Perhaps the bravery of the good man won
their hearts by its kinship to their daring; perhaps they were already
planning to seize upon a part of France and to forsake the Hebrides
altogether, and Rolf had a secret design of founding a kingdom for
himself that should stand steadfast against enemies. When the good
priest went back to Rouen, I think the people must have been surprised
that he had kept his head upon his shoulders, and still more filled
with wonder because he was able to tell them that he had made a truce,
that he had guaranteed the assailants admission to the city, but that
they had promised not to do any harm whatever. Who knows if there were
not many voices that cried out that it was only delivering them to the
cruel foe, with their wives and children and all that they had in the
world. When the ships came up the river and were anchored before one
of the city gates near the Church of St. Morin, and the tall chieftain
and his comrades began to come ashore, what beating hearts, what
careful peeping out of windows there must have been in Rouen that day!

But the chiefs had given their word of honor, and they kept it well;
they walked all about the city, and examined all the ramparts, the
wharves, and the supply of water, and gave every thing an unexpectedly
kind approval. More than this, they said that Rouen [Pg037] should be
their head-quarters and their citadel. This was not very welcome news,
but a thousand times better than being sacked and ravaged and burnt,
and when the ships had gone by up the river, I dare say that more than
one voice spoke up for Rolf the Ganger, and gratefully said that he
might not prove the worst of masters after all. Some of the citizens
even joined the ranks of the sea-king's followers when they went on in
quest of new adventure up the Seine.

Just where the river Eure joins the Seine, on the point between the
two streams, the Norwegians built a great camp, and fortified it,
and there they waited for the French army. For once King Charles was
master of his whole kingdom, and he had made up his mind to resist
this determined invasion. Pirates were bad enough, but pirates who
were evidently bent upon greater mischief than usual could not be sent
away too soon. It was not long before the French troops, under the
command of a general called Regnauld, who bore the title of Duke of
France, made their appearance opposite the encampment, on the right
bank of the Eure.

The French counts had rallied bravely; they made a religious duty of
it, for were not these Norwegians pagans? and pagans deserved to be
killed, even if they had not come to steal from a Christian country.

There was one count who had been a pagan himself years before, but he
had become converted, and was as famous a Christian as he had been
sea-king. He had declared that he was tired of leading a life of wild
adventure, and had made peace with France [Pg038] twenty years before
this time; and the kingdom had given him the county of Chartres--so he
must have been a powerful enemy. Naturally he was thought to be the
best man to confer with his countrymen. There was a council of war
in the French camp, and this Hasting (of whom you will hear again by
and by) advised that they should confer with Rolf before they risked
a battle with him. Perhaps the old sea-king judged his tall successor
by his own experience, and thought he might like to be presented with
a county too, as the price of being quiet and letting the frightened
Seine cities alone. Some of the other lords of the army were very
suspicious and angry about this proposal, but Hasting had his way, and
went out with two attendants who could speak Danish.

The three envoys made their short journey to the river-side as quickly
as possible, and presently they stood on the bank of the Eure. Across
the river were the new fortifications, and some of the sea-kings' men
were busy with their armor on the other shore.

"Gallant soldiers!" cries the Count of Chartres; "what is your
chieftain's name?"

"We have no lord over us," they shouted back again; "we are all equal."

"For what end have you come to France?"

"To drive out the people who are here, or make them our subjects, and
to make ourselves a new country," says the Northman. "Who are you?--How
is it that you speak our own tongue?"

"You know the story of Hasting," answers the [Pg039] count, not
without pride--"Hasting, the great pirate, who scoured the seas with
his crowd of ships, and did so much evil in this kingdom?"

"Aye, we have heard that, but Hasting has made a bad end to so good
a beginning"; to which the count had nothing to say; he was Lord of
Chartres now, and liked that very well.

"Will you submit to King Charles?" he shouts again, and more men
are gathering on the bank to listen. "Will you give your faith and
service, and take from him gifts and honor?"

"No, no!" they answer; "we will not submit to King Charles--go back,
and tell him so, you messenger, and say that we claim the rule and
dominion of what we win by our own strength and our swords."

But the Frenchmen called Hasting a traitor when he brought this
answer back to camp, and told his associates not to try to force the
pagan entrenchments. A traitor, indeed! That was too much for the old
viking's patience. For all that, the accusation may have held a grain
of truth. Nobody knows the whole of his story, but he may have felt
the old fire and spirit of his youth when he saw the great encampment
and heard the familiar tones of his countrymen. It may be wrong to
suspect that he went to join them; but, at all events, Count Chartres
left the French camp indignantly, and nobody knows where he went,
either then or afterward, for he forsook his adopted country and left
it to its fate. They found out that he had given good advice to those
proud comrades of his, for when they attacked the enemy between the
rivers they were cut to [Pg040] pieces; even the duke of France,
their bold leader, was killed by a poor fisherman of Rouen who had
followed the Northern army.

Now there was nothing to hinder Rolf, who begins to be formally
acknowledged as the leader, from going up the Seine as fast or as slow
as he pleased, and after a while the army laid siege to Paris, but
this was unsuccessful. One of the chiefs was taken prisoner, and to
release him they promised a year's truce to King Charles, and after
a while we find them back at Rouen again. They had been ravaging the
country to the north of Paris, very likely in King Charles's company,
for there had been a new division of the kingdom, and the northern
provinces no longer called him their sovereign. Poor Charles the
Simple! he seems to have had a very hard time of it with his unruly
subjects, and his fellow-knights and princes too, who took advantage
of him whenever they could find a chance.

By this time we know enough of Rolf and his friends not to expect
them to remain quiet very long at Rouen. Away they went to Bayeux,
a rich city, and assaulted that and killed Berenger, the Count of
Bayeux, and gained a great heap of booty. We learn a great deal of the
manners and fashions of that early day when we find out that Berenger
had a beautiful daughter, and when the treasure was divided she was
considered as part of it and fell to Rolf's lot. He immediately
married her with apparent satisfaction and a full performance of
Scandinavian rites and ceremonies.

After this the Northmen went on to Evreux and [Pg041] to some other
cities, and their dominion was added to, day by day. They began to
feel a certain sort of respect and care for the poor provinces now
that they belonged to themselves. And they ceased to be cruel to the
unresisting people, and only taxed them with a certain yearly tribute.
Besides this, they chose Rolf for their king, but this northern title
was changed before long for the French one of duke. Rolf must have
been very popular with his followers. We cannot help a certain liking
for him ourselves or being pleased when we know that his new subjects
liked him heartily. They had cursed him very often, to be sure, and
feared his power when he was only a pirate, but they were glad enough
when they gained so fearless and strong a man for their protector.
Whatever he did seemed to be with a far-sightedness and better object
than they had been used to in their rulers. He was a man of great
gifts and uncommon power, and he laid his plans deeper and was not
without a marked knowledge of the rude politics of that time--a good
governor, which was beginning to be needed more in France than a good
fighter even.

Fighting was still the way of gaining one's ends, and so there was
still war, but it was better sustained and more orderly. These
Northerners, masters now of a good piece of territory, linked
themselves with some of the smaller scattered settlements of Danes at
the mouth of the river Loire, and went inland on a great expedition.
They could not conquer Paris this time either, nor Dijon nor Chartres.
The great walls of these cities and several others were not to
[Pg042] be beaten down, but there is a long list of weaker towns that
fell into their hands, and at last the French people could bear the
sieges no longer, and not only the peasants but the nobles and priests
clamored for deliverance. King Charles may have been justly called the
Simple, but he showed very good sense now. "We shall starve to death,"
the people were saying. "Nobody dares to work in the field or the
vineyard; there is not an acre of corn from Blois to Senlis. Churches
are burnt and people are murdered; the Northmen do as they please.
See, it is all the fault of a weak king!"

King Charles roused himself to do a sensible thing; he may have
planned it as a stroke of policy, and meant to avail himself of the
Northmen's strength to keep himself on his throne. He consulted his
barons and bishops, and they agreed with him that he must form a
league with their enemies, and so make sure of peace. As we read the
story of those days, we are hardly sure that Rolf was the subject
after this rather than the king. He did homage to King Charles, and
he received the sovereignty over most of what was to be called the
dukedom of Normandy. The league was little more than an obligation of
mutual defence, and King Charles was lucky to call Rolf his friend
and ally. The vigorous Norwegian was likely to keep his word better
than the French dukes and barons, who broke such promises with perfect
ease. Rolf's duty and his interest led him nearly in the same path,
but he was evidently disposed to do what was right according to his
way of seeing right and wrong. [Pg043]

All this time he had been living with his wife Popa, the daughter
of Count Berenger, who was slain at Bayeux. They had two
children--William, and a daughter, Adela. According to the views of
King Charles and the Christian church of that time, the marriage
performed with Scandinavian rites was no marriage at all, though Rolf
loved his wife devotedly and was training his son with great care, so
that he might by and by take his place, and be no inferior, either, of
the young French princes who were his contemporaries. As one historian
says, the best had the best then, and this young William was being
made a scholar as fast as possible.

For all this, when the king's messenger came to Rolf and made him an
offer of Gisla, the king's daughter, for a wife, with the seigneury of
all the lands between the river Epte and the border of Brittany, if he
would only become a Christian and live in peace with the kingdom, Rolf
listened with pleasure. He did not repeat now the words that Hasting
heard on the bank of the Eure, "We will obey no one!" while with
regard to the marriage he evidently felt free to contract a new one.

It was all a great step upward, and Rolf's clear eyes saw that. If
he were not a Christian he could not be the equal of the lords of
France. He was not a mere adventurer any longer, the leader of a
band of pirates; other ambitions had come to him since he had been
governor of his territory. The pagan fanaticism and superstition of
his companions were more than half extinguished already; the old myths
of the Northern gods had not flourished in [Pg044] this new soil. At
last, after much discussion and bargaining about the land that should
be given, Rolf gave his promise once for all, and now we may begin to
call him fairly the Duke of Normandy and his people the Normans; the
old days of the Northmen in France had come to an end. For a good many
years the neighboring provinces called the new dukedom "the pirate's
land" and "the Northman's land," but the great Norman race was in
actual existence now, and from this beginning under Rolf, the tall
Norwegian sea-king, has come one of the greatest forces and powers of
the civilized world.

I must give you some account of the ceremonies at this establishment
of the new duke, for it was a grand occasion, and the king's train
of noblemen and gentlemen, and all the Norman officers and statesmen
went out to do honor to that day. The place was in a village called
St. Claire, on the river Epte, and the French pitched their tents
on one bank of the river and the Normans on the other. Then, at the
hour appointed, Rolf came over to meet the king, and did what would
have astonished his father Roegnwald and his viking ancestors very
much. He put his hand between the king's hands and said: "From this
time forward I am your vassal and man, and I give my oath that I will
faithfully protect your life, your limbs, and your royal honor."

After this the king and his nobles formally gave Rolf the title of
duke or count, and swore that they would protect him and his honor
too, and all the lands named in the treaty. But there is an old story
that, when Rolf was directed to kneel before [Pg045] King Charles and
kiss his foot in token of submission, he was a rebellious subject at
once. Perhaps he thought that some of his French rivals had revived
this old Frankish custom on purpose to humble his pride, but he said
nothing, only beckoned quietly to one of his followers to come and
take his place. Out steps the man. I do not doubt that his eyes were
dancing, and that his yellow beard hid a laughing mouth; he did not
bend his knee at all, but caught the king's foot, and lifted it so
high that the poor monarch fell over backward, and all the pirates
gave a shout of laughter. They did not think much of Charles the
Simple, those followers of Rolf the Ganger.

Afterward the marriage took place at Rouen, and the high barons of
France went there with the bride, though it was not a very happy day
for Gisla, whom Rolf never lived with or loved. He was a great many
years older than she, and when she died he took Popa, the first wife
back again--if, indeed, he had not considered her the true wife all the
time. Then on that wedding-day he became a Christian too, though there
must have been more change of words and manner than of Rolf's own
thoughts. He received the archbishop's lessons with great amiability,
and gave part of his lands to the church before he divided the rest
among his new-made nobles. They put a long white gown or habit on
him, such as newly baptized persons wore, and he must have been an
amusing sight to see, all those seven days that he kept it on, tall
old seafarer that he was, but he preserved a famous dignity, and gave
estates to [Pg046] seven churches in succession on each day of that
solemn week. Then he put on his every-day clothes again, and gave his
whole time to his political affairs and the dividing out of Normandy
among the Norwegian chieftains who had come with him on that lucky
last voyage.

It is said that Rolf himself was the founder of the system of
landholding according to the custom of feudal times, and of a regular
system of property rights, and customs of hiring and dividing the
landed property, but there are no state papers or charters belonging
to that early time, as there are in England, so nobody can be very
sure. At any rate, he is said to have been the best ruler possible,
and his province was a model for others, though it was the most modern
in Gaul. He caused the dilapidated towns and cities to be rebuilt, and
the churches were put into good repair and order. There are parts of
some of the Rouen churches standing yet, that Rolf rebuilt.

There is a great temptation to linger and find out all we can of the
times of this first Count of Normandy--so many later traits and customs
date back to Rolf's reign; and all through this story of the Normans
we shall find a likeness to the first leader, and trace his influence.
His own descendants inherited many of his gifts of character--a
readiness of thought and speech; clear, bright minds, and vigor of
action. Even those who were given over to ways of vice and shame, had
a cleverness and attractiveness that made their friends hold to them,
in spite of their sins and treacheries. A great deal was thought of
learning and scholarship among the nobles and gentle folk of [Pg047]
that day, and Rolf had caught eagerly at all such advantages, even
while he trusted most to his Northern traditions of strength and
courage. If he had thought these were enough to win success, and had
brought up his boy as a mere pirate and fighter, it would have made a
great difference in the future of the Norman people and their rulers.
The need of a good education was believed in, and held as a sort of
family doctrine, as long as Rolf's race existed, but you will see in
one after another of these Norman counts the nature of the sea-kings
mixed with their later learning and accomplishments.

We cannot help being a little amused, however, when we find that
young William, the grandson of old Roegnvald, loved his books so well
that he begged his father to let him enter a monastery. The wise,
good man Botho, who was his tutor, had taught him to be proud of his
other grandfather, Count Berenger, who belonged to one of the most
illustrious French families, and taught him also to follow the example
of the good clergymen of Normandy, as well as the great conquerors and
chieftains. By and by we shall see that he loved to do good, and to do
works of mercy, though his people called him William Longsword, and
followed him to the wars.

Normandy was wild enough when Rolf came to rule there, but before he
died the country had changed very much for the better. He was very
careful to protect the farmers, and such laws were made, and kept,
too, that robbery was almost unknown throughout the little kingdom.
The peasants could leave their oxen or their tools in the [Pg048]
field now, and if by chance they were stolen, the duke himself was
responsible for the loss. A pretty story is told of Rolf that has also
been told of other wise rulers. He had gone out hunting one day, and
after the sport, while he and his companions were resting and having
a little feast as they sat on the grass, Rolf said he would prove the
orderliness and trustiness of his people. So he took off the two gold
bracelets which were a badge of his rank, and reached up and hung them
on a tree close by, and there they were, safe and shining, a long time
afterward, when he went to seek them. Perhaps this story is only a
myth, though the tale is echoed in other countries--England, Ireland,
and Lombardy, and others beside. At any rate, it gives an expression
of the public safety and order, and the people's gratitude to their
good kings. Rolf brought to his new home some fine old Scandinavian
customs, for his own people were knit together with close bonds in
Norway. If a farmer's own servants or helpers failed him for any
reason, he could demand the help of his neighbors without paying
them, and they all came and helped him gather his harvest. Besides,
the law punished nothing so severely as the crime of damaging or
stealing from a growing crop. The field was said to be under God's
lock, with heaven for its roof, though there might be only a hedge for
its wall. If a man stole from another man's field, and took the ripe
corn into his own barn, he paid for it with his life. This does not
match very well with the sea-kings' exploits abroad, but they were
very strict rulers, and very honest [Pg049] among themselves at home.
One familiar English word of ours--hurrah,--is said to date from Rolf's
reign. /Rou/ the Frenchmen called our Rolf; and there was a law that
if a man was in danger himself, or caught his enemy doing any damage,
he could raise the cry /Ha Rou!/ and so invoke justice in Duke Rolf's
name. At the sound of the cry, everybody was bound, on the instant, to
give chase to the offender, and whoever failed to respond to the cry
of /Ha Rou!/ must pay a heavy fine to Rolf himself. This began the old
English fashion of "hue and cry," as well as our custom of shouting
Hurrah! when we are pleased and excited.

We cannot help being surprised to see how quickly the Normans became
Frenchmen in their ways of living and even speaking. There is hardly a
trace of their Northern language except a few names of localities left
in Normandy. Once settled in their new possessions, Rolf and all his
followers seem to have been as eager for the welfare of Normandy as
they were ready to devastate it before. They were proud not of being
Norsemen but of being Normans. Otherwise their country could not have
done what it did in the very next reign to Rolf's, nor could Rouen
have become so much like a French city even in his own lifetime. This
was work worthy of his power, to rule a people well, and lift them
up toward better living and better things. His vigor and quickness
made him able to seize upon the best traits and capabilities of his
new countrymen, and enforce them as patterns and examples, with no
tolerance of their faults. [Pg050]

From the viking's ships which had brought Rolf and his confederates,
all equal, from the Hebrides, it is a long step upward to the Norman
landholders and quiet citizens with their powerful duke in his palace
at Rouen. He had shared the lands of Normandy, as we have seen, with
his companions, and there was a true aristocracy among them--a rule of
the best, for that is what aristocracy really means. No doubt there
was sin and harm enough under the new order of things, but we can see
that there was a great advance in its first duke's reign, even if we
cannot believe that all the fine stories are true that his chroniclers
have told.

Rolf died in 927, and was a pious Christian according to his friends,
and had a lingering respect for his heathen idols according to his
enemies. He was an old man, and had been a brave man, and he is
honored to this day for his justice and his courage in that stormy
time when he lived. Some say that he was forty years a pirate before
he came to Normandy, and looking back on these days of seafaring and
robbery and violence must have made him all the more contented with
his pleasant fields and their fruit-trees and waving grain; with his
noble city of Rouen, and his gentle son William, who was the friend of
the priests.

Rolf became very feeble in body and mind, and before his death he gave
up the rule of the duchy to his son. He lingered for several years,
but we hear nothing more of him except that when he lay dying he had
terrible dreams of his old pirate days, and was troubled by visions of
his slaughtered victims [Pg051] and the havoc made by the long-ships.
We are glad to know that he waked from these sorrows long enough to
give rich presents to the church and the poor, which comforted him
greatly and eased his unhappy conscience. He was buried in his city
of Rouen, in the cathedral, and there is his tomb still with a figure
of him in stone--an old tired man with a furrowed brow; the strength
of his fourscore years had become only labor and sorrow, but he looks
like the Norseman that he was in spite of the ducal robes of French
Normandy. There was need enough of bravery in the man who should fill
his place. The wars still went on along the borders, and there must
have been fear of new trouble in the duchy when this old chieftain
Rolf had lain down to die, and his empty armor was hung high in the
palace hall.

 [Illustration]

[Pg052]

 [Illustration]




III.

WILLIAM LONGSWORD.

 "For old, unhappy, far-off things
  And battles long ago."           --WORDSWORTH.


Before we follow the fortunes of the new duke, young William
Longsword, we must take a look at France and see what traditions and
influences were going to affect our colony of Northmen from that
side, and what relations they had with their neighbors. Perhaps the
best way to make every thing clear is to go back to the reign of the
Emperor Charlemagne, who inherited a great kingdom, and added to it
by his wars and statesmanship until he was crowned at Rome, in the
year 800, emperor not only of Germany and Gaul, but of the larger part
of Italy and the northeastern part of Spain. Much of this territory
had shared in the glories of the Roman Empire and had fallen with it.
But Charlemagne was equal to restoring many lost advantages, being
a man of great power and capacity, who found time, while his great
campaigns were going on, to do a great deal for the schools of his
country. He even founded a sort of normal school, where teachers were
fitted for their work, and his daughters were [Pg053] busy in copying
manuscripts; the emperor himself was fond of being read to when he was
at his meals, and used to get up at midnight to watch the stars. Some
of the interesting stories about him may not be true, but we can be
sure that he was a great general and a masterly governor and lawgiver,
and a good deal of a scholar. Like Rolf, he was one of the men who
mark as well as make a great change in the world's affairs, and in
whose time civilization takes a long step forward. When we know that
it took him between thirty and forty years to completely conquer the
Saxons, who lived in the northern part of his country, and we read the
story of the great battle of Roncesvalles in which the Basque people
won; when we follow Charlemagne (the great Charles, as his people love
to call him) on these campaigns which take up almost all his history,
we cannot help seeing that his enemies fought against the new order
of things that he represented. It was not only that they did not want
Charlemagne for their king, but they did not wish to be Christians
either, or to forsake their own religion and their own ideas for his.

When he died he was master of a great association of countries which
for years yet could not come together except in name, because of their
real unlikeness and jealousy of each other. Charlemagne had managed to
rule them all, for his sons and officers, whom he had put in command
of the various provinces, were all dictated to by him, and were not
in the least independent of his oversight. His fame was widespread.
Embassies came to him from [Pg054] distant Eastern countries, and
no doubt he felt that he was establishing a great empire for his
successors. Thirty years after he died the empire was divided into
three parts, and thirty-four years later it was all broken up in
the foolish reign of his own great-grandson, who was called Charles
also, but instead of Charles the Great became known as Charles the
Fat. From the fragments of the old empire were formed the kingdoms of
France, of Italy, and of Germany, with the less important states of
Lorraine, Burgundy, and Navarre. But although the great empire had
fallen to pieces, each fragment kept something of the new spirit that
had been forced into it by the famous emperor. For this reason there
was no corner of his wide domain that did not for many years after his
death stand in better relation to progress, and to the influence of
religion, the most potent civilizer of men.

All this time the power of the nobles had been increasing, for,
whereas, at first they had been only the officers of the king, and
were appointed to or removed from their posts at the royal pleasure,
they contrived at length to make their positions hereditary and to
establish certain rights and privileges. This was the foundation of
the feudal system, and such a growth was sure to strike deep root.
Every officer could hope to become a ruler in a small way, and to
endow his family with whatever gains and holdings he had managed to
make his own. And as these feudal chiefs soon came to value their
power, they were ready to fight, not only all together for their king
or over-lord, but for themselves; and one [Pg055] petty landholder
with his dependents would go out to fight his next neighbor, each
hoping to make the other his tributary. France proper begins to make
itself heard about in these days.

If you have read "The Story of Rome," and "The Rise and Fall of the
Roman Empire," you can trace the still earlier changes in the old
province of Gaul. The Franks had come westward, a bold association
of German tribes, and in that fifth century when the Roman rule was
overthrown, they swarmed over the frontiers and settled by hundreds
and thousands in the conquered provinces. But, strange to say, as
years went on they disappeared; not because they or their children
went away again and left Gaul to itself, but because they adopted
the ways and fashions of the country. They were still called Franks
and a part of the country was called France even, but the two races
were completely mixed together and the conquerors were as Gallic as
the conquered. They even spoke the new language; it appears like an
increase or strengthening of the Gallic race rather than a subjugation
of it, and the coming of these Franks founded, not a new province of
Germany, but the French nation.

The language was changed a good deal, for of course many Frankish or
German words were added, as Roman (or Romance) words had been added
before, to the old Gallic, and other things were changed too. In
fact we are not a bit surprised when we find that the German kings,
Charlemagne's own descendants, were looked upon as foreigners, and
some of the French leaders, the feudal lords and princes, [Pg056]
opposed themselves to their monarchs. They were brave men and ready to
fight for what they wanted. Charles the Fat could not keep himself on
his unsteady throne, and in Rolf's day France was continually at war,
sometimes at home, and almost always with the neighboring provinces
and kingdoms. Rolf's contemporary, Charles the Simple, lost his
kingship in 922, when his nobles revolted and put another leader in
his place, who was called Hugh the Great, Count of Paris. Charles the
Simple was kept a prisoner until he died, by a Count of Vermandois, of
whom he had claimed protection, and whose daughter William Longsword
had married.

There was a great deal of treachery among the French nobles. Each was
trying to make himself rich and great, and serving whatever cause
could promise most gain. There was diplomacy enough, and talking
and fighting enough, but very little loyalty and care for public
welfare. In Normandy, a movement toward better things showed itself
more and more plainly; instead of wrangling over the fragments of an
old dismembered kingdom, Rolf had been carefully building a strong
new one, and had been making and keeping laws instead of breaking
laws, and trying to make goodness and right prevail, and theft and
treachery impossible. We must not judge those days by our own, for
many things were considered right then that are wrong now; but Rolf
knew that order and bravery were good, and that learning was good, and
so he kept his dukedom quiet, though he was ready enough to fight his
enemies, and he sent his son William [Pg057] Longsword to school, and
made him a good scholar as well as soldier. This was as good training
as a young man could have in those stormy times.

Under Rolf, Normandy had held faithfully to the king, but under
his son's rule we find a long chapter of changes, for William was
constantly transferring his allegiance from king to duke. When he
succeeded his father, Normandy and France were at war--that is, Rolf
would not acknowledge any king but Charles, who was in prison, while
the usurper, Rudolph of Burgundy, was on the French throne. It is
very hard to keep track of the different parties and their leaders.
Everybody constantly changed sides, and it is not very clear what
glory there was in being a king, when the vassals were so powerful
that they could rebel against their sovereign and make war on him as
often as they pleased. Yet they were very decided about having a king,
if only to show how much greater they were by contrast. Duke Hugh of
Paris takes the most prominent place just at this time, and with his
widespread dominions and personal power and high rank, we cannot help
wondering that he did not put himself at the head of the kingdom.
Instead of that he chose to remain a subject, while he controlled
the king's actions and robbed him of his territory and kept him in
personal bondage. He had no objection to transferring his strange
loyalty from one king to another, but he would always have a king over
him, though at three different times there was nothing except his own
plans to hinder him from putting the crown of [Pg058] France upon
his own head. He had a stronger guiding principle than some of his
associates, and seems to have been a better man.

From Charles the Simple had come the lands of Normandy, and to him
the first vow of allegiance had been made, and so both Rolf and
William took his part and were enemies to his usurper and his foes.
When William came into possession of his dukedom, one of his first
acts was to do homage to his father's over-lord, and he never did
homage to Rudolph the usurper until Charles was dead, and even then
waited three years; but Rudolph was evidently glad to be friends, and
presented Longsword with a grant of the sea-coast in Brittany. The
Norman duke was a formidable rival if any trouble should arise, and
the Normans themselves were very independent in their opinions. One of
Rolf's followers had long ago told a Frenchman that his chief, who had
come to Neustria a king without a kingdom, now held his broad lands
from the sun and from God. They kept strange faith with each other in
those days. Each man had his own ambitious plans, and his leagues and
friendships were only for the sake of bringing them about. This was
not being very grateful, but Rolf's men knew that the Breton lands
were the price of peace and alliance, and not a free gift for love's
sake by any means.

As we try to puzzle out a distinct account of William's reign, we
find him sometimes the enemy of Rudolph and in league with Hugh of
Paris, sometimes he was in alliance with Rudolph, though he would not
call him king, and oftener he would have [Pg059] nothing to do with
either. It is very dull reading, except as we trace the characters of
the men themselves.

Most of the Normans had accepted Christianity many years before,
in the time of Rolf, and had been christened, but a certain number
had refused it and clung to the customs of their ancestors. These
people had formed a separate neighborhood or colony near Bayeux, and
after several generations, while they had outwardly conformed to the
prevailing observances, they still remained Northmen at heart. They
were remarkable among the other Normans for their great turbulence and
for an almost incessant opposition to the dukes, and some of them kept
the old pagan devices on their shields, and went into battle shouting
the Northern war-cry of "/Thor aide!/" instead of the pious "/Dieu
aide!/" or "/Dex aide!/" of Normandy.

Whatever relic of paganism may have clung to Rolf himself, it is
pretty certain that his son, half Frenchman by birth, was almost
wholly a Frenchman in feeling. We must remember that he was not the
son of Gisla the king's sister, however, but of Popa of Bayeux. There
was a brother or half-brother of hers called Bernard de Senlis, who
in spite of his father's murder and the unhappy beginning of their
acquaintance with Rolf, seems to have become very friendly with the
Norse chieftain.

The fortunes of war were so familiar in those days and kept so many
men at fierce enmity with each other, that we are half surprised to
come upon this sincere, kindly relationship in the story of the early
[Pg060] Normans. Even Rolf's wife's foolish little nickname, "Popa,"
under cover of which her own name has been forgotten,--this name of
puppet or little doll, gives a hint of affectionateness and a sign of
home-likeness which we should be very sorry to miss. As for Bernard
de Senlis, he protected not only the rights of Rolf's children and
grandchildren, but their very lives, and if it had not been for his
standing between them and their enemies Rolf's successors would never
have been dukes of Normandy.

With all his inherited power and his own personal bravery, William
found himself in a very hard place. He kept steadfastly to his ideas
of right and might, and one thinks that with his half French and
half Northman nature he might have understood both of the parties
that quickly began to oppose each other in Normandy. He ruled as
a French prince, and he and his followers were very eager to hold
their place in the general confederacy of France, and eager too that
Normandy should be French in religion, manners, and customs. Yet they
did not wish Normandy to be absorbed into France in any political
sense. Although there were several men of Danish birth, Rolf's old
companions, who took this view of things, and threw in their lot with
the French party, like Botho, William's old tutor, and Oslac, and
Bernard the Dane, of whom we shall hear again, there was a great body
of the Normans who rebelled and made much trouble.

William's French speech and French friends were all this time making
him distrusted and even disliked by a large portion of his own
subjects. There still [Pg061] remained a strong Northern and pagan
influence in the older parts of the Norman duchy; while in the new
lands of Brittany some of the independent Danish settlements, being
composed chiefly of the descendants of men who had forced their way
into that country before Rolf's time, were less ready for French rule
than even the Normans. Between these new allies and the disaffected
Normans themselves a grand revolt was organized under the leadership
of an independent Danish chief from one of the Breton provinces. The
rebels demanded one concession after another, and frightened Duke
William dreadfully; he even proposed to give up his duchy and to beg
the protection of his French uncle, Bernard de Senlis. We are afraid
that he had left his famous longsword at home on that campaign, until
it appears that his old counsellor, Bernard the Dane, urged him to go
back and meet the insurgents, and that a great victory was won and the
revolt ended for that time. The account of William's wonderful success
is made to sound almost miraculous by the old chronicles.

The two Norman parties held separate territories and were divided
geographically, and each party wished to keep to itself and not be
linked with the other. The Christian duke who liked French speech
and French government might keep Christian Rouen and Evreux where
Frenchmen abounded, but the heathen Danes to the westward would rather
be independent of a leader who had turned his face upon the traditions
and beliefs of his ancestors. For the time being, these rebellious
subjects must keep their grudges and bear their wrongs as best they
might, [Pg062] for their opponents were the masters now, and William
was free to aim at still greater influence in French affairs as his
dominion increased.

Through his whole life he was swayed by religious impulses, and, as
we have known, it was hard work at one time to keep him from being
a monk. Yet he was not very lavish in his presents to the church,
as a good monarch was expected to be in those days, and most of the
abbeys and cathedrals which had suffered so cruelly in the days of the
pirates were very poor still, and many were even left desolate. His
government is described as just and vigorous, and as a general thing
his subjects liked him and upheld his authority. He was very desirous
all the time to bring his people within the bounds of Christian
civilization and French law and order, yet he did not try to cast away
entirely the inherited speech or ideas of his ancestors. Of course his
treatment of the settlements to the westward and the Danish party in
his dominion must have varied at different times in his reign. Yet,
after he had made great efforts to identify himself with the French,
he still found himself looked down upon by his contemporaries and
called the Duke of the Pirates, and so in later years he concerned
himself more with his father's people, and even, so the tradition
goes, gave a new Danish colony direct from Denmark leave to settle
in Brittany. His young son Richard was put under the care, not of
French priests, but his own old tutor, Botho the Dane, and the boy and
his master were sent purposely to Bayeux, the very city which young
Richard's grandfather, Rolf, had helped to ravage. [Pg063] At Rouen
the Northman's language was already almost forgotten, but the heir to
the duchy was sent where he could hear it every day, though his good
teacher had accepted French manners and the religion of Rome. William
Longsword had become sure that there was no use in trying to be either
wholly Danish or wholly French, the true plan for a Duke of Normandy
was to be Dane and Frenchman at once. The balance seems to have swung
toward the Danish party for a time after this, and after a troubled,
bewildering reign to its very close, William died at the hands of his
enemies, who had lured him away to hold a conference with Arnulf, of
Flanders, at Picquigny, where he came to a mysterious and sudden death.

The next year, 943, was a marked one in France and began a new order
of things. There was a birth and a death which changed the current
of history. The Count of Vermandois, the same man who had kept the
prison and helped in the murder of Charles the Simple, was murdered
himself--or at least died in an unexplained and horrible way, as men
were apt to do who were called tyrants and were regicides beside. His
dominion was divided among his sons, except some parts of it that Hugh
of Paris seized. This was the death, and the birth was of a son and
heir to Hugh of Paris himself. His first wife was an Englishwoman,
Eadhild, but she had died childless, to his great sorrow. This baby
was the son of his wife Hadwisa, the daughter of King Henry of
Germany, and he was called Hugh for his father; Hugh Capet, the future
king. After this Hugh of Paris [Pg064] changed his plans and his
policy. True enough, he had never consented to being a king himself,
but it was quite another thing to hinder his son from reigning over
France by and by. Here the Frenchman begins to contrast himself more
plainly against the Frank, just as we have seen the Norman begin to
separate himself from the Northman. Under Rolf Normandy had been
steadily loyal to King Charles the Simple; under William it had
wavered between the king and the duke; under Richard we shall see
Normandy growing more French again.

Under William Longsword, now Frenchman, now Northman was coming to the
front, and everybody was ready to fight without caring so very much
what it was all about. But everywhere we find the striking figure of
the young duke carrying his great sword, that came to be the symbol of
order and peace. The golden hilt and long shining blade are familiar
enough in the story of William's life. Somehow we can hardly think of
him without his great weapon. With it he could strike a mighty blow,
and in spite of his uncommon strength, he is said to have been of a
slender, graceful figure, with beautiful features and clear, bright
color like a young girl's. His charming, cheerful, spirited manners
won friendship and liking. "He had an eye for splendor," says one
biographer; "well spoken to all, William Longsword could quote a text
to the priest, listen respectfully to the wise sayings of the old,
talk merrily with his young friends about chess and tables, discuss
the flight of the falcon and the fleetness of the hound." [Pg065]

When he desired to be a monk, he was persuaded that his rank and
duties would not permit such a sacrifice, and that he must act his
part in the world rather than in the cloister, for Normandy's sake,
but in spite of his gay life and apparent fondness for the world's
delights and pleasures, when he died his followers found a sackcloth
garment and scourge under his splendid clothes. And as he lay dead
in Rouen the rough haircloth shirt was turned outward at the throat
so that all the people could see. He had not the firmness and
decision that a duke of Normandy needed; he was very affectionate
and impulsive, but he was a miserly person, and had not the power of
holding on and doing what ought to be done with all his might.

 [Illustration]

[Pg066]

 [Illustration]




IV.

RICHARD THE FEARLESS.

 "By many a warlike feat
 Lopped the French lilies."--DRAYTON.


Around the city of Bayeux, were the head-quarters of the Northmen, and
both Rolf's followers and the later colonists had kept that part of
the duchy almost free from French influence. There Longsword's little
son Richard (whose mother was Espriota, the duke's first wife, whom
he had married in Danish fashion), was sent to learn the Northmen's
language, and there he lived yet with his teachers and Count Bernard,
when the news came of the murder of his father by Arnulf of Flanders,
with whom William had gone to confer in good faith.

We can imagine for ourselves the looks of the little lad and his
surroundings. He was fond even then of the chase, and it might be on
some evening when he had come in with the huntsmen that he found a
breathless messenger who had brought the news of Lonsgword's death. We
can imagine the low roofed, stone-arched room with its thick pillars,
and deep stone casings to the windows, where the wind came in and made
the torches flare. At each end of [Pg067] the room would be a great
fire, and the servants busy before one of them with the supper, and
there on the flagstones, in a dark heap, is the stag, and perhaps some
smaller game that the hunters have thrown down. There are no chimneys,
and the fires leap up against the walls, and the smoke curls along the
ceiling and finds its way out as best it can.

One end of the room is a step or two higher than the other, and here
there is a long table spread with drinking-horns and bowls, and
perhaps some beautiful silver cups, with figures of grapevines and
fauns and satyrs carved on them, which the Norse pirates brought home
long ago from Italy. The floor has been covered with rushes which the
girls of the household scatter, and some of these girls wear old Norse
ornaments of wrought silver, with bits of coral, that must have come
from Italy too. The great stag-hounds are stretched out asleep after
their day's work, and the little Richard is tired too, and has thrown
himself into a tall carved chair by the fire.

Suddenly there comes the sound of a horn, and everybody starts and
listens. Was the household to be attacked and besieged? for friends
were less likely visitors than enemies in those rough times.

The dogs bark and cannot be quieted, and again the horn sounds outside
the gate, and somebody has gone to answer it, and those who listen
hear the great hinges creak presently as the gate is opened and the
sound of horses' feet in the courtyard. The dogs have found that there
is no danger and creep away lazily to go to sleep again, but when the
[Pg068] men of the household come back to the great hall their faces
are sadly changed. Something has happened.

Among them are two guests, two old counts whom everybody knows, and
they walk gravely with bent heads toward the boy Richard, who stands
by the smaller fire, in the place of honor, near his father's chair.
Has his father come back sooner than he expected? The boy's heart
must beat fast with hope for one minute, then he is frightened by the
silence in the great hall. Nobody is singing or talking; there is a
dreadful stillness; the very dogs are quiet and watching from their
beds on the new-strewn rushes. The fires snap and crackle and throw
long shadows about the room.

What are the two counts going to do--Bernard Harcourt and Rainulf
Ferrieres? They are kneeling before the little boy, who is ready to
run away, he does not know why. Count Bernard has knelt before him,
and says this, as he holds Richard's small hand: "Richard, Duke of
Normandy, I am your liegeman and true vassal"; and then the other
count does and says the same, while Bernard stands by and covers his
face with his hands and weeps.

Richard stands, wondering, as all the rest of the noblemen promise
him their service and the loyalty of their castles and lands, and
suddenly the truth comes to him. His dear father is dead, and he
must be the duke now; he, a little stupid boy, must take the place
of the handsome, smiling man with his shining sword and black horse
and purple robe and the feather with its shining clasp in the high
ducal [Pg069] cap that is as splendid as any crown. Richard must take
the old counts for his playfellows, and learn to rule his province
of Normandy; and what a long, sad, frightened night that must have
been to the fatherless boy who must win for himself the good name of
Richard the Fearless!

Next day they rode to Rouen, and there, when the nobles had come, the
dead duke was buried with great ceremony, and all the people mourned
for him and were ready to swear vengeance on his treacherous murderer.
After the service was over Richard was led back from the cathedral to
his palace, and his heavy black robes were taken off and a scarlet
tunic put on; his long brown hair was curled, and he was made as fine
as a little duke could be, though his eyes were red with crying, and
he hated all the pomp and splendor that only made him the surer that
his father was gone.

They brought him down to the great hall of the palace, and there he
found all the barons who had come to his father's burial, and the boy
was told to pull off his cap to them and bow low in answer to their
salutations. Then he slowly crossed the hall, and all the barons
walked after him in a grand procession according to rank--first the
Duke of Brittany and last the poorest of the knights, all going to the
Church of Notre Dame, the great cathedral of Rouen, where the solemn
funeral chants had been sung so short a time before.

There were all the priests and the Norman bishops, and the choir sang
as Richard walked to his place near the altar where he had seen his
father sit [Pg070] so many times. All the long services of the mass
were performed, and then the boy-duke gave his promise, in the name
of God and the people of Normandy, that he would be a good and true
ruler, guard them from their foes, maintain truth, punish sin, and
protect the Church. Two of the bishops put on him the great mantle
of the Norman dukes, crimson velvet and trimmed with ermine; but
it was so long that it lay in great folds on the ground. Then the
archbishop crowned the little lad with a crown so wide and heavy that
one of the barons had to hold it in its place. Last of all, they gave
him his father's sword, taller than he, but he reached for the hilt
and held it fast as he was carried back to his throne, though Count
Bernard offered to carry it. Then all the noblemen did homage, from
Duke Alan of Brittany down, and Richard swore in God's name to be the
good lord of every one and to protect him from his foes. Perhaps some
of the elder men who had followed Rolf the Ganger felt very tenderly
toward this grandchild of their brave old leader, and the friends of
kind-hearted Longsword meant to be loyal and very fatherly to his
defenceless boy, upon whom so much honor, and anxiety too, had early
fallen.

See what a change there was in Normandy since Rolf came, and what a
growth in wealth and orderliness the dukedom had made. All the feudal
or clannish spirit had had time to grow, and Normandy ranked as the
first of the French duchies. Still it would be some time yet before
the Danes and Norwegians of the north could cease to think of the
Normans as their brothers and cousins, and begin to [Pg071] call them
Frenchmen or Welskes, or any of the other names they called the people
in France or Britain. It was sure to be a hard dukedom enough for the
boy-duke to rule, and all his youth was spent in stormy, dangerous
times.

His father had stood godfather--a very close tie--to the heir of the new
king of France, who was called Louis, and he was also at peace with
Count Hugh of Paris. Soon after Longsword's death King Louis appeared
in Rouen at the head of a body of troops, and demanded that he should
be considered the guardian and keeper of young Richard during his
minority. He surprised the counts who were in Rouen, and who were just
then nearly defenceless. It would never do for them to resist Louis
and his followers; they had no troops at hand; and they believed that
the safest thing was to let Richard go, for a time at any rate. It
was true that he was the king's vassal, and Normandy had always done
homage to the kings of France. And with a trusty baron for protection
the boy was sent away out of pleasant Normandy to the royal castle
of Laon. The Rouen people were not very gracious to King Louis, and
that made him angry. Indeed, the French king's dominion was none too
large, and everybody knew that he would be glad to possess himself
of the dukedom, or of part of it, and that he was not unfriendly to
Arnulf, who had betrayed William Longsword. So the barons who were
gathered at Rouen, and all the Rouen people, must have felt very
anxious and very troubled about Richard's safety when the French
horsemen [Pg072] galloped away with him. From time to time news came
that the boy was not being treated very well. At any rate he was not
having the attention and care that belonged to a duke of Normandy. The
dukedom was tempestuous enough at any time, with its Northman party,
and its French party, and their jealousies and rivalries. But they
were all loyal to the boy-duke who belonged to both, and who could
speak the pirate's language as well as that of the French court. If
his life were brought to an untimely end what a falling apart there
would be among those who were not unwilling now to be his subjects. No
wonder that the old barons were so eager to get Richard home again,
and so distrustful of the polite talk and professions of affection
and interest on King Louis's part. Louis had two little sons of his
own, and it would be very natural if he sometimes remembered that,
if Richard were dead, one of his own boys might be Duke of Normandy
instead--that is, if old Count Hugh of Paris did not stand in the way.

So away went Richard from his pleasant country of Normandy, with
its apple and cherry orchards and its comfortable farms, from his
Danes and his Normans, and the perplexed and jealous barons. A young
nobleman, named Osmond de Centeville, was his guardian, and promised
to take the best of care of his young charge, but when they reached
the grim castle of Laon they found that King Louis' promises were not
likely to be kept. Gerberga, the French queen, was a brave woman, but
eager to forward the fortunes of her own household, and nobody took
much notice of the boy who was of so [Pg073] much consequence at home
in his own castle of Rouen. We cannot help wondering why Richard's
life did not come to a sudden end like his father's, but perhaps
Osmond's good care and vigilance gave no chance for treachery to do
its work.

After a while the boy-duke began to look very pale and ill, poor
little fellow, and Osmond watched him tenderly, and soon the rest of
the people in the castle had great hopes that he was going to die.
The tradition says that he was not sick at all in reality, but made
himself appear so by refusing to eat or sleep. At any rate he grew so
pale and feeble that one night everybody was so sure that he could not
live that they fell to rejoicing and had a great banquet. There was no
need to stand guard any longer over the little chief of the pirates,
and nobody takes much notice of Osmond even as he goes to and from the
tower room with a long face.

Late in the evening he speaks of his war-horse which he has forgotten
to feed and litter down, and goes to his stable in the courtyard with
a huge bundle of straw. The castle servants see him, but let him pass
as usual, and the banquet goes on, and the lights burn dim, and the
night wanes before anybody finds out that there was a thin little lad,
keeping very still, in the straw that Osmond carried, and that the two
companions were riding for hours in the starlight toward the Norman
borders. Hurrah! we can almost hear the black horse's feet clatter and
ring along the roads, and take a long breath of relief when we know
that the fugitives get safe to Crecy castle within the Norman lines
next morning. [Pg074]

King Louis was very angry and sent a message that Richard must come
back, but the barons refused, and before long there was a great
battle. There could really be no such thing as peace between the
Normans and the kingdom of France, and Louis had grown more and more
anxious to rid the country of the hated pirates. Hugh the Great
and he were enemies at heart and stood in each other's way, but
Louis made believe that he was friendly, and granted his formidable
rival some new territory, and displayed his royal condescension in
various ways. Each of these rulers was more than willing to increase
his domain by appropriating Normandy, and when we remember the two
parties in Normandy itself we cannot help thinking that Richard's
path was going to be a very rough one to follow. His father's enemy,
Arnulf of Flanders, was the enemy of Normandy still, and always in
secret or open league with Louis. The province of Brittany was hard
to control, and while William Longsword had favored the French party
in his dominions he had put Richard under the care of the Northmen.
Yet this had not been done in a way to give complete satisfaction,
for the elder Danes clung to their old religion and cared nothing
for the solemn rites of the Church, by means of which Richard had
been invested with the dukedom. They were half insulted by such silly
pageantry, yet it was not to the leaders of the old pirate element
in the dukedom, but to the Christianized Danes, whose head-quarters
were at Rouen, that the guardianship of the heir of Normandy had
been given. He did not belong to the [Pg075] Christians, but to the
Norsemen, yet not to the old pagan vikings either. It was a curious
and perhaps a very wise thing to do, but the Danes little thought
when Longsword promised solemnly to put his son under their charge,
that he meant the Christian Danes like Bernard and Botho. There was
one thing that all the Normans agreed upon, that they would not be
the vassals and lieges of the king of France. They had promised it in
their haste when the king had come and taken young Richard away to
Laon, but now that they had time to consider, they saw what a mistake
it had been to make Louis the boy-duke's guardian. They meant to take
fast hold of Richard now that he had come back, and so the barons were
summoned, and when Louis appeared again in Normandy, with the spirit
and gallantry of a great captain, to claim the guardianship and to
establish Christianity, as well as to avenge the murder of Longsword,
if you please!--he found a huge army ready to meet him.

Nobody can understand how King Louis managed to keep such a splendid
army as his in good condition through so many reverses. He had lost
heavily from his lands and his revenues, and there were no laws, so
far as we know, that compelled military service, but the ranks were
always full, and the golden eagle of Charlemagne was borne before the
king on the march, and the banner of that great emperor, his ancestor,
fluttered above his pavilion when the army halted. As for the Danes
(which means simply the Northern or Pirate party of Normandy), they
were very unostentatious soldiers and fought [Pg076] on foot, going
to meet the enemy with sword and shield. Some of them had different
emblems on their shields now, instead of the old red and white stripes
of the shields that used to be hung along the sides of the long-ships,
and they carried curious weapons, even a sort of flail that did great
execution.

We must pass quickly over the long account of a feigned alliance
between Hugh of Paris and King Louis, their agreement to share
Normandy between themselves, and then Hugh's withdrawal, and Bernard
of Senlis's deep-laid plot against both the enemies of Normandy. It
was just at this time that there was a great deal of enmity between
Normandy and Brittany, and the Normans seem to be in a more rebellious
and quarrelsome state than usual. If there was one thing that they
clung to every one of them, and would not let go, it was this: that
Normandy should not be divided, that it should be kept as Rolf had
left it. Sooner than yield to the plots and attempted grasping and
divisions of Hugh and Arnulf of Flanders, and Louis, they would send
to the North for a fleet of dragon ships and conquer their country
over again. They knew very well that however bland and persuasive
their neighbors might become when they desired to have a truce, they
always called them filthy Normans and pirates behind their backs, and
were always hoping for a chance to push them off the soil of Normandy.
There was no love lost between the dukedoms and the kingdom.

 [Illustration: FLAIL AS A MILITARY WEAPON (1).]

 [Illustration: FLAIL AS A MILITARY WEAPON (2).]

After some time Louis was persuaded again that Normandy desired
nothing so much as to call him her feudal lord and sovereign. Bernard
de Senlis [Pg077] assured him, for the sake of peace, that they were
no longer in doubt of their unhappiness in having a child for a ruler,
that they were anxious to return to the old pledge of loyalty that
Rolf gave to the successor of Charlemagne. He must be the over-lord
again and must come and occupy his humble city of Rouen. They were
tired of being harried, their land was desolated, and they would do
any thing to be released from the sorrows and penalties of war. Much
to our surprise, and very likely to his own astonishment too, we find
King Louis presently going to Rouen, and being received there with all
manner of civility and deference. Everybody hated him just as much as
ever, and distrusted him, and no doubt Louis returned the compliment,
but to outward view he was beloved and honored by his tributaries,
and the Norman city seemed quiet and particularly servile to its new
ruler and his bragging troops. Nobody understood exactly why they had
won their ends with so little trouble, and everybody [Pg078] was on
the watch for some amazing counterplot, and dared not trust either
friend or foe. As for Louis, they had shamed and tormented him too
much to make him a very affectionate sovereign now. To be sure he
ruled over Normandy at last, but that brought him perplexity enough.
In the city the most worthless of his followers was putting on the
airs of a conqueror and aggravating the Norman subjects unbearably.
The Frenchmen who had followed the golden eagle of Charlemagne so
long without any reward but glory and a slender subsistence, began
to clamor for their right to plunder the dukedom and to possess
themselves of a reward which had been too long withheld already.

Hugh, of Paris, and King Louis had made a bold venture together for
the conquest of Normandy, and apparently succeeded to their heart's
content. Hugh had besieged Bayeux; and the country, between the two
assailants, had suffered terribly. Bernard the Dane, or Bernard de
Senlis either, knew no other way to reestablish themselves than
by keeping Louis in Rouen and cheating him by a show of complete
submission. The Normans must have had great faith in the Danish
Bernard when they submitted to make unconditional surrender to Louis.
Could it be that he had been faithless to the boy-duke's rights, and
allowed him to be contemptuously disinherited?

Now that the king was safely bestowed in Rouen, his new liegemen
began to say very disagreeable things. Louis had made a great fool
of himself at a banquet soon after he reached Rolf's tower in the
[Pg079] Norman city. Bernard the Dane, had spread a famous feast for
him and brought his own good red wine. Louis became very talkative,
and announced openly that he was going to be master of the Normans at
last, and would make them feel his bonds, and shame them well. But
Bernard the Dane left his own seat at the table and placed himself
next the king. Presently he began, in most ingenious ways, to taunt
him with having left himself such a small share of the lands and
wealth of the ancient province of Neustria. He showed him that Hugh
of Paris had made the best of the bargain, and that he had given up a
great deal more than there was any need of doing. Bernard described
in glowing colors the splendid dominions he had sacrificed by letting
his rival step in and take first choice. Louis had not chosen to take
a seventh part of the whole dukedom, and Hugh of Paris was master of
all Normandy beyond the Seine, a beautiful country watered by fine
streams whose ports were fit for commerce and ready for defence. More
than this; he had let ten thousand fighting men slip through his hands
and become the allies of his worst enemy. And so Bernard and his
colleagues plainly told Louis that he had made a great mistake. They
would consent to receive him as their sovereign and guardian of the
young duke, but Normandy must not be divided; to that they would never
give their consent.

Louis listened, half dazed to these suggestions, and when he was well
sobered he understood that he was attacked on every side. Hugh of
Paris had declared that if Louis broke faith with him now he [Pg080]
would make an end to their league, and Louis knew that he would
be making a fierce enemy if he listened to the Normans; yet if he
refused, they would turn against him.

On the other hand, if he permitted Hugh to keep his new territory,
he was only strengthening a man who was his enemy at heart, and who
sooner or later would show his antagonism. Louis's own soldiers were
becoming very rebellious. They claimed over and over again that Rolf
had had no real right to the Norman lands, but since he had divided
them among his followers, all the more reason now that the conquerors,
the French owners of Normandy, should be put into possession of what
they had won back again at last. They demanded that the victors should
enforce their right, and not only expressed a wish for Bernard the
Dane's broad lands, but for his handsome young wife. They would not
allow that the Normans had any rights at all. When a rumor of such
wicked plans began to be whispered through Rouen and the villages,
it raised a great excitement. There would have been an insurrection
at once, if shrewd old Bernard had not again insisted upon patience
and submission. His wife even rebelled, and said that she would bury
herself in a convent; and Espriota, young Richard's mother, thriftily
resolved to provide herself with a protector, and married Sperling, a
rich miller of Vaudreuil.

Hugh of Paris was Bernard's refuge in these troubles, and now we see
what the old Dane had been planning all the time. Hugh had begun to
believe that there was no use in trying to hold his new [Pg081]
possessions of Normandy beyond the Seine, and that he had better
return to his old cordial alliance with the Normans and uphold Rolf
the Ganger's dukedom. So the Danish party, Christians and pagans, and
the Normans of the French party, and Hugh of Paris, all entered into a
magnificent plot against Louis. The Normans might have been contented
with expelling the intruders, and a renunciation of the rights Louis
had usurped, but Hugh the Great was very anxious to capture Louis
himself.

Besides Hugh of Paris and the Norman barons who upheld the cause of
young Richard, there was a third very important ally in the great
rebellion against King Louis of France. When Gorm a famous old king
of Denmark had died some years before, the successor to his throne
was Harold Blaatand or Bluetooth, a man of uncommonly fine character
for those times--a man who kept his promises and was noted for his
simplicity and good faith and loyalty to his word. Whatever reason may
have brought Harold to Normandy at this time, there he was, the firm
friend of the citizens of the Bayeux country, and we find him with his
army at Cherbourg.

All Normandy was armed and ready for a grand fight with the French,
though it appears that at first there was an attempt at a peaceful
conference. This went on very well at first, the opposing armies being
drawn up on either side of the river Dive, when who should appear but
Herluin of Montreuil, the insolent traitor who was more than suspected
of having caused the murder of William Longsword. Since then he had
ruled in Rouen as Louis's deputy and [Pg082] stirred up more hatred
against himself, but now he took a prominent place in the French
ranks, and neither Normans nor Danes could keep their tempers any
longer. So the peaceful conference was abruptly ended, and the fight
began.

Every thing went against the French: many counts were killed; the
golden eagle of Charlemagne and the silk hangings and banners of the
king's tent had only been brought for the good of these Normans, who
captured them. As for the king himself, he was taken prisoner; some
say that he was led away from the battle-field and secreted by a loyal
gentleman of that neighborhood, who hid him in a secluded bowery
island in the river near by, and that the poor gentleman's house and
goods were burnt and his wife and children seized, before he would
tell anything of the defeated monarch's hiding-place. There is another
story that Harold Blaatand and Louis met in hand-to-hand combat, and
the Dane led away the Frank as the prize of his own bravery. The king
escaped and was again captured and imprisoned in Rouen. No bragging
now of what he would do with the Normans, or who should take their
lands and their wives. Poor Louis was completely beaten, but there was
still a high spirit in the man and in his brave wife Gerberga, who
seems to have been his equal in courage and resource. After a while
Louis only regained his freedom by giving up his castle of Laon to
Hugh of Paris, and the successor of Charlemagne was reduced to the
pitiful poverty of being king only of Compiegne. Yet he was still
king, and nobody was more ready to give him the title than [Pg083]
Hugh of Paris himself, though the diplomatic treacheries went on as
usual.

Harold had made a triumphant progress through Normandy after the
great fight was over, and all the people were very grateful to him,
and it is said that he reestablished the laws of Rolf, and confirmed
the authority of the boy-duke. We cannot understand very well at this
distance just why Harold should have been in Normandy at all with his
army to make himself so useful, but there he was, and unless one story
is only a repetition of the other, he came back again, twenty years
after, in the same good-natured way, and fought for the Normans again.

Poor Louis certainly had a very hard time, and for a while his pride
was utterly broken; but he was still young and hoped to retrieve his
unlucky fortunes. Richard, the young duke, was only thirteen years
old when Normandy broke faith with France. He had not yet earned his
title of the Fearless, which has gone far toward making him one of
the heroes of history, and was waiting to begin his real work and
influence in the dukedom. Louis had sympathy enough of a profitless
sort from his German and English neighbors. England sent an embassy
to demand his release, and Hugh of Paris refused most ungraciously.
Later, the king of the Germans or East Franks determined to invade
Hugh's territory, and would not even send a message or have any
dealings with him first; and when he found that the German army
was really assembling, the Count of Paris yielded. But, as we have
already seen, Louis had to give up a great piece of his [Pg084]
kingdom. As far as words went, he was king again. He had lost his
authority while he was in prison, but it was renewed with proper
solemnity, and Hugh was again faithful liegeman and homager of his
former prisoner. The other princes of Europe, at least those who were
neighbors, followed Hugh's example--all except one, if we may believe
the Norman historians. On the banks of the Epte, where Rolf had first
done homage to the French king, the Norman duchy was now set free
from any over-lordship, and made an independent country. The duke was
still called duke, and not king, yet he was completely the monarch of
Normandy, and need give no tribute nor obedience.

Before long, however, Richard, or his barons for him--wily Bernard the
Dane, and Bernard de Senlis, and the rest--commended the lands and men
of Normandy to the Count of Paris, benefactor and ally. The Norman
historians do not say much about this, for they were not so proud of
it as of their being made free from the rule of France. We are certain
that the Norman soldiers followed Hugh in his campaigns, for long
after this during the reign of Richard the Fearless there were some
charters and state papers written which are still preserved, and which
speak of Hugh of Paris as Richard's over-lord.

There are so few relics of that time that we must note the coinage of
the first Norman money in Richard's reign. The chronicles follow the
old fashion of the sagas in sounding the praises of one man--sometimes
according to him all the deeds of his ancestors besides; but,
unfortunately, they refer little to general history, and tell few
things about the [Pg085] people. We find Normandy and England coming
into closer relations in this reign, and the first mention of the
English kings and of affairs across the Channel, lends a new interest
to our story of the Normans. Indeed, to every Englishman and American
the roots and beginnings of English history are less interesting in
themselves than for their hints and explanations of later chapters and
events.

Before we end this account of Duke Richard's boyhood, we must take
a look at one appealing fragment of it which has been passed by in
the story of the wars and tumults and strife of parties. Once King
Louis was offered his liberty on the condition that he would allow
the Normans to take his son and heir Lothair as pledge of his return
and good behavior. No doubt the French king and Queen Gerberga had
a consciousness that they had not been very kind to Richard, and
so feared actual retaliation. But Gerberga offered, not the heir
to the throne, but her younger child Carloman, a puny, weak little
boy, and he was taken as hostage instead, and soon died in Rouen.
Miss Yonge has written a charming story called "The Little Duke," in
which she draws a touching picture of this sad little exile. It makes
Queen Gerberga appear very hard and cruel, and it seems as if she
must have been to let the poor child go among his enemies. We must
remember, though, that these times were very hard, and one cannot help
respecting the poor queen, who was very brave after all, and fought as
gallantly as any one to keep her besieged and struggling kingdom out
of the hands of its assailants. [Pg086]

We must pass over the long list of petty wars between Louis and
Hugh. Richard's reign was stormy to begin with, but for some years
before his death Normandy appears to have been tolerably quiet. Louis
had seen his darkest times when Normandy shook herself free from
French rule, and from that hour his fortunes bettered. There was one
disagreement between Otto of Germany and Louis, aided by the king
of Burgundy, against the two dukes, Hugh and Richard, and before
Louis died he won back again the greater part of his possessions at
Laon. Duke Hugh's glories were somewhat eclipsed for a time, and he
was excommunicated by the Archbishop of Rheims and took no notice
of that, but by and by when the Pope of Rome himself put him under
a ban, he came to terms. The Normans were his constant allies, but
there is not much to learn about their own military enterprises. The
enthusiastic Norman writers give a glowing account of the failure
of the confederate kings to capture Rouen, but say less about their
marauding tour through the duchies of Normandy and Hugh's dominions.
Rouen was a powerful city by this time, and a famous history belonged
to her already. There are some fragments left still of the Rouen of
that day, which is very surprising when we remember how battered and
beleaguered the old town was through century after century.

Every thing was apparently prospering with the king of France when
he suddenly died, only thirty-three years of age, in spite of his
tempestuous reign and always changing career. He must have felt like
a [Pg087] very old man, one would think, and somehow one imagines him
and Gerberga, his wife, as old people in their Castle of Laon. Lothair
was the next king, and Richard, who so lately was a child too, became
the elder ruler of his time. Hugh of Paris died two years later, and
the old enemy of Normandy, Arnulf of Flanders, soon followed him. The
king of Germany, Otto, outlived all these, but Richard lived longer
than he or his son.

 [Illustration: ABBEY CHURCH OF ST. OUEN (ROUEN).]

[Pg088]

The duchy of France, Hugh's dominion, passed to his young son, Hugh
Capet, a boy of thirteen. When this Hugh grew up he did homage to
Lothair, but Richard gave his loyalty to Hugh of Paris's son. The
wars went on, and before many years went over Hugh Capet extinguished
the succession of Charlemagne's heirs to the throne of France, and
was crowned king himself, so beginning the reign of France proper;
as powerful and renowned a kingdom as Europe saw through many
generations. By throwing off the rule of German princes, and achieving
independence of the former French dynasty, an order of things began
that was not overthrown until our own day. Little by little the
French crown annexed the dominions of all its vassals, even the duchy
of Normandy, but that was not to be for many years yet. I hope we
have succeeded in getting at least a hint of the history of France
from the time it was the Gaul of the Roman empire; and the empire
of Charlemagne, and later, of the fragments of that empire, each a
province or kingdom under a ruler of its own, which were reunited in
one confederation under one king of France. All this time Europe is
under the religious rule of Rome, and in Richard the Fearless's later
years we find him the benefactor of the Church, living close by the
Minster of Fecamp and buried in its shadow at last. There was a deep
stone chest which was placed by Duke Richard's order near one of the
minster doors, where the rain might fall upon it that dropped from
the holy roof above. For many years, on Saturday evenings, the chest
was filled to the brim with [Pg089] wheat, a luxury in those days,
and the poor came and filled their measures and held out their hands
afterward for five shining pennies, while the lame and sick people
were visited in their homes by the almoner of the great church. There
was much talk about this hollowed block of stone, but when Richard
died in 996 at the end of his fifty-five years' reign, after a long,
lingering illness, his last command was that he should be buried in
the chest and lie "there where the foot should tread, and the dew and
the waters of heaven should fall." Beside this church of the Holy
Trinity at Fecamp he built the abbey of St. Wandville, the Rouen
cathedral, and the great church of the Benedictines at St. Ouen. New
structures have risen upon the old foundations, but Richard's name is
still connected with the places of worship that he cared for.

"Richard Sans-peur has long been our favorite hero," says Sir Francis
Palgrave, who has written perhaps the fullest account of the Third
Duke; "we have admired the fine boy, nursed on his father's knee
whilst the three old Danish warriors knelt and rendered their fealty.
During Richard's youth, adolescence, and age our interest in his
varied, active, energetic character has never flagged, and we go with
him in court and camp till the day of his death."

 [Illustration]

[Pg090]

 [Illustration]




V.

DUKE RICHARD THE GOOD.

 "Then would he sing achievements high
  And circumstance of chivalry."--SCOTT.


Richard the Fearless had several sons, and when he lay dying his
nobles asked him to say who should be his successor. "He who bears
my name," whispered the old duke, and added a moment later: "Let
the others take the oaths of fealty, acknowledge Richard as their
superior; and put their hands in his, and receive from him those lands
which I will name to you."

So Richard the Good came to his dukedom, with a rich inheritance in
every way from the father who had reigned so successfully, and his
brothers Geoffry, Mauger, William, and Robert, accepted their portions
of the dukedom, to which Richard added more lands of his own accord.

During this reign there were many changes, some very gradual
and natural ones, for Normandy was growing more French and less
Scandinavian all the time, and the relationship grew stronger and
stronger between vigorous young Normandy and troubled, failing
England. Later we shall see how our [Pg091] Normans gave a new
impulse to England, but already there are signs and forebodings of
what must come to pass in the days of Richard the Good's grandson,
William the Conqueror.

We first hear now of many names which are great names in Normandy
and England to this day. "It seems as if there were never any region
more peopled with men of known deeds, known names, known passions
and known crimes," says Palgrave; and the Norman annals abound with
historical titles "rendered illustrious by the illusions of time
and blazonry which imagination imparts." It is very strange how
few records there are, among the state papers in France, of all
this period. Every important public matter in England was carefully
recorded long before this, but with all the proverbial love of going
to law, and all the well-ordered priesthood, and good education of the
upper classes, there are only a few scattered charters until Normandy
is really merged in France. This almost corresponds to the absence,
in the literary world, of papers relating to Shakespeare, which is
such a puzzle to antiquarians. Here was a man well-known and beloved
both in his native village and the world of London, a man who must
have covered thousands of pages with writing, and written letters
and signed his name times without number, and yet not one of his
manuscripts and very few signatures can be found. Only the references
to him in contemporary literature remain to give us any facts at all
about the greatest of English writers. Of far less noteworthy men,
of his time and before that, we can make up [Pg092] reasonably full
biographies. And Normandy is known only through the records of other
nations, and the traditions and reports of romancing chroniclers.
There are no long lists of men and money, and no treasurer or general
of Rolf's, or Longsword's time has left us his accounts. Rolf's
brother, who went to Iceland while Rolf came to Normandy, in the
tyrannical reign of Harold Haarfager, established in that storm-bound
little country a nation of scholars and record-makers. Perhaps it was
easier to write there where the only enemies were ice and snow and
darkness and the fury of the sea and wind.

Yet we can guess at a great deal about the condition of Normandy.
There was so much going to and fro, such a lively commerce and
transportation of goods, that we know the old Roman roads had been
kept in good repair, and that many others must have been built as
the population increased. The famous fairs which were held make us
certain that there was a large business carried on, and besides the
maintenance and constant use of a large army, in some years there was
also a thrifty devotion to mercantile matters and agriculture. Foreign
artisans and manufacturers were welcomed to the Norman provinces, and
soon formed busy communities like the Flemish craftsmen, weavers and
leather-makers, at Falaise. The Normans had an instinctive liking for
pomp and splendor; so their tradesmen flourished, and their houses
became more and more elegant, and must be carved and gilded like the
dragon ships.

A merry, liberal duke was this Richard; fond of his court, and always
ready to uphold Normandy's [Pg093] honor and his own when there was
any fighting to be done. He had a great regard for his nobles, and we
begin to find a great deal said about gentlemen; the duke would have
only gentlemen for his chosen followers, and the aristocrats make
themselves felt more distinctly than before. The rule of the best is a
hard thing to manage, it sinks already into a rule of the lucky, the
pushing, or the favored in the Rouen court. The power and reign of
chivalry begins to blossom now far and wide.

We begin to hear rumors too on the other side that there were wrong
distinctions between man and man, and tyranny that grew hard to bear,
and one Norman resents the truth that his neighbor is a better and
richer man than he, and moreover has the right to make him a servant,
and to make laws for him. The Norman citizens were equal in civil
rights--that is to say, they were not taxed without their own consent,
need pay no tolls, and might hunt and fish; all could do these things
except the villeins[2] and peasants, who really composed the mass of
the native population, the descendants of those who lived in Normandy
before Rolf came there. Even the higher clergy did not form part of
the nobility and gentry at first, and in later years there was still a
difference in rank and privileges between the priests of Norwegian and
Danish race and the other ecclesiastics.

  [2] Farm laborers; countrymen.

Before Richard the Good had been long on his throne there was a great
revolt and uprising of the peasantry, who evidently did not think that
their new [Pg094] duke deserved his surname at all. These people
conceived the idea of destroying the inequality of races, so that
Normandy should hold only one nation, as it already held one name.
We cannot help being surprised at the careful political organization
of the peasantry, and at finding that they established a regular
parliament with two representatives from every district. In all
the villages and hamlets, after the day's work was over, they came
together to talk over their wrongs or to listen to some speaker more
eloquent than his fellows. They "made a commune," which anticipates
later events in the history of France in a surprising way. Freeman
says that "such a constitution could hardly have been extemporized by
mere peasants," and believes that the disturbance was founded in a
loyalty to the local customs and rights which were fast being trampled
under foot, and that the rebels were only trying to defend their
time-honored inheritance. The liberty which they were eager to grasp
might have been a great good, scattered as it would have been over
a great extent of country, instead of being won by separate cities.
The ancient Norman constitutions of the Channel Islands, Jersey and
Guernsey and the rest, antiquated as they seem, breathe to-day a
spirit of freedom worthy of the air of England or Switzerland or
Norway.

The peasants clamored for their right to be equal with their
neighbors, and no doubt many a small landholder joined them, who did
not wish to swear fealty to his over-lord. In the /Roman de Rou/,
an old chronicle which keeps together many traditions about early
[Pg095] Normandy that else might have been forgotten, we find one of
these piteous harangues. Perhaps it is not authentic, but it gives the
spirit of the times so well that it ought to have a place here:

"The lords do nothing but evil; we cannot obtain either reason or
justice from them; they have all, they take all, eat all, and make us
live in poverty and suffering. Every day with us is a day of pain; we
gain nought by our labors, there are so many dues and services. Why do
we allow ourselves to be thus treated? Let us place ourselves beyond
their power; we too are men, we have the same limbs, the same height,
the same power of endurance, and we are a hundred to one. Let us swear
to defend each other; let us be firmly knit together, and no man shall
be lord over us; we shall be free from tolls and taxes, free to fell
trees, to take game and fish, and do as we will in all things, in the
wood, in the meadow, on the water!"

At this time the larger portion of Normandy was what used to be called
forest. That word meant something more than woodland; it belonged then
to tracts of wild country, woodland and moorland and marshes, and
these were the possession of the crown. The peasants had in the old
days a right, or a custom at any rate, of behaving as if the forests
were their own, but more and more they had been restricted, and the
unaccustomed yoke galled them bitterly. Besides their being forbidden
to hunt and fish in the forests, the water-ways were closed from them,
taxes imposed, and their time and labor demanded on the duke's lands.
There had been grants [Pg096] of these free tracts of country to
the new nobility, and with the lands the new lords claimed also the
service of the peasantry.

The people do not appear to have risen against the duke himself, so
much as against their immediate oppressors, and it was one of these
who was to be their punisher. You remember that Richard the Fearless'
mother, Espriota, married, in the troublous times of his boyhood,
a rich countryman called Sperling. They had a son called Raoul of
Ivry, who seems to have been high in power and favor with the second
Richard, his half-brother, and who now entered upon his cruel task
with evident liking. He had been brought up among the country-folk,
although he stood at this time next to the duke in office.

He was very crafty, and sent spies all through Normandy to find out
when the Assembly or Parliament was to be held, and then dispersed
his troops according to the spies' report, and seized upon all the
deputies and these peasants who were giving oaths of allegiance to
their new commanders. Whether from design or from anger and prejudice
Raoul next treated his poor prisoners with terrible cruelty. He maimed
them in every way, putting out their eyes, cutting off their hands
or feet; he impaled them alive, and tortured them with melted lead.
Those who lived through their sufferings were sent home to be paraded
through the streets as a warning. So fear prevailed over even the
love of liberty in their brave hearts, for the association of Norman
peasants was broken up, and a sad resignation took the place, for
[Pg097] hundreds of years, of the ardor and courage which had been
lighted only to go out again so quickly.

There was another rebellion besides this, of which we have some
account, and one man instead of a whole class was the offender. One of
Richard's brothers, or half-brothers, the son of an unknown mother,
had received as his inheritance the county of Exmes, which held three
very rich and thriving towns. These were Exmes, Argentan, and Falaise
in which we have already learned that there was a colony of Flemings
settled, skilful, industrious weavers and leather-makers and workers
in cloth and metals. Falaise itself was already very old indeed, and
there remain yet the ruins of an old Roman camp, claimed to belong to
the time of Julius Caesar, beside the earliest specimen of that square
gray tower which is really of earlier date though always associated
with Norman feudalism. The Falaise Fair, which was of such renown in
the days of the first dukes, is supposed to be the survival of some
pagan festival of vast antiquity. The name of Guibray, the suburb of
Falaise which gave its name to the Fair, is said to be derived from
the Gaulish word for mistletoe, and wherever we hear of mistletoe in
ancient history it reminds us, not of merry-makings and Christmas
holidays, but of the grim rites and customs of the Druids.

William, Duke Richard's brother, does not seem to have been grateful
for these rich possessions, and before long there is a complaint that
he fails to respond to the royal summons, and that he will not render
service or do homage in return for his holding. [Pg098] Raoul of Ivry
promptly counselled the Duke to take arms against the offender.

It was not long before William found himself a prisoner in the old
tower of Rolf at Rouen. He was treated with great severity, and only
avoided being hanged by making his escape in most romantic fashion. A
compassionate lady contrived to supply him with a rope, and he came
down from his high tower-window to the ground hand over hand. Luckily
he found none of his keepers waiting for him, and succeeded in getting
out of the country. Raoul had been hunting his partisans, and now he
had the pleasure of hunting William himself, by keeping spies on his
track and forcing him from one danger to another until he was tired
of his life, and boldly determined to go to his brother the Duke and
beg for mercy. He was very fortunate, for Richard not only listened
to him, and was not angry at being stopped on a day when he had gone
out to amuse himself with hunting, but he pardoned the suppliant and
pitied his trials and sufferings, and more than all, though he did not
give back the forfeited county of Exmes, he did give him the county of
Eu. We hear nothing of what Raoul thought of such a pleasant ending
to the troubles after he had shown such zeal himself in pursuing and
harassing the Duke's enemy.

We must take a quick look at the relations between Richard the Good
and Hugh Capet, Hugh of Paris's successor, and Robert of France, Hugh
Capet's son, who was trying to uphold the fading dignities and power
of the Carlovingian throne. Truly [Pg099] Charlemagne's glories were
almost spent, and the new glories of the great house of the Capets
were growing brighter and brighter. Our eyes already turn toward
England and the part that the Norman dukes must soon play there, but
there is something to say first about France.

Robert and Richard were great friends; they had many common interests,
and were bound by solemn oaths and formal covenants of loyalty toward
and protection of each other. Robert was a very honorable man; his
relation to his father was a most curious one, for they seem to have
been partners in royalty and to have reigned together over France.
Richard the Fearless had done much to establish the throne of the
Capets, and there was a firm bond between the second Richard and young
Robert, to whom he did homage. There were several powerful chiefs and
tributaries, but Richard the Good outranks them all, and takes his
place without question as the first peer of France. The golden lilies
of France are already in flower, and though history is almost silent
through the later years of Hugh Capet's life, there are signs of great
activity within the kingdom and of growing prosperity. There is an old
proverb: "Happy is that nation which has no history!" and whenever
we come to a time that the historians pass over or describe in a few
sentences, we take a long breath and imagine the people busy in their
homes and fields and shops, blest in the freedom from war and disorder.

Robert of France was a famous wit and liked to play tricks upon his
associates. He was a poet too, [Pg100] and wrote some beautiful
Latin rhymes which are still sung in the churches. There is a good
story about his being at Rome once at a solemn church festival. When
he approached the altar he held a chalice in his hands with great
reverence, and everybody could see that it held a roll of parchment.

There could be no doubt that the king meant to bestow a splendid gift
upon the church, perhaps, a duchy or even his whole kingdom; but after
the service was over, and the pope and cardinals, full of expectation,
hurried to see what prize was put into their keeping, behold! only a
copy of Robert's famous chant "/Cornelius Centurio!/" It was a sad
disappointment indeed when they looked at this unexpected offering!

But Robert was more than a good comrade, he was a remarkably good
king, as kings went; he kept order and was brave, decided, and
careful. It was true that he had fallen heir to a prosperous and
well-governed kingdom, but it takes constant effort and watchfulness
and ready strength to keep a kingdom or any lesser responsibilities
up to the right level. He had one great trial, for his wife Bertha,
being his first cousin, should not have been his wife according to the
laws of the Roman Church. For the first time there was a pope of Rome
who was from beyond the Alps, a German; and Robert and he were on bad
terms, which resulted in the excommunication of the king of France and
the queen, and at one time they were put so completely under the ban
that even their servants forsook them and the whole kingdom was thrown
into confusion. The misery became so [Pg101] great that the poor
queen presently had to be separated from her husband, and this was the
more grievous as she had no children, and so Robert was obliged to put
her away from him and marry again for the sake of having an heir to
the throne. Bertha's successor was very handsome, but very cross, and
in later years King Robert used to say: "There are plenty of chickens
in the nest, but my old hen pecks at me!"

In spite of the new queen's bad temper there are a good many things to
be said in her praise. She was much better educated than most women of
her day, and she had a great admiration for Robert's poetry, and these
things must have gone far to make up for her faults.

Duke Richard's marriage was a very fortunate one. His sister Hawisa,
of whom he was guardian, was asked in marriage by Duke Godfrey of
Brittany, and this was a very welcome alliance, since it bound the two
countries closer together than ever before, and made them forget the
rivalries which had sometimes caused serious trouble. Especially this
was true when a little later Richard himself married Godfrey's sister
Judith, who was distinguished for her wisdom. They had a most splendid
wedding at the Abbey of St. Michael's Mount, and in course of time one
of their daughters married the Count of Burgundy and one the Count of
Flanders.

In spite of much immorality and irregularity in those days, there was
enough that was proper and respectable in the alliances of the noble
families, and we catch many a glimpse of faithful lovers and [Pg102]
gallant love-making. It was often said that Normandy's daughters did
as much for the well-being of the country as her sons, and when we
read the lists of grand marriages we can understand that the dukes'
daughters won as many provinces by their beauty as the sons did by
their bravery in war.

It is hard to keep the fortunes of all these races and kingdoms clear
in our minds. We cannot help thinking of England, and looking at all
this early history of the Normans and their growth in relation to it.
Then we must keep track of the Danes and Northmen, who have by no
means outgrown their old traits and manners, though their cousins in
Normandy have given up privateering and the long ships. The history of
France makes a sort of background for Normandy and England both.

These marriages of which I have just told you greatly increased
the magnificence and the power of the Norman duchy and widened the
territory in every way. The Norman dukes could claim the right to
interfere in the affairs of those states to which they were allied,
and they improved their opportunities. But the most important of all
the alliances has not been spoken of at all--the marriage of Richard
the Fearless' daughter Emma to AEthelred the Unready of England.

AEthelred himself was the black sheep of his illustrious family--a long
line of noble men they were for the most part. In that age much of the
character of a nation's history depended upon its monarch, and it is
almost impossible to tell the fortunes of a country except by giving
the biographies [Pg103] of the reigning king. This AEthelred seems
to have had energy enough, but he began many enterprises and never
ended them, and wasted a great deal of strength on long, needless
expeditions, and does not appear to have made effective resistance to
the enemies who came knocking at the very gates of England. He had
no tact and little bravery, and was given to putting his trust in
unworthy and treacherous followers. AEthelred was the descendant of
good King AElfred and his noble successors, but his own kingdom was
ready to fall to pieces before he reigned over it very long, and his
reign of thirty-eight years came near to being the ruin of England.
There were two or three men who helped him in the evil work, who were
greater traitors at heart than AEthelred himself, and we can hardly
understand why they were restored to favor after their treason and
selfishness were discovered. As one historian says, if we could only
have a few of the private letters, of which we have such abundance two
or three centuries later, they would be the key to many difficulties.

The Danes were nibbling at the shores of England as rats would gnaw
at a biscuit. They grew more and more troublesome. Over in Normandy,
Richard the Good was treating these same Danes like friends, and
allowing them to come into his harbors to trade with the Norman
merchants. In the Cotentin country they found a people much like
themselves, preserving many old traditions, and something of the
northern speech. The Cotentin lands were poor and rocky, but the hills
were crowded [Pg104] with castles, well armed and well fortified, and
the men were brave soldiers and sailors, true descendants of the old
vikings. They sought their fortunes on the sea too, and we can trace
the names of these Cotentin barons and their followers through the
army of William the Conqueror to other castles in the broad English
lands that were won in less than a hundred years from AEthelred's time.
Very likely some of these Cotentin Normans were in league with the
northern Danes who made their head-quarters on the Norman shores, and
went plundering across the Channel. Soon AEthelred grew very angry,
which was to be expected, and he gathered his fleets at Portsmouth,
and announced that he should bring Duke Richard back a captive in
chains, and waste the whole offending country with fire, except the
holy St. Michael's Mount.

 [Illustration: QUEEN EMMA OR AELFGIFU (FROM THE REGISTER OF HYDE
    ABBEY).]

The fleet obeyed AEthelred's foolish orders, and went ashore at the
mouth of the river Barfleur, only to find the Normans assembled from
the whole surrounding country--not a trained army by any means, but an
enraged peasantry, men and women alike, armed with shepherds' crooks,
and reaping-hooks and flails, and in that bloody battle of Sanglac,
they completely routed the English. All the invaders who escaped
crowded into six of their vessels and abandoned the rest, and hurried
away as fast as they could go. This was a strong link in the chain
that by and by would be long enough to hold England fast, and put her
at the mercy of the Normans altogether. There was peace made before
very long, though the Normans considered themselves [Pg105] to have
been grievously insulted, and laughed at the English for being so well
whipped. Perpetual peace, the contract unwisely promises, and the pope
interfered between the combatants, to prevent the shedding of innocent
blood. After the promises were formally made, AEthelred tried to make
the alliance even closer. He had children already--one, the gallant
Eadmund Ironside, who might have saved the tottering kingdom if he had
only held the authority which was thrown away in his father's hands.
The name of AEthelred's first queen has been lost, but she was "a
noble lady, the daughter of Thored, an Ealdorman," and had been some
time dead, so with great diplomacy King AEthelred the Unready, "by the
grace of God Basileus of Albion, King and Monarch of all the British
Nations, of the Orkneys and the surrounding Islands," as he liked
to sign himself, came wooing to Normandy. Emma, the duke's sister,
married him and went to England.

AEthelred gave her a splendid wedding-present of [Pg106] wide domains
in the counties of Devon and Hants, part of which held the cathedral
cities of Winchester and Exeter, the pride and defence of Southern
Britain. Queen Emma gave the governorship of Exeter to her chief
adviser and officer, Hugh the Norman, and her new subjects called her
the Gem of Normandy, and treated her with great deference. She had the
beauty of her race and of Rolf's descendants, and her name was changed
to AElfgifu, because this sounded more familiar to the English ears. At
least that is the explanation which has come down to us.

Things were in a very bad way in England--the Anglo-Saxon rule of that
time was founded upon fraud and violence, and the heavy misfortunes
which assailed the English made them fear worse troubles later on. The
wisest among them tried to warn their countrymen, but the warnings
were apparently of little use. The make-believe rejoicings at Queen
Emma's coming were quickly over with, and soon we hear of her flight
to Normandy. Many reasons were given for this ominous act. Some say
that AEthelred disgusted her by his drunkenness and lawlessness, and
others that Hugh the Norman was treacherous, and betrayed his trust to
the Danes, and that the queen was a partner in the business. There is
still another story, that AEthelred was guilty of a shocking massacre,
and that Emma fled in the horror and confusion that it made. Yet later
she returned to England as the queen of Cnut the Dane.

Now we must change from England to France altogether for a few pages,
and see how steadily the [Pg107] power of the Normans was growing,
and how widely it made itself felt. We must see Richard the Good
as the ally of France in the warfare waged by King Robert against
Burgundy, which was the most important event of Robert's reign.
Old Hugh of Paris had carefully avoided any confusion between the
rights of Burgundy and the rights of France when he established the
foundation of his kingdom. He was a wise politician, and understood
that it would not do to conflict with such a power as Burgundy's,
which held the Low Countries, Spain, and Portugal and Italy within its
influence. Since his day Burgundy had been divided, but it was still
distinguished for its great piety and the number of its religious
institutions. Robert's uncle was Duke of Burgundy, and he was a very
old man; so Robert himself had high hopes of becoming his successor.
His chief rival was the representative of the Lombard kings in
Italy--Otho William, who was son of Adalbert, a pirate who had wandered
beyond the Alps, and Gerberga, the Count of Chalons' daughter. After
Adalbert died Gerberga married old Duke Henry of Burgundy, and
prevailed upon him to declare her son as his successor. This was
illegal, but Otho William was much admired and beloved, and the great
part of the Burgundians upheld his right.

Behold, then, Richard the Good and his Norman soldiery marching away
to the wars! Duke Henry was dead, and King Robert made haste to summon
his ally. Thirty thousand men were mustered under the Norman banner,
and the black raven of war went slowly inland. What an enterprise
it was to transport [Pg108] such a body of men and horses across
country! Supplies could not be hurried from point to point as readily
as in after-times, and the country itself must necessarily be almost
devastated as if a swarm of locusts had crept through it. Normandy was
overflowing with a military population anxious for something to do,
with a lingering love for piracy and plundering. They made a swift
journey, and Richard and his men were at the gates of the city of
Auxerre almost as soon as the venerable duke was in his grave.

There was a tremendous siege; Robert's rival had won the people's
hearts, and in the natural strongholds of the mountain slopes they
defended themselves successfully. Besides this brave opposition of
the Burgundians, the Normans were fought against in a more subtle way
by strange phenomena in the heavens. A fiery dragon shot across the
sky, and a thick fog and darkness overspread the face of the earth.
Auxerre was shrouded in night, and the Norman archers could not see
to shoot their arrows. Before long the leagued armies raised the
siege of the border city and marched on farther into the country up
among the bleak, rocky hills. Only one of the Burgundian nobles--Hugh,
Count of Chalons and Bishop of Auxerre--was loyal to the cause of
King Robert of France. Presently we shall see him again under very
surprising circumstances for a count, not to speak of a bishop! The
country was thoroughly ravaged, but some time passed before it was
finally conquered. At last there was a compromise, and Robert's son
was elected duke. His [Pg109] descendants gave France a vast amount
of trouble in later years, and so Burgundy revenged herself and Otho
William's lost cause.

Richard of Normandy had kept his army well drilled in this long
Burgundian campaign, but before his reign was over he had another war
to fight with the Count of Dreux. The lands of Dreux were originally
in the grant made to Rolf, but later they were held by a line of
counts, whose last representative disappeared in Richard the Fearless'
reign. We find the country in Richard's possession without any record
of war, so it had probably fallen to the crown by right. There was a
great Roman road through the territory like the Watling Street that
ran from Dover to Chester through England, and this was well defended
as the old Roman roads always were. Chartres was joined to Dreux by
this road, and Chartres was not at peace with Normandy. So a new fort
and a town sprung up on the banks of the river to keep Chartres in
check: Tillieres, or the Tileries, which we might call the ancestor of
the famous Tuileries of modern Paris.

There were several fierce battles, and sometimes gaining and sometimes
losing, the Normans found themselves presently in a hard place. We
are rather startled to hear of the appearance of king Olaf of Norway
and the king of the Swedes as Richard's allies. The French people had
not wholly outgrown their hatred--or fear and distrust either--of the
pirates, and when the news came that bands of Northmen were landing
in Brittany there was a wild excitement. Richard and the Chartres
chieftain were making [Pg110] altogether too much of their quarrel,
and King Robert, as preserver of the public peace, was obliged to
interfere. After this episode everybody was more afraid of Normandy
than ever, and Chartres was the gainer by the town of Dreux, with
its forest and castle, that being the king's award. We cannot help
wondering why Richard was persuaded to yield so easily, with all his
Northmen eager enough to fight--but they disappear for the time being,
and many stories were told of their treacherous warfare in Brittany;
of the pitfalls covered with branches into which they tempted their
mounted enemies on the battle-field of Dol. All this seems to have
been a little private diversion on their way to the Norman capital,
where they were bidden for the business with Chartres.

Then there was a fight with the bishopric of Chalons, which interests
us chiefly because Richard's son and namesake first makes his
appearance. Renaud, the son of Otho William, who had lost the dukedom
of Burgundy, had married a Norman damsel belonging to the royal family
of Rolf. This Renaud was defeated and captured by the Count-Bishop
of Chalons, of whom we know something already. He was loyal to King
Robert of France, you remember, in the war with Burgundy, and now
he treated Renaud with terrible severity, and had broken his vows,
moreover, by getting married.

King Robert gave the Normans permission to march through his
dominions, and seems to have turned his back upon the Count-Bishop.
There was a succession of sieges, and the army burned and [Pg111]
destroyed on every side as it went through Burgundy, and finally
made great havoc in one of the chief towns, called Mirmande in the
chronicles, though no Mirmande can be heard of now in that part of
the world, and perhaps the angry Normans determined to leave no trace
of it for antiquarians and geographers to discover. The Count-Bishop
flees for his life to Chalons, and when he was assailed there, he was
so frightened that he put an old saddle on his back and came out of
the city gates in that fashion to beg for mercy. The merry historian
who describes this scene adds that he offered Richard a ride and
that he rolled on the ground at the young duke's feet in complete
humiliation. One might reasonably say that the count made a donkey of
himself in good earnest, and that his count's helmet and his priestly,
shaven crown did not go very well together.

The third Richard covered himself with glory in this campaign,
however, and went back to Normandy triumphant, to give his old father
great pleasure by his valor. But Richard the Good was very feeble now,
and knew that he was going to die; so, like Richard the Fearless, he
went to Fecamp to spend his last days.

When he had confessed to the bishops, he called for his faithful
barons, and made his will. Richard was to be his successor, and his
courage and honesty deserved it; but the old father appears to have
had a presentiment that all would not go well, for he begged the
barons to be loyal to the good youth. Robert, the second son, fell
heir to the county of Exmes, upon the condition that he should be
faithful [Pg112] to his brother. There was another son, Mauger, a
bad fellow, who had no friends or reputation, even at that early day.
He was a monk, and a very low-minded one; but later he appears, to
our astonishment, as Archbishop of Rouen. No mention is made of his
receiving any gift from his father; and soon Richard the Good died and
was buried in the Fecamp Abbey. In after years the bones of Richard
the Fearless were taken from the sarcophagus outside the abbey door,
and father and son were laid in a new tomb near the high altar.

All this early history of Normandy is told mainly by two men, the
saga-writers of their time--William of Jumieges, who wrote in the
lifetime of William the Conqueror, and Master Wace, of Caen, who was
born on the island of Jersey, between thirty and forty years after
the conquest of England. His "Roman de Rou" is most spirited and
interesting, but, naturally, the earlier part of it is not always
reliable. Both the chroniclers meant to tell the truth, but writing at
a later date for the glory of Normandy, and in such a credulous age,
we must forgive them their inaccuracies.

They have a great deal more to say about Richard the Good than about
his two sons, Richard and Robert. Richard was acknowledged as duke by
all the barons after his father's death, and then went in state to
Paris to do homage to King Robert. This we learn from the records of
his contract of marriage with the king's daughter, Lady Adela, who was
a baby in her cradle, and the copy of the settlements is preserved,
or, at least, the account of the dowry [Pg113] which Richard
promised. This was the /seigneurie/ of the whole Cotentin country, and
several other baronies and communes; Cherbourg and Bruot and Caen, and
many cities and lands besides. Poor little Lady Adela! and poor young
husband, too, for that matter; for this was quite a heartless affair
of state, and neither of them was to be any happier for all their
great possessions.

In the meantime Robert, the Duke's brother, was not in the least
satisfied, and made an outcry because, though he was lord of the
beautiful county of Exmes, the city of Falaise was withheld from him.
There was a man from Brittany who urged him to resent his wrongs, and
made trouble between the brothers; Ermenoldus he was called, /the
theosophist/; and there is a great mystery about him which the old
writers stop to wonder over. He was evidently a sort of magician, and
those records that can be discovered give rise to a suspicion that he
had strayed far eastward with some pirate fleet toward Asia, and had
learned there to work wonders and to compass his ends by uncanny means.

There was a siege of Falaise, which Robert seized and tried to keep by
main strength; but Richard's army was too much for him, and at last he
sued for peace. The brothers went back to Rouen apparently the best
of friends; but there was a grand banquet in Rolf's old castle, and
Richard was suddenly death-struck as he sat at the head of the feast,
and was carried to his bed, where he quickly breathed his last. The
funeral bell began to toll while the banquet still went on, and the
barons made themselves merry in the old hall. [Pg114]

There was great lamentation, for Richard was already much beloved, and
nobody doubted that he had been poisoned. So Robert came to the throne
of Normandy with a black stain upon his character, and during all the
rest of his life that stain was not overlooked nor forgotten.

As for the baby-widow, she afterward became the wife of the Count of
Flanders, Baldwin de Lisle, and she was the mother of Matilda, who was
the wife of William the Conqueror.

 [Illustration]

[Pg115]

 [Illustration]




VI.

ROBERT THE MAGNIFICENT.

 "What exile from himself can flee?"--BYRON.


Before we begin the story of the next Duke of Normandy whose two
surnames, the Devil, and the Magnificent, give us a broad hint of
his character, we must take a look at the progress of affairs in the
dukedom. There is one thing to be remembered in reading this history,
or any other, that history is not merely the story of this monarch
or that, however well he may represent the age in which he lived and
signify its limitations and development.

In Normandy one cannot help seeing that a power has been at work
bringing a new Northern element into the country, and that there has
been a great growth in every way since Rolf came with his vikings and
besieged the city of Jumieges. Now the dukedom that he formed is one
of the foremost of its day, able to stand on equal ground with the
royal kingdom and duchy of France, for Robert's homage is only the
homage of equals and allies. Normandy is the peer of Burgundy and of
Flanders, and every day increases in strength, in [Pg116] ambition,
in scholarship and wealth. The influence and /prestige/ of the dukedom
are recognized everywhere, and soon the soldiers of Normandy are
going to take hold of English affairs and master them with unequalled
strength. Chivalry is in the bloom of its youth, and the merchants of
Falaise, and Rouen, and their sister cities, are rich and luxurious.
The women are skilled in needlework and are famous for their beauty
and intelligence. Everywhere there are new castles and churches, and
the land swarms with inhabitants who hardly find room enough, while
the great army hardly draws away the overplus of men from the farms
and workshops. There are whole districts like the Cotentin peninsula,
that are nearly ready to pour out their population into some new
country, like bees when they swarm in early summer, and neither the
fashion of going on pilgrimage to the holy shrines, nor the spirit
that leads to any warlike adventure, are equal to the need for a new
conquest of territory, and a general emigration.

There are higher standards everywhere in law and morals and customs of
home-life. The nobles are very proud and keep up a certain amount of
state in their high stone castles. In the Cotentin alone the ruins of
more than a hundred of these can yet be seen, and all over Normandy
and Brittany are relics of that busy, prosperous time. The whole
territory is like a young man who has reached his majority, and who
feels a strength and health and ambition that make him restless, and
make him believe himself capable of great things.

[Pg117]

 [Illustration: NORMAN COSTUMES.

1. Herdsman. 2. Man of rank. 3. Pilgrim. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Warriors. 9.
Man of rank. 10. Lady of rank.]

[Pg118]

From followers of the black ravens and worshippers of the god Thor,
the Normans have become Christians and devout followers of the Church
of Rome. They go on pilgrimage to distant shrines and build churches
that the world may well wonder at to-day and try to copy. They have
great houses for monks and nuns, and crowds of priests and scholars,
and it would not be easy to find worshippers of the old faith unless
among old people and in secluded neighborhoods. There is little left
of the old Northman's fashions of life but his spirit is as vigorous
as ever, and his courage, and recklessness, his love of a fight and
hatred of cowardice, his beauty and shapeliness, are sent down from
generation to generation, a surer inheritance than lands or money. We
grow eager, ourselves, to see what will come of this leaven of daring
and pride of strength. There is no such thing for Normandy now, as
tranquillity.

Duke Robert's story is chiefly interesting to us because he was the
father of William the Conqueror, and in most of the accounts of that
time it is hard to find any thing except various versions of his
course toward his more famous son. But in reality he was a very gifted
and powerful man, and strange to say, the conquest of England was only
the carrying out of a plan that was made by Duke Robert himself.

The two young sons of Emma and AEthelred were still in Normandy, and
the Duke thought it was a great pity that they were neglected and
apparently forgotten by their countrymen. He undertook to be their
champion, and boldly demanded that King [Pg119] Cnut of England
should consider their rights. He sent an embassy to England and bade
Cnut "give them their own," which probably meant the English crown.
Cnut disdained the message, as might have been expected, and Duke
Robert armed his men and fitted out a fleet, and all set sail for
England to force the Dane to recognize the young princes. It sounds
very well that the Normans should have been so eager to serve the
Duke's cousins, but no doubt they were talking together already about
the possibility of extending their dominions across the Channel. They
were disappointed now, however, for they were beaten back and out of
their course by very bad weather, and had to put in at the island of
Jersey. From there they took a short excursion to Brittany, because
Robert and his cousin Alan were not on good terms, Alan having refused
to do homage to Normandy. There was a famous season of harrying
and burning along the Breton coast, which may have reconciled the
adventurers to their disappointment, but at any rate the conquest of
England was put off for forty years. One wonders how Cnut's Queen
Emma felt about the claims of her sons. It was a strange position for
her to be put into. A Norman woman herself who had virtually forsaken
her children, she could hardly blame her brother for his efforts to
restore them to their English belongings, and yet she was bound to her
new English interests, and must have different standards as Danish
Cnut's wife from those of Saxon AEthelred's. There is an announcement
in one of the Norman chronicles that Cnut sent a message to the
[Pg120] effect that he would give the princes their rights at his
death. This must have been for the sake of peace, but it is not very
likely that any such thing ever happened.

A new acquaintance between the countries must have grown out of the
banishment of some of the English nobles in the early part of Cnut's
reign, and they no doubt strengthened the interest of the Normans,
and made their desire to possess England greater than ever before. We
shall be conscious of it more and more until the time of the Conquest
comes. The Normans plotted and planned again and again, and their
intrigues continually grew more dangerous to England. It is plain to
see that they were always watching for a chance to try their strength,
and were not unwilling to provoke a quarrel. Eadward, one of the
English princes, was ready to claim his rights, but he had learned
to be very fond of Normandy, and his half-heartedness served his
adopted country well when he came at last to the English throne. For
the present we lose sight of him, but not of AElfred his brother, who
ventured to England on an expedition which cost him his life, but that
failure made the Norman desire for revenge burn hotter and deeper than
before, though the ashes of disappointment covered it for a time.

Duke Robert's reign began with a grand flourish, as if he wished to
bribe his subjects into forgetfulness of his brother Richard's death.
There were splendid feasts and presents of armor and fine clothes for
his retainers, and he won his name of the Magnificent in the very face
of those who whispered [Pg121] that he was a murderer. He was very
generous, and seems to have given presents for the pleasure it gave
himself rather than from any underhand motives of gaining popularity.
We are gravely told that some of his beneficiaries died of joy, which
strikes one as being somewhat exaggerated.

The old castle of Rolf at Rouen was forsaken for the castle of
Falaise. No doubt there were unpleasant associations with Rolf's hall,
where poor Richard had been seized with his mysterious mortal illness.
Falaise, with its hunting-grounds and pleasant woods and waters and
its fine situation, was Robert's favorite home forever after. There he
brought his wife Estrith, Cnut's sister, who first had been the wife
of Ulf the Danish king, and there he lived in a free companionship
with his nobles and with great condescension towards his inferiors,
with whom he was often associated in most familiar terms.

There were chances enough to show his valor. Once Baldwin the elder,
of Flanders, was attacked by his son Baldwin de Lisle, who had put
himself at the head of an army, and the poor Count was forced to flee
to Falaise for shelter and safety. Any excuse for going to war seems
to have been accepted in Normandy; the country was brimming over with
people. There was almost more population than the land could support,
and Robert led his men to Flanders with great alacrity, and settled
the mutiny so entirely that there was no more trouble. Flanders was
brought to a proper state of submission, as if in revenge for old
scores. At last the noblemen who had upheld the insurrection all
deserted the leader of [Pg122] it, and both they and young Baldwin
besought Robert to make the terms of peace. After this, Flanders and
Normandy were very friendly together, and before long they formed a
most significant alliance of the royal houses.

In Robert's strolls about Falaise, perhaps in disguise, like another
Haroun al Raschid, his beauty-loving eyes caught sight one day of a
young girl who was standing bare-footed in a shallow brook, washing
linen, and making herself merry with a group of busy young companions.
This was Arlette, or Herleva, according as one gives her the Saxon
or the Norman name; her father was a brewer and tanner, who had been
attracted to Falaise from Germany by the reputation of its leather
manufactures and good markets. The pastures and hunting-grounds made
skins very cheap and abundant, but the trade of skinning of beasts was
considered a most degrading one, and those who pursued it in ancient
times were thought less of than those who followed almost any other
occupation. If we were not sure of this, we might suspect the Norman
nobles of casting undue shame and reproach upon this man Fulbert.

Duke Robert seems to have quite forgotten his lawful wife in his new
love-making with Herleva. Even the tanner himself objected to the
duke's notice of his daughter, but who could withstand the wishes of
so great a man? Not Fulbert, who accepted the inevitable with a good
grace, for later in the story he shows himself a faithful retainer and
household official of his lord and master. Robert never seems to have
recovered from his first [Pg123] devotion to the pretty creature who
stood with slender, white feet in the brook, and turned so laughing
a face toward him. They showed not long ago the very castle-window
in Falaise from which he caught his first sight of the woman who
was to rule his life. He did not marry her, though Estrith was sent
away; but they had a son, who was named William, who himself added
the titles of the Great and The Conqueror, but who never escaped
hearing to his life's end the shame and ignominy of his birth. We
cannot doubt that it was as mean an act then as now to taunt a man
with the disgrace he could not help; but of all the great men who
were of illegitimate birth whom we know in the pages of history,
this famous William is oftenest openly shamed by his title of the
Bastard. He won much applause; he was the great man of his time, but
from pique, or jealousy, or prejudice, perhaps from some faults that
he might have helped, he was forever accused of the shame that was
not his. The Bastard,--the Tanner's Grandson; he was never allowed to
forget, through any heroism or success in war, or furthering of Norman
fortunes, that these titles belonged to him.

The pride of the Norman nobles was dreadfully assailed by Duke
Robert's shameful alliance with Herleva. All his relations, who had
more or less right to the ducal crown, were enraged beyond control.
Estrith had no children, and this beggarly little fellow who was
growing plump and rosy in the tanner's house, was arch-enemy of
all the proud lords and gentlemen. There was plenty of scandal and
mockery [Pg124] in Falaise, and the news of Robert's base behavior
was flying from village to village through Normandy and France. The
common people of Falaise laughed in the faces of the barons and
courtiers as they passed in the street, and one day an old burgher and
neighbor of the tanner asked William de Talvas, the head of one of
the most famous Norman families, to go in with him to see the Duke's
son. The Lord of Alencon was very angry when he looked at the innocent
baby-face. He saw, by some strange foreboding and prevision, the
troubles that would fall upon his own head because of this vigorous
young life, and, as he cursed the unconscious child again and again,
his words only echoed the fear that was creeping through Normandy.

Robert was very bold in his defiance of public opinion, and before
long the old tanner sheds his blouse like the cocoon of a caterpillar,
and blooms out resplendent in the gay trappings of court chamberlain.
Herleva was given the place as duchess which did not legally belong to
her, and this hurt the pride of the ladies and gentlemen of the court
and the country in a way that all Robert's munificence and generosity
could not repay or cure. The age was licentious enough, but public
opinion demanded a proper conformity to law and etiquette. All the
aristocratic house of Rolf's descendants, the valor and scholarship
and churchmanship of Normandy, were insulted at once. The trouble
fermented more and more, until the Duke's uncle, the Archbishop of
Rouen, called his nephew to account for such open sin and disgrace
of his kindred, and finally [Pg125] excommunicated him and put all
Normandy under a ban.

Somehow this outbreak was quieted down, and just then Robert was
called upon, not only to settle the quarrel in Flanders above
mentioned, but to uphold the rights of the French king. For his
success in this enterprise he was granted the district of the Vexin,
which lay between Normandy and France, and so the Norman duchy
extended its borders to the very walls of Paris. Soon other questions
of pressing importance rose up to divert public comment; it was no
time to provoke the Duke's anger, and there was little notice taken of
Herleva's aggravating presence in the ducal castle, or the untoward
growth and flourishing of her son.

At length Duke Robert announced his intention of going on a pilgrimage
to Jerusalem. He wished to show his piety and to gain as much credit
as possible, so the long journey was to be made on foot. The Norman
barons begged him not to think of such a thing, for in the excited
condition of French and Norman affairs nothing could be more imprudent
than to leave the dukedom masterless. "By my faith!" Robert answered
stoutly, "I do not mean to leave you without a lord. Here is my young
son, who will grow and be a gallant man, by God's help; I command you
to take him for your lord, for I make him my heir and give him my
whole duchy of Normandy."

There was a stormy scene in the council, and however we may scorn
Robert's foolish, selfish present-giving and his vulgarity, we cannot
help pitying him [Pg126] as he pleads with the knights and bishops
for their recognition of his innocent boy. We pity the Duke's shame,
while his natural feeling toward the child wars with his disgust. With
all his eloquence, with all his authority, he entreats the scornful
listeners until they yield. They have warned him against the danger
of the time, and of what he must expect, not only if he goes on
pilgrimage and leaves the dukedom to its undefended fate, but also
if he further provokes those who are already his enemies, and who
resent the presence of his illegitimate child. But he dares to put
the base-born lad over the dukedom of Normandy as his own successor.
He even goes to the king of France and persuades him to receive the
unworthy namesake of Longsword as vassal and next duke, and to Alan
of Brittany, who consents to be guardian. Then at last the unwilling
barons do homage to the little lord--a bitter condescension and service
it must have been!

After all the ceremonies were finished, Robert lost no time in
starting on his pilgrimage. He sought the shrine of Jerusalem, many a
weary mile away, over mountain and fen, past dangers of every sort.
Nothing could be more characteristic than his performance of his
penance or his pleasure journey--whichever he called it--for although he
went on foot, he spent enormous sums in showering alms upon the people
who came out to greet him. Heralds rode before him, and prepared his
lodging and reception, and the great procession of horses and grooms
and beasts of burden grew longer and longer as he went on his way.
Once they blocked up the [Pg127] gateway of a town, and the keeper
fell upon the pilgrim Duke, ignorantly, and gave him a good thrashing
to make him hurry on with his idle crowd. Robert piously held back
those of his followers who would have beaten the warder in return, and
said that it was well for him to show himself a pattern of humility
and patience, and such suffering was meant for the good of one's soul.

 [Illustration: ROBERT, DUKE OF NORMANDY, CARRIED IN A LITTER TO
    JERUSALEM.

    (FROM AN OLD ILLUMINATED MANUSCRIPT.)]

[Pg128]

The Duke did a great many foolish things; for one, he had his horses
shod with silver shoes, held on by only one nail, and gave orders that
none of his servants should pick up the shoes when they were cast, but
let them lie in the road.

At last the pilgrims reached Constantinople, and Robert made a great
display of his wealth, not to speak of his insolent bad manners.
The emperor, Michael, treated his rude guests with true Eastern
courtesy, and behaved himself much more honorably than those who
despised him and called him names. He even paid all the expenses of
the Norman procession, but, no doubt, he was anxious not to give
any excuse for displeasure or disturbance between the Northerners
and his own citizens. When the visit was over, and Robert moved on
toward Jerusalem, his already feeble health, broken by his bad life,
grew more and more alarming, and at last he could not take even a
very short journey on foot, and was carried in a litter by negroes.
The Crusades were filling the roads with pilgrims and soldiers, and
travellers of every sort. One day they met a Cotentin man, an old
acquaintance of Robert's. The Duke said with grim merriment that he
was borne like a corpse on a bier. "My lord," asked the Crusader, who
seems to have been sincerely shocked and doleful at the sight of the
Duke's suffering; "my lord, what shall I say for you when I reach
home?" "That you saw me carried toward Paradise by four devils," said
the Duke, readier at any time to joke about life than to face it
seriously and to do his duty. He kept up the pretence of travelling
unknown and in [Pg129] disguise, like a humbler pilgrim, but his
lavishness alone betrayed the secret he would really have been sorry
to keep. Outside the gates of Jerusalem there was always a great crowd
of people who were not able to pay the entrance-fee demanded of every
pilgrim; but Robert paid for himself and all the rest before he went
in at the gate. The long journey was almost ended, for on the way
home, at the city of Nicaea, the Duke was poisoned, and died, and was
buried there in the cathedral with great solemnity and lamentation. He
had collected a heap of relics of the saints, and these were brought
safely home to Normandy by Tostin, his chamberlain, who seems to have
served him faithfully all the way.

 [Illustration]

[Pg130]

 [Illustration]




VII.

THE NORMANS IN ITALY.

 "And therefore must make room
  Where greater spirits come."--MARVELL.


There is a famous old story about Hasting, the viking captain. Once
he went adventuring along the shores of the Mediterranean, and when
he came in sight of one of the Tuscan cities, he mistook it for Rome.
Evidently he had enough learning to furnish him with generous ideas
about the wealth of the Roman churches, but he had brought only a
handful of men, and the city looked large and strong from his narrow
ship. There was no use to think of such a thing as laying siege to the
town; such a measure would do hardly more than tease and provoke it:
so he planned a sharp stroke at its very heart.

Presently word was carried from the harbor side, by a long-faced
and tearful sailor, to the pious priests of the chief church, that
Hasting, a Northman, lay sick unto death aboard his ship, and was
desirous to repent him of his sins and be baptized. This was promising
better things of the vikings, and the good bishop visited Hasting
readily, and ministered eagerly to his soul's distress. Next day
word came that the robber was dead, and his men brought him early
[Pg131] to the church in his coffin, following him in a defenceless,
miserable group. They gathered about the coffin, and the service
began; the priests stood in order to chant and pray, their faces bowed
low or lifted heavenward. Suddenly up goes the coffin-lid, out jumps
Hasting, and his men clutch at the shining knives hidden under their
cloaks. They strip the jewelled vestments from the priests' backs;
they shut the church doors and murder the poor men like sheep; they
climb the high altar, and rob it of its decorations and sacred cups
and candlesticks, and load themselves with wealth. The city has hardly
time to see them dash by to the harbor side, to hear the news and
give them angry chase, before the evil ships are standing out to sea
again, and the pirates laugh and shout as they tug at the flashing
oars. No more such crafty converts! the people cry, and lift their
dead and dying priests sorrowfully from the blood-stained floor. This
was the fashion of Italy's early acquaintance with the Northmen, whose
grandchildren were to conquer wide dominions in Apulia, in Sicily, and
all that pleasant country between the inland seas of Italy and Greece.

It must have seemed almost as bad to the Romans to suffer invasion of
this sort as it would to us to have a horde of furious Esquimaux come
down to attack our coasts. We only need to remember the luxury of the
Italian cities, to recall the great names of the day in literature
and art, in order to contrast the civilization and appearance of the
invader and the invaded. Yet war was a constant presence then, and
every nation had its bitter enemies born of race [Pg132] prejudice
and the resentment of conquest. To be a great soldier was to be great
indeed, and by the time of the third of the Norman dukes the relation
of the Northmen and Italians was much changed.

Yet there was not such a long time between the time of Hasting the
pirate, and that of Tancred de Hauteville and Robert Guiscard.
Normandy had taken her place as one of the formidable, respectable
European powers. The most powerful of the fiefs of France, she was
an enemy to be feared and honored, not despised. She was loyal to
the See of Rome; very pious and charitable toward all religious
establishments; no part of Southern Europe had been more diligent in
building churches, in going on pilgrimage, in maintaining the honor
of God and her own honor. Her knights prayed before they fought, and
they were praised already in chronicle and song. The troubadours sung
their noble deeds from hall to hall. The world looked on to see their
bravery and valor, and when they grew restless and went a-roving and
showed an increasing desire to extend their possessions and make
themselves lords of new acres, the rest of the world looked on with
envy and approval. Unless the Normans happened to come their way; that
of course was quite a different thing.

We cannot help thinking that the readiness of the Englishman of to-day
to form colonies and to adapt himself to every sort of climate and
condition of foreign life, was anticipated and foreboded in those
Norman settlements along the shores of the Mediterranean sea. Perhaps
we should say again that the Northmen of a much earlier date were the
true [Pg133] ancestors of all English colonists with their roving
spirit and love of adventure, but the Normandy of the early part of
the eleventh century was a type of the England of to-day. Its power
was consolidated and the territory became too narrow for so much
energy to be pent up in. The population increased enormously, and the
familiar love of conquest and of seeking new fortunes was waked again.
The bees send out new swarms when summer comes, and, like the bees,
both Normans and Englishmen must have a leader and centralization of
the general spirit, else there is scattering and waste of the common
force.

We might go on with this homely illustration of the bees to explain
the way in which smaller or larger groups of pilgrims, and adventurers
of a less pious inclination, had wandered southward and eastward,
toward the holy shrines of Jerusalem, or the rich harvest of Oriental
wealth and luxury. Not much result came from these enterprises, though
as early as 1026, we find the Duke of Naples allowing a company of
Norman wanderers to settle at Aversa, and even helping them to build
and fortify the town, and to hold it as a kind of out-post garrison
against his enemies in Capua. They were understood to be ready for
all sorts of enterprises, and the bitter flowers of strategy and
revolt appeared to yield the sweetest honey that any country-side
could offer. They loved a fight, and so they were often called in by
the different Italian princes and proved themselves most formidable
and trustworthy allies in case of sudden troubles. This is what an
historian of that time says about them: [Pg134]

"The Normans are a cunning and revengeful people; eloquence and
dissimulation appear to be their hereditary qualities. They can stoop
to flatter; but unless they are curbed by the restraint of law they
indulge the licentiousness of nature and passion, and in their eager
search for wealth and dominion they despise whatever they possess and
hope whatever they desire. Arms and horses, the luxury of dress, the
exercises of hawking and hunting, are the delight of the Normans; but
on pressing occasions they can endure with incredible patience the
inclemency of every climate, and the toil and abstinence of a military
life."

How we are reminded of the old vikings in this striking description!
and how we see certain changes that have overlaid the original Norse
and Danish nature. There are French traits now, like a not very thick
veneering of more delicate and polished wood upon the sturdy oak.

Aversa was quickly made of great importance to that part of the world.
The Norman colony did good missionary work, and Robert Guiscard, the
chief Norman adventurer and founder of the kingdom of Naples, was
leader and inspirer of great enterprises. In following the history of
the time through many volumes, it is very disappointing to find such
slight reference to this most interesting episode in the development
of Norman civilization.

In one of the green valleys of the Cotentin, near a small stream
that finds its way into the river Dove, there are still standing the
crumbling walls of an ancient Norman castle. The neighboring fields
still [Pg135] keep their old names of the Park, the Forest, and
the Dove-Cot; and in this way, if in no other, the remembrance is
preserved of an old feudal manor-house. Not long ago some huge oaks
were clustered in groups about the estate, and there was a little
church of very early date standing in the shade of a great cedar tree.
Its roof had a warlike-looking rampart, and a shapely tower with
double crosses lifted itself high against the sky.

In the early years of the eleventh century there lived in this quiet
place an old Norman gentleman who was one of Duke Richard the Good's
best soldiers. He had wandered far and wide in search of gain and
glory. The Duke had given him command of ten armed men who formed
his body-guard, and after a long service at court this elder Tancred
returned to his tranquil ancestral home to spend the rest of his
days. He was poor, and he had a very large family. His first wife,
Muriel, had left several children, and their good step-mother treated
them all with the same tenderness and wise helpfulness that she had
shown to her own flock. The young de Hautevilles had received such
education as gentlemen gave their children in those days, and, above
every thing else, were expert in the use of arms and of horses and the
pleasures of the chase. They trained their falcons, and grew up brave
and strong. There were twelve sons, all trained to arms. Three of the
elder family were named William, Drogo, and Humphrey, and the sixth,
their half-brother, was Robert, who early won for himself the surname
of Guiscard, or the Wise. Tall fellows they were, these [Pg136] sons
of the Chevalier de Hauteville. One of the old French historians tells
us that they had an air of dignity, and even in their youth great
things were expected of them; it was easy to prophesy their brilliant
future.

While they were still hardly more than boys, Serlon, their eldest
brother, who had already gone to court, killed one of Duke Robert's
gentlemen who had offered him some insult, and was banished to England
where he spent some time in the dreariness of exile, longing more
and more to get back to Normandy. This brought great sorrow to the
household in the Cotentin valley; it was most likely that a great
deal depended upon Serlon's success, and the eager boys at home were
looking to him for their own advancement. However, the disappointment
was not very long-lived, for at the time when Henry of France was
likely to lose his throne through the intrigues of his brother and his
mother, Constance of Provence, and came to the Duke of Normandy for
aid, Serlon came home again without being asked, and fought like a
tiger at the siege of Tillieres. You remember that this siege lasted
a long time, and it gives us a good idea of the warfare of that age
to discover that every day there came out of the city gate an awesome
knight who challenged the conqueror to single combat. The son of brave
old Tancred was not frightened by even the sight of those unlucky
warriors who lay dead under the challenger's blows, and one morning
Serlon went to the gate at daybreak and called the knight out to fight
with him. [Pg137]

The terrible enemy did not wait; he presently appeared in glistening
armor and mounted upon a fiery steed. He asked Serlon who he was,
and as if he knew by instinct that he had met his match at last,
counselled the champion of Normandy to run away, and not try to fight
with him.

Nobody had recognized the banished man, who carefully kept the visor
of his helmet down over his face, and when the fight was over and the
enemy's head was off and borne at the head of his victorious lance,
he marched silently along the ranks of the Norman knights, who were
filled with pride and glory, but for all their cheering he was still
close-helmeted. Duke Robert heard the news of this famous deed, and
determined that such a valiant knight must not hide himself or escape,
so he sent a messenger to command the stranger to make himself known.
When he found that Serlon himself had been the hero, he ran to meet
him, and embraced him and held him to his heart, and still more, gave
back to him all the lands and treasures which had come to him by his
marriage and which had been confiscated when he was sent into exile.
All these glories of their elder brother made the other sons more
eager now than ever to show their prowess, but there was slight chance
in Normandy, for the war lasted but little longer. But when Robert
had put the French king on his throne again, he determined, as we
have seen already, to go on a pilgrimage. There was not much prospect
of winning great fame at home while young William the heir was so
unpopular and Alan of Brittany was his careful [Pg138] guardian.
The de Hautevilles were impatient at the prospect of years of petty
squabbles and treacherous intrigues; they longed for a broader field
for their energies. There was no such thing as staying at home and
training the falcons; their hungry young brothers and sisters were
pushing their way already, and the ancient patrimony was growing
less and less. So William and Drogo and Humphrey went away to seek
their fortunes like fairy-book princes, and hearing vague rumors of
Rainulf's invitation to his countrymen, and of his being made count of
the new possessions in Aversa, they turned their faces towards Italy.
We cannot help lingering a moment to fancy them as they ride away from
the door of their old home--the three brave young men together. The
old father looks after them wistfully, but his eyes are afire, and
he lives his own youth over again and wishes with all his heart that
he were going too. The little sisters cry, and the younger brothers
long for the day when their turn will come to go adventuring. The tame
falcons flutter and peck at their hoods, there where they stand on
their perches with fettered claws; the grass runs in long waves on the
green hill-sides and dazzles the eyes that look after the sons as they
ride towards the south; and the mother gives a little cry and goes
back into the dark hall and weeps there until she climbs the turret
stairs to see if she cannot catch one more look at the straight backs
and proud heads of the young knights, or even one little glint of
their horses' trappings as they ride away among the orchard leaves.
[Pg139]

They would have to fight their way as best they could, and when they
reached Apulia at last they still found work enough for their swords.
South of Rome were the territories of the independent counts of Naples
and the republic of Amalfi. South of these the Greek possessions of
Lombardy, which had its own governor and was the last remnant of the
Eastern empire.

The beautiful island of Sicily had been in the hands of the Moslems
and belonged to the African kingdom of Tunis. In 1038 the governor
of Lombardy believed he saw the chance that he had long been waiting
for, to add Sicily to his own dominions. The Arabs were fighting
among themselves and were split up already into several weak and
irreconcilable factions, and he begged the Normans to go and help his
own army to conquer them. After a while Sicily was conquered, but the
Normans were not given their share of the glory of the victories; on
the contrary, the Lombard governor was too avaricious and ungrateful
for his own good, and there was a grand quarrel when the spoils were
divided. Two years afterwards the indignant Normans came marching back
to attack Apulia, and defeated the Greeks at Cannae so thoroughly that
they were only left in possession of a few towns.

This was in 1043, and we cannot help feeling a great satisfaction at
finding William de Hauteville president of the new republic of Apulia.
Had not the three brothers shown their bravery and ability? Perhaps
they had only remembered their old father's wise talk, and profited by
his advice, and warning [Pg140] lest they should spend their strength
by being great in little things instead of aiming at nobler pieces of
work. All the high hopes which filled their hearts as they rode away
from Normandy must have come true. They were already the leaders in
Apulia, and had been foremost in the organization of an aristocratic
republic. Twelve counts were elected by popular suffrage, and lived at
their capital of Melfi, and settled their affairs in military council.
And William, as I have said, was president.

Presently from East and West envious eyes began to look at this
powerful young state. Europe knew well enough what had come from
giving these Normans foothold in Gaul not so very long ago, and the
Pope and the emperors of the West and East formed a league to chase
the builders of this new Normandy out of their settlements. The two
emperors, however, were obliged to hurry back to defend their own
strongholds, and Leo the Tenth was left to fight his neighbors alone,
with the aid of some German soldiers, a mere handful, whom Henry the
Third had left. The Normans proposed fair terms to his Holiness, but
he ventured to fight the battle of Civitella, and was overpowered
and beaten, and taken prisoner himself. Then the shrewd Normans said
how grieved they had been to fight against the Father of the Church,
and implored him, captive as he was, to receive Apulia as a fief of
the Holy See. This seems very puzzling, until we stop to think that
the Normans would gain an established position among the Italian
powers, and this amounted to an alliance with the power of the papal
interests. [Pg141]

William de Hauteville died, and the office of president, or first
count, passed to his next brother, Drogo, and after him to Humphrey.
One day, while Drogo was count, a troop of pilgrims appeared in
Amalfi, with their wallets and staves. This was no uncommon sight,
but at the head of the dusty company marched a young man somewhere
near twenty-five years of age, and of remarkable beauty. The high
spirit, the proud nobility in his face, the tone of his voice even,
showed him to be an uncommon man; his fresh color and the thickness
of his blond hair gave nobody a chance to think that he had come
from any of the Southern countries. Suddenly Drogo recognized one
of his step-brothers, whom he had left at home a slender boy--this
was Robert, already called Guiscard. He had gathered a respectable
little troop of followers--five knights and thirty men-at-arms made his
escort,--and they had been forced to put on some sort of disguise for
their journey, because the court of Rome, jealous of the growing power
of the Normans in Italy, did every thing to hinder their project, and
refused permission to cross their territories to those who were coming
from the North to join the new colony. Humbert de Hauteville was with
Robert--indeed the whole family, except Serlon, went to Italy sooner or
later after the old knight Tancred died; even the mother and sisters.

Robert arrived in time for the battle of Civitella, and distinguished
himself amazingly. Indeed he was the inspirer and leader of the Norman
successes in the South, and to him rather than to either of his
[Pg142] elder brothers belongs the glory of the new Normandy.

His frank, pleasant manners won friends and followers without
number, who loved him dearly, and rallied to his standard. He was
well furnished with that wiliness and diplomacy which were needed to
cope with Southern enemies, and his wild ambition led him on and on
without much check from feelings of pity, or even justice. Like many
other Normans, he was cruel, and his acts were those of a man who
sees his goal ahead, and marches straight toward it. While William
the Conqueror was getting ready to wear the crown of England, Robert
Guiscard was laying his plans for the kingdom of the two Sicilies.

After a while Drogo was assassinated, and then Humphrey was put in
his place, but he and Robert were always on bad terms with each other
apparently. Robert's faults were the faults of his time, and yet
his restlessness and ambition seem to have given his brother great
disquietude; perhaps Humphrey feared him as a rival, but at any rate
he seems to have kept him almost a prisoner of state. The Guiscard
gained the votes of the people before long, when the count died and
left only some young children, and in 1054 he was made Count of Apulia
and general of the republic. We need not be surprised to find his
title much lengthened a little later; he demanded the ducal title
itself from Pope Nicholas, and styles himself "by the grace of God
and St. Peter, Duke of Apulia, Calabria, and hereafter of Sicily."
The medical and philosophical schools of Salerno, long renowned in
Italy, added lustre to his kingdom, and [Pg143] the trade of Amalfi,
the earliest of the Italian commercial cities, extending to Africa,
Arabia, India, with affiliated colonies in Constantinople, Antioch,
Jerusalem, and Alexandria, enriched his ample domain. Excelling in
the art of navigation, Amalfi is said to have discovered the compass.
Under her Norman dukes, she held the position of the queen of Italian
commerce, until the rise of the more famous cities of Pisa, Genoa, and
Venice.[3]

  [3] A. H. Johnson: "The Normans in Europe."

Roger de Hauteville, the youngest brother of all, who was much like
Robert in every way, was the conqueror of Sicily, and the expedition
was piously called a crusade against the unbelievers. It was thirty
years before the rich island was added to the jurisdiction of Rome,
from which the Mussulmans had taken it. Roger was given the title
of count, but his dominion was on a feudal basis instead of being a
republic. This success induced Robert to make a campaign against the
Eastern empire, and the invasions continued as long as he lived. They
were not very successful in themselves, but they were influential in
bringing about great changes. The first crusade was an outcome of
these plans of Robert's, and all the altered relations of the East and
West for years afterward.

We must go far ahead of the slow pace of our story of the Normans
in Normandy and England to give this brief sketch of the Southern
dukedoms. The story of the de Hautevilles is only another example
of Norman daring and enterprise. The spirit of adventure, of
conquest, of government, of chivalry, and personal [Pg144] ambition
shines in every page of it, and as time goes on we watch with joy
a partial fading out of the worse characteristics of cruelty and
avarice and trickery, of vanity and jealous revenge. "Progress in
good government," says Mr. Green in his preface to A Short History
of England, "is the result of social developments." The more we all
think about that, the better for us and for our country. No doubt the
traditions of Hasting the Northman and his barbarous piracies had
hardly died out before the later Normans came, first in scattered
groups, and then in legions, to settle in Italy. One cannot help
feeling that they did much to make amends for the bad deeds of their
ancestors. The south of Italy and the Sicilian kingdom of Roger were
under a wiser and more tolerant rule than any government of their
day, and Greeks, Normans, and Italians lived together in harmony and
peace that was elsewhere unknown. The people were industrious, and all
sorts of trades flourished, especially the silk manufacture. Perhaps
the soft air and easy, luxurious fashion of life quieted the Norman
restlessness a little. Who can tell?

Yet we get a hint of a better explanation of the prosperity of the two
Sicilies in this passage from an old chronicle about King Roger: "He
was a lover of justice and most severe avenger of crime. He abhorred
lying; did every thing by rule, and never promised what he did not
mean to perform. He never persecuted his private enemies, and in war
endeavored on all occasions to gain his point without shedding of
blood. Justice and peace were universally observed throughout his
dominions." [Pg145]

A more detailed account of the reigns of the De Hautevilles will be
found in the "Story of Sicily," but before this brief review of their
conquests is ended, it is only fair to notice the existing monuments
of Norman rule. The remains of Norman architecture, dating back to
their time, may still be seen in Palermo and other cities, and give
them a romantic interest. There are ruins of monasteries and convents
almost without number, and many churches still exist, though sometimes
more or less defaced by modern additions and ignorant restoration. The
Normans raised the standard of Western forms of architecture here as
they did elsewhere, and their simpler buildings make an interesting
contrast with Eastern types left by the Saracens. Outside the large
cities almost every little town has at least some fragments of Norman
masonry, and in Aderno--to note only one instance of the sort--there is
a fine Norman castle in excellent preservation, which is used as a
prison now. At Troina, a dreary mountain fortress, there is a belfry
and part of the wall of a cathedral that Roger I. built in 1078. It
was in Troina that he and his wife bravely established their court
fifteen years earlier, and withstood a four months' siege from the
Saracens. Galfridus, an old chronicler, tells sadly that the young
rulers only had one cloak between them, and grew very hungry and
miserable; but Eremburga, the wife, was uncomplaining and patient.
At last the count was so distressed by the sight of her pallor and
evident suffering, that he rallied his men and made a desperate
charge upon his foes, and was happily [Pg146] victorious. Galfridus
says of that day: "The single hand of Roger, with God's help, did
such execution that the corpses of the enemy lay around him on every
side like the branches of trees in a thick forest when strewn by a
tempest." Once afterward, when Roger was away fighting in Calabria,
Eremburga was formally left in command, and used to make the round
with the sentinels on the walls every night.

We must look in Palermo for the noblest monuments of Norman days,
and beside the churches and palaces, for the tombs of the kings and
archbishops in San Rosario Cathedral. There lies Roger himself,
"mighty Duke and first King of Sicily." Mr. Symonds says[4]: "Very
sombre and stately are these porphyry resting-places of princes born
in the purple, assembled here from lands so distant, from the craggy
heights of Hohenstauffen, from the green orchards of Cotentin, from
the dry hills of Aragon. They sleep and the centuries pass by. Rude
hands break open the granite lids of their sepulchres to find tresses
of yellow hair, and fragments of imperial mantles embroidered with
the hawks and stags the royal hunter loved. The church in which they
lie changes with the change of taste in architecture and the manners
of successive ages. But the huge stone arks remain unmoved, guarding
their freight of mouldering dust beneath gloomy canopies of stone,
that tempers the sunlight as it streams from the chapel windows."

  [4] "Studies in Southern Italy."

And again at Venosa, the little town where the poet Horace was born,
and where William de Hauteville with his brothers Drogo, Humphrey,
and [Pg147] Robert Guiscard are buried, we cannot do better than
quote the same charming writer:

"No chapter of history more resembles a romance than that which
records the sudden rise and brief splendor of the house of Hauteville.
In one generation the sons of Tancred de Hauteville passed from the
condition of squires in the Norman vale of Cotentin to Kinghood in
the richest island of the Southern Sea. The Norse adventurers became
sultans of an Oriental capital. The sea-robbers assumed, together
with the sceptre, the culture of an Arabian court ... lived to mate
their daughters with princes and to sway the politics of Europe with
gold.... What they wrought, whether wisely or not, for the ultimate
advantage of Italy, endures to this day, while the work of so many
emperors, republics, and princes, has passed and shifted like the
scenes in a pantomime. Through them the Greeks, the Lombards, and
the Moors were extinguished in the South. The Papacy was checked
in its attempt to found a province of St. Peter below the Tiber.
The republics of Naples, Caeta, Amalfi, which might have rivalled
perchance with Milan, Genoa, and Florence, were subdued to a master's
hand. In short, to the Norman, Italy owed that kingdom of the two
Sicilies, which formed one third of her political balance; and which
proved the cause of all her most serious revolutions."

Much has been lost of the detailed history of the Norman-Italian
states, and lost especially to English literature. If the development
of Southern Italy [Pg148] had gone steadily forward to this time,
with the eagerness and gathering force that might have been expected
from that vigorous impulse of the eleventh century, no doubt there
would have been a permanent factor in history rather than a limited
episode. The danger of the climate, to those born and reared in
Northern or Western Europe, was undoubtedly in the way of any
long-continued progress. To-day the Norman buildings look strangely
different from their surroundings, and are almost the only evidence
of the once brilliant and prosperous government of the Normans in the
South. One enthusiastic historian, who wrote before the glories of
the de Hautevilles had faded, would have us believe that "there was
more security in the thickets of Sicily than in the cities of other
kingdoms."

 [Illustration]

[Pg149]

 [Illustration]




VIII.

THE YOUTH OF WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR.

 "One equal temper of heroic hearts
 Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will
 To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield."
                                             --TENNYSON.


There was one man, famous in history, who more than any other
Norman seemed to personify his race, to be the type of the Norman
progressiveness, firmness, and daring. He was not only remarkable
among his countrymen, but we are forced to call him one of the great
men and great rulers of the world. Nobody has been more masterful,
to use a good old Saxon word, and therefore he came to be master
of a powerful, venturesome race of people and gathered wealth and
widespread territory. Every thing would have slipped through his
fingers before he was grown to manhood if his grasp had not been like
steel and his quickness and bravery equal to every test. "He was born
to be resisted," says one writer;[5] "to excite men's jealousy and to
awaken their life-long animosity, only to rise triumphant above them
all, and to show to mankind the work that one man can do--one man of
fixed principles and resolute [Pg150] will, who marks out a certain
goal for himself, and will not be deterred, but marches steadily
towards it with firm and ruthless step. He was a man to be feared and
respected, but never to be loved; chosen, it would seem, by Providence
... to upset our foregone conclusions, and while opposing and crushing
popular heroes and national sympathies, to teach us that in the
progress of nations there is something required beyond popularity,
something beyond mere purity and beauty of character--namely, the mind
to conceive and the force of will to carry out great schemes and to
reorganize the failing institutions and political life of states. Born
a bastard, with no title to his dukedom but the will of his father;
left a minor with few friends and many enemies, with rival competition
at home and a jealous over-lord only too glad to see the power of his
proud vassal humbled, he gradually fights his way, gains his dukedom,
and overcomes competition at an age when most of us are still under
tutors and governors; extends his dominions far beyond the limits
transmitted to him by his forefathers, and then leaves his native soil
to seek other conquests, to win another kingdom, over which again
he has no claim but the stammering will of a weak king and his own
irresistible energy, and what is still more strange, securing the
moral support of the world in his aggression, and winning for himself
the position of an aggrieved person recovering his just and undoubted
rights. Truly the Normans could have no better representative of their
extraordinary power."

  [5] Johnson: "The Normans in Europe."

William was only seven years old or a little more [Pg151] when his
father left him to go on pilgrimage. No condition could have appeared
more pitiable and desperate than his--even in his childhood we become
conscious of the dislike his character inspired. Often just and true
to his agreements, sometimes unexpectedly lenient, nothing in his
nature made him a winner and holder of friendship, though he was a
leader of men and a controller of them, and an inspirer of faithful
loyalty besides the service rendered him for fear's sake. His was
the rule of force indeed, but there is one thing to be particularly
noted--that in a licentious, immoral age he grew up pure and
self-controlled. That he did not do some bad things must not make us
call him good, for a good man is one who does do good things. But his
strict fashion of life kept his head clearer and his hands stronger,
and made him wide-awake when other men were stupid, and so again and
again he was able to seize an advantage and possess himself of the key
to success.

While his father lived, the barons paid the young heir unwilling
respect, and there was a grim acquiescence in what could not be
helped. Alan of Brittany was faithful to his trust, and always
able to check any dissensions and plots against his ward. The old
animosity between him and Robert was quite forgotten, apparently;
but at last Alan was poisoned. Robert's death was the signal for a
general uprising of the nobles, and William's life was in peril for
a dozen years. He never did homage to the king of France, but for a
long time nobody did homage to him either; the barons disdained any
such [Pg152] allegiance, and sometimes appear to have forgotten their
young duke altogether in their bitter quarrels, and murders of men of
their own rank. We trace William de Talvas, still the bastard's fierce
enemy, through many plots and quarrels;--it appears as if he were
determined that his curse should come true, and made it the purpose
of his life. The houses of Montgomery and Beaumont were linked with
him in anarchy and treachery; it was the Montgomeries' deadly mischief
to which the faithful Alan fell victim. William himself escaped
assassination by a chance, and several of his young followers were
not so fortunate. They were all in the strong castle of Vaudreuil, a
place familiar to the descendants of Longsword, since it was the home
of Sperling, the rich miller, whom Espriota married. The history of
the fortress had been a history of crime, but Duke Robert was ready to
risk the bad name for which it was famous, and trust his boy to its
shelter. There had never been a blacker deed done within those walls
than when William was only twelve years old, and one of his playmates,
who slept in his chamber, was stabbed as he lay asleep. No doubt the
Montgomery who struck the cruel blow thought that he had killed the
young duke, and went away well satisfied; but William was rescued, and
carried away and hidden in a peasant's cottage, while the butchery
of his friends and attendants still went on. The whole country
swarmed with his enemies. The population of the Cotentin, always more
Scandinavian than French, welcomed the possibility of independence,
and the worst side of feudalism began to assert itself [Pg153]
boldly. Man against man, high rank against low rank, farmer against
soldier,--the bloody quarrels increased more and more, and devastated
like some horrible epidemic.

 [Illustration: A NORMAN PLOUGHMAN.]

There were causes enough for trouble in the state of feudalism itself
to account for most of the uproar and disorder, let alone the claim
of the unwelcome young heir to the dukedom. It is very interesting
to see how, in public sentiment, there was always an undertone of
resentment to the feudal system, and of loyalty to the idea, at least,
of hereditary monarchy. Even Hugh the Great, of France, was governed
by it in his indifference to his good chances for seizing the crown
years before this time; and though the great empire of Charlemagne had
long since tottered to its fall and dismemberment, there [Pg154] was
still much respect for the stability and order of an ideal monarchical
government.

The French people had already endured some terrible trials, but it was
not because of war and trouble alone that they hated their rulers,
for these sometimes leave better things behind them; war and trouble
are often the only way to peace and quietness. They feared the very
nature of feudalism and its political power. It seemed to hold them
fast, and make them slaves and prisoners with its tangled network and
clogging weights. The feudal lords were petty sovereigns and minor
despots, who had certain bonds and allegiances among themselves and
with each other, but they were, at the same time, absolute masters of
their own domain, and their subjects, whether few or many, were under
direct control and surveillance. Under the great absolute monarchies,
the very extent of the population and of the country would give a
greater security and less disturbance of the middle and lower classes,
for a large army could be drafted, and still there would be a certain
lack of responsibility for a large percentage of the subjects. Under
the feudal system there were no such chances; the lords were always
at war, and kept a painfully strict account of their resources. Every
field and every family must play a part in the enterprises of their
master, and a continual racking and robbing went on. Even if the lord
of a domain had no personal quarrel to settle, he was likely to be
called upon by his upholder and ally to take part with him against
another. In the government of a senate or an ecclesiastical council,
the common people [Pg155] were governed less capriciously; their
favor was often sought, even in those days, by the different factions
who had ends to gain, and were willing to grant favors in return; but
the feudal lords were quite independent, and could do as they pleased
without asking anybody's advice or consent.

This concerns the relation of the serfs to their lords, but among the
lords themselves affairs were quite different. From the intricate
formalities of obligation and dependence, from the necessity for
each feudal despot's vigilant watchfulness and careful preparation
and self-control and quick-sighted decision, arose a most active,
well-developed class of nobles. While the master of a feudal castle
(or robber-stronghold, whichever we choose to call it) was absent on
his forays, or more determined wars, his wife took his place, and
ruled her dependents and her household with ability. The Norman women
of the higher classes were already famous far and wide through Europe,
and, since we are dealing with the fortunes of Normandy, we like to
picture them in their castle-halls in all their dignity and authority,
and to imagine their spirited faces, and the beauty which is always a
power, and which some of them had learned already to make a power for
good.

No matter how much we deplore the condition of Normandy and the lower
classes of society, and sympathize with the wistfulness and enforced
patience of the peasantry; no matter how perplexed we are at the
slowness of development in certain directions, we are attracted and
delighted by other aspects. We turn our heads quickly at the sound
of [Pg156] martial music. The very blood thrills and leaps along
our veins as we watch the Norman knights ride by along the dusty
Roman roads. The spears shine in the sunlight, the horses prance, the
robber-castles clench their teeth and look down from the hills as if
they were grim stone monsters lying in wait for prey. The apple-trees
are in blossom, and the children scramble out of the horses' way;
the flower of chivalry is out parading, and in clanking armor, with
flaunting banners and crosses on their shields, the knights ride by
to the defence of Jerusalem. Knighthood was in its early prime, and
in this gay, romantic fashion, with tender songs to the ladies they
loved and gallantly defended, with a prayer to the Virgin Mary, their
patroness, because they reverenced the honor and purity of womanhood,
they fought through many a fierce fight, with the bitter, steadfast
courage of brave men whose heart is in their cause. It was an easy
step from their defiance of the foes of Normandy to the defence of
the Church of God. Religion itself was the suggester and promoter
of chivalry, and the Normans forgot their lesser quarrels and petty
grievances when the mother church held up her wrongs and sufferings
to their sympathy. It was to Christianity that the mediaeval times
owed knighthood, and, while historians complain of the lawlessness of
the age, the crimes and violence, the social confusion and vulgarity,
still the poetry and austerity and real beauty of the knightly
traditions shine out all the brighter. Men had got hold of some new
suggestions; the best of them were examples of something better than
[Pg157] the world had ever known. As we glance over the list of rules
to which a knight was obliged to subscribe, we cannot help rejoicing
at the new ideal of christian manhood.

 [Illustration: ARMING A KNIGHT.]

Rolf the Ganger had been proud rather than ashamed of his brutal
ferocity and selfishness. This new standard demands as good soldiery
as ever; in fact, a greater daring and utter absence of fear, but it
recognizes the rights of other people, and the single-heartedness and
tenderness of moral strength. It is a very high ideal.

A little later than the time of William the Conqueror's youth, there
were formal ceremonies at the making of a knight, and these united
so surprisingly the poet's imaginary knighthood and the customs of
military life and obligations of religious life, that we cannot wonder
at their influence. [Pg158]

The young man was first stripped of his clothes and put into a bath,
to wash all former contaminations from body and soul--a typical second
baptism, done by his own free will and desire. Afterward, he was
clothed first in a white tunic, to symbolize his purity; next in a red
robe, a sign of the blood he must be ready to shed in defending the
cause of Christ; and over these garments was put a tight black gown,
to represent the mystery of death which must be solved at last by him,
and every man.

Then the black-robed candidate was left alone to fast and pray for
twenty-four hours, and when evening came, they led him to the church
to pray all night long, either by himself, or with a priest and his
own knightly sponsors for companions. Next day he made confession;
then the priest gave him the sacrament, and afterward he went to hear
mass and a sermon about his new life and a knight's duties. When this
was over, a sword was hung around his neck and he went to the altar,
where the priest took off the sword, blessed it, and put it on again.
Then the candidate went to kneel before the lord who was to arm him,
and was questioned strictly about his reasons for becoming a knight,
and was warned that he must not desire to be rich or to take his ease,
or to gain honor from knighthood without doing it honor; at last the
young man solemnly promised to do his duty, and his over-lord to whom
he did homage granted his request to be made a knight.

After this the knights and ladies dressed him in his new garments, and
the spurs came first of all the armor, then the haubert or coat of
mail; next [Pg159] the cuirass, the armlets, and gauntlets, and, last
of all, the sword. Now he was ready for the /accolade/; the over-lord
rose and went to him and gave him three blows with the flat of the
sword on his shoulder or neck, and sometimes a blow with the hand on
his breast, and said: "In the name of God, of St. Michael and St.
George, I make thee knight. Be valiant and fearless and loyal."

Then his horse was led in, and a helmet was put on the new knight's
head, and he mounted quickly and flourished his lance and sword,
and went out of the church to show himself to the people gathered
outside, and there was a great cheering, and prancing of horses, and
so the outward ceremony was over, and he was a dubbed knight, as the
old phrase has it--adopted knight would mean the same thing to-day;
he belonged to the great Christian brotherhood of chivalry. We have
seen how large a part religion played in the rites and ceremonies,
but we can get even a closer look at the spirit of knighthood if we
read some of the oaths that were taken by these young men, who were
the guardians and scholars of whatever makes for peace, even while
they chose the ways of war and did such eager, devoted work with
their swords. M. Guizot, from whose "History of France" I have taken
the greater part of this description, goes on to give twenty-six
articles to which the knights swore, not that these made a single
ritual, but were gathered from the accounts of different epochs. They
are so interesting, as showing the steady growth and development of
better ideas and purposes, that I copy them here. [Pg160] Indeed
we can hardly understand the later Norman history, and the crusades
particularly, unless we make the knights as clear to ourselves as we
tried to make the vikings.

We must thank the clergymen of the tenth and eleventh centuries for
this new thought about the duties and relationships of humanity,--men
like Abelard and St. Anselm, and the best of their contemporaries.
It is most interesting to see how the church availed herself of the
feudal bonds and sympathies of men, and their warlike sentiment and
organization, to develop a better and more peaceful service of God.
Truthfulness and justice and purity were taught by the church's
influence, and licentiousness and brutality faded out as the new order
of things gained strength and brightness. Later the pendulum swung
backward, and the church used all the terrors of tyranny, fire, and
sword, to further her ends and emphasize her authority, instead of the
authority of God's truth and the peace of heavenly living. The church
became a name and cover for the ambitions of men.

Whatever the pretences and mockeries and rivalries and thefts of
authority may be on the part of unworthy churchmen, we hardly need to
remind ourselves that in every age the true church exists, and that
true saints are living their holy, helpful lives, however shadowed
and concealed. Even if the harvest of grain in any year is called a
total loss, and the country never suffered so much before from dearth,
there is always enough wheat or corn to plant the next spring, and
the fewer handfuls the more [Pg161] precious it is sure to seem. In
this eleventh century, a century which in many ways was so disorderly
and cruel, we are always conscious of the presence of the "blameless
knights" who went boldly to the fight; the priests and monks of God
who hid themselves and prayed in cell and cloister. "It was feudal
knighthood and Christianity together," says Guizot, "which produced
the two great and glorious events of that time--the Norman conquest of
England, and the Crusades."

These were the knight's promises and oaths as Guizot repeats them,
and we shall get no harm from reading them carefully and trying to
keep them ourselves, even though all our battles are of another sort
and much duller fights against temptations. It must be said that our
enemies often come riding down upon us in as fine a way and break a
lance with us in as magnificent a fashion as in the days of the old
tournaments. But our contests are apt to be more like the ancient
encounters with cruel treachery of wild beasts in desert places, than
like those at the gay jousts, with all the shining knights and ladies
looking on to admire and praise.

The candidates swore: "First, to fear, reverence, and serve God
religiously, to fight for the faith with all their might, and to die a
thousand deaths rather than renounce Christianity;

To serve their sovereign prince faithfully, and to fight for him and
fatherland right valiantly;

To uphold the rights of the weaker, such as widows, orphans, and
damsels, in fair quarrel, exposing themselves on that account
according as need [Pg162] might be, provided it were not against
their own honor or against their king or lawful princes.

That they would not injure any one maliciously, or take what was
another's, but would rather do battle with those who did so.

That greed, pay, gain, or profit should never constrain them to do any
deed, but only glory and virtue.

That they would fight for the good and advantage of the common weal.

That they would be bound by and obey the orders of their generals and
captains, who had a right to command them.

That they would guard the honor, rank, and order of their comrades,
and that they would, neither by arrogance nor by force, commit any
trespass against any one of them.

That they would never fight in companies against one, and that they
would eschew all tricks and artifices.

That they would wear but one sword, unless they had to fight against
two or more enemies.

That in tourney or other sportive contests, they would never use the
point of their swords.

That being taken prisoner in a tourney, they would be bound on their
faith and honor to perform in every point the conditions of capture,
besides being bound to give up to the victors their arms and horses,
if it seemed good to take them, being also disabled from fighting in
war or elsewhere without their victor's leave.

That they would keep faith inviolably with all the [Pg163] world, and
especially with their comrades, upholding their honor and advantage
wholly in their absence.

That they would love and honor one another, and aid and succor one
another whenever occasion offered.

That having made vow or promise to go on any quest or adventure, they
would never put off their arms save for the night's rest.

That in pursuit of their quest or adventure, they would not shun bad
and perilous passes, nor turn aside from the straight road for fear of
encountering powerful knights, or monsters, or wild beasts, or other
hindrance, such as the body and courage of a single man might tackle.

That they would never take wage or pay from any foreign prince.

That in command of troops or men-at-arms, they would live in the
utmost possible order and discipline, and especially in their own
country, where they would never suffer any harm or violence to be done.

That if they were bound to escort dame or damsel, they would serve,
protect, and save her from all danger and insult, or die in the
attempt.

That they would never offer violence to any dame or damsel, though
they had won her by deeds of arms.

That being challenged to equal combat, they would not refuse without
wound, sickness, or other reasonable hindrance.

That, having undertaken to carry out any enterprise, they would devote
to it night and day, unless they were called away for the service of
their king and country. [Pg164]

That, if they made a vow to acquire any honor, they would not draw
back without having attained it or its equivalent.

That they would be faithful keepers of their word and pledged faith,
and that, having become prisoners in fair warfare, they would pay to
the uttermost the promised ransom, or return to prison at the day and
hour agreed upon, on pain of being proclaimed infamous and perjured.

That, on returning to the court of their sovereign, they would render
a true account of their adventures, even though they had sometimes
been worsted, to the king and the registrar of the order, on pain of
being deprived of the order of knighthood.

That, above all things, they would be faithful, courteous, and humble,
and would never be wanting to their word for any harm or loss that
might accrue to them."

It would not do to take these holy principles, or the pageant of
knight-errantry, for a picture of Normandy in general. We can only
remind ourselves with satisfaction that this leaven was working in the
mass of turbulent, vindictive society. The priests worked very hard
to keep their hold upon their people, and the authority of the church
proved equal to many a subtle weakness of faith and quick strain of
disloyalty. We should find it difficult to match the amazing control
of the state by the church in any other country,--even in the most
superstitiously devout epochs. When the priesthood could not make the
Normans promise to keep the peace altogether, they still obtained
an astonishing [Pg165] concession and truce. There was no fighting
from Wednesday evening at sunset until Monday morning at sunrise.
During these five nights and four days no fighting, burning, robbing,
or plundering could go on, though for the three days and two nights
left of the week any violence and crime were not only pardonable, but
allowed. In this Truce of God, not only the days of Christ's Last
Supper, Passion, and Resurrection were to remain undesecrated, but
longer periods of time, such as from the first day of Advent until
the Epiphany, and other holy seasons. If the laws of the Truce were
broken, there were heavy penalties: thirty years' hard penance in
exile for the contrite offender, and he must make reparation for all
the evil he had committed, and repay his debt for all the spoil. If he
died unrepentant, he was denied Christian burial and all the offices
of the church, and his body was given to wild beasts and the fowls of
the air.

To be sure, the more ungodly portion of the citizens fought against
such strict regulations, and called those knights whom the priests
armed, "cits without spirit," and even harder names, but for twelve
years the Truce was kept. The free days for murder and theft were
evidently made the most of, and from what we can discover, it appears
as if the Normans used the Truce days for plotting rather than for
praying. Yet it was plain that the world was getting ready for great
things, and that great emergencies were beginning to make themselves
evident. New ideas were on the wing, and in spite of the despotism of
the church, sometimes by [Pg166] very reason of it, we can see that
men were breaking their intellectual fetters and becoming freer and
wiser. A new order of things was coming in; there was that certain
development of Christian ideas, which reconciles the student of
history in every age to the constant pain and perplexity of watching
misdirected energies and hindering blunders and follies.

"It often happens that popular emotions, however deep and general,
remain barren, just as in the vegetable world many sprouts come to
the surface of the ground, and then die without growing any more or
bearing any fruit. It is not sufficient for the bringing about of
great events and practical results, that popular aspirations should
be merely manifested; it is necessary further that some great soul,
some powerful will, should make itself the organ and agent of the
public sentiment, and bring it to fecundity, by becoming its type--its
personification."[6]

  [6] Guizot.

 [Illustration: CONFERRING KNIGHTHOOD ON THE FIELD OF BATTLE.]

In the middle of this eleventh century, the time of William the
Conqueror's youth, the opposing elements of Christian knighthood, and
the fighting spirit of the viking blood, were each to find a champion
in the same leader. The young duke's early years were a hard training,
and from his loveless babyhood to his unwept death, he had the bitter
sorrows that belong to the life of a cruel man and much-feared
tyrant. It may seem to be a strange claim to make for William the
Conqueror--that he represented Christian knighthood--but we must
remember that fighting was almost the first duty of [Pg167] man in
those days, and that this greatest of the Norman dukes, with all his
brutality and apparent heartlessness and selfishness, believed in his
church, and kept many of her laws which most of his comrades broke as
a matter of course. We cannot remind ourselves too often that he was a
man of [Pg168] pure life in a most unbridled and immoral age, if we
judge by our present standards of either purity or immorality. There
is always a temptation in reading or writing about people who lived
in earlier times, to rank them according to our own laws of morality
and etiquette, but the first thing to be done is to get a clear
idea of the time in question. The hero of Charlemagne's time or the
Conqueror's may prove any thing but a hero in our eyes, but we must
take him in relation to his own surroundings. The great laws of truth
and justice and kindness remain, while the years come and go; the
promises of God endure, but while there is, as one may say, a common
law of heavenly ordering, there are also the various statute laws that
vary with time and place, and these forever change as men change, and
the light of civilization burns brighter and clearer.

In William the Conqueror's lifetime, every landed gentleman fortified
his house against his neighbors, and even made a secure and loathsome
prison in his cellar for their frequent accommodation. This seems
inhospitable, to say the least, and gives a tinge of falseness to such
tender admonitions as prevailed in regard to charity and treatment of
wayfarers. Yet every rich man was ambitious to go down to fame as a
benefactor of the church; all over Normandy and Brittany there was a
new growth of religious houses, and those of an earlier date, which
had lain in ruins since the Northmen's time, were rebuilt with pious
care. There appears to have been a new awakening of religious interest
in the year 1000, which lasted late into the century. There was a
[Pg169] surprising fear and anticipation of the end of the world,
which led to a vast number of penitential deeds of devotion, and it
was the same during the two or three years after 1030, at the close of
the life of King Robert of France.

Normandy and all the neighboring countries were scourged by even worse
plagues than the feudal wars. The drought was terrible, and the famine
which followed desolated the land everywhere. The trees and fields
were scorched and shrivelled, and the poor peasants fought with the
wild beasts for dead bodies that had fallen by the roadside and in the
forests. Sometimes men killed their comrades for very hunger, like
wolves. There was no commerce which could supply the failure of one
country's crops with the overflow of another's at the other side of
the world, but at last the rain fell in France, and the misery was
ended. A thousand votive offerings were made for very thankfulness,
for again the people had expected the end of the world, and it had
seemed most probable that such an arid earth should be near its final
burning and desolation.

In the towns, under ordinary circumstances, there was a style of
living that was almost luxurious. The Normans were skilful architects,
and not only their minsters and monasteries, but their houses
too, were fit for such proud inhabitants, and rich with hangings
and comfortable furnishings. The women were more famous than ever
for needlework, some of it most skilful in design, and the great
tapestries are yet in existence that were hung, partly for warmth's
sake, about the stone walls of the castles. [Pg170] Sometimes the
noble ladies who sat at home while their lords went out to the wars,
worked great pictures on these tapestries of various events of family
history, and these family records of battles and gallant bravery by
land and sea are most interesting now for their costume and color,
beside their corroboration of historical traditions.

We have drifted away, in this chapter, from William the Conqueror
himself, but I believe that we know more about the Normandy which
he was to govern, and can better understand his ambitions, his
difficulties, and his successes. A country of priests and soldiers,
of beautiful women and gallant men; a social atmosphere already
alive with light, gayety, and brightness, but swayed with pride and
superstition, with worldliness and austerity; loyal to Rome, greedy
for new territory, the feudal lords imperious masters of complaining
yet valiant serfs; racked everywhere by civil feuds and petty wars and
instinctive jealousies of French and foreign blood--this was Normandy.
The Englishmen come and go and learn good manners and the customs of
chivalry, England herself is growing rich and stupid, for Harthacnut
had introduced a damaging custom of eating four great meals a day,
and his subjects had followed the fashion, though that king himself
had died of it and of his other habit of drinking all night long with
merry companions. [Pg171]

 [Illustration]




IX.

ACROSS THE CHANNEL.

           "------------------------------One decree
 Spake laws to them, and said that, by the soul
 Only, the nations should be great and free."
                                     --WORDSWORTH.


It is time to take a closer look at England and at the shameful
degradations of AEthelred's time. The inroads of the Danes read like
the early history of Normandy, and we must take a step backward in
the condition of civilization when we cross to the other side of
the Channel. There had been great changes since AElfred's wise and
prosperous reign, or even since the time of AEthelred's predecessor,
Eadgar, who was rowed in his royal-barge at Chester by eight of his
vassal kings--Kenneth of Scots, Malcolm of Cumberland, Maccus of the
Isles, and five Welsh monarchs. The lord of Britain was gracious
enough to do the steering for so noble a company of oarsmen, and it
was considered the proudest day that ever had shone upon an English
king.

We must remind ourselves of the successive waves of humanity which
had overspread England in past ages, leaving traces of each like
less evident geologic [Pg172] strata. From the stone and bronze age
people, through the Celts with their Pictish and Scottish remnant,
through the Roman invasion, and the Saxon, more powerful and enduring
than any from our point of view, we may trace a kinship to our Normans
across the water. But the English descendants of Celts, Danes, Angles,
Saxons, and Jutes needed to feel a new influence and refreshing of
their better instincts by way of Normandy.

Perhaps each one of the later rulers of Britain thought he had fallen
upon as hard and stormy times and had as much responsibility as
anybody who ever wielded a sceptre, but in the reign of the second
AEthelred, there are much greater dramas being played, and we feel,
directly we get a hint of it, as children do who have been loitering
among petty side-shows on their way to a great play. Here come the
Danes again, the kings of Denmark and the whole population of Norway
one would think, to read the records, and this time they attack
England with such force and determination that within less than forty
years a Danish king is master of Britain.

If AEthelred had been a better man this might never have happened, but
among all the Saxon kings he seems to have been the worst--thoroughly
bad, weak, cowardly, and cruel. He was sure to do things he had better
have left alone, and to neglect his plain duty. Other kings had fallen
on as hard, perplexing times as he, but they had been strong enough
to keep some sort of control of themselves at any rate. Dunstan the
archbishop warned the [Pg173] people, when AEthelred was crowned, that
they had no idea of the trouble that was coming, and through the whole
reign things went from bad to worse. Dreadful things happened which
we can hardly blame the silly king for--like a plague among cattle,
and the burning of London in 982; and a few years afterward there was
a terrible invasion of the Norwegians, and we have seen that aid and
comfort were ready for them over in Bayeux and the pirate cities of
Normandy.

Now we first hear of the Danegelt, great sums of money, always
doubling and increasing, that were paid the Northmen as bribes to go
away and leave England in peace. The paying of this Danegelt became
a greater load than the nation could carry, for the pirates liked
nothing better than to gather a great fleet of ships every few months
and come to anchor off the coast, sending a messenger to make the
highwayman's favorite request, your money or your life! One of the
first sums boldly demanded of AEthelred's aldermen was ten thousand
pounds. We can see how rapidly the wealth of England had increased,
for in AElfred's time the fine for killing a king was a hundred and
twenty shillings, and this was considered a great sum of money; the
penalty for taking a peasant's life was only five shillings, which
makes us understand, without any doubt, the scarceness and value of
money. Here are some extracts from the English chronicle, which had
been kept since Bede's time and for many years after this, which will
show how miserably every thing was going on: [Pg174]

1001. "The army [the Danes of course] went over the land and did as
was their wont. Slew and burned ... it was sad in every way for they
never ceased from their evil."

1002. "In this year the king and his witan resolved, that tribute
would be paid and peace made with them, on condition that they should
cease from their evil." This they accepted and were paid, L24,000.

1006. "At midwinter the Winchester folk might see an insolent and
fearless army as they went by their gate to the sea, and fetched
them food and treasure over fifty miles from the sea. Then was there
so great awe of the army that no one could think or devise how they
should be driven from the country. Every shire in Wessex had they
cruelly marked with burning and with harrying. The king began then
with his witan earnestly to consider what might seem most advisable to
them all, so that the country might be protected ere it were at last
undone." This time the tribute was L36,000, and another time the ships
put to sea with a Danegelt of L48,000.

England grew more and more miserable and shamefully unable to defend
herself, the captains of her fleet were incapable or treacherous, and
at last, when some of the ships had been wrecked and there had been
some sad disasters at sea, the chronicle has a more despairing tone
than ever. "It was as if all counsel had come to an end," the writer
says, "and the king and aldermen and all the high witan went home, and
let the toil of all the nation lightly perish." [Pg175]

AEthelred the Unready won for himself, in his reign of thirty-eight
years, the hearty contempt and distrust of all his people. There
is a temptation to blame him for the misery of England, and to
attribute it all to his faults and to the low aims and standards of
his character, to his worthless ambitions. But, in a general way,
the great men, or notorious men of history, who stand out before a
dim and half-forgotten background, are only typical of their time
and representative of it. One very good man, or bad man, cannot be
absolutely a single specimen of his kind; there must be others who
rank with him, and who have been his upholders and influencers. So
while the story of any nation is in its early chapters, and seems to
be merely an account of one ruler or statesman after another, we must
not forget that each symbolized his day and generation,--a brave leader
of a brave race, or a dull or placid or serene representative of a
secure, inactive age.

Although there was blundering enough and treachery in AEthelred's
reign, there was a splendid exception in the victories and
steadfastness of the city of London, which was unsuccessfully attacked
again and again by the Danes. The heathen, as the English called their
enemies, were lucky in their two leaders, the king of Norway, and the
king of Denmark. Olaf, the first-named, was converted after a while,
and going from the islands of Orkney to England, he was baptized
there, and the English bishops were very kind to him, and AEthelred
gave him some presents, and made him promise that he would not come
plundering to England any more. [Pg176] We are quite surprised to
hear that the promise was kept. Swegen the Dane promised too, but he
appeared again after a while, and AEthelred thought he would improve
upon the fashion of paying Danegelt by ordering a general massacre of
all the Danes instead. Afterward somebody tried to excuse such a piece
of barbarianism by saying that the Danes had plotted against the king,
but even if they had, AEthelred showed a wretched spirit. It was a time
of peace, but he sent secret messengers all through the country, and
as the English were only too glad to carry out such orders, there was
a terrible slaughter of men, women, and children.

Next year Swegen came back to avenge the wrong, all the more readily
because his own sister and her husband and son were among the
murdered, and the poor woman had made a prophecy, as she fell, dying,
that misery and vengeance should fall upon the English for their
sins. For a long time afterward the Danes were very fierce and kept
England in fear and disorder. Once they laid siege to Canterbury, and
when it had fallen into their hands they demanded Danegelt from the
Archbishop, a very good old man. He had a heart full of pity for his
poor people already so abominably taxed and oppressed in every way,
and was brave enough to squarely refuse, so the Danes slew him with
horrible torture; one might tell many such stories of the cruelty and
boldness of the invaders. AEthelred was perfectly helpless or else
cowardly and indifferent, and presently Swegen, who had gone back
to the North returned with a great fleet and a swarm of followers,
[Pg177] and not long afterward he conquered every sort of opposition,
even that of the brave Londoners, and was proclaimed king of England.
Here was a change indeed! the silly Saxon king and his wife and
children fled across the sea to Normandy, and Swegen sat upon the
throne. He began to reign in splendid state; he had the handsomest
ships afloat, all decked out with figures of men and birds and beasts
wrought in silver and amber and gold, and fine decorations of every
sort. No doubt he had made fine plans and meant to do great deeds, but
he died suddenly within a very short time, and the people believed he
was frightened to death by a vision.

AEthelred was in Normandy at the court of Richard the Fearless. You
remember that Richard's sister Emma went over to England to marry
the unready king. AEthelred had one older son, Eadmund Ironside,
beside the two boys who were Emma's children, and the hearts of the
English turned to their old king, and at last they sent for him to
come back, in spite of his faults. He made many fine promises, and
seems to have done a great deal better most of the time during the
last two years that he lived. Perhaps he had taken some good lessons
from the Norman court. But Cnut, Swegen's son, came back to England,
just before he died, as fearless as a hawk, and led his men from one
victory to another, and AEthelred faded out of life to everybody's
relief. When he was dead at last, the witan chose Cnut for king in
his stead, but the Londoners, who were rich and strong, and who hated
the Danes bitterly--the Londoners would have none of the pirates to
[Pg178] reign over them, and elected young Eadmund Ironside, a valiant
soldier and loyal-hearted fellow who feared nothing and was ready to
dare every thing. The two young kings were well matched and fought six
great battles, in most of which Ironside gained the advantage, but
at last the Danes beat him back--and though everybody was ready for a
seventh battle, the witan showed their wisdom for once and forbade any
more fighting, and somehow managed to proclaim peace. The young kings
treated each other most generously, and called each other brother, and
were very cordial and good-natured. They agreed to divide the kingdom,
so that Eadmund Ironside had all England south of the Thames--East
Anglia and Essex and London. Cnut took all the northern country and
owned Eadmund for his over-lord, but within the year Cnut reigned
alone. Eadmund died suddenly--some say that he was murdered, and some
that he had worn himself out with his tremendous activity and anxiety.
It is a great temptation to follow out the story of such a man, and
especially because he lived in such an important time, but we must
hurry now to the point where Norman and English history can be told
together, and only stop to explain such things as will make us able to
understand and take sides in the alliance of the two vigorous, growing
nations.

 [Illustration: KING CNUT.

(From the Register of Hyde Abbey.)]

Cnut's life, too, is endlessly interesting. He began by behaving like
a pirate, and the latter part of his reign was a great reform and a
very comfortable time for England, so scarred and spoiled by war. In
the beginning there was a great question about [Pg179] the kingship.
In those days it was a matter of great importance that the king should
be able to rule and able to fight, and the best and most powerful
member of the royal family was the proper one to choose. The English
for a long time had elected their kings, and Cnut, though he held half
the country, was very careful not to seize the rest by force. We
[Pg180] watch with great interest his wielding of rude politics before
the witan; he called them into council and laid his claim before them.

Eadmund Ironside had left two little sons, but nobody thought of their
being his successors. Indeed Cnut showed a great fear of the royal
family, and took care that his rivals should be disposed of; he knew
that the witan and everybody else were tired of the everlasting war
and bloodshed. He was fierce and downright in his demands, and in
the end the heirs of Ironside were all passed over--the Athelings or
princes were all set aside, and Cnut the Dane was king of England.

Ironside's brother, Eadwy, of whom the best things are said, was
outlawed, and died within a few months under very suspicious
circumstances. The two little boys, Ironside's sons, were sent out of
the country to Cnut's half-brother, the king of Sweden, with orders
that they should be put out of the way. The king felt such pity for
the innocent children, that he sent them away to Hungary instead of
having them murdered. The Hungarian king, Stephen, was a saint and a
hero, and he was very kind to the poor exiles, and brought them up
carefully. One died young, but we shall hear again about the other.

Cnut did a very surprising thing next. He sent for Queen Emma to come
back again from the Norman court to marry him. She must have been a
good deal older than he, but she was still a beautiful woman, and
marked with the famous Norman dignity and grace. Cnut promised that if
they should ever have a son born, he should be the next [Pg181] king
of England. Emma's two elder sons, AElfred and Eadward, were left in
Normandy, and there they grew up quite apart from their mother, and
thinking much more of their Norman descent and belonging than of their
English heritage.

Cnut now appears in the light of a model sovereign for those days. He
had renounced all his pagan ideas, and been christened and received
into the Church. We might expect that he would have pushed his own
countrymen forward and all the Danish interests, but it was quite
the other way. At the beginning of his reign he had executed several
powerful English nobles whose influence and antagonism he had reason
to fear; but now he favored the English in a marked way, and even
ordered his ships and all the pirates and fighting men back to the
North. It seems very strange, now, that a king of England ever reigned
over Sweden and Denmark, and Norway beside, but it seems as if Cnut
were prouder of being king of England than of all his other powers
and dignities. He was not only very gracious and friendly with his
English subjects at home, but he sent them abroad to be bishops, and
displeased the Danish parishes by such arrangements.

We all know the story of the rising tide, and Cnut's reproof to his
courtiers on the sea-shore. As we read about him we are reminded
a little of Rolf the Ganger, and his growth from pirate fashions
to a more gentle and decent humanity. The two men were not so very
unlike after all, but I must confess that I think with a good deal of
sympathy [Pg182] of Cnut's decision to go on a pilgrimage to Rome. It
was expecting a good deal of the young sea-rover that he should stay
quietly at home to rule his kingdom. The spirit of adventure stirred
in his veins, and we may be sure that he enjoyed his long and perilous
overland journey to Italy. He made the road safer for his countrymen
who might also have a pious desire to worship at the famous foreign
shrines. He complained to the emperor and the priests at Rome about
the robber-chiefs who pounced down upon travellers from their castles
in the Alps, and they promised to keep better order. The merchants
and pilgrims were often laden with rich offerings for the churches,
besides goods which they wished to sell, and the robbers kept watch
for them. Their ruined fortresses are still perched along the Alpine
passes, and one cannot help hoping that Cnut had some exciting
disputes with his enemies, and a taste of useful fighting and proper
discipline among the bold marauders.

He wrote a famous letter about his pilgrimage, directed to the
archbishops, and bishops, the great men, and all the people. He tells
whom he saw in Rome--the Pope, and the German Emperor, and other great
lords of the earth; and says, with pride, that every one has treated
him handsomely, and what fine presents he has had given him to carry
home. He had come to Rome for the good of his people, and for the
salvation of his own soul, he tells them seriously; and one thing he
did for England was to complain of the heavy taxes the church had put
upon it, and the Pope promised that such injustice [Pg183] should
not happen any more. There is something very touching in the way
that he says he had made a great many good resolves about his future
life, and that he is not ashamed to own that he has done wrong over
and over again, but he means, by God's help, to amend entirely. He
vows to Heaven that he will govern his life rightly, and rule his
kingdom honestly and piously, and that neither rich nor poor shall be
oppressed or hardshipped. There never was a better letter, altogether,
and Cnut kept his promises so well that the old Anglo-Saxon chronicle,
which aches with stories of war and trouble, grows quite dull now in
the later years of his reign. There was nothing to tell any more, the
monks thought who kept the record; but we know, for that very reason,
that the English farms flourished, and the wheat fields waved in the
summer wind, the towns grew rich, and the merchants prosperous; and
when the English-Northman king died, it was a sad day for England.
Cnut was only forty years old, but that was a long time for a king to
live. His son, Harold Harefoot, reigned in his stead, and many of the
old troubles of the country sprang up at once, as if they had only
been asleep for a little while, and were by no means out-grown or
ended.

Harold Harefoot was not in the least pious, and behaved himself
with most unreasonable folly, and fortunately died at the close of
four years of insult and unworthiness. Then Harthacnut, the younger
brother, was made king, and he promptly demanded a Danegelt, the most
hateful of taxes, and did [Pg184] a great many things which only
reopened the breach between Dane and Englishman, though it had seemed
to be smoothed over somewhat in his father's time. Harold had done one
brutal thing that towered above all the rest. The two princes who had
been living in Normandy thought there might be some chance of their
gaining a right to the throne, and the younger one, AElfred, had come
over to England with his knights and gentlemen. Harold seized them and
was most cruel; he first blinded his half-brother and then had him put
to death. This made a great noise in Normandy, and there is one good
thing to be said about Harthacnut, that he was bitterly angry with his
brother, and also with Earl Godwine, a famous nobleman, who was the
most powerful man in England next the king. He was Cnut's favorite and
chief adviser, but Harthacnut suspected that he had a hand in AElfred's
murder. Nobody has ever been quite clear about the matter. Godwine
and all his lords swore that he was innocent, and gave the king a
magnificent ship with all sorts of splendors belonging to it, besides
nearly a hundred men in full armor, and gold bracelets to make them as
grand as could be. So the king accepted Godwine's oath in view of such
a polite attention, but he asked Eadward to leave the Norman court and
come over to live with him. Eadward came, and in two years he was king
of England, Harthacnut having died a wretched drunken death.

So again there was a descendant of AElfred the Great and the house of
Cerdic on the throne. Eadward was the last of the line, and in his
day began [Pg185] the most exciting and important chapter of English
history--the Norman Conquest.

We have come quickly along the line of Danish kings, and now it is
time to stop and take a more careful look at the state of manners and
customs in England, and make ourselves sure what the English people of
that time were like, how they lived in their houses, and what changes
had come to the country in general. There were certain hindrances to
civilization, and lacks of a fitting progress and true growth. Let
us see what these things were, and how the greater refinement of the
Normans, their superior gifts and graces, must come into play a little
later. There was some deep meaning in the fusion of the two peoples,
and more than one reason why they could form a greater nation together
than either Normans or Englishmen could alone.

First, the dwellers on English soil had shown a tendency, not
yet entirely outgrown, to fall back into a too great indulgence
in luxurious living. When the storm and strain of conquest, of
colonization, had spent itself, the Englishmen of Eadward's and Cnut's
time betook themselves to feasting and lawlessness, of the sort that
must undermine the vigor of any people. The fat of the land tempted
them in many ways, and they sank under such habits as quickly as they
had risen under the necessities that war makes for sacrifices and
temperance. They were suffering, too, from their insularity; they
were taken up with their own affairs, and had kept apart from the
progress of the rest of Europe. There was a new wave and impulse of
scholarship, which had not yet reached [Pg186] them. It was ebb-tide
in England in more ways than one; and time for those Normans to appear
who, to use the words of one of their historians, "borrow every thing
and make it their own, and their presence is chiefly felt in increased
activity and more rapid development of institutions, literature, and
art. Thus ... they perfect, they organize every thing, and everywhere
appear to be the master spirits of their age."

The English people had become so impatient of the misrule of Cnut's
sons, that the remembrance of Cnut's glories was set aside for the
time being, and no more Danish kings were desired. "All folk chose
Eadward to king," says the chronicle, and evidently the hearts of the
people were turned, full of hope and affection, to the exiled son of
AEthelred and Emma, who had been since his childhood at the Norman
court. His murdered brother AElfred had been canonized by the romantic
sympathy of his English friends; he was remembered now as a saintly
young martyr to English patriotism, and the disreputable reign of
Cnut's sons had made the virtues of the ancient race of English kings
very bright by comparison. The new king must be of English blood and
a link with past prosperity. The son of Eadmund Ironside was an exile
also in the distant court of Hungary, but Eadward, a gentle, pious
man, was near at hand, and there were a thousand voices ready to shout
for him even while Harthacnut lay unburied in the royal robes and
trappings.

There was an opposition on the part of the Danes, who were naturally
disinclined to any such change, [Pg187] and when the formal election
and consecration of the new king took place, some months after this
popular vote, all Earl Godwine's power and influence were brought to
bear before certain important votes could be won. Indeed, at first
Eadward himself was apparently hard to persuade to accept his high
office. He seems to have been much more inclined to a religious
life than to statesmanship, but between much pushing from behind in
Normandy and the eager entreaties of his English friends, he was
forced to make his way again across the Channel. There are interesting
accounts, which may or may not be true, of his conversations with
Godwine; but the stronger man prevailed. The very promise he made
to uphold the new king's rights might make Eadward feel assured and
hopeful of some stability and quietness in his reign. England was
far behind Normandy in social or scholarly progress; to reign over
Englishmen did not appear the most rewarding or alluring career to
the fastidious, delicate, cloister-man. The rough-heartiness and
red-cheeked faces of his subjects must have contrasted poorly with his
Norman belongings, so much more refined and thoughtful, not to say
adroit and dissembling. England was still divided into four parts, as
Cnut had left it. His scheme of the four great earldoms had proved a
bad one enough, for it had only made the nation weaker, and kept up
continual rivalries and jealousies between the lords of Northumbria,
Mercia, East Anglia, and Wessex. The northern territory was chiefly
Danish in its traditions, and though there was a nominal subjection
to the king, Northumbria was [Pg188] almost wholly independent of
any over-rule. In Mercia, Lady Godiva and Earl Leofric were spending
their lives and their great wealth, chiefly in furthering all sorts of
religious houses and good works of the churches.

The greatest earl of all was Godwine of Wessex, the true leader of
the English and a most brave and loyal man. Cnut had trusted him, and
while there were enough jealous eyes to look at his kingly prosperity,
and malicious tongues ready to whisper about his knowledge of young
AElfred's murder, or his favor and unrighteous advancement of his own
family to places of power, Godwine still held the confidence of a
great faction among the English people. His son Harold was earl of
East Anglia, and they were lawful governors, between them, of the
whole southern part of the kingdom. It was mainly through Godwine's
influence that Eadward was crowned king, and we may look to the same
cause for his marriage with the earl's daughter Edith, but the line
of English princes, of whom Godwine hoped to be ancestor, never
appeared, for the king was childless, and soon made an enemy of his
father-in-law. Some people say that Godwine did not treat his royal
son with much respect having once put him on the throne. Eadward too
never was able to forget the suspicion about AElfred's murder, so
the breach between him and the great earl was widened year by year.
Eadward was not the sturdy English monarch for whom his people had
hoped; he was Norman at heart, as a man might well be who had learned
to speak in the foreign tongue, and had made the friendships of
his [Pg189] boyhood and manhood in the duke's court and cloisters.
Priestcraft was dearer to him than statecraft, and his name of The
Confessor showed what almost saintly renown he had won from those who
were his friends and upholders.

It did not suit very well that one Norman gentleman after another came
to London to fill some high official position. Eadward appeared to
wish to surround himself wholly with Normans, and the whole aspect of
the English court was changed little by little. The king proved his
own weakness in every way--he was as like AEthelred the Unready as a
good man could be like a bad one.

Godwine grew more and more angry, and his determination to show that
England could do without the crowds of interlopers who were having
every thing their own way worked him disaster for a time. There was
a party of the king's friends journeying homeward to Normandy, who
stopped overnight in the city of Dover and demanded its hospitality
in insolent fashion. The Dover men would not be treated like slaves,
and a fight followed in which the Frenchmen were either killed or
driven out of the town. Eadward of course sided with his friends,
and was very indignant; he sent orders to Earl Godwine, who was
governor of the region, to punish the offenders, but Godwine refused
squarely unless the men should have been fairly tried and given a
chance to speak for themselves. This ended in a serious quarrel, and
the king gained a victory without any battle either, for there was a
sudden shifting of public feeling in Eadward's favor--Godwine's own
men forsook him [Pg190] and were loyal to the crown, and the great
earl was banished for conscience sake, he and all his family, for the
king even sent away his own wife, though he kept all her lands and
treasures, which was not so saint-like and unworldly as one might
have expected. One of Godwine's sons had proved himself a very base
and treacherous man, and the earl had shielded him; this was one
reason why his defence of English liberty was so overlooked by his
countrymen, but the Normans had a great triumph over this defeat, and
praised the pious king and told long stories of his austere life, his
prayers, and holy life. After he was canonized these stories were
lengthened still more, but while he was yet without a halo some of his
contemporaries charge him with laziness and incapacity. He certainly
was lacking in kingly qualities, but he gained the respect and love
of many of his subjects, and was no doubt as good as so weak a man
could be. After his death Englishmen praised him the more because they
liked William the Conqueror the less, and as for the Normans they
liked anybody better than Harold, who had been a much more formidable
opponent in his claim to the English crown. Mr. Freeman says: "------------
The duties of secular government ... were ... always something which
went against the grain. His natural place was not on the throne of
England, but at the head of a Norman abbey.... For his virtues were
those of a monk; all the real man came out in his zeal for collecting
relics, in his visions, in his religious exercises, in his gifts to
churches and monasteries, in his desire to mark his [Pg191] reign as
its chief result, by the foundation of his great abbey of Saint Peter
at Westminster. In a prince of the manly piety of AElfred things of
this sort form only a part, a pleasing and harmonious part, of the
general character. In Eadward they formed the whole man."

The chronicler who writes most flatteringly of him acknowledges that
he sometimes had shocking fits of bad temper, but that he was never
betrayed into unbecoming language. On some occasions he was hardly
held back by Godwine or Harold from civil war and massacre; though he
was conscientious within the limit of his intelligence, and had the
art of giving a gracious refusal and the habit of affability and good
manners. William of Malmesbury, the chronicler, tells us that he kept
his royal dignity, but that he took no pleasure in wearing his robes
of state, even though they were worked for him by his affectionate
queen. Like his father, he was ever under the dominion of favorites,
and this was quickly enough discovered and played upon by Norman
ecclesiastics and Norman and Breton gentlemen in search of adventure
and aggrandizement. It makes a great difference whether we read the
story of this time in English or in French records. Often the stories
are directly opposite to each other, and only the most careful steps
along the path keep one from wandering off one way or the other
into unjust partisanship. Especially is this true of Godwine, the
confessor's great contemporary. He seems, at any rate, to have been
a man much ahead of his time in knowledge of affairs and foresight
of the probable effects [Pg192] from the causes of his own day.
His brother earls were jealous of him; the Church complained of his
lack of generosity; even his acknowledged eloquence was listened to
incredulously; and his good government of his own provinces, praised
though it was, did not gain him steady power. His good government
made him, perhaps more than any thing else, the foremost Englishman
of his time, and presently we shall see how deep a feeling there
was for him in England, and how much confidence and affection were
shown in his welcome back from exile, though he had been allowed to
go away with such sullen disapproval. Godwine's wife, Gytha, was a
Danish woman, which was probably a closer link with that faction in
the northern earldom than can be clearly understood at this late day.
Lord Lytton's novel, called "Harold," makes this famous household seem
to live before our eyes, and the brief recital of its fortunes and
conditions here cannot be more than a hint of the real romance and
picturesqueness of the story.

The absence of Godwine in Flanders--a whole year's absence--had taught
his countrymen what it was to be without him. They were sadly annoyed
and troubled by the king's continued appointment of Normans to every
place of high honor that fell vacant. Bishoprics and waste lands alike
were pounced upon by the hangers-on at court, and castles were lifting
their ugly walls within sight of each other almost, here and there in
the quiet English fields. Even in London itself the great White Tower
was already setting its strong foundations; [Pg193] a citadel for the
town, a fort to keep the borderers and Danes at bay were necessary
enough to a country, but England was being turned into another
Normandy and Brittany, with these new houses that were built for war,
as if every man's neighbor were his enemy. The square high towers were
no fit places for men to live in who tilled the soil and tended their
flocks and herds. There were too many dark dungeons provided among the
foundation stones beside, and the English farmers whispered together
about their new townsfolk and petty lords, and feared the evil days
that were to come.

The ruined Roman houses and strange tall stones of the Druid temples
were alike thrown down and used to build these new castles. Men who
had strayed as far as the Norman coasts had stories enough to tell;
what landmarks of oppression these same castles were in their own
country, and how the young Duke William had levelled many of them to
the ground in quarrelsome Normandy. There was no English word for this
awesome new word--/castles!/ The free and open halls of the English
thanes were a strange contrast to the new order of dwelling-places.
Robert of Jumieges had been made Archbishop of Canterbury, and a
host of his countrymen surrounded the king more and more closely and
threatened to deprive the English of their just rights. It was this
monk Robert who had "beat into the king's head" that his brother
AElfred had come to his death through Earl Godwine.

It is very easy to tell the story of the Normans from the English
side. Let us cross the Channel again [Pg194] to Rouen and see what
effect the condition of English affairs was having upon the young
duke. It would not be strange if his imagination were busy with some
idea of enlarging his horizon by a look at his neighbors. Eadward
had no heir, they had talked together oftentimes, perhaps, about
the possibility of making one noble great kingdom by the joining of
England and Normandy. Every day more stories reached his ears of the
wealth and fruitfulness of the Confessor's kingdom.

 [Illustration]

[Pg195]

 [Illustration]




X.

THE BATTLE OF VAL-ES-DUNES.

 "Who stood with head erect and shining eyes,
 As if the beacon of some promised land
 Caught his strong vision, and entranced it there."
                                               --A. F.


The Viking's grandchildren had by no means lost their love for
journeying by land or sea. As in old Norway one may still find bits of
coral and rudely shaped precious stones set in the quaintly wrought
silver ornaments made by the peasants, so in Normandy there are pieces
of Spanish leather and treasures from the east and from the south,
relics of the plundering of a later generation. Roger de Toesny, one
of William's fiercest enemies, does not become well-known to us until
we trace out something of his history as a wanderer before he came to
join Talvas in a well-planned rebellion.

In Duke Richard the Good's time there was a restless spirit of
adventure stirring in Norman hearts, and the foundations were laid of
the Southern kingdoms which made such a change in Europe. A Norman
invasion of Spain came to nothing in comparison with those more
important settlements, but in 1018 Roger de Toesny carried the Norman
[Pg196] arms into the Spanish peninsula. A long time before this
Richard the Fearless had persuaded a large company of his Scandinavian
subjects to wander that way, being pagan to the heart's-core and
hopelessly inharmonious. Roger followed them on a grand crusade
against the infidel Saracen, and also hoped to gain a kingdom for
himself. He was of the noblest blood in Normandy, of Rolf the Ganger's
own family, and well upheld the warlike honor of his house in his
daring fights with the infidel. Almost unbelievable stories are told
of his cannibal-like savagery with his captives, but the very same
stories are told of another man, so we will not stop to moralize upon
Roger's wickedness. He married the Spanish countess of Barcelona, who
did homage to the king of France, and every thing looked prosperous at
one time for his dominion, but it never really took root after all,
and de Toesny went back again to Normandy, and blazed out instantly
with tremendous wrath at the pretentions of William the Bastard. He
could not believe that the proud Norman barons and knights would ever
submit to such a degradation. De Talvas was only too glad to greet so
sympathetic an ally, and the opposition to the young duke took a more
formidable shape than ever before.

All through William's earliest years the feudal lords spent most
of their strength in quarrelling with each other, but de Toesny's
appearance gave the signal for a league against the ruler whom they
despised. William was no longer a child, and rumors of his premature
sagacity, and his uncommon strength and quickness in war, were
flying about from town [Pg197] to town and warned his enemies that
they had no time to lose if they meant to crush him down. He was a
noble-looking lad and had shown a natural preference for a soldier's
life; at fifteen he had demanded to be made a knight of the old Norman
tradition in which lurked a memory of Scandinavian ceremonies. None
save Duke William could bend Duke William's bow, and while these
glowing accounts of him were written from a later standpoint, and his
story might easily be read backward, as a fulfilment of prophecy, we
can be sure, at least, that his power asserted itself in a marked
way, and that he soon gained importance and mustered a respectable
company of followers as the beginning of a brilliant and almost
irresistible court and army. Even King Henry of France was jealous
of his vassal's rising fame and popularity, and felt obliged to pay
William a deference that his years did not merit. All through the
first twelve years men felt that the boy William's life was in danger,
and that, whatever respect Henry paid him, was likely to be changed to
open animosity and disdain the moment that there was a good excuse.
We have a glimpse now and then of the lonely lad at his sport in
the forest about Falaise and Valognes, where he set apart preserves
for hunting. We follow him from Alan of Brittany's wardship, to the
guardian he chose himself, who held the place of tutor with that of
captain-general of the Norman army, but, guardian or no guardian, he
pushed forward single-handed, and mastered others, beside himself, in
a way that the world never will cease to wonder at. [Pg198]

Roger de Toesny refused allegiance to begin with, and with loud
expressions of his scorn of the Bastard, began to lay waste his
neighbors' lands as if they, too, had been Saracens and merited any
sort of punishment. We first hear the name of De Beaumont, famous
enough ever since, in an account of a battle which some of Roger's
outraged victims waged against him. Grantmesnil, too, is a name that
we shall know very well by and by, when William has gone over to
England with his Norman lords. Normandy never got over its excitement
and apparent astonishment at William's presence and claims; but
even in his boyhood he was the leader of a party. "So lively and
spirited was he, that it seemed to all a marvel," says one of the old
chroniclers, with enthusiasm. When he began to take deep interest in
his affairs, the news of revolts and disorderliness in the country
moved him to violent fits of irritation, but he soon learned to hide
these instinctively, and the chronicle goes on to say that he "had
welling up in his child's heart all the vigor of a man to teach the
Normans to forbear from all acts of irregularity." In this outbreak
against de Toesny he found an irresistible temptation to assert his
mastery, and boy as he was, he really made himself felt; De Toesny was
killed in the fierce little battle, and his death gave a temporary
relief from such uprisings; but William comes more and more to the
front, and all Normandy takes sides either for or against him. This
was no insignificant pretender, but one to be feared; his guardians
and faithful men who had held to him for good or bad reasons, were
mostly put out of the way [Pg199] by their enemies, and there was
nobody at last who could lead the Bastard's men to battle better than
he could himself.

Henry of France had been biding his time, and now Guy of Burgundy, the
son of William's cousin, whom he had welcomed kindly at his feudal
court, puts in a claim to the dukedom of Normandy. He helped forward
a conspiracy, and one night, while William was living in his favorite
castle at Valognes, the jester came knocking with his bauble, and
crying at the chamber door, begging him to fly for his life: "They are
already armed; they are getting ready; to delay is death!" cried poor
Golet the fool; and his master leaped out of bed, seized his clothes,
and ran to the stables for his horse. Presently he was galloping away
toward Falaise for dear life, and to this day the road he took is
called the Duke's road. This was in 1044, and William was nineteen
years old. He was not slow to understand that the rebels had again
risen, and that the conspiracy was more than a conspiracy; it was a
determined insurrection. All the night long, as he rode across the
country in the bright moonlight, he was thinking about his plans, no
doubt, and great energies and determinations were suddenly waked in
his heart. This was more than a dislike of himself and the tan-yard
inheritance; it was the old rivalry of the Frenchmen and Northmen. The
old question of supremacy and race prejudice was to be fought over
once more and for the last time with any sort of distinctness. This
was not the petty animosity of one baron or another; it was almost the
whole nobility of Normandy against their duke. [Pg200]

There was one episode of the duke's journey which is worth telling:
He had ridden for dear life, and had forded many a stream, and one,
more dangerous, tide inlet where the rivers Oune and Vire flowed out
to sea; and when he got safe across, he went into the Church of St.
Clement, in the Bayeux district, to kneel down and say his prayers.

As the sun rose, he came close to the church and castle of Rye, and
the Lord of Rye was standing at the castle gate in the clear morning
air. William spurred his horse, and was for hurrying by, but this
faithful vassal, whose name was Hubert, knew him, and stopped him, and
begged to be told the reason of such a headlong journey. The Lord of
Rye was very hospitable, and the tired duke dismounted, and was made
welcome in the house; and presently a fresh horse was brought out for
him, and the three brave sons of the loyal house were mounted also
to ride by his side to Falaise. This hospitality was not forgotten.
Later, in England, their grateful guest set them in high places, and
favored them in princely fashion. Guy, of Burgundy had been brought up
with William as a friend and kinsman, and had been treated with great
generosity. He was master of some great estates, and one of these was
a powerful border fortress between Normandy and France. His friends
were many, and he found listeners enough to his propositions. Born of
the princely houses of Burgundy and Normandy, he claimed the duchy as
his inherited right; and while so many in court and camp were ashamed
of their lawful leader, and ready to deny his authority, came Guy's
opportunity. [Pg201]

William was cautious, and not without experience. When he was only a
baby he had caught at the straw on which he lay, and would not let go
his hold, and this sign of his future power and persistence had been
proved a true one. The quarrelsome, lawless lords felt that their days
of liberty for themselves, and oppression of everybody else, would
soon be over if they did not strike quickly. They dreaded so strong
and stern a master, and rallied to the standard of the Bastard's
rival, Guy of Burgundy.

There were some of the first nobles of the Cotentin who forsook
their young duke for this rival who was hardly Norman at all, as
they usually decided such points. His Norman descent was on the
spindle side rather than the sword, to use the old distinction, and
his mother's ancestors would not have prevented him in other days
from being called almost a Frenchman. There is a tradition that Guy
promised to divide the lands of Normandy with his allies, keeping only
the old French grant to Rolf for himself, and this must have been
the cause of the treason of the descendants of Rolf's and William
Longsword's loyal colonists. It would amaze us to see the change in
the life and surroundings of the feudal lords even in the years of
William's minority. The leader of the barons in the revolt was the
Viscount of Coutances, the son of that chief who had defeated AEthelred
of England and his host nearly half a century before. He lived in a
castle on the river Oune, near which he afterward built his great St.
Saviour's Abbey. This was the central point of the insurrection, and
from his tower Neal of St. [Pg202] Saviour could take a wide survey
of his beautiful Cotentin country with its plough-land and pastures
and forests, the great minster of Lessay, and the cliffs and marshes;
the sturdy castles of his feudal lords scattered far and wide. There
came to Saint Saviour's also Randolf of Bayeux, and Hamon of Thorigny
and of Creuilly, and Grimbald of Plessis, and each of them made his
fortress ready for a siege, and swore to defend Guy of Burgundy and
to use every art of war and even treachery to subdue and disgrace
William. I say "even treachery," but that was the first resort of
these insurgents rather than the last. They had laid the deep plot to
seize and murder him at Valognes, and Grimbald was to have struck the
blow.

King Henry of France was another enemy at heart. It is difficult at
first to understand his course toward his young neighbor. He never
had fairly acknowledged him, and William on his part had never put
his hands into the king's and announced with the loyal homage of his
ancestors that he was Henry's man. While Normandy was masterless in
William's youth, there was a good chance, never likely to come again
in one man's lifetime, for the king to assert his authority and to
seize at least part of the Norman territory. The discontent with the
base-born heir to the dukedom might not have been enough by itself to
warrant such usurpation, but then, while the feudal lords were in such
turmoil and so taken up with, for the most part, merely neighborhood
quarrels; while they had so little national and such fierce sectional
feeling, would have [Pg203] been the time for an outsider to enrich
himself at their expense. It was not yet time for Normandy to be
provoked into a closer unification by any outside danger. The French
and Scandinavian factions were still distinct and suspicious of each
other, but it was already too late when King Henry at last, without
note or warning, poured his soldiers across the Norman boundary and
invaded the Evrecin; too late indeed in view of what followed, and in
spite of the temporary blazing up of new jealousies and the revival
of old grievances and hatreds. Henry won a victory and triumph for
the time being; he demanded the famous border castle of Tillieres and
insisted that it should be destroyed, and though the brave commander
held out for some time even against William's orders, he finally
surrendered. Henry placed a strong garrison there at once, and after
getting an apparently strong hold on Normandy there followed a time
of peace. The king seemed to be satisfied, but no doubt the young
duke's mind was busy enough with a forced survey of his enemies,
already declared or still masked by hypocrisy, and of his own possible
and probable resources. A readiness to do the things that must be
done was making a true man of Duke William even in his boyhood. For
many years he had seen revolt and violence grow more easy and more
frequent in his dukedom; the noise of quarrels and fighting grew
louder and louder. In his first great battle at Val-es-dunes the rule
of the Cotentin lords and Guy of Burgundy, or the rule of William the
Bastard, struggled for the mastery. [Pg204]

It was a great battle in importance rather than in numbers. William
called to his loyal provinces for help, and the knights came riding
to court from the romance-side of Normandy, while from the Bessin and
the Cotentin the rebels came down to meet them. It seems strange that,
when William represents to us the ideal descendant of the Northmen,
the Scandinavian element in his dukedom was the first to oppose him.
For once King Henry stood by his vassal, and when William asked for
help in that most critical time, it was not withheld. Henry had not
been ashamed to take part with the Norman traitors in past times,
and now that there was a chance of breaking the ducal government in
pieces and adding a great district to France, we are more than ever
puzzled to know why he did not make the most of the occasion. Perhaps
he felt that the rule of the dukes was better than the rule of the
mutinous barons of the Cotentin, and likely, on the whole, to prove
less dangerous. So when William claimed protection, it was readily
granted, and the king came to his aid at the head of a body of troops,
and helped to win the victory.

We hear nothing of the Norman archers yet in the chronicler's story
of the fight. They were famous enough afterward, but this battle was
between mounted knights, a true battle of chivalry. The place was
near the river Orne, and the long slopes of the low hills stretched
far and wide, covered with soft turf, like the English downs across
the Channel, lying pleasantly toward the sun. Master Wace writes the
story of the day in the "Roman de Rou," [Pg205] and sketches the
battle-field with vivid touches of his pen. Mr. Freeman says, in a
note beneath his own description, that he went over the ground with
Mr. Green, his fellow-historian, for company, and Master Wace's book
in hand for guide. In the "Roman de Rou" there is a hint that not
only the peasantry, but the poorer gentlemen as well, were secretly
on William's side, that the prejudice and distrust toward the feudal
lords was very great, and that there was more confidence in a
sovereign than in the irksome tyranny of less powerful lords.

The barons of Saxon Bayeux and Danish Coutances were matched against
the loyal burghers of Falaise, Romanized Rouen, and the men of the
bishop's cities of Liseux and Evreux. King Henry stopped at the little
village of Valmeray to hear mass, as he came up from the south with
his followers, and presently the duke joined them in the great plain
beyond. The rebels are there too; the horses will not stand in place
together, they have caught the spirit of the encounter, and the bright
bosses of the shields; the lances, tied with gay ribbons, glitter and
shine, as the long line of knights bends and lifts and wavers like
some fluttering gay decoration,--some many-colored huge silken splendor
all along the green grass. The birds fly over swiftly, and return as
quickly, puzzled by the strange appearance of their country-side.
Their nests in the grass are trampled under foot--the world is alive
with men in armor, who laugh loudly and swear roundly, and are there
for something strange, to kill each other if they can, rather than
live, for the sake of [Pg206] Normandy. Far away the green fields
stretch into the haze, the cottages look like toys, and the sheep and
cattle feed without fear in the pastures. Church towers rise gray and
straight-walled into the blue sky. It is a great day for Normandy, and
her best knights and gentlemen finger their sword-hilts, or buckle
their saddle-girths, and wait impatiently for the battle to begin on
that day of Val-es-dunes.

Among the Cotentin lords was Ralph of Tesson, lord of the forest of
Cinquelais and the castle of Harcourt-Thury. Behind him rode a hundred
and twenty knights, well armed and gallant, who would follow him to
the death. He had sworn on the holy relics of the saints at Bayeux to
smite William wherever he met him, yet he had no ground for complaint
against him. His heart fell when he saw his rightful lord face to
face. A tanner's grandson, indeed, and a man whose father and mother
had done him wrong; all that was true, yet this young Duke William was
good to look upon, and as brave a gentleman as any son of Rolf's, or
the fearless Richard's. Ralph Tesson (the Badger they called him), a
man both shrewd and powerful, stood apart, and would not rank himself
and his men with either faction, and his knights crowded round him, to
remind him that he had done homage once to William, and would fight
against his natural lord. The Cotentin lords were dismayed and angry,
they promised him great rewards, but nothing touched him, and he stood
silent, a little way from the armies. The young duke and the king
noticed him, and the six-score-and-six brave knights in his troop, all
with their [Pg207] lances raised and trimmed with their ladies' silk
tokens. William said that they would come to his aid; neither Tesson
nor his men had any grudge against him.

Suddenly Tesson put spurs to his horse, and came dashing across the
open field, and all the lords and gentlemen held their breath as
they watched him. "Thury! Thury!" he shouted as he came, and "Thury!
Thury!" the cry echoed back again from the distance. He rode straight
to the duke; there was a murmur from the Cotentin men; he struck the
duke gently with his glove. It was but a playful mockery of his vow to
the saints at Bayeux; he had struck William, but he and his knights
were William's men again; the young duke said, "Thanks to thee!" and
the fight began, all the hotter for the anger of the deserted barons
and their desire for revenge. The day had begun with a bad omen for
their success. "/Dexaide!/" the old Norman war-cry, rang out, and
those who had followed the lilies of France cried "/Montjoie Saint
Denis!/" as they fought.

Nowadays, a soldier is a soldier, and men who choose other professions
can keep to them, unless in their country's extremity of danger,
but in that day every man must go to the wars, if there were need
of him, and be surgeon or lawyer, and soldier too; yes, even the
priests and bishops put on their swords and went out to fight. It
would be interesting to know more names on the roll-call that day at
Val-es-dunes, but we can almost hear the shouts to the patron saints,
and the clash of the armor. King [Pg208] Henry fought like a brave
man, and the storm of the battle raged fiercest round him. The knights
broke their lances, and fought sword to sword. There was no play of
army tactics and man[oe]uvring, but a hand-to-hand fight, with the sheer
strength of horse and man. Once King Henry was overthrown by the
thrust of a Cotentin lance, and sprang up quickly to show himself to
his men. Again he was in the thickest of the encounter, and was met
by one of the three great rebel chiefs and thrown upon the ground,
but this Lord of Thorigny was struck, in his turn, by a loyal French
knight, and presently his lamenting followers carried him away dead
on his shield like any Spartan of old. And the king honored his valor
and commanded that he should be buried with splendid ceremonies in a
church not far from the battlefield. Long afterward the Norman men and
women loved to sing and to tell stories about the young Duke William's
bravery and noble deeds of arms in that first great fight that made
him duke from one end of Normandy to the other. He slew with his own
hand the noblest and most daring warrior of Bayeux. Master Wace,
the chronicler, tells us how William drove the sharp steel straight
through his hardy foe, and how the body fell beneath his stroke and
its soul departed. Wace was a Bayeux man himself, and though he was a
loyal songster and true to his great duke, he cannot help a sigh of
pride and sorrow over Hardrez' fate.

Neal of St. Saviour fought steadily and cheered his men eagerly as
the hour went on, but Randolf of Bayeux felt his courage begin to
fail him. Hamon [Pg209] was dead. Their great ally, Hardrez, had
been the flower of his own knights, and he was lying dead of a cruel
sword-thrust there in plain sight. He lost sight of Neal, perhaps, for
he was suddenly afraid of betrayal, and grieved that he had ever put
his helmet on. There is a touching bit of description in the "Roman de
Rou" just now. The battle pleased him no more, is told in the quaint
short lines. He thought how sad it was to be a captive, and sadder
still to be slain. He gave way feebly at every charge; he wandered
to and fro aimlessly, a thing to be stumbled over, we fancy him, now
in the front of the fight, now in the rear; at last he dropped his
lance and shield. "He stretched forth his neck and rode for his life,"
says Master Wace, quite ashamed of his countryman. But we can see the
poor knight's head drooping low, and his good, tired horse--the better
man of the two--mustering all his broken strength to carry his master
beyond the reach of danger. All the cowards rode after him pell-mell,
but brave Saint Saviour fought to the last and held the field until
his right arm failed and he could not strike again. The French pressed
him hard, the Norman men looked few and spent, and the mighty lord of
the Cotentin knew that all hope was lost. There on the rising ground
of Saint Lawrence the last blow was struck.

Away went the rebels in groups of three or four--away for dear life
every one of them, riding this way and that, trying to get out of
reach of their enemies and into some sort of shelter. The duke chased
them like a hound on the track of hares on, on [Pg210] toward Bayeux,
past the great Abbey of Fontenay and the Allemagne quarries, until
they reached the river Orne with its deep current. Men and horses
floundered in the water there, and many hot wounds tinged it with
a crimson stain. They were drowned, poor knights, and poor, brave
horses too. They went struggling and drifting down stream; the banks
were strewn with the dead; and the mill-wheels of Borbillon, a little
farther down, were stopped in their slow turning by the strange wreck
and floating worthless fragments of those lords and gentlemen who had
lost the battle of the Val-es-dunes.

And William was the conqueror of Normandy. Guy of Burgundy was a
traitor to his friends, and won a heritage of shame for his flight
from the field. We hear nothing of him while the fight went on, only
that he ran away. It appears that he must have been one of the first
to start for a place of safety, because they blame him so much; there
is nothing said about all the rebels running away together a little
later. That was the fortune of war and inevitable; not personal
cowardice, they might tell us. Guy of Burgundy was the man who had
led the three Cotentin lords out by fair promises and taunts about
their bastard duke, and he should have been brave and full of prowess,
since he undertook to be the rival of so brave a man. He did not go
toward the banks of the fateful river, but in quite another direction
to his own castle of Brionne, and a troop of his vassals escaped with
him and defended themselves there for a long time, until William
fairly starved them out like rats in a hole. They held [Pg211] their
own bravely, too, and no man was put to death when they surrendered,
while Guy was even allowed to come back to court. Master Wace stoutly
maintains that they should have been hung, and says long afterward
that some of those high in favor at court were the traitors of the
great rebellion.

Strange to say, nobody was put to death. Mr. Freeman says of this
something that gives us such a clear look at William's character
that I must copy it entire. "In those days, both in Normandy and
elsewhere, the legal execution of a state criminal was an event that
seldom happened. Men's lives were recklessly wasted in the endless
warfare of the times, and there were men, as we have seen, who did not
shrink from private murder, even in its basest forms. But the formal
hanging or beheading of a noble prisoner, so common in later times,
was, in the eleventh century, a most unusual sight. And, strange as
it may sound, there was a sense in which William the Conqueror was
not a man of blood. He would sacrifice any number of lives to his
boundless ambition; he did not scruple to condemn his enemies to cruel
personal mutilations; he would keep men for years as a mere measure
of security, in the horrible prison-houses of those days; but the
extinction of human life in cold blood was something from which he
shrank."

At the time of the first great victory, the historian goes on to
say, William was of an age when men are commonly disposed to be
generous, and the worst points of his character had not begun to show
themselves. Later in life, when he had broken the [Pg212] rule, or
perhaps we must call it only his prejudice and superstition, we find
that the star of his glory is already going down, pale and spent, into
the mists of shame and disappointment.

None of the traitors of the Val-es-dunes were treated harshly,
according to the standard of the times. The barons paid fines and gave
mortgages, and a great many of them were obliged to tear down their
robber castles, which they had built without permission from the duke.
This is the reason that there are so few ruins in Normandy of the
towers of that date. The Master of St. Saviour's was obliged to take
himself off to Brittany, but there was evidently no confiscation of
his great estates, for we find him back again at court the very next
year, high in the duke's favor and holding an honorable position.
He lived forty-four years after this, an uncommon lifetime for a
Norman knight, and followed the Conqueror to England, but he got
no reward in lands and honor, as so many of his comrades did. Guy
of Burgundy stayed at court a little while, and then went back to
his native province and devoted himself to making plots against his
brother, Count William. Grimbald de Plessis fared the worst of all the
conspirators; he was taken to Rouen and put into prison weighted down
with chains, and given the poorest of lodgings. He confessed that he
had tried to murder William that night at Valognes, when the court
jester gave warning, and said that a knight called Salle had been his
confederate. Salle denied the charge stoutly and challenged De Plessis
to fight a judicial combat, but before the day came the [Pg213]
scheming, unlucky baron from the Saxon lands was found dead in his
dungeon. The fetters had ground their way into his very bones, and he
was buried in his chains, for a warning, while his estates were seized
and part of them given to the church of Bayeux.

Now, at last, the Norman priests and knights knew that they had a
master. For some time it was surprisingly quiet in Normandy, and the
country was unexpectedly prosperous. The great duchy stood in a higher
rank among her sister kingdoms than ever before, and though there was
another revolt and serious attacks from envious neighbors, yet the
Saxons of the Bessin and the Danes of the Cotentin were overthrown,
and Normandy was more unitedly Norman-French than ever. There had been
a long struggle that had lasted from Richard the Fearless' boyhood
until now, but it was ended at last, to all intents and purposes. Even
now there is a difference between the two parts of Normandy, though so
many years have passed; but the day was not far off after this battle
of Val-es-dunes when the young conqueror could muster a great army and
cross the channel into England. "The Count of Rouen," says Freeman,
"had overcome Saxons and Danes within his own dominions, and he was
about to weld them into his most trusty weapons, wherewith to overcome
Saxons and Danes beyond the sea."

Perhaps nothing will show the barbarous cruelty of these times or
William's fierce temper better than the story of Alencon and its
punishment. William Talvas, the young duke's old enemy, formed a
rebellious league with Geoffry of Anjou, and they undertook [Pg214]
to hold Alencon against the Normans. When William came within sight of
the city, he discovered that they had sufficient self-confidence to
mock at him and insult him. They even spread raw skins over the edge
of the city walls, and beat them vigorously, yelling that there was
plenty of work for the tanner, and giving even plainer hints at what
they thought of his mother's ancestry.

William was naturally put into a great rage, and set himself and his
army down before the walls his enemies thought so invincible. He swore
"by the splendor of God" that he would treat them as a man lops a tree
with an axe, and, sure enough, when the siege was over, and Alencon
was at the Conqueror's mercy, he demanded thirty-two captives of war,
and nose, hands, and feet were chopped off, and presently thrown back
over the walls into the town.

 [Illustration]

[Pg215]

 [Illustration]




XI.

THE ABBEY OF BEC.

 "He heard across the howling seas,
  Chime convent bells on wintry nights."
                          --MATTHEW ARNOLD.


The only way of escaping from the obligations of feudalism and
constant warfare was by forsaking the follies of the world altogether
for the shelter of a convent, and there devoting one's time and
thought to holy things. A monastic life often came to be only an
excuse for devotion to art or to letters, or served merely to cover
the distaste for military pursuits. It was not alone ecclesiasticism
and a love for holy living and thoughts of heaven that inspired
rigid seclusion and monkish scorn of worldliness. Not only popular
superstition or recognition of true spiritual life and growth of the
Church made up the Church's power, but the presence of so much secular
thought and wisdom in the fold. Men of letters, of science, and
philosophy made it often more than a match for the militant element of
society, the soldiery of Normandy, and the great captains, who could
only prove their valor by the strength of their strategy and their
swords. William was quick to recognize the vast strength of the clergy
and the [Pg216] well-protected force of cloistered public opinion.
A soldier and worldly man himself, he arrayed himself on the side of
severe self-repression and knightly chastity and purity of life, and
kept the laws of the convent in high honor; while he mixed boldly with
the rude warfare of his age. He did not think himself less saintly
because he was guilty of secret crimes against his rivals. A skilful
use of what an old writer calls "the powder of succession" belonged as
much to his military glory as any piece of field-tactics and strategy.
He was anxious to stand well in the Pope's estimation, and the ban and
malediction of the Church was something by all means to be avoided.
The story of his marriage shows his bold, adventurous character and
determination in a marked way, and his persistence in gaining his ends
and winning the approval of his superior, in spite of obstacles that
would have daunted a weaker man. To gain a point to which the Church
objected he must show himself stronger than the Church.

 [Illustration: DOORWAY OF CATHEDRAL, CHARTRES.]

So there were two great forces at work in Normandy: this military
spirit, the love of excitement, of activity, and adventure; and this
strong religious feeling, which often made the other its willing
servant, and was sometimes by far the most powerful of the two.
Whether superstition or true, devout acceptance and unfolding of
the ideas of the Christian religion moved the Normans and their
contemporaries to most active service of the Church, we will not
stop to discuss. The presence of the best scholars and saints in any
age is a leaven and inspiration of that age, and men cannot help
being more or less [Pg217] influenced by the dwelling among them of
Christ's true disciples and ministers. That there was a large amount
of credulity, of superstitious rites and observances, we cannot doubt,
neither can we question that these exercised an amazing control over
ignorant minds. Standing so near to a pagan ancestry, the people of
large, and, relatively speaking, remote districts of Normandy, were no
doubt confused by lingering vestiges of the older forms of belief. As
yet, religion, in spite of the creeds of [Pg218] knighthood, showed
itself more plainly in stone and mortar, in vestments, and fasts,
and penances, and munificent endowments, than in simple truth and
godliness of life. A Norman nobleman, in the time of the Conqueror,
or earlier, thought that his estate would lack its chief ornament
if he did not plant a company of monks in some corner of it. It was
the proper thing for a rich man to found a monastery or religious
house of some sort or other, and this was a most blessed thing for
the scholars of their time. The profession of letters was already
becoming dignified and respectable, and the students of the Venerable
Bede, and other noble teachers from both north and south, had already
scattered good seeds through the states of Europe. It was in this
time that many great schools were founded, and in the more peaceful
years of the early reign of the Conqueror, religion and learning found
time to strike a deeper root in Normandy than ever before. There was
more wealth for them to be nourished with, the farms were productive,
and the great centres of industry and manufacture, like Falaise,
were thriving famously. It was almost as respectable to be a monk as
to be a soldier. There is something very beautiful in these earlier
brotherhoods--a purer fashion of thought and of life, a simplicity of
devotion to the higher duties of existence. But we can watch here, as
in the later movements in England and Italy, a gradual change from
poverty and holiness of life, to a love of riches and a satisfaction
with corrupt ceremonies and petty authority. The snare of worldliness
finds its victims always, and the temptation was easy then, [Pg219]
as it is easy now, to forget the things that belong to the spirit. We
have seen so much of the sword and shield in this short history that
we turn gladly away for a little space to understand what influences
were coming from the great abbeys of Bec and Saint Evreuil, and to
make what acquaintance we can with the men who dwelt there, and held
for their weapons only their mass-books and their principles of
education and of holy living. Lanfranc we must surely know, for he was
called the right-hand man of the Conqueror; and now let us go back a
little way and take a quick survey of the founding of the Abbey of
Bec, and trace its history, for that will help us to understand the
monastic life, and the wave of monasticism that left so plain a mark
upon the headlands and valleys of Normandy. Both in England and Norman
France, you can find the same red-roofed villages clustered about high
square church towers, with windows in the gray stone walls that look
like dim fret-work or lace-work. The oldest houses are low and small,
but the oldest minsters and parish churches are very noble buildings.

The first entrance into one of the old cathedrals is an event in one's
life never to be forgotten. It grows more beautiful the longer one
thinks of it; that first impression of height and space, of silence
and meditation; the walls are stored with echoes of prayers and
chanting voices; the windows are like faded gardens, with their sober
tints and gleams of brighter color. The saints are pictured on them
awkwardly enough, but the glory of heaven beams through the old glass
upon the worn tombstones in [Pg220] the floor; the very dust in the
rays of sunlight that strike across the wide, solemn spaces, seems
sacred dust, and of long continuance. We shut out this busy world when
we go into the cathedral door, and look about us as if this were a
waiting-room from whence one might easily find conveyance to the next
world. There is a feeling of nearness to heaven as we walk up the
great aisle of what our ancestors called, reverently enough, God's
house. One is suddenly reminded of many unseen things that the world
outside gives but little chance to think about. We are on the journey
heavenward indeed. There where many centuries have worn away the trace
of worldliness and the touch of builders' tools, so that the building
itself seems almost to have grown by its own life and strength, you
think about the builders and planners of such dignity and splendor
more than any thing, after all. Who were the men that dared to lift
the roof and plant the tall pillars, and why did they, in those poor,
primitive times, give all they had to make this one place so rich and
high. The bells ring a lazy, sweet chime for answer, and if you catch
a glimpse of some brown old books in the sacristy, and even spell out
the quaint records, you are hardly satisfied. We can only call them
splendid monuments of the spirit of the time (almost uncivilized,
according to our standard) when nevertheless there was a profound
sentiment of worship and reverence.

 [Illustration: CANTERBURY CATHEDRAL.]

Besides this, we are reminded that the lords of church and state were
able, if it pleased them, to command the entire service of their
vassals. All the [Pg222] liberties and aids and perquisites that
belonged to rank ceased where the lowest rank ended, at the peasant.
He was at anybody's command and mercy who chanced to be his master;
he had but precious few rights and claims of his own. When Christ
taught his disciples that whosoever would be chief among them must
become as a servant, he suggested a truth and order of relationship
most astonishing and contrary to all precedent. He that would be chief
among Hebrews or Normans, chief, alas, even in our own day, is still
misled by the old idea that the greatest is the master of many men.
Worldly power and heavenly service are always apt to be mistaken for
each other.

In an age when every man claimed the right of private war against
every other man, unless he were lord or vassal, we naturally look
for ferocity, and understand that the line between private war and
simple robbery and murder was not very clearly kept. Those who were
comparatively unable to defend themselves were the chief sufferers,
and of course many peace-loving men were obliged to take on the
appearance of fighters, and be ready for constant warfare in all its
shapes. There was only the one alternative--first to the universal
dissension of a nationality of armed men, and later to the more
orderly and purposeful system of knighthood,--simply to retreat
from the world altogether and lead a strictly religious life. The
famous order of the Benedictine monks was built up in Normandy with
surprising devotion. A natural love and respect for learning, which
had long been smouldering half-neglected, [Pg223] now burst into
a quick blaze in the hearts of many of the descendants of the old
Norse skalds and Sagamen. While the Augustinian order of monks is
chiefly famous for building great cathedrals, and the mendicant
friars have left many a noble hospital as their monuments, so the
Benedictines turned their energies toward the forming of great
schools. The time has passed when the Protestant world belittled
itself by contemptuously calling the monks lazy, sensual, and idle,
and by seeing no good in these ancient communities. Learning of every
sort, and the arts, as well, would have been long delayed in their
development, if it had not been for such quiet retreats, where those
men and women who chose could turn their thoughts toward better
employments than the secular world encouraged or even allowed. The
Benedictines were the most careful fosterers of scholarship; their
brethren of monastic fame owed them a great deal in every way.

There was a noble knight named Herluin, who lived in the time of Duke
Robert the Devil, and who was for thirty-seven years a knight-at-arms.
He was a descendant of one of Rolf's companions, his lineage was of
the very best, and his estates made part of the original grant of
Charles the Simple. Herluin was vassal to Count Gilbert of Brionne,
and had proved himself a brave and loyal knight, both to his overlord
and the duke. He was high in favor, and unusually tender-hearted and
just to those in trouble. We cannot help wishing that it had seemed
possible to such a man that he should stay in the world and leaven
society by his example, but to a thoughtful [Pg224] and gentle soul
like Herluin the cloister offered great temptations. There was still
great turbulence even among ecclesiastics--the worst of them "bore
arms and lived the life of heathen Danes.... The faith of Herluin
nearly failed him when he saw the disorder of one famous monastery,
but he was comforted by accidentally beholding the devotions of one
godly brother, who spent the whole night in secret prayer. He was thus
convinced that the salt of the earth had not as yet wholly lost its
savor."[7]

  [7] Freeman.

Our pious knight forsook the world, and with a few companions devoted
himself to building a small monastery on his own estate at Burneville,
near Brionne. The church was consecrated, and its founder received
benediction from his bishop, who ordained him a priest and made him
abbot of the little community. Herluin was very diligent in learning
to read, and achieved this mighty task without neglecting any of the
work which he imposed upon himself day by day. Soon he grew famous
in all that part of Normandy for his sanctity and great wisdom in
explaining the Bible. But it was discovered that the site of his
flourishing young establishment was not well chosen; an abbey must
possess supplies of wood and water, and so the colony was removed to
the valley of a small stream that flows into the Lisle, near the town
of Brionne. In the old speech of the Normans this brook was called
a beck; we have the word yet in verse and provincial speech; and it
gave a name to the most famous and longest remembered perhaps of all
the Norman [Pg225] monasteries. Mr. Freeman says: "The hills are
still thickly wooded; the beck still flows through rich meadows and
under trees planted by the waterside, by the walls of what was once
the renowned monastery to which it gave its name. But of the days of
Herluin no trace remains besides these imperishable works of nature.
A tall tower, of rich and fanciful design, one of the latest works of
mediaeval skill, still attracts the traveller from a distance; but of
the mighty minster itself, all traces, save a few small fragments,
have perished.... The truest memorial of that illustrious abbey is now
to be found in the parish church of the neighboring village. In that
lowly shelter is still preserved the effigy with which after-times had
marked the resting-place of the founder. Such are all the relics which
now remain of the house which once owned Lanfranc and Anselm as its
inmates.

"In this valley it was that Herluin finally fixed his infant
settlement, devoting to it his own small possession."

"By loving this world," he said, when he pleaded for his poor peasants
in Gilbert of Brionne's court--"By loving this world and by obeying man
I have hitherto much neglected God and myself. I have been altogether
intent on training my body, and I have gained no education for my
soul. If I have ever deserved well of thee, let me pass what remains
of life in a monastery. Let me keep thy affection and with me give to
God what I had of thee."

Herluin was not left alone in his enterprise; one companion after
another joined him, and presently [Pg226] there was a busy company of
monks at Bec. They subjected themselves to all sorts of self-denials
and privations, working hard at building their new home, at ditching,
gardening, or wood-cutting, and chanting their prayers with entire
devotion. Herluin allowed himself one scanty meal a day, and went
about his work poorly dressed, but serving God in most humble fashion.
This was the story of many small religious houses and their founders,
but we cannot help tracing the beginning of the abbey of Bec with
particular interest for the sake of Lanfranc, who has kept its memory
alive and made it famous in Norman and English history.

The story of this friar of Bec, who came to be archbishop of
Canterbury, and whose influence and power were only second, a few
years later, to William the Conqueror's own, reads like a romance, as
indeed does many another story of that romantic age. He was born at
Pavia, the City of the Hundred Towers, in Lombardy, and belonged to
an illustrious family. He was discovered in early boyhood to be an
uncommon scholar, and even in his university course he became well
known by his brilliant talents and fine gift of oratory. He was looked
upon as almost invincible in debate while he was still a school-boy,
and when he left college it was supposed that he would give the
benefit of his attainments and growth to his native city. For a little
while he did stay there, and began his career, but he appears to have
been made restless by a love of change and adventure, and a desire to
see the world, and next we find him going northward with a [Pg227]
company of admiring scholars, as if on pilgrimage, but in the wrong
direction! The enthusiastic little procession crossed the St. Bernard
pass into France and for some reason went to Avranches, where Lanfranc
taught a school and quickly became celebrated. In spite of the more
common profession or trade of fighting, there was never a time when
learning or the profession of letters was more honored, and the
Normans yielded to none of their contemporaries in the respect they
had for scholars.

Lanfranc became dissatisfied with the honor and glory of his success
at Avranches; and presently, in quest of something more deep and
satisfying--more in accordance with the craving of his spiritual
nature, left his flourishing school and again started northward.
The country was very wild and unsafe for a solitary wayfarer; and
presently, so the tradition runs, he was attacked by a band of
robbers, beaten, and left tied to a tree without food or money or any
prospect of immediate release. The long hours of the night wore away
and he grew more and more desperate; at last he bethought himself of
spiritual aid as a last resort, and tried to repeat the service of
the church. Alas! he could not remember the prayers and hymns, and in
his despair he vowed a pious vow to God that he would devote himself
to a holy life if his present sufferings might be ended. In good
season some charcoal burners played the welcome part of deliverers and
Lanfranc, yet aching with the pinch of his fetters and their galling
knots, begged to know of some holy house near by, and was directed to
Herluin's hermitage and the humble brotherhood of Bec. [Pg228]

The little colony of holy men was all astir that day. Soldiers and
sober gentlemen were tilling the soil and patiently furthering their
rural tasks. Herluin himself, the former knight-at-arms, was clad
in simple monkish garb, and playing the part of master-mason in the
building of a new oven. Out from the neighboring thicket comes a
strange figure, pale yet from his uncomforted vigil, and prays to
be numbered with those who give their lives to the service of God.
"This is surely a Lombard!" says Herluin, wonderstruck and filled
with sympathy; and when he discovers the new brother's name and eager
devotion, he kneels before him in love and reverence. It was a great
day for the abbey of Bec.

Such learning and ability to teach as Lanfranc's could not be hidden;
indeed the church believed in using a man's great gifts, and each
member was bound to give of his bounty in her service. The brothers
who could till the ground and hew timber and build ovens kept at their
tasks, and all the while Lanfranc, the theologian and teacher, the
man of letters, gathered a company of scholars from far and wide. Bec
became a famous centre of learning, and even from Italy and Greece
young men journeyed to his school, and, as years went by, he was
venerated more and more. His quick understanding and cleverness saved
him many a disaster, and we recognize in him a charming inheritance
of wit and good humor. He had the individuality and characteristics
of his Italian ancestry, while he was that rare man in any social
circle of his age, or even a later age,--a true man of the world. A
Norman of the Normans in his adopted [Pg229] home, he was yet able to
see Normandy, not as the world itself, but only a factor in it, and
to put it and its ambitions and possessions in their true relation
to wider issues. There was no such churchman-statesman as Lanfranc
in the young duchy, and his fame and glory were felt more and more.
William the duke himself might well set his wits at work to conquer
this formidable opponent of his marriage, and win him over to his
following, and the first attack was not by conciliatory measures.
Lanfranc received a formidable order to quit the country and leave his
abbey of Bec on penalty of worse punishment.

The future archbishop of English Canterbury meekly obeyed his temporal
lord, and set out through the forest with a pitiful straggling escort
affectingly futile in its appearance. He himself was mounted on
the worst old stumbling horse in the despoiled abbey stables, and
presently they meet the duke out hunting in most gallant array with
a lordly following of knights and gentlemen. It looks surprisingly
as if shrewd Lanfranc had arranged the scene beforehand. Along he
comes on his feeble steed, limping slowly on the forest path; he, the
greatest prior and book-man of Normandy, turned out of the house and
home that his own learning had made famous through Christendom. "Under
Lanfranc," says the chronicler, "the Normans first fathomed the art
of letters, for under the six dukes of Normandy scarce any one among
the Normans applied himself to liberal studies, nor was there any
learning found till God, the provider of all things, brought Lanfranc
to Normandy." All this, no doubt, flashed through [Pg230] William's
mind, and the prior of Bec's Italian good-humor proved itself the best
of weapons. "Give me a better horse," he cried, "and you shall see me
go away faster." The duke laughed in spite of himself, and Lanfranc
won a chance of pleading his cause. Before they parted they were
sworn friends, and the prior's knowledge of civil law and of theology
and of human nature (not least by any means of his famous gifts) were
for once and all at the duke's service. He supported the cause of the
unlawful marriage, and even won a dispensation from the Pope, long
desired and almost hopeless, in William's favor.

But the abbey of Bec was a great power for good in its time, and
carried a wonderful influence for many years. In the general scarcity
of books in those days before printing, the best way of learning was
to listen to what each great scholar had to say, and the students
went about from school to school, and lingered longest at places
like Bec, where the best was to be found. The men here were not only
the patrons of learning and the guarders of their own copies of the
ancient classics, but they taught the children of the neighborhood,
and sheltered the rich and poor, the old people and the travellers,
who wandered to their gates. They copied missals, they cast bells for
churches, they were the best of farmers, of musicians, of artists.
While Lanfranc waged his great battle with Berengarius about the
doctrine of the Eucharist, and came out a victorious champion for
the church, and won William's cause with the Pope with most skilful
pleading of the value of Norman loyalty to the See of Rome, his
humbler brethren [Pg231] tended their bees and ploughed straight
furrows and taught the country children their letters. Such a centre
of learning and of useful industry as Bec was the best flower of
civilization. Lanfranc himself was true to his vow of humility.
We catch some delightful glimpses of his simple life, and one in
particular of his being met on a journey by some reverential pilgrims
to his school. He was carefully carrying a cat behind him on the
saddle, comfortably restrained from using her claws, and Lanfranc
explained that he had sometimes been grievously annoyed by mice at his
destination, and had provided this practical ally. One can almost see
the twinkle in the good man's eyes, and the faces of the surprised
scholars who had been looking forward with awe and dread to their
first encounter with so renowned a man.

 [Illustration]

[Pg232]

 [Illustration]




XII.

MATILDA OF FLANDERS.

 "It had been easy fighting in some plain,
  Where victory might hang in equal choice;
  But all resistance against her is vain."
                                       --MARVELL.


We have occasionally had a glimpse of Flanders and its leading men
in the course of our Norman story; but now the two dukedoms were to
be linked together by a closer tie than either neighborhood, or a
brotherhood, or antagonism in military affairs. While Normandy had
been gaining new territory and making itself more and more feared by
the power of its armies, and had been growing richer and richer with
its farms and the various industries of the towns, Flanders was always
keeping pace, if not leading, in worldly prosperity.

Flanders had gained the dignity and opulence of a kingdom. Her people
were busy, strong, intelligent craftsmen and artists, and while her
bell-towers lifted themselves high in the air, and made their chimes
heard far and wide across the level country, the weavers' looms and
the women's clever fingers were sending tapestries to the walls of the
Vatican, and frost-like laces to the ladies of Spain. [Pg233]

The heavy ships of Flanders went and came with the richest of freights
from her crowded ports; her picture-painters were at work, her gardens
were green, and her noblemen's houses were filled with whatever
a luxurious life could demand or invent. As the country became
overcrowded, many of the inhabitants crossed over to Scotland, and
gained a foothold, sometimes by the sword, and oftener by the plough
and spade and weaver's shuttle. The Douglases and the Leslies, Robert
Bruce and all the families of Flemings, took root then, and, whether
by art or trade, established a right to be called Scotsmen, and to
march in the front rank when the story is told of many a brave day in
Scottish history.

The Count of Flanders was nominally vassal of both Rome and France,
but he was practically his own man. Baldwin de Lisle, of the
Conqueror's time, was too great a man to need anybody's help, or
to be bought or sold at will by an over-lord. He stood well as the
representative of his country's wealth and dignity. A firm alliance
with such a neighbor was naturally coveted by such a far-seeing man as
the young duke; and besides any political reasons, there was a closer
reason still, in the love that had sprung up in his heart for Matilda,
the count's daughter. In 1049, he had been already making suit for
her hand, for it was in that year when the Council of Rheims forbade
the banns, on some plea of relationship that was within the limit set
by the Church. William's whole existence was a fight for his life,
for his dukedom, for his kingdom of England, and he was not wanting
in courage in this long siege of [Pg234] church and state, when the
woman he truly loved was the desired prize. If history can be trusted,
she was a prize worth winning; if William had not loved her, he would
not have schemed and persisted for years in trying to win her in spite
of countless hindrances which might well have ended his quest if he
had been guided only by political reasons for the alliance.

His nobles had eagerly urged him to marry. Perhaps they would have
turned their eyes toward England first if there had been a royal
princess of Eadward's house, but failing this, Flanders was the best
prize. The Norman dukedom must not be left without an heir, and this
time there must be no question of the honesty of the heir's claim and
right to succession. Normandy had seen enough division and dissension,
and angry partisanship during the duke's own youth, and now that he
had reached the age of twenty-four, and had made himself master of
his possessions, and could take his stand among his royal neighbors,
everybody clamored for his marriage, and for a Lady of Normandy.
He was a pure man in that time of folly and licentiousness. He was
already recognized as a great man, and even the daughter of Baldwin of
Flanders might be proud to marry him.

Matilda was near the duke's own age, but she had already been married
to a Flemish official, and had two children. She was a beautiful,
graceful woman, and it is impossible to believe some well-known old
stories of William's rude courtship of her, since her father evidently
was ready to favor the marriage, and [Pg235] she seems to have
been a most loyal and devoted wife to her husband, and to have been
ready enough to marry him hastily at the end of a most troublesome
courtship. The great Council of Rheims had forbidden their marriage,
as we have already seen, and the pious Pope Leo had struck blows right
and left among high offenders of the Church's laws; a whole troop
of princes were excommunicated or put under heavy penances, and the
Church's own officials were dealt justly with according to their sins.
When most of these lesser contemporaries were properly sentenced, a
decree followed, which touched two more illustrious men: the Count
of Flanders was forbidden to give his daughter to the Norman duke
for a wife, and William, in his turn, was forbidden to take her. For
four long years the lovers--if we may believe them to be lovers--were
kept apart on the Pope's plea of consanguinity. There is no evidence
remaining that this was just, yet there truly may have been some
relationship. It is much easier to believe it, at any rate, than that
the count's wife Adela's former child-marriage to William's uncle
could have been put forward as any sort of objection.

We must leave for another chapter the affairs of Normandy and
William's own deeds during the four years, and go forward with this
story of his marriage to a later time, when in the course of Italian
affairs, a chance was given to bring the long courtship to a happy
end. Strangely enough this came by means of the De Hautevilles and
that Norman colony whose fortunes we have already briefly traced. In
the [Pg236] conflict with Pope Leo, when he was forced to yield to
the Normans' power and to recognize them as a loyal state, William
either won a consent to his wedding or else dared to brave the
Pope's disapproval. While Leo was still in subjection the eager duke
hurried to his city of Eu, near the Flemish border, and met there
Count Baldwin and his daughter. There was no time spent in splendid
processions and triumphal pageants of the Flemish craftsmen; some
minor priest gave the blessing, and as the duke and his hardly-won
wife came back to the Norman capital there was a great cheering and
rejoicing all the way; and the journey was made as stately and pompous
as heart could wish. There was a magnificent welcome at Rolf's old
city of Rouen; it was many years since there had been a noble lady, a
true duchess, on the ducal throne of Normandy.

But the spirit of ecclesiasticism held its head too high in the
pirates' land to brook such disregard of its canons, even on the part
of its chief ruler. There was an uncle of William's, named Mauger, who
was primate of the Norman church. He is called on every hand a very
bad man--at any rate, his faults were just the opposite of William's,
and of a sensual and worldly stamp. He was not a fit man for the
leader of the clergy, in William's opinion. Yet Mauger was zealous
in doing at least some of the duties of his office--he did not flinch
from rebuking his nephew! All the stories of his life are of the
worst sort, unless we give him the credit of trying to do right in
this case, but we can too easily remember the hatred that he and all
his family bore toward the [Pg237] bastard duke in his boyhood, and
suspect at least that jealousy may have taken the place of scorn and
despising. One learns to fear making point-blank decisions about the
character of a man so long dead, even of one whom everybody blamed
like Mauger. His biographers may have been his personal enemies, and
later writers have ignorantly perpetuated an unjust hue and cry.

Perhaps Lanfranc may be trusted better, for he too blamed the duke for
breaking a holy law,--Lanfranc the merry, wise Italian, who loved his
fellow-men, and who was a teacher by choice and by gift of God. All
Normandy was laid under a ban at this time for the wrong its master
had done. Lanfranc rebuked the assumed sinner bravely, and William's
fierce stern temper blazed out against him, and ordered a vicious
revenge of the insult to him and to his wife. The just William, who
kept Normandy in such good order, who stood like a bulwark of hewn
stone between his country and her enemies, was the same William who
could toss severed hands and feet over the Alencon wall, and give
orders to burn the grain stacks and household goods of the abbey
of Bec. We have seen how the duke and the abbot met, and how they
became friends again, and Lanfranc made peace with Pope Leo and won
him the loyalty of Normandy in return. Very likely Lanfranc was glad
to explain the truth and to be relieved from upholding such a flimsy
structure as the church's honor demanded. At any rate, William gladly
paid his Peter's pence and set about building his great abbey of
St. Etienne, in Caen, for a penance, and made [Pg238] Lanfranc its
prelate, and Matilda built her abbey of the Holy Trinity, while in
four of the chief towns of Normandy hospitals were built for the old
and sick people of the duchy. We shall see more of these churches
presently, but there they still stand, facing each other across the
high-peaked roofs of Caen; high and stately churches, the woman's
tower and the man's showing characteristics of boldness and of
ornament that mark the builders' fancy and carry us in imagination
quickly back across the eight hundred years since they were planned
and founded. Anselm, Maurilius, and Lanfranc, these were the teachers
and householders of the great churches, and one must have a new
respect for the young duke and duchess who could gather and hold three
such scholars and saintly men to be leaders of the church in Normandy.

There were four sons and three daughters born to William and Matilda,
and there is no hint of any difference or trouble between the duke
and his wife until they were unable to agree about the misconduct of
their eldest son. Matilda's influence for good may often be traced
or guessed at in her husband's history, and there are pathetic
certainties of her resignation and gentleness when she was often
cruelly hurt and tried by the course of events.

Later research has done away with the old idea of her working the
famous Bayeux tapestry with the ladies of her court to celebrate the
Conqueror's great deeds; but he needed no tribute of needle-work, nor
she either, to make them remembered. They have both left pictures
of themselves done in fadeless [Pg239] colors and living text of
lettering that will stand while English words are spoken, and Norman
trees bloom in the spring, and Norman rivers run to the sea, and the
towers of Caen spring boldly toward the sky.

We cannot be too thankful that so much of these historic churches
has been left untouched. When it is considered that at five separate
times the very fiends of destruction and iconoclasm seem to have been
let loose in Normandy, it is a great surprise that there should be so
many old buildings still in existence. From the early depredations of
the Northmen themselves, down to the religious wars of the sixteenth
century and the French revolution of the eighteenth, there have
been other and almost worse destroying agencies than even the wars
themselves. Besides the natural decay of masonry and timber, there was
the very pride and growing wealth of the rich monastic orders and the
large towns, who liked nothing better than to pull down their barns
to build greater and often less interesting ones. The most prosperous
cities naturally build the best churches, as they themselves increase,
and naturally replace them oftenest, and so retain fewest that are of
much historical interest in the end. The most popular weapon in the
tenth and eleventh centuries was fire; and the first thing that Norman
assailants were likely to do, was to throw burning torches over the
walls into the besieged towns. Again and again they were burnt--houses,
churches, and all.

The Normans were constantly improving, however, in their fashions of
building, and had made a great advance upon the Roman architecture
which [Pg240] they had found when they came to Neustria. Their work
has a distinct character of its own, and perhaps their very ignorance
of the more ornate and less effective work which had begun to prevail
in Italy, gave them freedom to work out their own simple ideas.
Instead of busying themselves with petty ornamentation and tawdry
imagery, they trusted for effect to the principles of height and
size. Their churches are more beautiful than any in the world; their
very plainness and severity gives them a beautiful dignity, and their
slender pillars and high arches make one think of nothing so much as
the tall pine forests of the North. What the Normans did with the idea
of the Roman arch, they did too in many other ways. They had a gift of
good taste that was most exceptional in that time, and especially in
that part of Europe; and whatever had been the power and efficiency
of the last impulse of civilization from the South, this impulse from
the North did a noble work in its turn. Normandy herself, in the days
of William and Matilda, was fully alive and pervaded with dreams of
growth and expansion.

 [Illustration: CRYPT OF MOUNT ST. MICHEL.]

Nobody can tell how early the idea of the conquest of England began
to be a favorite Norman dream. In those days there was always a
possibility of some day owning one's neighbor's land, and with weak
Eadward on the throne of England, only too ready to listen to the
suggestions and demands of his Norman barons and favorite counsellors,
it must have seemed always an easier, not to say more possible, thing
to take one step farther. There was an excellent antechamber across
the Channel for the crowded court [Pg242] and fields of Normandy,
and William and Eadward were old friends and companions. In 1051, when
Normandy was at peace, and England was at any rate quiet and sullen,
submissive to rule, but lying fast, bound like a rebellious slave that
has been sold to a new master, William and a fine company of lords and
gentlemen went a-visiting.

All those lords and gentlemen kept their eyes very wide open, and took
good notice of what they saw.

It was not a common thing by any means, for a great duke to go
pleasuring. He was apt to be too busy at home; but William's affairs
were in good order, and his cousin of England was a feeble man and
more than half a Norman; besides, he had no heir, and in course of
time the English throne would lack a proper king. The idea of such a
holiday might have pleased the anxious suitor of Matilda of Flanders,
too, and have beguiled the hard time of waiting. Nobody stopped
to remember that English law gave no right of succession to mere
inheritance or descent. Ralph the Timid was AEthelred's grandson; but
who would think of making him king instead of such a man as William?
The poor banished prince at the Hungarian court, half a world away,
was not so much as missed or wished for. Godwine was banished, Harold
was in Ireland; besides, it must be urged that there was something
fine in the notion of adding such a state as Normandy to England.
England was not robbed, but magnificently endowed by such a proposal.

Eadward was amiably glad to see this brave Duke of the Normans. There
was much to talk over [Pg243] together of the past; the present had
its questions, too, and it was good to have such a strong arm to lean
upon; what could have been more natural than that the future also
should have its veil drawn aside, not too rashly or irreverently? When
Eadward had been gathered to his fellow saints, pioneered by visions
that did not fade, and panoplied by authentic relics--nay, when the man
of prayers and cloistered quietness was kindly taken away from the
discordant painfulness of an earthly kingdom, what more easy than to
dream of this warlike William in his place; William, a man of war and
soldiery, for whom the government of two great kingdoms in one, would
only harden and employ the tense muscles and heavy brain; would only
provide his own rightful business? And, while Eadward thought of this
plan, William was Norman, too, and with the careful diplomacy of his
race, he joined the daring and outspokenness of old Rolf the Ganger;
he came back with his lords and gentlemen to Normandy, weighed down
with presents--every man of them who had not stayed behind for better
gain's sake. He came back to Normandy the acknowledged successor to
the English crown. Heaven send dampness now and bleak winds, and let
poor Eadward's sufferings be short! There was work for a man to do
in ruling England, and Eadward could not do it. The Englishmen were
stupid and dull; they ate too much and drank too much; they clung with
both hands to their old notions of state-craft and government. It was
the old story of the hare and the tortoise, but the hare was fleet of
foot and would win. [Pg244]

Win? Yes, this race and that race; and yet the tortoise was going to
be somehow made over new, and keep a steady course in the right path,
and learn speed, and get to be better than the old tortoise as the
years went on and on.

Eadward had no right to will away the kingship of England; but this
must have been the time of the promise that the Normans claimed, and
that their chroniclers have recorded. All Normandy believed in this
promise, and were ready to fight for it in after years. It is most
likely that Eadward was only too glad, at this date, to make a private
arrangement with the duke. He was on the worst of terms just then with
Godwine and his family, and consequently with the displeased English
party, who were their ardent upholders. Indeed, a great many of these
men were in Ireland with Harold, having turned their backs upon a king
and court that were growing more friendly to Normandy and disloyal to
England day by day.

The very next year after William's triumphal visit the Confessor was
obliged to change his course in the still stormier sea of English
politics. The Normans had shown their policy too soon, and there was
a widespread disapproval, and an outcry for Godwine's return from
exile. Baldwin of Flanders, and King Henry of France, had already been
petitioning for his pardon, and suddenly Godwine himself came sailing
up the Thames, and London eagerly put itself under his control. Then
Eadward the Confessor consented to a reconciliation, there being
no apparent alternative, and a troop of disappointed and [Pg245]
displaced foreigners went back to Normandy. Robert of Jumieges,
was among them. The Anglo-Saxon chronicle tells us gravely, that
at Walton-on-the-Naze, "they were lighted on a crazy ship, and the
archbishop betook himself at once over the sea, leaving behind him his
pall and all his christendom here in the land even as God willed it,
because he had taken upon him that worship as God willed it not." The
plea for taking away his place was "because he had done more than any
to cause strife between Godwine and the king"; and Godwine's power was
again the strongest in England.

The great earl lived only a few months longer, and when he died
his son Harold took his place. Already the eyes of many Englishmen
were ready to see in him their future king. Already he stands out a
bold figure, with a heart that was true to England, and though the
hopes that centred in him were broken centuries ago, we cannot help
catching something of the hope and spirit of the time. We are almost
ready to forget that this brave leader, the champion of that elder
English people, was doomed to fall before the on-rushing of a new
element of manhood, a tributary stream that came to swell the mighty
channel of the English race and history. William the Norman was busy
at home, meanwhile. The old hostility between Normandy and Flanders,
which dated from the time of William Longsword's murder, was now at
a certain end, by reason of the duke's marriage. Matilda, the noble
Flemish lady, the descendant of good King AElfred of England, had
brought peace and friendliness as not the least of [Pg246] her dowry,
and all fear of any immediate antagonism from that quarter was at an
end.

By the alliance with the kings of France, the Norman dukes had been
greatly helped to gain their present eminence, and to the Norman dukes
the French kings, in their turn, owed their stability upon their own
thrones; they had fought for each other and stood by each other again
and again. Now, there was a rift between them that grew wider and
wider--a rift that came from jealousy and fear of the Normans' wealth
and enormous growth in strength. They were masters of the Breton
country, and had close ties of relationship, moreover, with not only
Brittany, but with Flanders and the smaller county of Ponthieu, which
lay between them and the Flemings. Normandy stretched her huge bulk
and strength between France and the sea; she commanded the French
rivers, the French borders; she was too much to be feared; if ever her
pride were to be brought down, and the old vassalage insisted upon, it
could not be too soon. Henry forgot all that he owed to the Normans'
protection, and provoked them by incessant hostilities--secret and open
treacheries,--and the fox waged war upon the lion, until a spirit of
enmity was roused that hardly slept again for five hundred years.

There were other princes ready enough to satisfy their fear and
jealousy. The lands of the conspirators stretched from Burgundy to
the Pyrenees. Burgundy, Blois, Ponthieu, Aquitaine, and Poictiers all
joined in the chase for this William the Bastard, the chief of the
hated pirates. All the old gibes and [Pg247] taunts, and contemptuous
animosity were revived; now was the time to put an end to the Norman's
outrageous greed of power and insolence of possession, and the great
allied army divided itself in two parts, and marched away to Normandy.

King Henry's brother, Odo, turned his forces toward Rouen, and the
king himself took a more southerly direction, by the way of Lisieux to
the sea. They meant, at any rate, to pen the duke into his old Danish
region of the Cotentin and Bessin districts; all his eastern lands,
the grant from Charles the Simple, with the rest, were to be seized
upon and taken back by their original owners.

Things had changed since the battle of Val-es-dunes. There was no
division now among the Norman lords, and as the word to arm against
France was passed from one feudal chieftain to another, there was a
great mustering of horse and foot. So the king had made up his mind
to punish them, and to behave as if he had a right to take back the
gift that was unwillingly wrung from Charles the Simple. Normandy is
our own, not Henry's, was the angry answer; and Ralph of Tesson, and
the soldiers of Falaise, the Lord of Mortain, the men of Bessin, and
the barons of the Cotentin were ready to take the field, and stand
shoulder to shoulder. There had been a change indeed, in Normandy; and
from one end of it to the other there was a cry of shame and treachery
upon Henry, the faithless ally and overlord. They had learned to know
William as a man not against their interests but with them, and for
them and the glory of Normandy; and they had [Pg248] not so soon
forgotten the day of Val-es-dunes and their bitter mistake.

The king's force had come into the country by the frontier city of
Aumale, and had been doing every sort of damage that human ingenuity
could invent between conqueror and vanquished. It was complained
by those who escaped that the French were worse than Saracens. Old
people, women, and children were abused or quickly butchered; men
were taken prisoners; churches and houses were burnt or pulled to
pieces. There was a town called Mortemer which had the ill-luck to
be chosen for the French head-quarters, because it was then a good
place for getting supplies and lodging, though now there is nothing
left of it but the remains of an ancient tower and a few dwellings and
gardens. Here the feasting and revelry went on as if Normandy were
already fallen. All day there were raids in the neighboring country,
and bringing in of captives, and plunder; and William's spies came
to Mortemer, and went home to tell the duke the whole story of the
hateful scene. There was a huge army collected there fearless of
surprise; this was the place to strike a blow, and the duke and his
captains made a rapid march by night so that they reached Mortemer
before daylight.

There was no weapon more cherished by the pirates' grandchildren
than a blazing fire-brand, and the army stole through the town while
their enemies still slept, stupid with eating and drinking, or weary
from the previous day's harrying. They waked to find their houses
in flames, the roofs crackling, a horrid [Pg249] glare of light, a
bewilderment of smoke and shouts; the Normans ready to kill, to burn,
to pen them back by sturdy guards at the streets' ends. There was
a courageous resistance to this onslaught, but from early morning
until the day was well spent the fight went on, and most of the
invaders were cut to pieces. The dead men lay thick in the streets,
and scattered everywhere about the adjacent fields. "Only those were
spared who were worth sparing for the sake of their ransom. Many a
Norman soldier, down to the meanest serving-man in the ranks, carried
off his French prisoner; many a one carried off his two or three
goodly steeds with their rich harness. In all Normandy there was not
a prison that was not full of Frenchmen."[8] All this was done with
scarcely any loss to the Normans, at least so we are told, and the
news came to William that same evening, and made him thank God with
great rejoicing. It would seem as if only a God of battles could be a
very near and welcome sovereign to this soldier-lord of Normandy.

  [8] Freeman.

The victor had still another foe to meet. The king's command was
still to be vanquished, and perhaps it might be done with even less
bloodshed. The night had fallen, and he chose Ralph of Toesny, son
of that Roger who sought the Spanish kingdom, the enemy of his own
ill-championed childhood, to go as messenger to the king's tent. The
two chieftains cannot have been encamped very far apart, for it was
still dark when Ralph rode fast on his errand. He crept close to where
the king lay in the darkness, [Pg250] and in the glimmer of dawn he
gave a doleful shout: "Wake, wake, you Frenchmen! You sleep too long;
go and bury your friends who lie dead at Mortemer"; then he stole away
again unseen, while the startled king and his followers whispered
together of such a terrible omen. Ill news travels apace; they were
not long in doubt; a panic seized the whole host. Not for Rouen now,
or the Norman cities, but for Paris the king marched as fast as he
could go; and nobody gave him chase, so that before long he and his
counts were safe at home again with the thought of their folly for
company. Craft is not so fine a grace as courage; but craft served
the Normans many a good turn; and this was not the least glorious of
William's victories, though no blood was spilt, though the king was
driven away and no sword lifted to punish him. The Normans loved a
bit of fun; we can imagine how well they liked to tell the story of
spoiling half an army with hardly a scratch for themselves, and making
the other half take to its heels at the sound of Ralph de Toesny's
gloomy voice in the night. There were frequent hostilities after this
along the borders, but no more leagues of the French counts; there was
a castle of Breteuil built to stand guard against the king's castle
of Tillieres, and William Fitz-Osbern was made commander of it; there
was an expedition of the Count of Maine, aided by Geoffrey Martel and
a somewhat unwilling Breton prince, against the southern castle of
Ambrieres. But when William hastened to its relief the besiegers took
to flight, except the Lord of Maine, who was captured and put into
[Pg251] prison until he was willing to acknowledge himself the duke's
vassal; and after this there were three years of peace in Normandy.

It had grown to be a most orderly country. William's famous curfew
bell was proved to be an efficient police force. Every household's
fire was out at eight o'clock in winter, and sunset in summer, and
its lights extinguished; every man was in his own dwelling-place then
under dire penalty; he was a strict governor, but in the main a just
one--this son of the lawless Robert. He upheld the rights of the poor
landholders and widows, and while he was feared he was respected. It
was now that he gave so much thought to the rights of the Church, or
the following out of his own dislike, in the dismissal of his Uncle
Mauger, the primate of the duchy.

There is still another battle to be recorded in this chapter,--one
which for real importance is classed with the two famous days of
Val-es-dunes and Hastings,--the battle fought at Varaville, against the
French king and his Angevine ally, who took it into their silly heads
to go a-plundering on the duke's domain.

Bayeux and Caen were to be sacked, and all the surrounding country;
besides this, the allies were going to march to the sea to show the
Bastard that he could not lock them up in their inland country and
shake the key in their faces. William watched them as a cat watches
a mouse and lets the poor thing play and feast itself in fancied
security. He had the patience to let the invaders rob and burn, and
spoil the crops; to let them live in his towns, [Pg252] and the
French king himself hold a temporary court in a fine new abbey of
the Bessin, until everybody thought he was afraid of this mouse, and
that all the Normans were cowards; then the quick, fierce paw struck
out, and the blow fell. It is a piteous story of war, that battle of
Varaville!

There was a ford where the French, laden with their weight of spoils,
meant to cross the river Dive into the district of Auge. On the
Varaville side the land is marshy; across the river, and at no great
distance, there is a range of hills which lie between the bank of
the Dive and the rich country of Lisieux. The French had meant to
go to Lisieux when they started out on their other enterprise. But
William had waited for this moment; part of the army under the king's
command had crossed over, and were even beginning to climb the hills.
The rear-guard with the great baggage trains were on the other bank,
when there was a deplorable surprise. William, with a body of trained
troops, had come out from Falaise; he had recruited his army with all
the peasants of the district; armed with every rude weapon that could
be gathered in such haste, they were only too ready to fall upon the
French mercilessly.

 [Illustration: A NORMAN ARCHER.]

The tide was flowing in with disastrous haste, and the Frenchmen had
not counted upon this awful foe. Their army was cut in two; the king
looked down in misery from the height he had thoughtlessly gained.
Now we hear almost for the first time of that deadly shower of Norman
arrows, famous enough since in history. Down they came with their
sharp talons; the poor French were huddling together at [Pg253] the
river's brink; there was no shelter; the bowmen shot at them; the
peasants beat them with flails and scythes; into the rushing water
they went, and floated away writhing. There was not a man left alive
in troop after troop, and there were men enough of the Normans who
knew the puzzling, marshy ground to chase and capture those other
troopers who tried to run away. Alas for the lilies of France! how
they were trailed in the mire of that riverside at Varaville! It was
a massacre rather than a battle, and Henry's spirit was humbled.
"Heavy-hearted, he never held spear or shield again," says the
chronicle. There were no more expeditions against Normandy in his
time; he sued for a truce, and paid as the price for it, the castle
of Tillieres, and so that stronghold came back to its rightful lords
again. Within two years he died, being an old man, and we can well
believe a disappointed one. Geoffrey Martel died too, that year, the
most troublesome of the Bastard's great neighbors. This was 1060;
and it was in that year that Harold of England first came over to
Normandy--an unlucky visit enough, as time proved. His object was
partly to take a look at the political state of Gaul; but if he meant
to sound the [Pg254] hearts of the duke's neighbors in regard to him,
as some people have thought, he could not have chosen a more unlucky
time. If he meant to speak for support in case William proved to be
England's enemy in days to come, he was too late; those who would have
been most ready to listen were beyond the reach of human intrigues,
and their deaths had the effect of favoring William's supremacy, not
disputing it.

There is no record of the great earl's meeting the Norman duke at all
on this first journey. If we had a better account of it, we might
solve many vexed questions. Some scholars think that it was during
this visit that Harold was inveigled into taking oath to uphold
William's claim to the English crown, but the records nearly all
belong to the religious character of the expedition. Harold followed
King Cnut's example in going on a pilgrimage to Rome, and brought back
various treasures for his abbey of Waltham, the most favored religious
house of his earldom. He has suffered much misrepresentation, no
doubt, at the hands of the monkish writers, for he neglected their
claims in proportion as he favored their secular brethren, for whom
the abbey was designed. A monk retired from the world for the benefit
of his own soul, but a priest gave his life in teaching and preaching
to his fellow-men. We are told that Harold had no prejudice against
even a married priest, and this was rank heresy and ecclesiastical
treason in the minds of many cloistered brethren. [Pg255]

 [Illustration]




XIII.

HAROLD THE ENGLISHMAN.

 "The languid pulse of England starts
  And bounds beneath your words of power."
                                    --WHITTIER.


Just here we might well stop to consider the true causes and effects
of war. Seen in the largest way possible, from this side of life,
certain forces of development are enabled to assert themselves only
by outgrowing, outnumbering, outfighting their opposers. War is the
conflict between ideas that are going to live and ideas that have
passed their maturity and are going to die. Men possess themselves
of a new truth, a clearer perception of the affairs of humanity;
progress itself is made possible with its larger share of freedom
for the individual or for nations only by a relentless overthrowing
of outgrown opinions. It is only by new combinations of races, new
assertions of the old unconquerable forces, that the spiritual kingdom
gains or rather shows its power. When men claim that humanity can only
move round in a circle, that the world has lost many things, that the
experience of humanity is like the succession of the seasons, and
that there is reproduction but not progression, it is well to take
a [Pg256] closer look, to see how by combination, by stimulus of
example, and power of spiritual forces and God's great purposes, this
whole world is nearer every year to the highest level any fortunate
part of it has ever gained. Wars may appear to delay, but in due time
they surely raise whole nations of men to higher levels, whether by
preparing for new growths or by mixing the new and old. Generals of
battalions and unreckoned camp-followers alike are effects of some
great change, not causes of it. And no war was ever fought that was
not an evidence that one element in it had outgrown the other and was
bound to get itself manifested and better understood. The first effect
of war is incidental and temporary; the secondary effect makes a link
in the grand chain of the spiritual education and development of the
world.

We grow confused in trying to find our way through the intricate
tangle of stories about the relation of Harold and William to each
other, with their promises and oaths and understanding of each other's
position in regard to the throne of England. Of course, William knew
that Harold had a hope of succeeding the Confessor. There was nobody
so fit for it in some respects as he--nobody who knew and loved England
any better, or was more important to her welfare. He had fought for
her; he was his father's son, and the eyes of many southern Englishmen
would turn toward him if the question of the succession were publicly
put in the Witanagemot. He might have defamers and enviers, but the
Earl of the West Saxons was the foremost man in England. [Pg257] He
had a right to expect recognition from his countrymen. The kingship
was not hereditary, and Eadward had no heirs if it had been. Eadward
trusted him; perhaps he had let fall a hint that he meant to recommend
his wise earl as successor, even though it were a repetition of
another promise made to William when Harold was a banished man and the
house of Godwine serving its term of disgrace and exile.

It appears that Eadward had undergone an intermediate season of
distrusting either of these two prominent candidates for succession.
But the memory of Eadward Ironside was fondly cherished in England,
and his son, Eadward the Outlaw, the lawful heir of the crown, was
summoned back to his inheritance from Hungary. There was great
rejoicing, and the Atheling's wife and his three beautiful children, a
son and two daughters, were for a time great favorites and kindled an
instant loyalty all too soon to fade. Alas! that Eadward should have
returned from his long banishment to sicken and die in London just as
life held out such fair promises; and again the Confessor's mind was
troubled by the doubtful future of his kingdom.

On the other hand, if we trust to the Norman records now,--not always
unconfirmed by the early English historians,--we must take into
account many objections to, as well as admissions of, Harold's claim.
Eadward's inclination seems often to swerve toward his Norman cousin,
who alone seemed able to govern England properly or to hold her
jealous forces well in hand. The great English earls were [Pg258]
in fact nearly the same as kings of their provinces. There was much
opposition and lack of agreement between them; there was a good
deal of animosity along the borders in certain sections, and a deep
race prejudice between the Danes of Northumberland and the men of
the south. The Danes from oversea were scheming to regain the realm
that had belonged to their own great ruler Cnut, and so there was a
prospect of civil war or foreign invasion which needed a strong hand.
Harold's desire to make himself king was not in accordance with the
English customs. He was not of the royal house; he was only one of
the English earls, and held on certain grounds no better right to
pre-eminence than they. Leofric and Siward would have looked upon him
as an undeserving interloper, who had no right to rule over them. "The
grandsons of Leofric, who ruled half England," says one historian,
"would scarcely submit to the dominion of an equal.... No individual
who was not of an ancient royal house had ever been able to maintain
himself upon an Anglo-Saxon throne."

Before we yield too much to our natural sentiment over the story of
this unfortunate "last of the Saxon kings," it is well to remember the
bad and hindering result to England if Harold had conquered instead of
fallen on the battle-field of Hastings. The weakness of England was in
her lack of unity and her existing system of local government.

 [Illustration: GUY, COUNT OF PONTHIEU. BAYEUX TAPESTRY.]

There are two or three plausible stories about Harold's purpose in
going to Normandy. It is sometimes impossible in tracing this portion
of [Pg259] history through both English and Norman chronicles to find
even the same incidents mentioned. Each historian has such a different
proof and end in view, and it is only by the closest study, and a good
deal of guesswork beside, that a reasonable account of Harold's second
visit, and the effects of it, can be made out. We may listen for a
moment to the story of his being sent by Eadward to announce that the
English crown was to be given to the Norman duke by [Pg260] Eadward's
own recommendation to the council, or we may puzzle our way through
an improbable tale that Godwine's son, Wolfnoth, and grandson, Hakon,
were still held by William as hostages between Eadward and Godwine,
though Godwine's family had long since been formally reinstated and
re-endowed. Harold is supposed to have gone over to demand their
release, though Eadward mournfully warned him of danger and treachery.

The most probable explanation is that Harold was bound on a pleasure
excursion with some of his family either to Flanders or some part of
his own country, and was shipwrecked and cast ashore on the coast of
Ponthieu. All accounts agree about this, though they differ so much
about the port he meant to make and his secret purpose.

In those days wrecking was a sadly common practice, and the more
illustrious a rescued man might be, the larger ransom was demanded.
When we reflect that much of the brutal and lawless custom of wrecking
survived almost if not quite to our own time in England, we cannot
expect much from the leniency of the Count of Ponthieu's subjects, or
indeed much clemency from that petty sovereign himself. Harold was
thrown into prison and suffered many things there before the Duke of
Normandy could receive his message and come to his relief.

We might imagine for ourselves now a fine historical picture of
William the Conqueror seated in his palace at Rouen, busy with
affairs of church and state. He has grown stouter, and his face shows
marks of thought and care which were not all there [Pg261] when
he went to England. His hair is worn thin by his helmet, and the
frank, courteous look of his youth has given place to sternness and
insistance, though his smile is ready to be summoned when occasion
demands. He is a man who could still be mild with the gentle, and
pleasantry was a weapon and tool if it were not an unconscious habit.
Greater in state and less in soul, says one historian, who writes of
him from an English standpoint at this hour in his career. A Norman
gentleman lived delicately in those days; he was a worthy successor
of a Roman gentleman in the luxurious days of the empire, but not yet
enfeebled and belittled by ease and extravagance--though we do listen
with amusement to a rumor that the elegant successors of Rolf the
Ganger were very dependent upon warm baths, and a good sousing with
cold water was a much dreaded punishment and penance. The reign of the
valet had become better assured than the reign (in England) of the
offspring of Woden and the house of Cerdic.

But we forget to watch the great Duke of the Normans as he sits in
his royal chamber and listens to a messenger from the prisoned Earl
of the West Saxons. It is a moment of tremendous significance, for by
the assistance of winds and waves Harold has fallen into his power. He
must tread carefully now and use his best cleverness of strategy and
treacherous artifice. How the bystanders must have watched his face,
and listened with eager expectation for his answer. The messenger
pleads Harold's grievous condition; hints of famine, torture, and
death itself [Pg262] have been known to escape this brutal Count of
Ponthieu who keeps the great Englishman in his dungeon as if he were
a robber. Perhaps he only wishes to gain a greater ransom, perhaps he
acts in traitorous defiance of his Lord of Normandy's known friendship
for England.

William replies at last with stern courtesy. He is deeply grieved, we
can hear him say, for the earl's misfortune, but he can only deal in
the matter as prince with prince. It is true that Guy of Ponthieu is
his vassal and man, but Guy is governor of his coast, and makes his
own laws. It will cost great treasure to ransom this noble captive,
but the matter must be carefully arranged, for Guy is hot-tempered and
might easily be provoked into sending Harold's head to Rouen without
his body. Yet half the Norman duchy shall be spent if need be for such
a cause as the English earl's release.

Fitz-Osbern, the duke's seneschal and Malet de Graville, and the noble
attendants of the palace murmur a pleased assent as the half-satisfied
messenger is kindly dismissed. They detect an intrigue worthy of
the best Norman ability, and know by William's face that he has
unexpectedly gained a welcome control over events.

The liberation of Harold was effected after much man[oe]uvring,
necessary or feigned, and when he appeared before William it was as
a grateful man who was in debt not only for his release from danger
and discomfort, but for a great sum of money and a tract of valuable
landed property.

 [Illustration: MOUNT ST. MICHEL.]

It is impossible not to suspect that Guy of [Pg264] Ponthieu and
William were in league with each other, and when the ransom was paid,
the wrecker-count became very amiable, and even insisted upon riding
with a gay company of knights to the place where the Norman duke came
with a splendid retinue to meet his distinguished guest. William
laid aside the cumbrous forms of court etiquette and hurried to the
gates of the Chateau d'Eu to help Harold to dismount, and greeted
him with cordial affection, as friend with friend. Harold may well
have been dazzled by his reception at the most powerful court in that
part of the world. To have a welcome that befitted a king may well
have pleased him into at least a temporary acknowledgment of his
entertainer's majestic power and rights. No doubt, during that unlucky
visit it seemed dignity enough to be paraded everywhere as the great
duke's chosen companion and honored friend and guest. At any rate,
Harold's visit seems to have given occupation to the court, and we
catch many interesting glimpses of the stately Norman life, as well
as the humble, almost brutal, condition of the lower classes, awed
into quietness and acquiescence by the sternness and exactness of
William's rule. It must be acknowledged that if the laws were severe
they prevented much disorder that had smouldered in other times in the
lower strata of society; men had less power and opportunity to harm
each other or to enfeeble the state.

 [Illustration: OLD HOUSES, DOL.]

No greater piece of good luck could have befallen the duke than to win
the post of Harold's benefactor, and he played the part gallantly.
Not only the duke but the duchess treated their guest with [Pg265]
uncommon courtesy, and he was admitted to the closest intimacy with
the household. If Harold had been wise he would have gone back to
England as fast as sails could carry him, but instead of that he
lingered on, equally ready to applaud the Norman exploits in camp and
court, and to show his entertainers what English valor could achieve.
He went with the duke on some petty expedition against the rebellious
Britons, but it is hard to make out a straight story of that
enterprise. But there is a characteristic story of Harold's strength
in the form of a tradition that when the Norman army was crossing the
deep river Coesnon, which pours into the sea under the wall of Mount
St. Michel, some of the troops were being swept away by the waves,
when [Pg266] Harold rescued them, taking them with great ease, at
arm's length, out of the water.

There is a sober announcement in one of the old chronicles, that the
lands of Brittany were included in Charles the Simple's grant to Rolf,
because Rolf had so devastated Normandy that there was little there to
live upon. At the time of William's expedition, Brittany itself was
evidently taking its turn at such vigorous shearing and pruning of the
life of its fertile hills and valleys. The Bretons liked nothing so
well as warfare, and when they did not unite against a foreign enemy,
they spent their time in plundering and slaughtering one another.
Count Conan, the present aggressor, was the son of Alan of Brittany,
William's guardian. Some of the Bretons were loyal to the Norman
authority, and Dol, an ancient city renowned for its ill luck, and
Dinan were successively vacated by the rebels. Dinan was besieged by
fire, a favorite weapon in the hands of the Normans; but later we find
that both the cities remained Breton, and the Norman allies go back to
their own country. There is a hint somewhere of the appearance of an
army from Anjou, to take the Bretons' part, but the Norman chroniclers
ignore it as far as they can.

It is impossible to fix the date of this campaign; indeed there may
have been more than one expedition against Brittany. Still more
difficult is it to learn any thing that is undisputed about the famous
oath that Harold gave to William, and was afterward so completely
punished for breaking. Yet, while we do not know exactly what the
oath was, [Pg267] Harold's most steadfast upholders have never been
able to deny that there was an oath, and there is no contradiction,
on the English side, of the whole affair. His best friends have been
silent about it. The most familiar account is this, if we listen to
the Norman stories: Harold entered into an engagement to marry one of
William's daughters, who must have been very young at the time of the
visit or visits to Normandy, and some writers claim that the whole
cause of the quarrel lay in his refusal to keep his promise. There
is a list beside of what appears to us unlikely concessions on the
part of the English earl. Harold did homage to the duke, and formally
became his man, and even promised to acknowledge his claim to the
throne of England at the death of the Confessor. More than this, he
promised to look after William's interest in England, and to put him
at once into possession of the Castle of Dover, with the right of
establishing a Norman garrison there. William, in return, agreed to
hold his new vassal in highest honor, giving him by and by even the
half of his prospective kingdom. When this surprising oath was taken,
Harold was entrapped into swearing upon the holiest relic of Norman
saints which had been concealed in a chest for the express purpose.
With the superstitious awe that men of his time felt toward such
emblems, this not very respectable act on William's part is made to
reflect darkly upon Harold. Master Wace says that "his hand trembled
and his flesh quivered when he touched the chest, though he did not
know what was in it, and how much more distressed he was when he
[Pg268] found by what an awful vow he had unwittingly bound his soul."

So Harold returned to England the duke's vassal and future son-in-law,
according to the chronicles, but who can help being suspicious, after
knowing how Harold was indebted to the duke and bound with cunningly
contrived chains until he found himself a prisoner? William of
Poitiers, a chronicler who wrote in the Conqueror's day, says that
Harold was a man to whom imprisonment was more odious than shipwreck.
It would be no wonder if he had made use of a piece of strategy, and
was willing to make any sort of promise simply to gain his liberty.

The plot of the relic-business put a different face upon the whole
matter, and yet, even if Harold was dazzled for the time being by
William's power and splendor, one must doubt whether he would have
given up all his ambition of reigning in England. He was already
too great a man at home to play the subject and flatterer with much
sincerity, even though his master were the high and mighty Duke of the
Normans, and he had come from a ruder country to the fascination and
elegance of the Norman court. Whatever the oath may have been that
Harold gave at Bayeux, it is certain that he broke it afterward, and
that his enemies made his failure not only an affair of state, but of
church, and waged a bitter war that brought him to his sad end.

Now, the Norman knights might well look to it that their armor was
strong and the Norman soldiers provide themselves with arrows and
well-seasoned bows. It was likely that Harold's promise was no
[Pg269] secret, and that some echo of it reached from one end of
the dukedom to the other. There were great enterprises on foot, and
at night in the firelight there was eager discussion of possible
campaigns, for though the great Duke William, their soldier of
soldiers, had bent the strength of his resistless force upon a new
kingdom across the Channel and had won himself such a valuable ally,
it was not likely that England would be ready to fall into his hand
like a ripe apple from the bough. There was sure to be fighting, but
there was something worth fighting for; the petty sorties against the
provincial neighbors of Normandy were hardly worth the notice of her
army. Men like the duke's soldiers were fit for something better than
such police duty. Besides, a deep provocation had not been forgiven
by those gentlemen who were hustled out of England by Godwine and his
party, and many an old score would now stand a chance of repayment.

Not many months were passed before the news came from London that the
holy king Eadward was soon to leave this world for a better. He was
already renowned as a worker of miracles and a seer of visions, and
the story was whispered reverently that he had given his ring to a
beggar who appeared before him to ask alms in the middle of a crowd
assembled at the dedication of a church. The beggar disappeared, but
that very night some English pilgrims on their way to Jerusalem are
shelterless and in danger near the holy city. Suddenly a company of
shining acolytes approach through the wilderness, carrying two tapers
before an old man, as if he were [Pg270] out on some errand of the
church. He stops to ask the wondering pilgrims whence they come and
whither they are going, and guides them to a city and a comfortable
lodging, and next morning tells them that he is Saint John the
Evangelist. More than this, he gives them the Confessor's ring, with
a message to carry back to England. Within six months Eadward will
be admitted to paradise as a reward for his pure and pious life. The
message is carried to the king by miraculous agency that same night,
and ever since he prays and fasts more than ever, and is hurrying
the builders of his great Westminster, so that he may see that holy
monument of his piety dedicated to the service of God before he dies.

The Norman lords and gentlemen who listened to this tale must have
crossed themselves, one fancies, and craved a blessing on the saintly
king, but the next minute we fancy also that they gave one another a
glance that betokened a lively expectation of what might follow the
news of Eadward's translation.

Twice in the year, at Easter and Christmas, the English king wore his
crown in the great Witanagemot and held court among his noblemen.
In this year the midwinter Gemot was held at the king's court at
Westminster, instead of at Gloucester, to hallow the Church of St.
Peter, the new shrine to which so much more of the Confessor's thought
had gone than to the ruling of his kingdom.

But in the triumphant days to which he had long looked forward, his
strength failed faster and faster, and his queen, Edith, the daughter
of Godwine, had [Pg271] to take his place at the ceremonies. The
histories of that day are filled with accounts of the grand building
that Eadward's piety had reared. He had given a tenth part of all
his income to it for many years, and with a proud remembrance of the
Norman churches with which he was familiar in his early days, had made
Westminster a noble rival of them and the finest church in England.
The new year was hardly begun, the Witan had not scattered to their
homes, before Eadward the Confessor was carried to his tomb--the last
of the sons of Woden. He had reigned for three and twenty years, and
was already a worn old man.

 "Now, in the falling autumn, while the winds
 Of winter blew across his scanty days
 He gathered up life's embers----"

But as he lay dying in the royal palace at Westminster everybody
was less anxious about the king, than about the country's uncertain
future. Harold had been a sort of under-king for several years, and
had taken upon himself many of the practical duties of government.
He had done great deeds against the Welsh, and was a better general
and war-man than Eadward had ever been. Nobody had any hope of the
Confessor's recovery, and any hour might find the nation kingless. The
Atheling's young son was a feeble, incompetent person, and wholly a
foreigner; only the most romantic and senseless citizen could dream
of making him Lord of England in such a time as that. There were a
thousand rumors afloat; every man had his theory and his prejudice,
and at last there must have been a general feeling of relief [Pg272]
when the news was told that the saint-king was dead in his palace and
had named Harold as his successor. The people clung eagerly to such a
nomination; now that Eadward was dead he was saint indeed, and there
was a funeral and a coronation that same day in the minster on the
Isle of Thorney; his last word to the people was made law.

No more whispering that Harold was the Duke of the Normans' man, and
might betray England again into the hands of those greedy favorites
whom the holy king had cherished in his bosom like serpents. No
more fears of Harold's jealous enemies among the earls; there was a
short-sighted joy that the great step of the succession had been made
and settled fast in the consent of the Witan, who still lingered; to
be dispersed, when these famous days were at an end, by another king
of England than he who had called them together.

 [Illustration: FUNERAL OF EADWARD THE CONFESSOR. (FROM THE BAYEUX
    TAPESTRY.)]

The king had prophesied in his last hours; he had seen visions and
dreamed dreams; he had said that great sorrows were to fall upon
England for her sins, and that her earls and bishops and abbots were
but ministers of the fiend in the eye of God; that within a year and
a day the whole land would be harried from one end to another with
fire and slaughter. Yet, almost with the same breath, he recommends
his Norman friends, "those whom in his simplicity he spoke of as men
who had left their native land for love of him," to Harold's care, and
does not seem to suspect their remotest agency in the future harrying.
True enough some of the Norman officers were loyal to him and to
England. This death-bed scene [Pg273] is sad and solemn. Norman
Robert the Staller was there, and Stigand, the illegal archbishop;
Harold, the hope of England, and his sister, the queen, who mourns now
and is very tender to her [Pg274] royal husband, who has given her a
sorry lot with his cold-heartedness toward her and the dismal exile
and estrangement he has made her suffer. He loves her and trusts her
now in this last day of life, and her woman's heart forgets the days
that were dark between them. He even commends her to Harold's care,
and directs that she must not lose the honors which have been hers as
queen.

There is a tradition that when Eadward lay dying he said that he was
passing from the land of the dead to the land of the living, and the
chronicle adds: "Saint Peter, his friend, opened to him the gates
of Paradise, and Saint John, his own dear one, led him before the
Divine Majesty." The walls that Eadward built are replaced by others;
there is not much of his abbey left now but some of the foundation
and an archway or two. But his tomb stands in a sacred spot, and the
prayers and hymns he loved so devoutly are said and sung yet in his
own Westminster, the burying-place of many another king since the
Confessor's time.

 [Illustration]

[Pg275]

 [Illustration]




XIV.

NEWS FROM ENGLAND.

 "Great men have reaching hands."
                             --SHAKESPEARE.


So Harold was crowned king of England. Our business is chiefly with
what the Normans thought about that event, and while London is divided
between praises of the old king and hopes of the new one, and there
are fears of what may follow from Earl Tostig's enmity; while the
Witan are dispersing to their homes, and the exciting news travels
faster than they do the length and breadth of the country, we must
leave it all and imagine ourselves in Normandy.

Duke William was at his park of Quevilly, near Rouen, and was on his
way to the chase. He had been bending his bow--the famous bow that was
too strong for other men's hands--and just as he gave it to the page
who waited to carry it after him, a man-at-arms came straight to his
side; they went apart together to speak secretly, while the bystanders
watched them curiously and whispered that the eager messenger was an
Englishman.

"Eadward the king is dead," the duke was told, [Pg276] but that not
unexpected news was only half the message. "Earl Harold is raised to
the kingdom."

There came an angry look into the duke's eyes, and the herald
left him. William forgot his plans for the hunt; he strode by his
retainers; he tied and untied his mantle absent-mindedly, and
presently went down to the bank of the Seine again and crossed over
in a boat to his castle hall. He entered silently, and nobody dared
ask what misfortune had befallen him. His companions followed him and
found him sitting on a bench, moving restlessly to and fro. Then he
became quieter; he leaned his head against the great stone pillar and
covered his face with his mantle. Long before, in the old Norse halls,
where all the vikings lived together, if a man were sick or sorry or
wished for any reason to be undisturbed, he sat on his own bench and
covered his head with his cloak; there was no room where he could be
alone; and after the old custom, in these later days, the knights of
William's court left him to his thoughts. Then William Fitz-Osbern,
the "bold-hearted," came into the quiet hall humming a tune. The
awe-struck people who were clustered there asked him what was the
matter; then the duke looked up.

"It is in vain for you to try to hide the news," said the Seneschal.
"It is blazing through the streets of Rouen. The Confessor is dead,
and Harold holds the English kingdom."

The duke answered gravely that he sorrowed both for the death of
Eadward and for the faithlessness of Harold. [Pg277]

 [Illustration: STIGAND, ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.]

"Arise and be doing," urges Fitz-Osbern. "There is no need for
mourning. Cross the sea and snatch the kingdom out of the usurper's
hand," and in this way stern thought and dire purpose were thrown
into the duke's holiday. The messenger had brought a lighted torch in
his hand that was equal to kindling great plans that winter day in
Normandy. [Pg278]

William and all his men, from the least soldier to the greatest,
knew that if they wished for England the only way to get it was to
fight for it. There had never been such a proof of their mettle as
this would be. The Normans who went to Italy had no such opponents as
Harold and the rest of the Englishmen fighting on their own ground
for their homes and their honor; but Norman courage shone brightest
in these days. This is one of the places where we must least of all
follow the duke's personal fortunes too closely, or forget that the
best of the Normans were looking eagerly forward to the possession of
new territory. Many of their cleverest men, too, were more than ready
to punish the English for ejecting them from comfortable positions
under Godwine's rule, and were anxious to reinstate themselves
securely. There was no such perilous journey before the army as the
followers of the Hautevilles had known, while their amazing stories
of gain and glory incited the Normans at home to win themselves new
fortunes. It is a proof that civilization and the arts of diplomacy
were advancing, when we listen (and the adventurers listened too)
while excuse after excuse was tendered for the great expedition. The
news of Harold's accession was simply a welcome signal for action,
but the heir of Rolf the Ganger was a politician, an astute wielder
of public opinion, and his state-craft was now directed toward giving
his desire to conquer England and reign over it a proper aspect in the
eyes of other nations.

The right of heritage was fast displacing [Pg279] everywhere the
people's right to choose their kings. The feudal system was close and
strong in its links, but while Harold had broken his oath of homage
to William, that alone was not sufficient crime. Such obligations
were not always unbreakable, and were too much a matter of formality
and temporary expediency to warrant such an appeal to the common law
of nations as William meant to make. As nearly as we can get at the
truth of the matter, the chief argument against Harold the Usurper
was on religious grounds--on William's real or assumed promise of the
succession from Eadward, and Harold's vow upon the holy relics of
the saints at Rouen. This at least was most criminal blasphemy. The
Normans gloried in their own allegiance to the church. Their duke was
blameless in private life and a sworn defender and upholder of the
faith, and by this means a most formidable ally was easily won, in the
character of Lanfranc the great archbishop.

Lanfranc and William governed Normandy hand in hand. In tracing
the history of this time the priest seems as familiar with secular
affairs, with the course of the state and the army and foreign
relations, as the duke was diligent in attending ecclesiastical synods
and church services. It was a time of great rivalry and uncertainty
for the papal crown; there was a pope and an anti-pope just then who
were violent antagonists, but Archdeacon Hildebrand was already the
guide and authority of the Holy See. Later he became the Pope famous
in history as Gregory VII. We are startled to find that the expedition
against England was made to [Pg280] take the shape of a crusade, even
though England was building her own churches, and sending pilgrims to
the Holy Land, and pouring wealth most generously into the church's
coffers. "Priests and prelates were subject to the law like other
men," that was the trouble; and "a land where the king and his Witan
gave and took away the staff of the bishop was a land which, in the
eyes of Rome, was more dangerous than a land of Jews or Saracens."
"It was a policy worthy of William to send to the threshold of the
apostles to crave their blessing on his intended work of reducing
the rebellious land, and it was a policy worthy of one greater than
William himself, to make even William, for once in his life, the
instrument of purposes yet more daring, yet more far-sighted, than his
own. On the steps of the papal chair, and there alone, had William and
Lanfranc to cope with an intellect loftier and more subtle than even
theirs."[9]

  [9] Freeman: "The Norman Conquest."

William sent an embassy to Harold probably very soon after the receipt
of the news of his coronation. The full account of both the demand and
its reply have been forgotten, but it is certain that whatever the
duke's commands were they were promptly disobeyed, and certain too
that this was the result that William expected and even desired. He
could add another grievance to his list of Harold's wrongdoings, and
now, beside the original disloyalty, William could complain that his
vassal had formally refused to keep his formal promise and obligation.
Then he called a council of Norman nobles at Lillebonne and laid his
plans before them.

[Pg281]

 [Illustration: NORMANDY (IN 1066).]

[Pg282]

It was a famous company of counsellors and made up of the duke's
oldest friends. There were William Fitz-Osbern, and the duke's
brother Odo of Bayeux, whose priesthood was no hindrance to his good
soldiery; Richard of Evreux, the grandson of Richard the Fearless;
Roger of Beaumont and the three heroes of Mortemer; Walter Giffard;
Hugh de Montfort and William of Warren; the Count of Mortain and
Roger Montgomery and Count Robert of Eu. All these names we know, and
familiar as they were in Normandy, they were, most of them, to strike
deeper root in their new domain of England. We do not find that they
objected now to William's plans, but urged only that they had no right
to speak for the whole country, and that all the Norman barons ought
to be called together to speak for themselves.

This was a return to the fashions of Rolf's day, when the adventurers
boasted on the banks of the Seine that they had no king to rule over
them, and were all equal; that they only asked for what they could win
with their swords. We do not find any other record of a parliament in
Normandy; perhaps nothing had ever happened of late which so closely
concerned every armed man within the Norman borders. The feudal barons
had a right to speak now for themselves and their dependants, and in
the great ducal hall of the castle at Lillebonne William duke told
them his story and called upon them for help. He had a great wish to
revenge Harold's treatment of him by force of arms, and asked the
noble company of barons what aid they would [Pg283] render; with how
many men and how many ships and with what a sum of money they would
follow him and uphold the weighty and difficult enterprise.

Now we find many of the barons almost unwilling; even doubtful of the
possibility of conquering such a kingdom as England. After insisting
that they had longed to go plundering across the Channel, and that the
old love for fighting burned with as hot a fire as ever within their
breasts, the chronicles say that this Norman parliament asked for time
to talk things over in secret before the duke should have any answer.
We are given a picture of them grouped around this and that pleader
for or against the duke, and are told that they demurred, that they
objected to crossing the sea to wage war, and that they feared the
English. For a moment it appears as if the whole mind of the assembly
were opposed to the undertaking. They even feared if they promised
unusual supplies of men and treasure that William would forever keep
them up to such a difficult standard of generosity. I must say that
all this does not ring true or match at all with the Norman character
of that time. It would not be strange if there were objectors among
them, but it does not seem possible when they were so ready to
go adventuring before and after this time; when they were after
all separated by so short a time from Rolf the Ganger's piracies,
that many could have been so seriously daunted by the prospect of
such limited seafaring as crossing the Channel. It appears like an
ingenious method of magnifying the greatness and splendor of the
Norman victory, and the valiant leadership of the duke and his most
trusted aids. [Pg284]

William Fitz-Osbern was chosen to plead with the barons, and persuade
them to follow the duke's banner. He reminded them that they were
William's vassals, and that it would be unwise to disappoint him.
William was a stern man and fearful as an enemy. If any among them
loved their ease, and wished to avoid their lawful tribute of service,
let them reflect that they were in the power of such a mighty lord and
master. What was their money worth to them if the duke branded them as
faithless cowards, and why did they wish to disgrace their names and
take no part in this just and holy war against the usurper?

These were the arguments we can fancy brave Fitz-Osbern giving them
one by one if indeed they hung back and were close-fisted or afraid.
They commissioned him at last to speak for them at the next hearing,
and when he boldly promised for each man double his regular fee and
allotment--for the lord of twenty knights forty knights, and "for
himself, of his love and zeal, sixty ships armed and equipped and
filled with fighting men," the barons shouted at first "No, no!" and
the hall at Lillebonne echoed with the noise.

But it was all settled finally, and we are told that the duke himself
talked with his barons one by one, and that at last they were as eager
as he. The whole objection seems to have been made for fear that their
doubled and extraordinary tribute should be made a precedent, but the
duke promptly gave his word of honor that it should not be so, and
their estates should not be permanently weighted beyond [Pg285] their
ability. The scribes took down the record of the knights and soldiers
that each baron had promised, and from this time there was a hum and
stir of war-making in Normandy, and that spring there were more women
than men in the fields tending the growing crops.

The duke set himself seriously to work. All the barons of his duchy
and all their men were not enough to depend upon for the overthrowing
of England. William must appeal to his neighbors for help, and in
this he was aided by the Pope's approval, and the blessing that was
promised to those who would punish Harold and his countrymen, traitors
to the Holy Church. The spoils of England were promised to all who
would win a share in them, and adventurers flocked from east, north,
and south to enroll themselves in the Norman ranks. Alan of Brittany
was ready to command his forces in person and to come to William's
assistance, and so was Eustace of Boulogne, but the French nobles
who gathered about their young King Philip, still under Baldwin of
Flanders's guardianship, were by no means willing to help forward any
thing that would make their Norman rivals any more powerful than they
were already. From Flanders there were plenty of adventurers, and some
high noblemen who needed little urging to join their fortunes to such
an expedition, and William sent embassies to more distant countries
still, with better or worse results. There is a tradition that even
the Normans of Sicily came northward in great numbers.

The most important thing, next to carrying a [Pg286] sufficient force
into England, was to leave the Norman borders secure from invasion. If
they were repulsed in England and returned to find they had lost part
of Normandy, that would be a sorry fate indeed, and the duke exerted
himself in every way to leave his territory secure.

The most powerful alliance was that with the papal court at Rome. Here
Lanfranc could serve his adopted country to good effect. Hildebrand's
power was making itself felt more and more, and it was he who most
ardently desired and fostered the claim of the Church to a mastery of
all the crowns of Christendom. "The decree went forth, which declared
Harold to be a usurper and William to be the lawful claimant of
the English crown. It would even seem that it declared the English
king and all his followers to be cut off from the communion of the
faithful. William was sent forth as an avenger to chastise the wrong
and perjury of his faithless vassal. But he was also sent forth as a
missionary, to guide the erring English into the true path, to teach
them due obedience to Christ's vicar, and to secure a more punctual
payment of the temporal dues of his apostle. The cause of the invasion
was blessed, and precious gifts were sent as the visible exponents
of the blessing. A costly ring was sent, containing a relic, holier,
it may be, than any on which Harold had sworn--a hair of the prince
of the apostles. And with the ring came a consecrated banner."[10]
These were, after all, more formidable weapons than the Norman arrows.
They inspired [Pg287] not only courage, but a sense of duty and of
righteous service of God. Alas for poor humanity that lends itself so
readily to wrongdoing, and even hopes to win heaven by making this
earth a place of bloodshed and treachery. Now, William had something
besides English lands and high places for knight and priest alike on
conquered soil--he could give security and eminence in the world to
come. Heaven itself had been promised by its chief representative
on earth to those who would fight for the Duke of Normandy against
England. Hildebrand had made a last appeal to the holy assembly of
cardinals when he told the story of the profaned relics and Harold's
broken oath, and had urged the willing fathers of the church to
consider how pious and benevolent it would be to Christianize the
barbarous and heathen Saxons. Nobody took pains to remember that the
priesthood of England owned a third of the English lands, and ruled
them with a rod of iron. So long as England would not bend the knee to
Rome, what did all that matter?

  [10] Freeman, "The Norman Conquest."

One significant thing happened at this time. Who should make his
appearance at the duke's court but Tostig, the son of Godwine, eager,
no doubt, to plot against Harold, and to take a sufficient revenge for
the banishment and defeat by means of which he was then an outcast.
He did not linger long, for the busy duke sent him quickly away, not
uncommissioned for the war that was almost ready to begin.

Harold also had set himself at work to gather his forces and to be
in readiness for an attack which was sure to come. Another enemy was
first in the field, [Pg288] for in the spring Tostig appeared in
the Isle of Wight, the captain of a fleet of ships that were manned
by Flemish and Norman men. He had received aid from William, and
proceeded to wreak his vengeance upon the Kent and Sussex villages
over which his father had once ruled. He does not appear to have
gained any English allies, except at the seaport of Sandwich, where he
probably hired some sailors; then he went northward from there with
sixty ships and attacked the coast of Godwine's earldom. He made great
havoc in the shore towns, but Eadwine and Morkere of Northumberland
hurried to meet him with their troops and drove him away, so that
with only twelve ships left he went to Scotland, where Malcolm, the
Scottish king received him with a hearty welcome, and entertained him
politely the rest of the summer. They had lately been sworn enemies,
but now that Tostig was fighting against England, Malcolm put aside
all bygone prejudice.

 [Illustration: ENGLAND.]

In the summer of that eventful year, Tostig first proposed to the king
of Denmark that he should come to England and help him to recover his
earldom. Swegen had the good sense to refuse, and then the outlaw went
on to Norway to make further proposals to Harold Hardrada, who also
listened incredulously, but when Tostig suggested that Harold should
be king of England, and that he would only ask to be under-king of the
northern territory, that he would do homage to Harold and serve him
loyally, the great Norwegian chieftain consented to make ready for an
expedition. He seems to have been much like Rolf the Ganger, and a
true, valiant viking at heart. [Pg290] The old saga whence the story
comes makes us forget the plottings and claims of Rome and the glories
of Norman court life; the accounts of Harold Hardrada's expedition are
like a breath of cold wind from the Northern shores, and the sight
of a shining dragon-ship stealing away between the high shores of a
fiord, outward-bound for a bout of plundering. But the saga records
also the fame and prowess of that other Harold, the son of Godwine,
and magnifies the power of such an enemy.

Perhaps the English king trusted at first in the ability of the
northern earls to take care of their own territory, and only tried to
stand guard over the southern coast.

He gathered an army and kept it together all the latter part of the
summer, a most unprecedented and difficult thing in those days; and
with help from the local forces, or what we should call the militia,
his soldiers kept guard along the shores of Sussex and Kent. We cannot
estimate what a troublesome step forward in the art of warfare this
was for Englishmen, who were used to quick forced marches and decisive
battles, and a welcome dispersion after the cessation of whatever
exciting cause or sudden summons had gathered them.

Harold's ships patrolled the Channel and the footsoldiers paced the
downs, but food, always hard to obtain, became at last impossible, and
in September the army broke ranks. Harold himself went back to London,
whither the fleet was also sent, but on the way it met with disaster,
and many of the ships were lost and many more began to leak and were
reluctantly [Pg291] judged unseaworthy. The whole southern coast was
left undefended; it was neither the king's fault nor the subjects'
fault. Both had done their best,--but the crops must be gathered then
or not at all, and at any rate, the army was weakened by famine and a
growing belief in the uncertainty of attack.

Alas for Harold's peace of mind! In those very days William the
Norman's host was clustering and gathering like bees just ready to
swarm, on the coast of Normandy, and from the mouth of the Bergen
fiord came Harold Hardrada with a great company, with a huge mass of
treasure, such as had not for years and years floated away from a
Northern haven. It seems as if he had determined to migrate, to crush
the English usurper, and then to establish himself as Cnut had done in
the richer southern kingdom. There must have been some knowledge in
Norway of the state of things in England and Normandy, but this famous
old adventurer was ready to fight whoever he met, and the Black Raven
was flying at his masthead. Bad omens cast their shadows over this
great expedition of the last of the sea-kings, but away he sailed to
the Shetland Islands and left his wife and daughters there, while he
gained new allies; and still farther south, Tostig came to meet him
with a new army which he had gathered in Flanders. An Irish chieftain
and a great lord from Iceland were there too, and down they all came
upon the defenceless country that was marked as their prey, burning
and destroying church and castle and humble homestead, daring the
Englishmen to come out and fight and drive them away again. We have
no time [Pg292] to trace their lawless campaign. The two northern
earls summoned their vassals, but in a few days after the Northmen had
landed they had taken, without much trouble it appears to us, the city
of York, and news was hurriedly sent to the king of England.

What a grievous message! Harold, the son of Godwine, was ill, his
southern coast was undefended, still he could not forget the message
that William had sent to him late in the summer by a spy who had
crossed to Normandy, that the Normans would soon come and teach him
how many they were and what they could do. But a holy abbot consoled
the king by telling him that Eadward the Confessor had shown himself
in a vision and assured his successor of certain victory.

The prophecy was proved to be true; the king summoned his strength
and his soldiers and marched to York. There King Harold was to set
up his new kingdom; he had not the desire for revenge that filled
Tostig's breast, and was anxious to prove himself a generous and wise
ruler. As he came toward the walls which had been so easily won, the
rival Harold's army comes in sight--first a great cloud of dust like
a whirlwind, and next the shining spears prick through and glitter
ominously. A little later Harold of England sends a message to his
brother Tostig. He shall have again his kingdom of Northumberland if
he will be loyal; and Tostig sends back a message in his turn to ask
what shall be the portion of Harold Hardrada. "Seven feet of English
ground for his grave," says the other Harold, and the fight begins.
[Pg293]

Alas for the tall Northman, the winner of eighty castles from the
Saracens, the scourge of Moslem and robber in Palestine; the ally of
Sicily, of Russia, and the Greeks! Alas for the kingdom he had lightly
lost in Norway! Alas for the wife and daughters who were watching
all through those shortening September days in the Orkneys for the
triumphant return of the fleet--for Harold the saga-man and sea-king,
who built his hopes too high. He may be fierce with the old rage of
the Berserkers, and lay sturdily about him with his heavy two-handed
sword; he may mow down great swaths of Englishmen like grain, but the
moment comes when an arrow flies with its sharp whistle straight at
his throat, and he falls dead, and his best fighters fall in heaps
above him; the flag of the Black Raven of Norway is taken. Tostig is
dead, and Harold of England is winner of that great day at Stamford
Bridge, the last great victory that he and his men would ever win,
the last fight of England before the Conquest. Out of the crowd of
ships that had come from the North only four and twenty sailed away
again, and Harold made peace with the Orkney-men and the Icelanders
and the rest. Since that day there has been peace between England and
the countries of the Northern Seas. Harold's last victory was with
the past, one might say, with the Northmen of another age and time,
as if the last tie of his country were broken with the old warfare
and earlier enemies. New relationships were established, the final
struggle for mastery was decided. The battle of Stamford Bridge might
have been called a deadly [Pg294] game at jousting, and the English
knight receives the prize and rides home the victor of the tournament.
Yet that very day of triumph saw the approach of a new foe--the Norman
ships full of horses and men are ready to put out for the English
shore. Harold must fight another battle and lose it, and a new order
of things must begin in Britain. The Northmen and the Normans; it is a
long step between the two, and yet England's past and her future meet;
the swordsmen's arms that ache from one battle must try their strength
again in another; but the Normans bring great gifts at the point of
their arrows--without them "England would have been mechanical, not
artistic; brave, not chivalrous; the home of learning, not of thought."

Three days after the fight Harold sits at a splendid banquet among
his friends, and a breathless messenger comes in fleet-footed with
bad news. Muster your axemen and lances, Harold, King of the English;
the Normans have come like a flight of locusts and are landing on the
coast of Kent.

 [Illustration]

[Pg295]

 [Illustration]




XV.

THE BATTLE OF HASTINGS.

 "I see thy glory, like a shooting star,
  Fall to the base earth from the firmament!
  Thy sun sets weeping in the lowly west."
                                    --SHAKESPEARE.


Early in the summer there was a sound of wood-chopping and a crash of
falling trees in the forests of Normandy, and along her shores in the
shipyards the noise of shipwrights' mallets began, and the forging of
bolts and chains. The hemp-fields enlarge their borders, and catch the
eye quickly with their brilliant green leafage. There is no better
trade now than that of the armorer's, and many a Norman knight sees
to it that the links of his chain-mail jerkin and helmet are strongly
sewn, and that he is likely to be well defended by the clanking habit
that he must buckle on. Horses and men are drilling in the castle
yards, and every baron gathers his troop, and is stern in his orders
and authority. The churches are crowded, the priests are urging the
holy cause, and war is in everybody's mind. The cherry blossoms whiten
and fall, the apple-trees are covered with rosy snow, mid-summer sees
the young fruit greaten on the boughs, the sun rides high in the sky,
[Pg296] and the soldiers' mail weighs heavy; through the country-lanes
go troops of footmen and horsemen. You can see the tips of their
unstrung bows moving above the hedges, and their furled banners with
heraldic device or pious seal. They are all going toward the sea,
toward the mouth of the river Dive. The peasant women and children
stand in their cottage doors and watch the straggling processions on
their way. It is indeed a cause to aid with one's prayers, this war
against the heathen English.

All summer long, armed men were collecting at William's head-quarters
from every part of Normandy, or wherever his summons had wakened
a favorable response. If we can believe the chroniclers, the army
was well paid and well fed and kept in good order. It became a
question which army would hold its ground longest; Harold's, on the
Sussex downs, or William's, by the Dive. At last, news was brought
that the Englishmen were disbanded, then the Frenchmen--as we begin
to hear our Normans called,--the Frenchmen begin to make ready for
their expedition. There may have been skirmishes by sea in the hot
weather, but it was not until early autumn that William gave orders to
embark. There are different stories about the magnitude of the force.
The defeated party would have us believe that they were enormously
overpowered, and so set the numbers very high; the conquerors, on the
other hand, insist that they had not quantity so much as quality to
serve them in the fight, and that it was not the size of their army
but the valor of it that won the day. We are told that there were six
hundred and ninety-six [Pg297] ships and fourteen thousand men; we
are told also that there were more than three thousand ships and sixty
thousand men, all told; and other accounts range between these two
extremes.

 [Illustration: NORMAN VESSEL. (FROM BAYEUX TAPESTRY.)]

For a month the Norman army waited at the mouth of the Dive for a
south wind, but no south wind blew, while an adverse storm scattered
them and strewed the shore with Norman bodies. At last, the duke took
advantage of a westerly breeze and set sail for St. Valery, off the
coast of Ponthieu, from whence he hoped to go more easily over to
England. At the famous abbey of St. Valery he was saying his prayers
and watching the weather-cocks for fifteen days, and he and his
captains made generous offerings at the holy shrines. The monks came
out at last in solemn procession bearing their sacred relics, and the
Norman host knelt devoutly and did homage. [Pg298] At Caen, in June,
the two great minsters had been dedicated, and William and Matilda had
given their young daughter Cecily to the service of God, together with
rich offerings of lands and money. In their own churches, therefore,
and at many another Norman altar beside, prayer and praise never
ceased in those days while Harold was marching to Stamford Bridge.

At last, on Wednesday, the twenty-seventh of September, the wind went
round to the southward, and the great fleet sailed. The soldiers
believed that their prayers had been answered, and that they were the
favorites of heaven. They crowded on board the transport-ships, and
were heedless of every thing save that they were not left behind, and
had their armor and weapons ready for use. The trumpets were playing,
their voices cried loud above the music that echoed back in eager
strains from the shore. The horsemen shouted at their horses, and
the open ships were plainer copies of the dragon-ships of old; they
carried gayly dressed gentlemen, and shining gonfanons, and thickets
of glittering spears. The shields were rich with heraldic blazoning,
and the golden ship, Mora, that the Duchess Matilda had given to the
duke, shone splendid on the gray water, as just at evening William
himself set sail and turned the gilded figure of a boy blowing an
ivory trumpet, like some herald of certain victory, toward the shore
of Kent. The Pope's sacred banner was given to the welcome breeze,
and William's own standard, figured with the three lions of Normandy,
fluttered and spread itself wide. The [Pg299] colored sails looked
gay, the soldiers sang and cheered, and away they went without a fear,
these blessed Normans of the year 1066. On the Mora's masthead blazed
a great lantern when the darkness fell. It was a cloudy night.

In the early morning, the Mora being lighter-laden than the rest,
found herself alone on the sea, out of sight of either land or ships,
but presently the loitering forest of masts rose into view. At nine
o'clock William had landed at Pevensey on the Sussex shore. As he
set foot for the second time on English soil, he tripped and fell,
and the bystanders gave a woful groan at such a disastrous omen. "By
the splendor of God," cried the duke, in his favorite oath, "I have
taken seizin of my kingdom; see the earth of England in my two hands!"
at which ready turn of wit a soldier pulled a handful of thatch
from a cottage roof and gave it to his master for a further token
of proprietorship. This also was seizin of all that England herself
embraced.

There was nobody to hinder the Normans from landing or going where
they pleased. At Pevensey they stayed only one day for lack of
supplies, and then set out eastward toward Hastings. In the Bayeux
tapestry, perhaps the most reliable authority so far as it goes, there
is an appealing bit of work that pictures a burning house with a woman
and little child making their escape. The only places of safety, we
are told elsewhere, were the churchyards and the churches. William's
piety could hardly let him destroy even an enemy's sacred places of
worship. [Pg300]

The next few days were filled with uncertainty and excited expectancy.
Clearly there was no army in the immediate neighborhood of Hastings;
the Normans had that part of the world to themselves apparently, and
hours and days went by leaving them undisturbed. Many a voice urged
that they might march farther into the country, but their wary leader
possessed his soul in patience, and at last came the news of the great
battle in the north, of Harold's occupation of York, and the terrible
disaster that had befallen the multitude of Harold Hardrada and
Tostig, with their allies. Now, too, came a message to the duke from
Norman Robert the Staller, who had stood by the Confessor's death-bed,
and who kept a warm heart for the country of his birth, though he had
become a loyal Englishman in his later years. Twenty thousand men have
been slain in the north, he sends word to William; the English were
mad with pride and rejoicing. The Normans were not strong enough nor
many enough to risk a battle; they would be like dogs among wolves,
and would be worse than overthrown. But William was scornful of such
advice--he had come to fight Harold, and he would meet him face to
face--he would risk the battle if he had only a sixth part as many men
as followed him, eager as himself for his rights.

 [Illustration: WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR. (BAYEUX TAPESTRY.)]

Harold had bestirred his feasting and idle army, and held council of
his captains at York. Normans and French and the men of Brittany had
landed at Pevensey in numbers like the sand of the sea and the stars
of heaven. If only the south wind had [Pg302] blown before, so that
he might have met these invaders with his valiant army, too soon
dispersed! To have beaten back William and then have marched north
to Stamford Bridge, that, indeed, would have been a noble record.
Now the Normans were burning and destroying unhindered in the south;
what should be done? And every captain-baron of the English gave his
word that he would call no man king but Harold the son of Godwine;
and with little rest from the battle just fought, they made ready
to march to London. They knew well enough what this new invasion
meant; a prophetic dread filled their hearts, for it was not alone
out of loyalty to Harold, but for love of England, that these men of
different speech and instincts must be pushed off the soil to which
they had no lawful claim.

The fame of the northern victory brought crowds of recruits to the
two banners, the Dragon of Wessex and Harold's own standard, the
Fighting Man, as they were carried south again. Nothing succeeds like
success; if Harold could conquer the great Hardrada, it were surely
not impossible to defeat the Norman duke. So the thanes and churchmen
alike rallied to the Fighting Man. The earls of the north half
promised to follow, but they never kept their word; perhaps complete
independence might follow now their half-resented southern vassalage.
At least they did not mean to fight the battles of Wessex until there
was no chance for evasion. But while Harold waited at London, men
flocked together from the west and south, and he spent some days in
his royal house at Westminster, heavy-hearted and full [Pg303] of
care in his great extremity. He was too good a general, he had seen
too much of the Norman soldiery already to underrate their prowess in
battle; he shook his head gloomily when his officers spoke with scorn
of their foes. One day he went on a pilgrimage to his own abbey at
Waltham, and the monks' records say that, while he prayed there before
the altar and confessed his sins and vowed his fealty to God, who
reigns over all the kingdoms of the earth; while he lay face downward
on the sacred pavement, the figure of Christ upon the cross bowed its
head, as if to say again, "It is finished." Thurkill, the sacristan,
saw this miracle, and knew that all hope must be put aside, and that
Harold's cause was already lost.

Next, the Norman duke sent a message to Westminster by a monk from the
abbey of Fecamp, and there was parleying to and fro about Harold's
and William's rival claims to the English crown. It was only a
formal challenging and a final provocation to the Englishmen to come
and fight for their leader, there where the invaders had securely
entrenched and established themselves. "Come and drive us home if you
dare, if you can!" the Normans seemed to say tauntingly, and Harold
saw that he must make haste lest the duke should be strengthened
by reinforcements or have time to make himself harder to dislodge.
William's demand that he should come down from the throne had been
put into insolent words, and the Kentish people were being pitifully
distressed and brought to beggary by the host of foreigners. Yet
Gyrth, the son of Godwine, begged [Pg304] his royal brother to stay
in London; to let him go and fight the Normans; and the people begged
Harold, at the last moment, to listen to such good counsel. But Harold
refused; he could never play coward's part, or let a man who loved
him fight a battle in his stead; and so when six days were spent he
marched away to the fight where the two greatest generals the world
held must match their strength one against the other, hand to hand.
The King of England had a famous kingdom to lose, the Duke of Normandy
had a famous kingdom to win.

 [Illustration: A NORMAN MINSTREL.]

On the night before the fourteenth of October, the armies stood before
each other near Hastings, on the field of Senlac, now called Battle.
They made their camps hastily; for hosts of them the rude shelters
were a last earthly dwelling-place and habitation of earthly hopes
or fears. Through the Norman encampment went bands of priests, and
the Normans prayed and confessed their sins. The Bishop of Coutances
and Duke William's half-brother Odo, Bishop of Bayeux, both these
high officials of the Church were there to stay the hands of their
parishioners, and uphold the devout fighters in this crusade. Odo
made the soldiers promise that whoever survived the morrow's battle
would never again eat meat on Saturday; by such petty means he hoped
to gain success at the hands of God who rules battles on a larger
scope, and who, through the quarrels and jealousies of men, brings
slowly near the day when justice shall be done on earth as it is in
heaven. They sang hymns; the watch-fires flickered and faded; the gray
morning dawned, and there in the [Pg305] dim light stood the English
on a hillside that jutted like a promontory into the marshy plain. A
woodland lay behind them, as if the very trees of the English soil had
mustered with the men; in the thickest of the ranks was Harold's royal
banner, the Fighting Man, and Harold himself stood close beside it
with his brothers. The awful battle-axes, stained yet with the blood
of those who died at Stamford Bridge, were in every man's hand, and
every man was sheltered by his shield and kept silence. The Normans
saw their foes stand waiting all together shoulder to shoulder, yet
there was silence--an awful stillness in which to see so vast a host of
men, and yet not hear them speak. The English had feasted that night,
and sung their songs, and told the story of the northern fight. How
their battle-axes looked gray and cold as the light dawned more and
more! The Normans knew that they might feel the bitter edges and the
cleaving steel of them ere the day was spent. [Pg306]

Archers first, behind them the lancers, and behind all, the horsemen;
so the Normans were placed, high-hearted and bold with their great
errand. To gain is better than to keep; by night this England might
be theirs in spite of the battle-axes. While the day was yet young,
Taillefer, the minstrel, went riding boldly out from the ranks singing
the song of Roland and Charlemagne at Roncesvalles, tossing his sword
lightly and fast into the air and catching it deftly as he galloped
to the English lines. There sat the duke on his horse that was a
present from the king of Spain. His most holy relics were hung about
his neck; as he glanced from Taillefer along his army front he could
see the Cotentin men, led by Neal of Saint Saviour, and his thoughts
may have gone back quickly to the battle of his early youth at
Val-es-dunes. What a mighty host had gathered at his summons! All his
Norman enemies were his followers now; he had won great championship,
and if this day's fortune did not turn against him, the favor of the
Holy Mother Church at Rome, the church of the apostles and martyrs,
was won indeed; and no gift in Christendom would be more proudly
honored than this kingdom of England made loyal to the papal crown.
William the Bastard, the dishonored, insulted grandson of a Falaise
tanner,--William, the Duke of proud Normandy, at the head of a host,
knocking at the gates of England; nay, let us set the contrast wider
yet, and show Rolf the Ganger, wet by salt spray on the deck of his
dragon-ship, steering boldly southward, and William, Duke of the
Normans, rich and great, a master of masters, and soon [Pg307] to be
king of a wide and noble land, and winner of a great battle, if the
saints whom he worshipped would fight upon his side.

Taillefer has killed his two men, and been killed in his turn; his
song has ended, and his sword has dropped from his hand. The Normans
cry "/Dex aide! Dex aide! Ha Rou!/" and rush boldly up the hill to
Harold's palisades. The arrows flew in showers, but the English stand
solid and hew at the horsemen and footmen from behind their shields.
Every man, even the king, was on foot; they shouted "Out! out!" as the
Normans came near; they cried "God Almighty!" and "Holy Cross!" and
at this sound Harold must have sadly remembered how the crucifix had
bowed its head as he lay prone before it. And the fight grew hotter
and hotter, the Normans were beaten back, and returned again fiercely
to the charge, down the hill, now up the hill over the palisades,
like a pouring river of men, dealing stinging sword-thrusts--dropping
in clumsy heaps of javelin-pricked and axe-smitten lifelessness; from
swift, bright-eyed men becoming a bloody mass to stumble over, or
feebly crying for mercy at the feet that trampled them; so the fight
went on. Harold sent his captains to right and left, and William
matched his captains against them valiantly. The Norman arrows were
falling blunted and harmless from the English shields, and he told the
archers to shoot higher and aim so that the arrows might fall from
above into the Englishmen's faces. There was no sound of guns or smoke
of powder in that day, only a fearful wrangling and chopping, and a
whir of [Pg308] arrow and lance and twang of bowstring. Yes, and a
dolorous groaning as closer and closer the armies grappled with each
other, hand to hand.

Hour after hour the day spent itself, and the fight would never be
done. There was a cry that the duke was dead, and he pulled off his
helmet and hurried along the lines to put new courage into his men.
The arrows were dropping like a deadly rain, the axemen and lancers
were twisted and twined together like melted rock that burns and
writhes its way through widening crack and crevice. The hot flood of
Normans in chain-mail and pointed helmets sweeps this way, and the
English with their leathern caps and their sturdy shoulders mailed
like their enemies, swinging their long-handled weapons, pour back
again, and so the day draws near its end, while the races mix in
symbolic fashion in the fight as they must mix in government, in
blood, in brotherhood, and in ownership of England while England
stands.

Harold has fallen, the gleaming banner of the Fighting Man, with its
golden thread and jewelry, is stained with blood and mire. An arrow
has gone deep into the king's eye and brain; he has fallen, and
his foes strike needless blows at his poor body, lest so valiant a
spirit cannot be quieted by simple death. The English have lost the
fight, there is a cry that they are flying, and the Normans hear it
and gather their courage once more; they rally and give chase. All
at once there is a shout that thrills them through and through--a
glorious moment when they discover that the day is won. William the
Bastard is William the Conqueror, a sad word for many [Pg309] English
ears in days to come; to us the sign of great gain that was and is
England's--of the further advance of a kingdom already noble and
strong. The English are strongest, but the Normans are quickest. The
battle has been given to Progress, and the Norman, not the Saxon, had
the right to lead the way.

 [Illustration: SOLDIER IN CLOAK.]

But the field of Senlac makes a sad and sorry sight as the light of
the short October day is fading and the pale stars shine dimly through
the chilly mist that gathers in from the sea. It is not like the
bright Norman weather; the slow breeze carries a faint, heavy odor
of fallen leaves, and the very birds give awesome cries as they fly
over the battle-field. There are many of the victors who think of the
spoils of England, but some better men remember that it is in truth a
mighty thing to have conquered such a country. What will it mean in
very truth that England is theirs? [Pg310]

Later, William the Conqueror and his knights are resting and feasting
and bragging of their deeds, there where Harold's standards were
overthrown and the banner of the Three Lions of Normandy waves in the
cool night wind. The living men look like butchers from the shambles,
and the dead lie in heavy heaps; here and there a white face catches
a ray of light and appeals for pity in its dumb loneliness. There are
groans growing ever fainter, and cries for help now and then, from a
soldier whose wits have come back to him, though he lay stunned and
maimed among those who are forever silent. There go weeping men and
women with litters--they cannot find the king, and they must lead the
woman who loved him best of all the earth, Edith the Swan-throated,
through this terrible harvest-field to discover his wounded body among
the heaps of slain. He must be buried on the sea-shore, the Norman
duke gives command to William Malet, and so guard forever the coast he
tried to defend.

The heralds of victory set sail exultantly across the brown water
of the Channel; the messengers of defeat go mourning to London and
through the sorrowful English towns. Harold the son of Godwine, and
his brother, Gyrth the Good--yes, and the flower of all Southern
England; no man of Harold's own noble following lived to tell the
story and to bewail this great defeat. There were some who lived to
talk about it in after days;--and there was one good joy in saying that
as the Normans pursued them after the day was lost, they hid in ambush
in the fens and routed their pursuers with deadly, [Pg311] unexpected
blows. But the country side looked on with dismay while William fought
his way to London, not without much toil and opposition, but at last
the humbled earldoms willingly or unwillingly received their new lord.
Since Eadgar the underwitted Atheling was not fit for the throne,
and the house of Godwine had fallen, William the Norman was made
monarch of England, and there was a king-crowning in Westminster at
Christmas-tide.

 [Illustration]

[Pg312]

 [Illustration]




XVI.

WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR.

 "Then in his house of wood with flaxen sails
  She floats, a queen, across the fateful seas."
                                                 --A. F.


Rather than follow in detail the twenty-one years of William's English
reign, we must content ourselves with a glance at the main features
of it. We cannot too often remind ourselves of the resemblance
between the life and growth of a nation and the life and growth of
an individual; but while William the Conqueror is in so many ways
typical of Normandy, and it is most interesting to follow his personal
fortunes, there are many developments of Norman character in general
which we must not overlook. William was about forty years old when the
battle of Hastings was fought and won; Normandy, too, was in her best
vigor and full development of strength. The years of decadence must
soon begin for both; the time was not far distant when the story of
Normandy ends, and it is only in the history of France and of England
that the familiar Norman characteristics can be traced. Foremost in
vitalizing force and power of centralization and individuality, while
so much of Europe was [Pg313] unsettled and misdirected toward petty
ends, this duchy of Rolf the Ganger seems, in later years, like a
wild-flower that has scattered its seed to every wind, and plants for
unceasing harvests, but must die itself in the first frost of outward
assailment and inward weakness.

       *       *       *       *       *

The march to London had been any thing but a triumphant progress, and
the subjects of the new king were very sullen and vindictive. England
was disheartened, her pride was humbled to the dust, and many of
her leaders had fallen. In the dark winter weather there was sorrow
and murmuring; the later law of the curfew bell, a most wise police
regulation, made the whole country a prison.

A great deal of harrying had been thought necessary before the people
were ready to come to William and ask him to accept the crown. William
had a great gift for biding his time, and in the end the crown was
proffered, not demanded. We learn that the folk thought better of
their conqueror at last, that Cnut was remembered kindly, and the
word went from mouth to mouth that England might do worse than take
this famous Christian prince to rule over her. Harold had appealed
to heaven when the fight began at Senlac, but heaven had given the
victory to other hands. The northern earls had forsaken them, and at
any rate the Norman devastations must be stopped. If William would
do for England what he had done for his own duchy and make it feared
for valor and respected for its prosperity like Normandy, who could
ask more? So the [Pg314] duke called a formal council of his high
noblemen and, after careful consideration, made known his acceptance!
There was a strange scene at the coronation in Westminster. Norman
horsemen guarded the neighboring streets, a great crowd of spectators
filled the church, and when the question was put to this crowd,
whether they would accept William for their king, there was an eager
shout of "Yea! yea! King William!" Perhaps the Normans had never heard
such a noisy outcry at a solemn service. Again the shout was heard,
this time the same question had been repeated in the French tongue,
and again the answer was "Yea! yea!"

The guards outside thought there was some treachery within, and
feared that harm might come to their leader, so, by way of antidote
or revenge, they set fire to the buildings near the minster walls.
Out rushed the congregation to save their goods or, it might be,
their lives, while the ceremony went on within, and the duke himself
trembled with apprehension as he took the solemn oath of an English
king, to do justice and mercy to all his people. There was a new crown
to be put on,--what had become of the Confessor's?--but at last the rite
was finished and William, king of the English, with his priests and
knights, came out to find a scene of ruin and disorder; it was all
strangely typical--the makeshift splendors, the new order of church and
state, the burning hatred and suspicions of that Christmas-tide. Peace
on earth, good-will to men! alas, it was any thing but that in the
later years of William's reign. [Pg315]

No doubt he built high hopes and made deep plans for good governance
and England's glory. He had tamed Normandy to his guiding as one
tames a wild and fiery horse, and there seemed to be no reason why
he could not tame England. In the beginning he attempted to prove
himself lenient and kind, but such efforts failed; it was too plain
that the Normans had captured England and meant to enjoy the spoils.
The estates belonging to the dead thanes and ealdormen, who fought
with Harold, were confiscated and divided among the Normans: this
was the fortune of war, but it was a bitter grievance and injustice.
O, for another Godwine! cried many a man and woman in those days. O,
for another Godwine to swoop down upon these foreign vultures who
are tearing at England's heart! But even in the Confessor's time
there was little security for private property. We have even seen the
Confessor's own wife banished from his side without the rich dowry she
had brought him, and Godwine's estates had been seized and refunded
again, as had many another man's in the reign of that pious king whom
everybody was ready to canonize and deplore.

After the king had given orders to his army to stop plundering and
burning, there was a good deal of irregular depredation for which he
was hardly responsible. He was really king of a very small part of
England. The army must not be disbanded, it must be kept together
for possible defence, but the presence of such a body of rapacious
men, who needed food and lodging, and who were not content [Pg316]
unless they had some personal gain from the rich country they had
helped to win, could not help being disastrous. Yet there is one
certain thing--the duke meant to be master of his new possessions,
and could use Englishmen to keep his Norman followers in check,
while he could indulge his own countrymen in their love of power and
aggrandizement at England's expense. There are touching pictures of
his royal progress through the country in the early part of his reign;
the widows of thanes and the best of the churls would come out with
their little children, to crave mercy and the restitution of even
a small part of their old estates to save them from beggary. Poor
women! it was upon them that the heaviest burden fell; the women of a
war-stricken country suffer by far the most from change and loss; not
the heroes who die in battle, or the heroes who live to tell the story
of the fight, and who have been either victors or vanquished. Men are
more reasonable; they have had the recompense of taking part in the
struggle. If they have been in the wrong or in the right, great truths
have come home to them as they stood sword in hand.

The Norman barons, who had followed their leader beyond the Channel,
had been won by promises, and these promises must be kept. They were
made rich with the conquered lands, and given authority, one would
think, to their heart's content. They were made the king's magistrates
and counsellors, and as years went by there was more and more
resentment of all this on the part of the English. They hated their
Norman lords; they hated the [Pg317] taxes which the king claimed.
The strong point of the Saxon civilization was local self-government
and self-dependence; but the weak point was the lack of unity and
want of proper centralization and superintendence. William was wise
in overcoming this; instead of giving feudalism its full sway and
making his Norman barons petty monarchs with right of coinage and full
authority over their own dominion, he claimed the homage and loyalty,
the absolute allegiance of his subjects. But for his foresight in
making such laws, England might have been such a kingdom as Charles
the Simple's or Hugh Capet's, and hampered with feudal lords greater
than their monarch in every thing but name.

In England, at last, every man held his land directly from the king
and was responsible to him. The Witanagemot was continued, but turned
into a sort of feudal court in which the officials of the kingdom, the
feudal lords, had places. The Witan became continually a smaller body
of men, who were joined with those officers of the royal power higher
than they. It must be remembered that the Conqueror did not make his
claim to the throne because he had won his right by the sword. He
always insisted that he was the lawful successor to Eadward, and the
name of Harold the Usurper was omitted from the list of English kings.
Following this belief or pretence he was always careful to respect the
nationality of the country, and made himself as nearly as possible an
Englishman. His plans for supplanting the weakness and insularity of
many English institutions by certain Continental [Pg318] fashions,
wrought a tremendous change, and put the undeveloped and self-centred
kingdom that he had won, on a footing with other European powers. The
very taxes which were wrung from the unwilling citizens, no doubt,
forced them to wider enterprise and the expansion of their powers of
resource. Much of England's later growth has sprung from seed that
was planted in these years--this early springtime of her prosperity,
when William's stern hands swept from field and forest the vestiges
of earlier harvests, and cleared the garden grounds into leafless
deserts, only to make them ready for future crops.

The very lowest classes were more fortunate under William's rule
than they had been in earlier times. Their rights and liberties
were extended, and they could claim legal defence against the
tyrannies of their masters. But the upper ranks of people were much
more dissatisfied and unhappy. The spirit of the laws was changed;
the language of the court was a foreign language; and the modified
feudalism of the king put foreigners in all high places, who could
hold the confiscated estates, and laugh at the former masters now
made poor and resourceless. The folk-land had become /Terra Regis/;
England was only a part of Normandy, and the king was often away,
busier with the affairs of his duchy than of his kingdom. Yet, as
had often happened before in this growing nation's lifetime, a
sure process of amalgamation was going on, and though the fire of
discontent was burning hot, the gold that was England's and the gold
that was Normandy's were being melted together and growing into a
greater [Pg319] treasure than either had been alone. We can best
understand the individuality and vital force of the Norman people by
seeing the difference their coming to England has made in the English
character. We cannot remind ourselves of this too often. The Norman
of the Conqueror's day was already a man of the world. The hindering
conditions of English life were localism and lack of unity. We can see
almost a tribal aspect in the jealousies of the earldoms, the lack of
sympathy or brotherhood between the different quarters of the island.
William's earls were only set over single shires, and the growth of
independence was rendered impossible; and his greatest benefaction to
his new domain was a thoroughly organized system of law. As we linger
over the accounts of his reign, harsh and cruel and unlovable as he
appears, it is rather the cruelty of the surgeon than of a torturer
or of a cut-throat. The presence of the Normans among the nations of
the earth must have seemed particularly irritating and inflammatory,
but we can understand, now that so many centuries have smoothed away
the scars they left, that the stimulus of their energy and their hot
ambition helped the rest of the world to take many steps forward.

While we account for the deeds of the fighting Normans, and their
later effects, we must not forget their praying brethren who stood
side by side with them, lording it over the English lands and reaching
out willing hands for part of the spoils. We must thank them for their
piety and their scholarship, and for the great churches they founded,
even while we [Pg320] laugh at the greed and wordliness under their
monkish cloaks. Lanfranc was made bishop of Canterbury, and wherever
the Conqueror's standard was planted, wherever he gained foothold, as
the tide of his military rule ebbed and flowed, he planted churches
and monasteries. Especially he watched over his high-towered Battle
Abbey, which marked the spot where the banner of the Fighting Man was
defeated and the banner of the Three Lions of Normandy was set up in
its place.

Before we go further we must follow the king back to his duchy in
the spring after that first winter in England. Three Englishmen
were chosen to attend his royal highness, and although they might
easily guess that there was something more than mere compliment in
this flattering invitation, these northern earls, Eadwine, Morkere,
and Waltheof (the Bear's great-grandson), were not anxious to hurry
forward the open quarrel which William himself was anxious to avoid.
Nothing could have been more unsafe in the unsettled condition of
England than to have left these unruly leaders to plot and connive
during his absence; besides, it would be a good thing to show such
rough islanders the splendours of the Norman court.

The Norman chroniclers are not often willing to admit that England
was in any respect equal to their own duchy, but when they have to
describe William's triumphant return, they forget their prudence and
give glowing accounts of the treasure of gold and silver that he
brings with him, and even the magnificent embroideries, tapestries
and [Pg321] hangings, and clerical vestments,--though they have so
lately tried to impress upon their readers that heathen squalor of
social life across the Channel which the Christian had sought to
remedy. Church after church was richly endowed with these spoils,
and the Conqueror's own Church of St. Stephen at Caen fared best of
all. Beside the English wealth we must not forget the goods of Harold
Hardrada, which had been brought with such mistaken confidence for
the plenishing of his desired kingdom. There is a tradition of a
mighty ingot of gold won in his Eastern adventures, so great that
twelve strong youths could scarcely carry it. Eadwine and Morkere of
Northumberland must have looked at that with regretful eyes.

Whatever the English prejudice might have been, the Normans had every
reason to be proud of their seventh duke. He had advanced their
fortunes in most amazing fashion, and they were proud of him indeed
on the day when he again set his foot on Norman ground. The time of
year was Lent. Spring was not yet come, but it might have been a
summer festival, if one judged by the way that the people crowded from
the farthest boundaries of the country to the towns through which
William was to pass. It was like the glorious holidays of the Roman
Empire. The grateful peasants fought and pushed for a sight of their
leader. The world is never slow to do honor to its great soldiers and
conquerors. The duke met his wife at Rouen, and that was the best
moment of all; Matilda had ruled Normandy wisely and ably during his
five or six [Pg322] months' absence, with old Roger de Beaumont for
her chief counsellor.

The royal procession trailed its gorgeous length from church to
church and from city to city about the duchy; the spoils of England
seemed inexhaustible to the wondering spectators, and those who had
made excuse to lag behind when their bows and lances were needed,
were ready enough now to clutch their hands greedily in their empty
pockets and follow their valiant countrymen. William himself was not
slow in letting the value of his new domain be known; the more men the
better in that England which might be a slippery prize to hold. He had
many a secret conference with Lanfranc, who had been chief adviser
and upholder of the invasion. The priest-statesman seems almost a
greater man than the soldier-statesman; many a famous deed of that
age was Lanfranc's suggestion, but nobody knew better than these two
that the conquest of England was hardly more than begun, and long and
deep their councils must have been when the noise of shouting in the
streets had ended, and the stars were shining above Caen.

No city of Normandy seems more closely connected with those days than
Caen. As one walks along its streets, beneath the high church towers
and gabled roofs of the houses, it is easy to fancy that more famous
elder generation of Normans alive again, to people Caen with knights
and priests and minstrels of that earlier day. The Duchess Matilda
might be alive yet and busy with her abbey church of Holy Trinity and
her favorite household of nuns; [Pg323] the people shout her praises
admiringly, and gaze at her lovingly as she passes through the street
with her troop of attendants. Caen is prosperous and gay. "Large,
strong, full of draperies and all sorts of merchandise; rich citizens,
noble dames, damsels, and fine churches," says Froissart years
afterwards. Even this very year one is tempted to believe that one
sees the same fields and gardens, the same houses, and hears the same
bells that William the Conqueror saw and heard in that summer after he
had become king of England.

And in Bayeux, too, great portions of the ancient city still remain.
There where the Northmen made their chief habitation, or in Rouen
or Falaise, we can almost make history come to life. Perhaps the
great tapestry was begun that very summer in Bayeux; perhaps the
company of English guests, some of those noble dames well-skilled in
"English work" of crewel and canvas, were enticed by Bishop Odo into
beginning that "document in worsted" which more than any thing else
has preserved the true history of the Conquest of England. Odo meant
to adorn his new church with it, and to preserve the account of his
own part in the great battle and its preliminaries, with the story
of Harold's oath and disloyalty, and William's right to the crown.
There is an Italian fashion of drawing in it--the figures are hardly
like Englishmen or Normans in the way they stand or make gestures to
each other in the rude pictures. Later history has associated the
working of these more than fifteen hundred figures with Matilda and
her maidens, as a tribute to the [Pg324] Conqueror's valor, but there
are many evidences to the contrary. The old idea that the duchess
and her women worked at the tapestry, and said their prayers while
the army had gone to England, seems improbable the more one studies
the work itself. Yet tradition sometimes keeps the grain of truth in
its accumulation of chaff. There is no early record of it, and its
historical value was rediscovered only in 1724 by a French antiquary.
The bright worsteds of it still keep their colors on the twenty-inches
wide strip of linen, more than two hundred feet in length. Odo is
said to have given it to his chapter at Bayeux, and it has suffered
astonishingly little from the ravages of time.

But we must return to Norman affairs in England. Odo himself and
William Fitz-Osbern had been made earls of the Counties Palatine of
Kent and Hereford, and were put in command in William's absence. The
rapacity of these Norman gentlemen was more than their new subjects
could bear. The bishop at least is pretty certain to have covered his
own greedy injustice by a plea that he was following out the king's
orders. Revolt after revolt troubled the peace of England. Harold's
two sons were ready to make war from their vantage-ground in Ireland;
the Danes and Scots were also conspiring against the new lord of the
English. At last some of the Normans themselves were traitorous and
troublesome, but William was fully equal to such minor emergencies as
these. He went back to England late in 1067, after spending the summer
and autumn in Normandy, and soon found himself busy [Pg325] enough
in the snarl of revolt and disagreement. One trouble followed another
as the winter wore away. The siege of Exeter was the most conspicuous
event, but here too William was conqueror, and Southwestern England
was forced to submit to his rule. At Easter-tide a stately embassy
was sent to bring over the Duchess Matilda from Normandy, and when it
returned she was hallowed as Queen by Ealdred the archbishop. Let us
hope that, surrounded by her own kindred and people, she did not see
the sorrowful English faces of those women who had lost husband and
home together, and who had been bereft of all their treasures that
strangers might be enriched.

 [Illustration: DEATH OF HAROLD. BAYEUX TAPESTRY.]

There is a curious tradition that a little while after this, much woe
was wrought because those other Norman ladies, whose lords had come
over to England to [Pg326] fight and remained to plunder, refused to
join them, because they were not fond of the sea, and thought that
they were not likely to find better fare and lodging. Very likely
the queen's residence in her new possessions had a good effect, but
some of the Norman men were obliged to return altogether, their
wives having threatened to find new partners if they were left alone
any longer. It may have been an excuse or a jest, because so many
naturally desired to see their own country again.

 [Illustration: NORMAN LADY. COTTON MSS.]

Both Saxons and Normans paid great deference to the instinctive
opinions of women. When such serious matters as going to war were
before them, a woman's unreasoning prejudice or favor of the
enterprise was often taken into account. They seem to have almost
taken the place of the ancient auguries! However, it is not pleasant
to feminine conceit to be told directly that great respect was also
paid to the neighing of horses! [Pg327]

Henry, the king's youngest son, was born not long after the queen's
arrival, and born too in Northern England the latest and hardest won
at that time of the out-lying provinces. The very name that was given
to the child shows a desire for some degree of identification with
new interests. William and Matilda certainly had England's welfare at
heart, for England's welfare was directly or indirectly their own,
and this name was a sign of recognition of the hereditary alliance
with Germany; with the reigning king and his more famous father.
There is nothing more striking than the traditional slander and
prejudice which history preserves from age to age. Seen by clearer
light, many reported injustices are explained away. If there was in
England then, anything like the present difficulty of influencing
public opinion to quick foresight and new decisions, the Conqueror
and Baldwin of Flanders' daughter had any thing but an easy path
to tread. Selfish they both may have been, and bigoted and even
cruel, but they represented a better degree of social refinement and
education and enlightenment. Progress was really what the English of
that day bewailed and set their faces against, though they did not
know it. William and Matilda had to insist upon the putting aside
of worn-out opinions, and on coming to England had made the strange
discovery that they must either take a long step backward or force
their subjects forward. They were not conscious reformers; they were
not infallibly wise missionaries of new truth, who tried actually to
give these belated souls a wider outlook upon life, but let us stop to
recognize the fact that no [Pg328] task is more thankless than his
who is trying to go in advance of his time. Men have been burnt and
hanged and disgraced and sneered at for no greater crime; in fact,
there is nothing that average humanity so much resents as the power
to look ahead and to warn others of pitfalls into which ignorant
shortsightedness is likely to tumble. Nothing has been so resented
and assailed as the thorough survey of England, and the record of
its lands and resources in the Domesday Book. Yet nothing was so
necessary for any sort of good government and steady oversight of the
nation's affairs. We only wonder now that it was not made sooner. The
machinery of government was of necessity much ruder then. No doubt
William's tyranny swept its course to and fro like some Juggernaut car
regardless of its victims, yet for England a unified and concentrated
force of government was the one thing to be insisted upon; Harold and
his rival earls might have been hindering, ineffectual rulers of the
country's divided strength and jealous partisanship.

Yet the future right direction and prosperity of England was poor
consolation to the aching hearts of the women of that time, or the
landless lords who had to stand by and see new masters of the soil
take their places. What was won by William's sword must be held by
his sword, and the more sullen and rebellious the English grew, the
more heavily they were taxed and the faster the land was rid of them.
They were chased into the fens, and pursued with fire and bloodshed.
"England was made a great grave," says Dickens, "and men and beasts
lay dead [Pg329] together." The immediate result of the Conqueror's
rule was like fire and plough and harrow in a piece of new land.

 [Illustration: BATTLE AXES. BAYEUX TAPESTRY.]

It was a sad and tiresome lifetime, that of the Conqueror; just
or unjust toward his new subjects, they hated him bitterly; his
far-sighted plans for the country's growth and development gave
as much displeasure as the smallest of his personal prejudices or
selfish whims. Every man's hand was against him, and hardly an eye
but flashed angrily at the sight of the king. Eadward the Confessor,
pious ascetic, and relic-worshipper, had loved the chase as well
as this warlike successor of his ever loved it, and had been very
careful of his royal hunting-grounds, [Pg330] but nobody raised an
outcry against his unsaintly love of slaughtering defenceless wild
creatures, or thought him the less a meek and gentle soul, beloved by
angels and taught by them in visions. But ever since, the Conqueror's
love of hunting has been an accusation against him as if he were the
only man guilty of it, and his confiscation of the Hampshire lands
to make new forest seemed the last stroke that could be borne. The
peasants' cottages were swept away and the land laid waste. Norman
was master and Englishman was servant. The royal train of horses and
dogs and merry huntsmen in gay apparel clattered through the wood,
and from hiding-places under the fern men watched them and muttered
curses upon their cruel heads. There were already sixty-eight royal
forests in different parts of the kingdom before New Forest was begun.
Everybody thought that England had never seen such dark days, but so
everybody thought when the Angles and Saxons and Jutes came, and even
so vigorous a pruning and digging at the roots as this made England
grow the better.

Large tracts of the hunting-grounds had been unfit for human
habitation, and it was better to leave them to the hares and deer.
Wide regions of the country, too, were occupied by the lowest class
of humanity, who lived almost in beastly fashion, without chance
of enlightenment or uplifting. They were outlaws of the worst sort
who could not be brought into decent order or relationship with
respectable society, and it was better for these to be chased
from their lairs and forced to accept the [Pg331] companionship
of townsfolk. With these, however, there were many who suffered
undeserved. Among the rank weeds of England there were plucked many
blooming things and useful growths of simple, long-established
home-life and domestic affection. When fire was leaping high at the
city gates it is impossible not to regret its enmity against dear
and noble structures of the past, even though it cleared the way
for loftier minsters and fairer dwelling-places. In criticising and
resenting such a reign as William the Norman's over England, we must
avoid a danger of not seeing the hand of God in it, and the evidences
of an overruling Providence, which works in and through the works
of men and sees the end of things from the beginning as men cannot.
There may be overstatement in William of Malmesbury's account of
the bad condition of the country at the time of the Conquest, but
the outlines of it cannot be far from right. "In process of time,"
he says, "the desire after literature and religion had decayed for
several years before the arrival of the Normans. The clergy, contented
with a very slight degree of learning, could scarcely stammer out
the words of the sacraments, and a person who understood grammar was
an object of wonder and astonishment. The nobility were given up to
luxury and wantonness. The commonalty, left unprotected, became a
prey to the most powerful, who amassed fortunes by either seizing
on their property or selling their persons into foreign countries;
although it be an innate quality of this people to be more inclined to
revelling than to the accumulation of wealth. Drinking was a [Pg332]
universal practice, in which they passed whole nights, as well as
days. They consumed their whole substance in mean, despicable houses,
unlike Normans and French, who, in noble and splendid mansions, lived
with frugality." "There cannot be a doubt," says Mr. Bruce in his
interesting book about the Bayeux tapestry, "that by the introduction
of the refinements of life the condition of the people was improved,
and that a check was given to the grosser sensualities of our nature.
Certain it is that learning received a powerful stimulus by the
Conquest. At the period of the Norman invasion a great intellectual
movement had commenced in the schools on the Continent. Normandy had
beyond most other parts profited by it. William brought with him to
England some of the most distinguished ornaments of the school of his
native duchy; the consequence of this was that England henceforward
took a higher walk in literature than she had ever done before." One
great step was the freeing of the lower classes; there was one rank of
serfs, the churls, who were attached to the land, and were transferred
with it, without any power of choosing their employer or taking any
steps to improve their condition. Another large class, the thews, were
the absolute property of their owners. William's law that every slave
who had lived unchallenged a year and a day in any city or walled
town in the kingdom should be free forever, was, indeed, "a door of
hope to many," besides the actual good effects of town life, the
natural rivalry and promotion of knowledge, the stimulus given to the
cultivation and refinements of social [Pg333] life. He protected the
early growth of a public sentiment, which was finally strong enough to
venture to assert its rights and to claim recognition. He relentlessly
overthrew the flourishing slave-trade of the town of Bristol and no
doubt made many enemies by such an act.

Whatever may have been the king's better nature and earlier purposes
in regard to his kingdom and duchy, as he grew older one finds his
reputation growing steadily worse. He must have found the ruling of
men a thankless task, and he apparently cared less and less to soften
or control the harshness of his underrulers and officers. His domestic
relations had always been a bright spot in his stern, hard life, but
at length even his beloved wife Matilda no longer held him first, and
grieved him by favoring their troublesome son Robert, who was her
darling of all their children. Robert and his mother had been the
nominal governors of Normandy when he was still a child and his father
was away in England. They seem to have been in league ever afterward,
for when Robert grew up he demanded Normandy outright, which made
his father angry, and the instant refusal provoked Master Curt-hose
to such an extent that he went about from court to court in Europe
bewailing the injustice that had been shown him. He was very fond of
music and dancing, and spent a great deal of money, which the queen
appears to have been always ready to send him. He was gifted with a
power of making people fond of him, though he was not good for very
much else.

After a while William discovered that there was a [Pg334] secret
messenger who carried forbidden supplies to the rebellious prince,
and the messenger happily had time to betake himself to a convenient
convent and put on the dress and give, let us hope, heart-felt vows of
monkhood. This is what Orderic Vitalis reports of a meeting between
the king and queen: "Who in the world," sighs the king, "can expect
to find a faithful and devoted wife? The woman whom I loved in my
soul, and to whom I entrusted my kingdom and my treasures, supports
my enemies; she enriches them with my property; she secretly arms
them against my honor--perhaps my life." And Matilda answered: "Do not
be surprised, I pray you, because I love my eldest born. Were Robert
dead and seven feet below the sod, and my blood could raise him to
life, it should surely flow. How can I take pleasure in luxury when
my son is in want? Far from my heart be such hardness! Your power
cannot deaden the love of a mother's heart." The king did not punish
the queen, we are assured gravely; and Robert quarrelled with his
brothers, and defied his father, and won his mother's sympathy and
forbearance to the end. He found the king of France ready to uphold
his cause by reason of the old jealousy of William's power, and while
he was ensconced in the castle of Gerberoi, and sallying out at his
convenience to harry the country, William marched to attack him, and
the father and son fought hand to hand without knowing each other
until the king was thrown from his horse. Whereupon Robert professed
great contrition, and some time afterward, the barons having [Pg335]
interceded and Matilda having prayed and wept, William consented to a
reconciliation, and even made his son his lieutenant over Normandy and
Brittany.

In 1083 the queen died, and there was nobody to lift a voice against
her prudence and rare virtue, or her simple piety. There was no better
woman in any convent cell of Normandy, than the woman who had borne
the heavy weight of the Norman crown, and who had finished the sorry
task as best she could, of reigning over an alien, conquered people.
The king's sorrow was piteous to behold, and not long afterward
their second son, Richard, was killed in the New Forest, a place of
misfortune to the royal household. Another trouble quickly followed,
which not only hurt the king's feelings, but made him desperately
angry.

 [Illustration: ODO, BISHOP OF BAYEUX.]

William had been very kind to all his kinsfolk on his mother's side,
and especially to his half-brother, Odo, the Bishop of Bayeux. He
had loaded him with honors, and given him, long ago, vice-regal
authority in England. Even this was not enough for such an aspiring
ecclesiastic, and, under the pretence of gathering tax-money (no doubt
insisting that it was to serve [Pg336] the miserliness and greed of
the king), he carried on a flourishing system of plundering. After
a while it was discovered that he had an ambition to make himself
Pope of Rome, and was using his money for bribing cardinals and
ingratiating himself with the Italian nobles. He bought himself a
palace in Rome and furnished it magnificently, and began to fit out
a fleet of treasure-ships at the Isle of Wight. One day when they
were nearly ready to set sail, and the disloyal gentlemen who were
also bound on this adventure were collected into a comfortable group
on shore, who should appear among them but William himself. The king
sternly related what must have been a familiar series of circumstances
to his audience: Odo's disloyalty when he had been entirely trusted,
his oppression of England, his despoiling of the churches and the
confiscation of their lands and treasures, lastly that he had even
won away these knights to go to Rome with him; men who were sworn to
repulse the enemies of the kingdom.

After Odo's sins were related in detail, he was seized, but loudly
lamented thereat, declaring that he was a clerk and a minister of the
Most High, and that no bishop could be condemned without the judgment
of the Pope. The people who stood by murmured anxiously, for nobody
knew what might be going to happen to them also. Crafty William
answered that he was seizing neither clerk, nor prelate, nor Bishop
of Bayeux, only his Earl of Kent, his temporal lieutenant, who must
account to him for such bad vice-regal administration, and for four
[Pg337] years after that Odo was obliged to content himself with close
imprisonment in the old tower of Rouen.

Those four years were in fact all that remained of the Conqueror's
earthly lifetime, and dreary years they were. In 1087 William returned
to Normandy for the last time. The French king was making trouble;
some say that the quarrel began between the younger members of the
family, others that Philip demanded that William should do homage
for England. Ordericus Vitalis, the most truthful of the Norman
historians, declares that the dispute was about the proprietorship of
the French districts of the Vexin.

The Conqueror was an old man now, older than his years; he had never
quite recovered from his fall when Robert unhorsed him at the castle
of Gerberoi; besides he had suffered from other illness, and had grown
very stout, and the doctors at Rouen were taking him in charge. The
king of France joked insolently about his illness, and at the end of
July William started furiously on his last campaign, and no doubt
took vast pleasure in burning the city of Mantes. When the fire was
down he rode through the conquered town, his horse stepped among some
smouldering firebrands and reared, throwing his clumsy rider suddenly
forward against the high pommel of the saddle, a death-blow from
which he was never to recover. He was carried back to Rouen a worse
case for the doctors' skill than ever, and presently fever set in,
and torture followed torture for six long weeks. The burning fever,
the midsummer heat, the flattery or neglect of his [Pg338] paid
attendants; how they all reminded him and made him confess at last
his new understanding and sorrow for the misery he had caused to many
another human being! Yet we can but listen forgivingly as he says: "At
the time my father went of his own will into exile, leaving to me the
Duchy of Normandy, I was a mere child of eight years, and from that
day to this I have always borne the weight of arms."

The three sons, Rufus William, Robert Curt-hose, and Henry Beauclerc,
were all eager to claim their inheritance, but the king sends for
Anselm, the holy abbot, and puts them aside while he makes confession
of his sins and bravely meets the prospect of speedy death. He gives
directions concerning the affairs of England and Normandy, gives
money and treasure to poor people and the churches; he even says
that he wishes to rebuild the churches which were so lately burnt at
Mantes. Then he summons his sons to his bedside and directs those
barons and knights who were present to be seated, when, if we may
believe Ordericus the Chronicler, the Conqueror made an eloquent
address, reviewing his life and achievements and the career of many
of his companions. The chronicle writers had a habit of putting
extremely pious and proper long speeches into the mouths of dying
kings, and as we read these remarks in particular we cannot help a
suspicion that the old monk sat down in his cell some time afterward
and quietly composed a systematic summary of what William would
have said, or ought to have said if he could. Yet we may believe in
the [Pg339] truth of many sentences. We do not care for what he
expressed concerning Mauger or King Henry, the battle of Mortemer or
Val-es-dunes, but when he speaks of his loyalty to the Church and his
friendship with Lanfranc, and Gerbert, and Anselm, of his having built
seventeen monasteries and six nunneries, "spiritual fortresses in
which mortals learn to combat the demons and lusts of the flesh"; when
he tells his sons to attach themselves to men of worth and wisdom and
to follow their advice, to follow justice in all things and spare no
effort to avoid wickedness, to assist the poor, infirm, and honest, to
curb and punish the proud and selfish, to prevent them from injuring
their neighbors, devoutly to attend holy church, to prefer the worship
of God to worldly wealth;--when he says these things we listen, and
believe that he was truly sorry at last for the starving homeless
Englishmen who owed him their death, for even the bitter resentment he
showed for the slaughter of a thousand of his brave knights within the
walls of Durham. He dares not give the ill-gotten kingdom of England
to anybody save to God, but if it be God's will he hopes that William
Rufus may be his successor. Robert may rule Normandy. Henry may take
five thousand pounds' weight of silver from the treasury. It is true
that he has no land to dwell in, but let him rest in patience and be
willing that his brothers should precede him. By and by he will be
heir of everything.

At last the king unwillingly gives permission for Odo's release
along with other prisoners of state. [Pg340] He prophesies that Odo
will again disturb the peace and cause the death of thousands, and
adds that the bishop does not conduct himself with that chastity and
modesty which become a minister of God. For a last act of clemency
he gives back to Baudri, the son of Nicolas, all his lands, "because
without permission he quitted my service and passed over into Spain.
I now restore them to him for the love of God; I do not believe that
there is a better knight under arms than he, but he is changeable and
prodigal, and fond of roving into foreign countries."

On the morning of the eighth of September the great soul took its
flight. The king was lying in restless, half-breathless sleep or
stupor when the cathedral bells began to ring, and he opened his eyes
and asked what time it was. They told him it was the hour of prime.
"Then he called upon God as far as his strength sufficed, and on our
holy lady, the blessed Mary, and so departed while yet speaking,
without any loss of his senses or change of speech."

"At the time when the king departed this world, many of his servants
were to be seen running up and down, some going in, others coming
out, carrying off the rich hangings and the tapestry, and whatever
they could lay their hands upon. A whole day passed before the corpse
was laid upon its bier, for they who were wont before to fear him now
left him lying alone. But when the news spread much people gathered
together, and bishops and barons came in long procession. The body was
well tended and carried to Caen as he had before commanded. There was
no bishop in the province, nor abbot, nor noble [Pg341] prince, who
did not go to the burying if he could, and there were besides many
monks, priests, and clerks."

So writes Master Wace in his long rhyme of the Conquest; but the rhyme
does not end as befits the Conqueror's fame. The chanting monks had
hardly set the body down within the church, at the end of its last
journey, when there was a cry of fire without, and all the people
ran away and left the church empty save for the few monks who stayed
beside the bier. When the crowd returned the service went on again,
but just as the grave was ready a vavasour named Ascelin, the son of
Arthur, pushed his way among the bishops and barons, and mounted a
stone to make himself the better heard--"Listen to me, ye lords and
clerks!" he cries; "ye shall not bury William in this spot. This
church of St. Stephen is built on land that he seized from me and my
house. By force he took it from me, and I claim judgment. I appeal to
him by name that he do me right."

"After he had said this he came down. Forthwith arose great clamor in
the church, and there was such tumult that no one could hear the other
speak. Some went, others came; and all marvelled that this great king,
who had conquered so much and won so many cities and so many castles,
could not call so much land his own as his body might be covered in
after death."

We cannot do better than end with reading the Saxon chronicle, which
is less likely to be flattering than the Norman records. [Pg342]

"Alas, how false and unresting is this earth's weal! He that erst was
a rich king, and lord of many lands; had then of all his lands but
seven feet space; and he that was once clad with gold and gems, lay
overspread with mold! If any one wish to know what manner of man he
was, or what worship he had, or of how many lands he was the lord,
then will we write of him as we have known him; for we looked on him
and somewhile dwelt in his herd.

"This King William that we speak about was a very wise man and very
rich; more worshipped, and stronger than any of his foregangers were.
He was mild to the good men that loved God, and beyond all metes stark
to those who withsaid his will. On that same ground where God gave him
that he should win England, he reared a noble minster and set monks
there and well endowed it.

"Eke he was very worshipful. Thrice he wore his king-helm (crown),
every year as oft as he was in England. At Easter he wore it at
Winchester; at Pentecost at Westminster; at midwinter at Gloucester,
and then were with him all the rich men over all England: archbishops
and diocesan bishops; abbots and earls; thanes and knights. Truly he
was so stark a man and wroth that no man durst do any thing against
his will. He had earls in his bonds who had done against his will.
Bishops he set off their bishoprics, and abbots off their abbacies,
and thanes in prison. And at last he did not spare his brother Odo;
him he set in prison. Betwixt other things we must not forget the good
peace that he [Pg343] made in this land, so that a man that was worth
aught might travel over the kingdom unhurt with his bosom full of
gold. And no man durst slay another man though he had suffered never
so mickle evil from the other.

"He ruled over England, and by his cunning he had so thoroughly
surveyed it, that there was never a hide of land in England that he
wist not both who had it and what its worth was, and he set it down in
his writ. Wales was under his weald, and therein he wrought castles;
and he wielded Manncynn withal. Scotland he subdued by his mickle
strength. Normandy was his by kin--and over the earldom that is called
Mans he ruled. And if he might have lived yet two years he had won
Ireland, and without any armament.

"Truly in his time men had mickle taxing and many hardships. He let
castles be built, and poor men were sorely taxed. The king" (we might
in justice read oftener the king's officers)--"The king was so very
stark, and he took from his subjects many marks of gold and many
hundred pounds of silver, and that he took of his people some by
right and some by mickle unright, for little need. He was fallen into
covetousness, and greediness he loved withal.

"The king and the head men loved much, and over much, the getting in
of gold and silver, and recked not how sinfully it was got so it but
came to them....

"He set many deer-friths and he made laws therewith, that whosoever
should slay hart or hind, him [Pg344] man should blind. And as he
kept to himself the slaying of the harts, so eke did he the boars. He
loved the high deer as much as if he were their father. Eke he set as
to the hares that they should go free. His rich men bemoaned, and his
poor men murmured, but he recked not the hatred of them all, and they
must follow the king's will if they would have lands or goods or his
favor.

"Wa-la-wa! that any man should be so moody, so to upheave himself
and think himself above all other men! May God Almighty have
mild-heartedness on his soul and give him forgiveness of his sins!
These things we have written of him both good and evil, that men may
choose the good after their goodness, and withal flee from evil, and
go on the way that leadeth all to heaven's kingdom."

 [Illustration]

[Pg345]

 [Illustration]




XVII.

KINGDOM AND DUKEDOM.

 "Yes, while on earth a thousand discords ring,
  Man's senseless uproar mingling with his toil,
  Still do thy quiet ministers move on."
                                     --MATTHEW ARNOLD.


William Rufus hurried away to claim the kingdom of England before his
father died. Robert was at Abbeville, some say, with his singers and
jesters, making merry over the prospect of getting the dukedom. Henry
had put his five thousand pounds of silver into a strong box and gone
his ways likewise. Normandy was in the confusion that always befell a
country in those days while one master had put off his crown and the
next had not put it on. There were masses being said in the Norman
churches for the good of the Conqueror's soul, and presently, as the
autumn days flew by and grew shorter and shorter, news was received
that the English had received William Rufus and made him king with
great rejoicing. There was always much to hope from the accession of a
new monarch; he was sure to make many promises, and nobody knew that
he would not keep every one of them.

But neither in England nor Normandy did the [Pg346] outlook promise
great security. Robert was made duke, and Robert had plenty of
friends, whose love and favor were sure to last as long as his money
held out. He had a better heart than his brothers, but he was not
fit for a governor. "Robert, my eldest-born, shall have Normandy
and Maine," the Conqueror had told his barons on his death-bed. "He
shall serve the king of France for the same. There are many brave men
in Normandy; I know none equal to them. They are noble and valiant
knights, conquering in all lands whither they go. If they have a good
captain, a company of them is made to be dreaded, but if they have not
a lord whom they fear, and who governs them severely, the service they
render will soon be but poor. The Normans are worth little without
strict justice; they must be bent and bowed to their ruler's will, and
whoso holds them always under his foot and curbs them tightly, may get
his business well done by them. Haughty are they and proud, boastful
and arrogant; difficult to govern, and needing to be at all times kept
under, so that Robert will have much to do and to provide in order to
manage such a people."

The dying king may have smiled grimly at the thought that Robert's
ambition knew not what it asked. The gay gentleman had given his
father trouble enough, but the weight of Normandy should be his to
carry. The red prince, William, had been a dutiful son, and he wished
him joy of England. He was order-loving, and had a head for governing.
"Poor lads!" the old father may have sighed more than once. It was
all very well to be princes and [Pg347] knights and gay riders and
courtiers, but the man who has a kingdom to govern must wend his ways
alone, with much hindrance and little help.

The two courts bore little likeness to the Conqueror's as time went
on, and there was endless dissension among the knights. In England
the Normans complained greatly of the division of the kingdom and
the duchy. Odo, who had regained his earldom of Kent, was full of
mischievous, treacherous plans, and had no trouble in persuading other
men that they stood no chance of holding their lands or keeping their
rights under Rufus; it would be much better to overthrow him and to do
homage to Robert of Normandy in the old fashion. Robert was careless
and easy, and William was strong and self-willed. Robert was ready to
favor this party at once, and after a while William discovered what
was going on, and found the rebels under Odo were fortifying their
castles and winning troops of followers to their side--in fact, England
was all ready for civil war. The king besieged Odo forthwith in the
city of Rochester, and there was a terrible end to the revolt. Robert
had been too lazy or too inefficient to keep his promise of coming
to the aid of his allies, and disease broke out in the garrison and
raged until Odo sent messengers to ask forgiveness, and to promise
all manner of loyalty and penitence. The king was in a state of fury,
and meant to hang the leaders of the insurrection and put the rest
to death by the most ingenious tortures that could be invented. At
last, however, his own barons and officers made piteous pleas for the
lives [Pg348] of their friends and relatives, and in the end they
were driven out and deprived of their English estates, and Odo was
altogether banished from the country. No longer an earl, he went back
much humbled to his bishopric of Bayeux, which Robert had been foolish
enough to restore to him. But the intrigues went on. The Norman
barons in England were separated from their hereditary possessions
in Normandy, and William Rufus owed the safety of his crown to the
upholding of the English. Presently he went over to Normandy, where
things were getting worse and worse under Robert's rule, and announced
his intention of seizing the silly duke's dominions. Robert had
already sold the Cotentin to Henry for a part of the five thousand
pounds in the strong box, and after a good deal of dissension, and a
prospect of a long and bloody war, which the nobles on both sides did
every thing they could to prevent, the brothers made up their quarrel.
They signed an agreement that the one who outlived the other should
inherit all the lands and wealth, and then they made a league to go
and fight Henry Beauclerc, who was living peaceably enough on his
honestly-got Cotentin possessions. They chased him out of the country
to the French Vexin, where he spent a forlorn year or two; but he
could afford to wait for his inheritance, as the Conqueror had told
him long before.

William Rufus went back to England, and in the course of time there
was a war with the Scotch, who were defeated again and again and
finally made quiet. Then the Welsh rebelled in their turn and [Pg349]
were much harder to subdue. Robert got the king of France to join
forces with him soon afterward, and that war was only avoided by the
payment to France by Rufus of an enormous sum of money.

All this time William Rufus was doing some good things for his
kingdom and a great many more bad ones that there is not time to
describe. After Lanfranc's death the king grew worse and worse; he
was apparently without any religious principle, and there was always
a quarrel between him and the priests about the church money, which
both of them wanted. When bishops and abbots died the king would
not appoint their successors, and took all the tithes for himself.
His chief favorite was a low-born, crafty, wicked man named Ralph
Flambard, and the two were well matched. William Rufus had little of
the gift for business that made his father such a practical statesman
and organizer, and, in fact, his boisterous, lawless, indecent manner
of living shocked even the less orderly of his subjects. He had the
lower and less respectable of the Norman qualities, and something of
the rudeness of the worst of his more remote ancestry crops out in
his conduct. Once when he was very ill and was afraid that he was
going to die with all his sins on his head, he sent for Anselm, the
holy prior, his father's friend and counsellor, and appointed him to
the archbishopric of Canterbury, which had been vacant ever since
Lanfranc's death four years before. Rufus' guilty conscience was
quieted, and the people of England were deeply thankful for such a
prelate, but before long the king and Anselm naturally did not find
[Pg350] each other harmonious, and after a brave fight for what he
believed to be the right, Anselm appealed to Rome and left England
with orders never to return.

Robert was the same careless man that he had been in his youth;
through war and peace, danger and security, he lived as if there
were no to-morrow to provide for and no future to be dreaded. I have
sketched the course of affairs as briefly as possible in both England
and Normandy, as if the only men within their borders were these two
incompetent brothers who so ill became the Conqueror's "kingly helm,"
as Master Wace loves to call the crown. But the church builders were
still at work like ants busy with their grains of sand, towers were
rising, knights were fighting and parading, ladies were ordering their
households, the country men and women were tilling the green fields
of both countries and gathering in their harvests year by year. There
had been trouble now and then, as we have just seen, between the
kingdom and the duchy, between both of them and their border foes, but
almost ten years went by, and the children who had played with their
toys and sighed over their horn books the summer that William the
Conqueror died were now men and women grown. It would not seem like
the old Normandy if the news of some new great enterprise did not run
like wildfire through the towns and country lanes. The blood of the
Northmen was kindled with the blood of all Christendom at the story
of the Turks' capture of the Holy Sepulchre and the blessed city of
Jerusalem. The knights of Sicily were already on their journey by sea
and shore; the mother church [Pg351] at Rome called to her children
in every land to defend her holiest shrines against the insolence of
the heathen.

Duke Robert was most zealous. To go on pilgrimage had been many a
knight's ambition, but this was the greatest pilgrimage of all.
Robert, as usual, had no money, but to his joy he succeeded in making
a bargain with his more thrifty English brother, and pledged Normandy
to William Rufus for five years for the sum of something less than
seven thousand pounds. Away he went with his lords and gentlemen;
they wore white crosses on their right shoulders, and sang hymns as
they marched along. Not only lords and gentlemen made up this huge
procession of thousands and thousands, but men of every station--from
the poor cottages and stately halls alike. If any better persuasion
had been needed than the simple announcement that the Turks had taken
Jerusalem, it had come by way of Peter the Hermit's preaching. This
had created a religious frenzy that the world had never known; from
town to town the great preacher had gone with an inexhaustible living
stream of persuasive eloquence always at his lips. Women wept and
prayed and gave their jewels and rich garments, and men set their
teeth and clenched their hands, armed themselves and followed him.

England did not listen at first, and William Rufus chuckled over his
good bargain, and taxed his unwilling subjects more heavily than ever
to get the money to pay his crusader brother. England would listen by
and by, but in this first crusade she took [Pg352] little part, while
the Normans and Frenchmen and all their neighbors spent three years of
fearful suffering and hardship in the strange countries of the East;
at last they won the Holy Sepulchre. The Turks were still fighting to
win it back again; they were dangerous enemies, and the Christian host
was dwindling fast. The cry was sent again through Europe for more
soldiers of the Holy Cross.

Here we come face to face again with the old viking spirit: under all
the fast-increasing luxury that threatened to sap and dull the life of
Normandy, the love of adventure and fierce energy of character were
only sleeping. The most sentimental and pleasure loving of Robert's
knights could lightly throw off his ribbons and gay trappings, and
buckle on his armor when the summons came. Quickly they marched and
fiercely they fought in the holy wars, and so it came about that the
Norman banners were planted at the gates of Jerusalem and Antioch, and
new kingdoms were planted in the East. This is not the place to follow
the Crusaders' fortunes, or the part that the Norman Sicilians played
in the great enterprise of the Middle Ages. At least it must make but
an incident in my scheme of the Story of the Normans.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is a familiar modern sound in the bewailings of our old
chroniclers over their taxes. Resentment and pathos were blended then
as they are now in such complaints, but though William Rufus was not
the least of such extortionate offenders, he gave much of the money
back in fine buildings; the [Pg353] famous Great Hall of Westminster
was built in his day, and the stout wall that surrounded his father's
Tower of London, besides a noble bridge across the Thames.

When people expected unfailing generosity and gold thrown to the
crowd oftener than in these days, it is difficult to see how the king
could satisfy popular expectation without preliminary taxation. Yet
the wails of the chroniclers go up like the chirp of the grasshopper.
There was one mistaken scheme of benevolence in the endowment of
charities, which have borne bitter fruit of pauperism ever since, for
which taxation might well have been spared.

William Rufus died in the year 1100, in the New Forest. The peasants
believed that it was enchanted and accursed, and that evil spirits
flew about among the trees on dark and stormy nights. There was a
superstition that it was a fated place to those who belonged to the
Conqueror's line. Another prince had been killed there, named Richard,
too--the son of Duke Robert of Normandy.

The last year of the Red King's reign had been peaceful. The Witan
gathered to meet him at Westminster and Winchester and Gloucester, and
he reigned unchallenged from Scotland to Maine, and there was truce
with the French king at Paris. One August morning he went out to the
chase after a jolly night at one of the royal hunting-lodges. The
party scattered in different directions, and the king and Sir Walter
Tyrrel, a famous sportsman, were seen riding away together, and their
dogs after them. That night a poor forester, a lime-burner, was going
[Pg354] through the forest with his clumsy cart, and stumbled over
the king's body, which lay among the ferns with an arrow deep in the
breast. He lifted it into the cart and carried it to Winchester, where
it was buried next day with little sorrow. There were few bells tolled
and few prayers said, for the priests owed little to any friendliness
of William Rufus.

There were many stories told about his death. Tyrrel said that the
arrow was shot by an unknown hand, and that he had run away for fear
that people should accuse him of the murder, which they certainly did!
Others said that Tyrrel shot at a stag and the arrow glanced aside
from an oak, but nobody knows now, and in those days too many people
were glad that the king was dead, to ask many questions or to try to
punish any one.

Robert might have claimed the kingdom now because of the old
agreement, but he was still in the East fighting for Jerusalem.
Henry Beauclerc had been one of the huntsmen that fatal morning, so
he hurried to Winchester and claimed the crown. He made more good
promises than any of his predecessors, and the people liked him
because he was English-born, and so they made another Norman king.
Henry Beauclerc reigned over England thirty-five years, and won
himself another name of the Lion of Justice. He did not treat his
brother Robert justly, however he may have deserved his title in other
ways; but he had a zoological garden and brought wild beasts from
different quarters of the earth, and he fostered a famous love of
learning, [Pg355] and put Ralph Flambard in the Tower as soon as he
possibly could, and more than all, chose an excellent woman for his
wife, Maud, the good daughter of the Scottish King Malcolm. He was an
untruthful man, but a great man for all that, and made a better king
than some that England had already endured. In many ways his reign was
a gain to England. There was a distinct advance in national life, and
while the English groaned under his tyranny they could not help seeing
that he sought for quietness and order and was their best champion
against the worse tyranny of the nobles. Mr. Freeman believes that
the Saxon element was the permanent one in English history, and that
the Norman conquest simply modified it somewhat and was a temporary
influence brought to bear for its improvement. It is useless to argue
the question with such odds of learning and thought as his against
one, but the second invasion of Northmen by the roundabout way of
Normandy, seems as marked a change as the succession of the Celts to
the Britons, or the Saxons to the Danes. The Normans had so distinctly
made a great gain in ideas and civilization, that they were as much
foreigners as any Europeans could have been to the Anglo-Saxons of
that eleventh century, and their coming had a permanent effect,
besides a most compelling power. It seems to me that England would
have disintegrated without them, not solidified, and a warring handful
of petty states have been the result.

Yet undoubtedly through many centuries of history writing the English
of the Conqueror's day have been made to take too low a place in the
scale of [Pg356] civilization. As a nation, they surely responded
readily to the Norman stimulus, but the Normans had never found so
good a chance to work out their own ideas of life and achievement as
on English soil in the first hundred years after the Conquest. In many
respects the Saxon race possesses greater and more reliable qualities
than any other race; stability, perseverance, self-government,
industry are all theirs. Yet the Normans excelled them in their genius
for great enterprises and their love of fitness and elegance in social
life and in the arts. Indeed we cannot do better than to repeat here
what has been quoted once already. "Without them England would have
been mechanical, not artistic; brave, not chivalrous; the home of
learning, not of thought."

It has also been the fashion to ignore the influence of five hundred
years' contact between Roman civilization and the Saxon inhabitants
of Great Britain. Surely great influences have been brought to bear
upon the Anglo-Saxon race. That the making of England was more
significant to the world and more valuable than any manifestation
of Norman ability, is in one way true, but let us never forget that
much that has been best in English national life has come from the
Norman elements of it rather than the Saxon. England the colonizer,
England the country of intellectual and social progress, England the
fosterer of ideas and chivalrous humanity, is Norman England, and the
Saxon influence has oftener held her back in dogged satisfaction and
stubbornness than urged her forward to higher levels. The power of
holding back is necessary to [Pg357] the stability, of a kingdom, but
not so necessary as the

 "Glory of going on and still to be----"

The conjunction of Norman and Saxon elements has made England the
great nation that she is.

It is too easy as we draw near the end of this story of the Normans
to wander into talk about the lessons of Norman history and to fall
into endless generalizations. Let us look a little longer at Henry
Beauclerc's time while Robert, under the shadow of his name of duke,
spends enough dreary blinded years in prison to give him space to
remember again and again the misspent years of his youth and his
freedom; while Henry plots and plans carefully for the continuance
of his family upon the throne of England and Normandy, only to be
disappointed at every turn. His son is coming from France with a gay
company and is lost in the White Ship with all his lords and ladies,
and the people who hear the news do not dare to tell the king, and at
last send a weeping little lad into the royal presence to falter out
the story of the shipwreck. What a touch of humanity is there! The
king never smiled afterward, but he plotted on and went his kingly
ways, "the last of those great Norman kings who, with all their vices,
their cruelty, and their lust, displayed great talents of organization
and adaptation, guided England with a wise, if a strong, hand through
the days of her youth, and by their instinctive, though selfish, love
of order paved the way for the ultimate rise of a more stable, yet a
freer government."

The last Norman Duke of Normandy was really [Pg358] that young Prince
William, who was drowned in the White Ship off the port of Barfleur,
whom Henry had invested with the duchy and to whom the nobility had
just done homage. After his death, the son of Robert made claim to
the succession, and the greater proportion of the Normans upheld his
claim, and the king of France openly favored him, but he died of a
wound received in battle, and again Henry, rid of this competitor,
built an elaborate scheme upon the succession of his daughter Matilda,
whom he married to Geoffrey Plantagenet, son of the Count of Anjou.
But for all this, after the king's death, the law of succession was
too unsettled to give his daughter an unquestioned claim. Hereditary
title was not independent yet of election by the nobles, and Matilda's
claims were by many people set aside. There were wars and disorders
too intricate and dreary to repeat. Stephen, Count of Boulogne, son
of that Count Stephen of Blois who married the Conqueror's daughter
Adela, usurped the throne of England, and there was a miserable time
of anarchy in both England and Normandy. And as the government passed
away in this apparently profitless interregnum to the houses of Blois
and of Anjou, so Normandy seems like Normandy no longer. Her vitality
is turned into different channels, and it is in the history of England
and of France and of the Low Countries that we must trace the further
effect of Norman influence. [Pg359]

 [Illustration]




XVIII.

CONCLUSION.

 "I looked: aside the dust-cloud rolled,----
     The Waster seemed the Builder too;
  Upspringing from the ruined Old
            I saw the New."
                                          --WHITTIER.


It will be clearly seen that there is great apparent disproportion
between certain parts of this sketch of the rise and growth of the
Norman people. I have not set aside the truth that Normandy was not
reunited to France until 1204, and I do not forget that many years lie
between that date and the time when I close my account of the famous
duchy. But the story of the growth of the Normans gives one the key
to any later part of their history, and I have contented myself with
describing the characters of the first seven dukes and Eadward the
Confessor, who were men typical of their time and representative of
the various types of national character. Of the complex questions in
civic and legal history I am not competent to speak, nor does it seem
to me that they properly enter into such a book as this. With Mr.
Freeman's learned and exhaustive work at hand as a book of reference,
the readers of this story of Normandy will find all their puzzles
solved. [Pg360]

But I hope that I have made others see the Normans as I have seen
them, and grow as interested in their fortunes as I have been. They
were the foremost people of their time, being most thoroughly alive
and quickest to see where advances might be made in government, in
architecture, in social life. They were gifted with sentiment and with
good taste, together with fine physical strength and intellectual
cleverness. In the first hundred years of the duchy they made
perhaps as rapid progress in every way, and had as signal influence
among their contemporaries, as any people of any age,--unless it is
ourselves, the people of the young republic of the United States, who
might be called the Normans of modern times. For with many of the
gifts and many of the weaknesses (and dangers, too) of our viking
ancestry, we have repeated the rapid increase of power which was a
characteristic of our Norman kindred; we have conquered in many fights
with the natural forces of the universe where they fought, humanity
against humanity. Much of what marked the Northman and the Norman
marks us still.

The secret of Normandy's success was energetic self-development and
apprehension of truth; the secret of Normandy's failures was the
secret of all failures--blindness to the inevitable effects of certain
causes, and unwillingness to listen to her best and most far-seeing
teachers. Carlyle said once to a friend: "There has never been a
nation yet that did any thing great that was not deeply religious."
The things that are easy and near are chosen, instead of [Pg361]
the things that make for righteousness. When luxury becomes not the
means, but the end of life, humanity's best weapons grow rusty, and
humanity's best intelligence is dulled and threatens to disappear.
The church forgets her purpose and invites worshippers of the church
instead of worshippers of God. The state is no longer an impersonated
administrator of justice and order, but a reservoir from which to
plunder and by which to serve private ends.

I am not able to speak of the influence of the Normans upon the later
kingdom of France, the France of our day, as I confess the writer of
such a book as this should have been, but there is one point which has
been of great interest as the southward course of the Northmen has
been eagerly followed.

It has been the common impression that there was a marked growth of
refinement and courtliness, of dignified bearing and imaginative
literature connected with the development of the French men and women
of early times, to the gradual widening of which the modern world had
been indebted for much of its best social attainment.

I think that a single glance at the France of the ninth and tenth
centuries will do away with any belief in its having been the
sole inspirer or benefactor. The Franks were products of German
development, and were not at that time pre-eminent for social culture.
They were a ruder people by far than the Italians or even the people
of Spain, less developed spiritually, and wanting in the finer
attributes of human instinct or perception. Great as they already
[Pg362] were, no one can claim that quickness of tact or special
intolerance of ill-breeding came from their direction. Dante speaks, a
little later than this, of the "guzzling Germans," and though we must
make allowance for considerable race prejudice, there was truth, too,
in his phrase. Not from the Franks, therefore, but from among the very
rocks and chasms of the viking nature, sprang a growth of delicate
refinement that made the yellow-haired jarls and the "sea-kings'
daughters" bring a true, poetical, and lovely spirit to Normandy,
where they gave a soul to the body of art and letters that awaited
them. Each nation had something to give to the other, it is true, but
it was the Northern spirit that made the gifts of both available and
fruitful to humanity.

It may rightly be suggested that the standard of behavior was low
everywhere in the tenth century, according to our present standards,
but it is true that there was a re-kindling of light in the North,
which may be traced in its continued reflections through Norway to
Normandy, and thence to France and England and the world. We have
only to remind ourselves of the development of literature in Iceland
and the building of governmental and social strength and dignified
individuality, to see that the Northmen by no means owed every thing
to the influence of French superiority and precedence. We have only to
compare the tenth century with the eleventh, to see what an impulse
had been given. The saga-lovers and the clear-eyed people of the North
were gifted with a spark of grace peculiarly their own. [Pg363]

There is a pretty story told by an English traveller in Norway, who
met a young woman leading an old blind beggar through the street of a
poor, plain village. She was descended from one of the noble families
of ancient times; it was her pleasure and duty to serve the friendless
old man. But the traveller insists that never, among the best people
he has met, has he found such dignity and grace as this provincial
woman wore, who knew nothing of courts or the world's elegance. There
was a natural nobility in her speech and manner which the courtliest
might envy, and which might adorn the noblest palace and be its most
charming decoration. It is easy to write these words with sympathy,
and perhaps the traveller's half-forgotten story has been embellished
unconsciously with the memory in my mind of kindred experiences in
that country of the North. Plainness and poverty make gentle blood
seem more gracious still, and the green mountain-sides and fresh air
of old Norway have not yet ceased to inspire simple, unperverted
souls, from whose life a better and higher generation seems more than
possible.

The impulses that make toward social development are intermittent.
There is the succession of growing time and brooding time, of summer
and winter, in the great ages of the world. If we look at the
Normans as creatures of a famous spring where Europe made a bold and
profitable advance in every way, I think that we shall not be far from
right.

In telling their story in this imperfect way I have not been unmindful
of the dark side of their [Pg364] character, but what they were is
permanent, while what they were not was temporary. The gaps they left
were to be filled up by other means--by the slow processes by which
God in nature and humanity evolves the best that is possible for the
present with something that forestalls the future. The stones that
make part of a cathedral wall are shaped also with relation to the
very dome.

Here, at the beginning of the Norman absorption into England, I
shall end my story of the founding and growth of the Norman people.
The mingling of their brighter, fiercer, more enthusiastic, and
visionary nature with the stolid, dogged, prudent, and resolute
Anglo-Saxons belongs more properly to the history of England. Indeed,
the difficulty would lie in not knowing where to stop, for one may
tell the two races apart even now, after centuries of association and
affiliation. There are Saxon landholders, and farmers, and statesmen
in England yet--unconquered, unpersuaded, and un-Normanized. But the
effect on civilization of the welding of the two great natures cannot
be told fairly in this or any other book--we are too close to it and
we ourselves make too intimate a part of it to judge impartially. If
we are of English descent we are pretty sure to be members of one
party or the other. Saxon yet or Norman yet, and even the confusion
of the two forces renders us not more able to judge of either, but
less so. We must sometimes look at England as a later Normandy; and
yet, none the less, as the great leader and personified power that
she is and has been these many hundred years, drawing her strength
[Pg365] from the best of the Northern races, and presenting the world
with great men and women as typical of these races and as grandly
endowed to stand for the representatives of their time in days to
come, as the men and women of Greece were typical, and live yet in our
literature and song. In the courts and stately halls of England, in
the market-places, and among followers of the sea or of the drum, we
have seen the best triumphs and glories of modern humanity, no less
than the degradations, the treacheries, and the mistakes. In the great
pageant of history we can see a nation rise, and greaten, and dwindle,
and disappear like the varying lifetime of a single man, but the force
of our mother England is not yet spent, though great changes threaten
her, and the process of growth needs winter as well as summer. Her
life is not the life of a harborless country, her fortunes are the
fortunes of her generosity. But whether the Norman spirit leads her to
be self-confident or headstrong and wilful, or the Saxon spirit holds
her back into slowness and dulness, and lack of proper perception
in emergencies or epochs of necessary change, still she follows the
right direction and leads the way. It is the Norman graft upon the
sturdy old Saxon tree that has borne best fruit among the nations--that
has made the England of history, the England of great scholars and
soldiers and sailors, the England of great men and women, of books and
ships and gardens and pictures and songs! There is many a gray old
English house standing among its trees and fields, that has sheltered
and nurtured many a generation of loyal and [Pg366] tender and brave
and gentle souls. We shall find there men and women who, in their
cleverness and courtliness, their grace and true pride and beauty,
make us understand the old Norman beauty and grace, and seem to make
the days of chivalry alive again.

But we may go back farther still, and discover in the lonely mountain
valleys and fiord-sides of Norway even a simpler, courtlier, and
nobler dignity. In the country of the sagamen and the rough sea-kings,
beside the steep-shored harbors of the viking dragon-ships, linger
the constantly repeated types of an earlier ancestry, and the flower
of the sagas blooms as fair as ever. Among the red roofs and gray
walls of the Norman towns, or the faint, bright colors of its country
landscapes, among the green hedgerows and golden wheat-fields of
England, the same flowers grow in more luxuriant fashion, but old
Norway and Denmark sent out the seed that has flourished in richer
soil. To-day the Northman, the Norman, and the Englishman, and a young
nation on this western shore of the Atlantic are all kindred who,
possessing a rich inheritance, should own the closest of kindred ties.

 [Illustration]

[Pg367]

 [Illustration]




INDEX.


 A

 Adela, 112

 AElfred, the Confessor's brother, 184, 188

 AElfred the Great, 103, 171; fines, 173

 AElfgifu, see Emma of Normandy

 AEthelred the Unready, 102, 171; English contempt for, 175; flees
   to Normandy, 177

 Alan of Brittany, 70, 126, 137; death of, 151

 Alencon, siege of, 213; Lord of, see William de Talvas

 Ambrieres, 250

 Anglo-Saxons, 106, 365

 Anjou, 358

 Anselm, 238, 338, 349

 Apulia, 131, 139; allegiance to Rome, 140

 Architecture, 239, 240

 Argentan, 97

 Arlette, 122

 Arnulf of Flanders, 63, 71, 87

 Arrows, 252, 307

 Ascelin, 340

 Aumale, 248

 Auxerre, 108

 Aversa, 133, 139

 Avranches, 248


 B

 Baldwin of Flanders, 121

 Battle, 304

 Baudri, 340

 Bayeux, Northmen in, 40, 59; Richard the Fearless educated in, 62;
   description of, 323

 Bayeux tapestry, 238, 299, 323

 Beaumont, house of, 152, 198, 282

 Bec, abbey of, 219

 Benedictines, 222

 Berengarius, 230

 Berenger, Count of Bayeux, 40

 Bergen, 14, 291

 Bernard the Dane, 60, 61, 75

 Bernard Harcourt, 68

 Bernard de Senlis, 59, 61; plot of, 76

 Bertha, wife of Robert of France, 100

 Bessin, 247

 Blaatand Harold, 81

 Borbillon, 210

 Botho the Dane, 47, 60, 75

 Breteuil, castle of, 250

 Brionne, 224

 Brittany, 58; Danish settlements in, 61; enmity between Normandy
   and, 76; tributary to Normandy, 246; William's expedition against,
   265; aids William, 285

 Bruce, Robert, 233

 Burgundy, 54, 246; king of, 86; Henry of, 106

 Burneville, 224


 C

 Caen, 113; William builds Church of St. Stephen in, 237; 298, 321,
   322, 340

 Canterbury, archbishop of, 176

 Carloman, 85

 Carlyle, 360

 Cathedrals, 219

 Celts, 172

 Chalons, Hugh, Count of, 108, 110

 Charlemagne, 11, 19; empire of, 34, 52, 88

 Charles the Fat, 54, 56

 Charles the Simple, 34; resists Rolf's invasion, 37; captivity of,
   56

 Chartres, Count of, 38; siege of, 41, 109

 Chivalry, Norman, 93, 116

 Civitella, battle of, 140, 141

 Cloister life, 215

 Cnut the Dane, 106, 119; banishment of English nobles, 120; chosen
   king, 177; his improvement and England's, 178; pilgrimage to Rome,
   182; letter of, 182; death, 183

 Cotentin, 103, 113; castles of, 116; over-population of, 116; home
   of the Hautevilles, 134; rebellions, 152, 202; designs of Henry
   of France toward, 247; men at Hastings, 306; sold by Robert of
   Normandy, 348

 Coutances, bishop of, 304

 Crusades, 143, 351

 Curfew bell, 251


 D

 Danegelt, the, 173

 Danes in Bayeux, 74; in England, 103; inheritance from, in
   Northern England, 187; schemes for regaining England, 258

 Dante, 362

 Dickens' "Child's History of England," 328

 Dinan, 266

 Dive, river, 297

 Dol, 110, 266

 Domesday Book, 328

 Douglas, Scottish family of, 233

 Drayton, 28

 Dreux, county of, 109

 Dunstan, 172

 Durham, 339


 E

 Eadgyth (or Edith), the Confessor's wife, 188, 270

 Eadgyth the Swan-throated, 310

 Eadmund Ironside, 104, 177; poisoned, 178

 Eadward the Confessor, 184; pious character of, 186; weakness of,
   188, 240; likeness to AEthelred, 189; preference for Normans, 191;
   promises the crown to William, 242; also to Harold, 257; illness
   and death, 269; love of hunting, 329

 Eadward the Outlaw, 257

 Eadwine, Earl of Mercia, 320

 Eadwy, 180

 Emma of Normandy (or AElfgifu), 102; marriage to AEthelred, 105;
   flight to Normandy of, 106; sons of, 118; marries Cnut of England,
   180

 England, Danes in, 103; low condition of, 106; under misrule of
   AEthelred, 173; election of kings in, 179; same king as Denmark and
   Scandinavia, 181; under Cnut, 181; behind Norman civilization, 185;
   division into earldoms, 187; building of castles in, 193; conquest
   of, planned in Normandy, 240; Harold made king, 272; conquest of,
   by William, 308; English character, 365

 Epte, St. Claire on, 44

 Eremburga, 145

 Ericson, Leif, 18

 Ermenoldus, 113

 Espriota, 66; second marriage, 80, 96, 152

 Estrith, 121, 123

 Eu, 236

 Eustace of Boulogne, 285

 Evreux, 40

 Exeter, siege of, 325

 Exmes, 97, 111, 113


 F

 Falaise, 92; industries of, 97; Robert in, 121; the Conqueror in,
   197

 Fecamp, 89, 111, 303

 Feudal system, 54, 154; in England, 316

 Fitz-Osbern; see William Fitz-Osbern.

 Flails used as weapons, 76

 Flanders, Baldwin of, 121

 Flanders, civilization of, 232; aids William, 285

 Fleming, Scottish families of, 233

 Forests, Norman, 95; English, 330

 France, 54, 361

 Franks, 55, 361

 Freeman's (E. A.) History of the Norman Conquest, 190, 205, 224,
   225, 280, 286, 355, 359

 Froissart, 323

 Fulbert the Tanner, 122


 G

 Gaul, 20

 Geirrid the Norsewoman, 7

 Geoffrey Martel, 250; dies, 252

 Geoffrey Plantagenet, 358

 Gerberga, 72; courage of, 82-85

 Gerberoi, 334, 337

 Germany, 54; sympathy for Louis Outremer, 83, 361

 Gisla, 43

 Godfrey of Brittany, 101

 Godiva, Lady, 188

 Godwine, Earl of Wessex, 184; character and gifts, 188; a
   king-maker, 188; influence in England and banishment, 192; returns,
   244; remembrance of, in England, 315

 Golet the Fool, 199

 Gorm of Denmark, 30, 81

 Gottfried, 19

 Grantmesnil, 198

 Greece, typical characters of, 365

 Greenland, 16, 18

 Gregory VII., (or Hildebrand), 279, 285, 298

 Grimbald of Plessis, 202; imprisonment of, 212

 Guizot's history of France, 159

 Guy of Burgundy, 199; pretends to the ducal crown, 200; beaten at
   Val-es-dunes, 210

 Gyda, 30

 Gytha, Godwine's wife, 192

 Gyrth, son of Godwine, 303


 H

 Haarfager, Harold, 15; kingdom and marriage, 30; tyrannies of, 32

 Haman of Thorigny, 202

 Harold Blaatand 81, 82

 Harold Hardrada, 288, 290, 294

 Harold, son of Godwine, 192; in Ireland, 242; in Normandy, 253;
   desires to succeed Eadward, 256; shipwrecked in Ponthieu, 260;
   received by William of Normandy, and visits him, 264; at Mt. St.
   Michel, 265; promises to marry one of William's daughters, 267;
   oath on the relics, 267; again in Normandy, 267; made king of
   England, 272; battle of Hastings, 300

 /Ha Rou/, 49

 Harthacnut, 170; becomes king, 183; dies, 184

 Hasting the pirate, 38; Italian robberies, 130-144

 Hastings, battle of, 299

 Hauteville, Drogo of, 138

 Hauteville, Humbert of, 141

 Hauteville, Humphrey of, 138

 Hauteville, Roger of, 143

 Hauteville, Serlon of, 136; bravery of, 138, 141

 Hauteville, Tancred of, 132, 135, 141

 Hauteville, William of, president of Apulia, 139

 Hautevilles, Family of the, 236

 Hebrides, 2, 29, 50

 Henry Beauclerc, 327; his father's legacy, 339, 348; seizes the
   English crown, 354; death of his son, 357

 Henry of Burgundy, 137

 Henry of France, 197, 199; William's enemy, 202; Godwine's
   partisan, 244

 Herleva (or Arlette), 122

 Herluin of Bec, 223; becomes prior, 224

 Herluin of Montreuil, 81

 Hildebrand, archdeacon, see Gregory VII.

 Hugh Capet, 63, 88, 98

 Hugh the Great, Count of Paris, 56, 63, 153


 I

 Iceland, colonization of, 16, 32; expedition to England from, 291;
   literature, 32, 92, 362

 Italy, 54


 J

 Jersey, island of, 93

 Jerusalem, Robert's pilgrimage to, 126

 Jumieges, 35


 K

 Kent, 288, 290

 Knighthood, 156; oaths of, 161


 L

 Land-holding, Norman system of, 46

 Lanfranc, 219, 226; met by pilgrims, 231; brings about William's
   marriage, 237; William's ally, 279; Bishop of Canterbury, 320

 Laon, castle of, 72

 Leo, Pope of Rome, 235, 236

 Leofric, 188; grandsons of, 258

 Leslies, Scottish family of, 233

 Lillebonne, 282

 Lisieux, 247, 252

 Lisle, Baldwin de, 233

 London, 177, 192, 302

 Long Serpent, 12

 Longsword, see William Longsword.

 Lorraine, 54

 Lothair, 86

 Louis Outremer, 71; in Rouen, 77; loses the battle with Normandy,
   82; death of, 86


 M

 Maine, Count of, 280

 Malcolm, 288

 Mantes, 337

 Matilda of Flanders, 233; marries William of Normandy, 237; builds
   Church of the Holy Trinity in Caen, 238; influence in Normandy,
   245; gives William a ship, 298; rules Normandy in his absence, 325;
   favors her son Robert, 334; dies, 335

 Mauger, 90; Archbishop of Rouen, 112, 124; opposition to William
   and Matilda's marriage, 236; dismissal of, by William, 251

 Mauritius, 238

 Mercia, 187

 Michael, Emperor of Constantinople, 128

 Mirmande, 111

 Monasticism, 215; value of, to Normandy, 230

 Montgomery, house of, 152

 Morkere, 288, 320

 Mortain, Count of, 282

 Mortemer, battle of, 248

 Mount St. Michel, 265


 N

 Navarre, 54

 Neal of St. Saviour, 201; at Val-es-dunes, 208; goes to Brittany,
   202; at Hastings, 306

 Neustria, 35, 79

 Normandy, Rolf's voyage to, 29, 34; formerly called Neustria,
   35; independence of, 44; division of, 46; improvement of, 47;
   loyalty to France, 57; relations with France, 60; holds its own
   against Louis Outremer, 82; first money coined in, 84; the Norman
   character, 91; manufactures of, 92; chivalry in, 93; attacked
   by AEthelred, 103; changes in, 115; Christianity in, 118; social
   progress of, 132; colonies in Southern Italy, 133; feudalism in,
   153; knighthood of, 156; churches of, 168; plague in, 169; AEthelred
   escapes to, 177; state of religion in, 217; architecture, 239,
   240; enmity between Flanders and, 245; victory at Mortemer, 248;
   craftiness of, 250; victory at Varaville, 252; Harold in, 268;
   governed by William and Lanfranc, 279; preparation for war in, 295;
   wins the battle of Hastings, 300; influence of Norman character,
   356-360

 Norman women, 323, 326

 Northmen, voyages of, 4; literature of, 9; arts of the, 11;
   ship-building of, 12; in Bayeux, 59

 Norway, coast of, 1; metals in, 4; home-life in, 6; reputation of,
   9; ships of, 12-14; colonies of, 19; women in, 23; pirates, 26;
   Haarfager's government of, 30


 O

 Odo of Bayeux, 282, 304, 323; made Earl of Kent, 324; Italian
   plot, 336; release from prison, 339; plots of, 347

 Odo of France, 247

 Olaf of Norway, 109, 175

 Ordericus Vitalis, chronicle of, 334, 337

 Orkneys, 1, 30, 293

 Oslac, 60

 Osmond de Centeville, 72

 Otho William, 107

 Otto of Germany, 86


 P

 Palermo, 146

 Palgrave, Sir Francis, 89, 91

 Paris, plundering of, 19, 40; borders of Normandy near, 125

 Pavia, Lanfranc born in, 226

 Peasantry, Norman, 93; complaint of, 95; parliament of and
   commune, 96; in England, 330

 Peter the Hermit, 351

 Pevensey, 299

 Philip, King of France, 337

 Poictiers, 246

 Ponthieu, 246; Harold shipwrecked in, 260; William's ships sail
   for, 297

 Popa, 43, 45, 60

 Pyrenees, 246


 Q

 Quevilly, 275


 R

 Ragnar Lodbrok, 25

 Rainulf of Ferrieres, 68

 Ralph Flambard, 349

 Ralph of Tesson, 206

 Ralph of Toesny, 249

 Randolph of Bayeux, 202

 Raoul of Ivry, 96; against the peasants, 97, 98

 Ravens, black, 15

 Renaud, 110

 Richard of Evreux, 282

 Richard the Fearless, 62; boyhood of, 66; made duke, 68; sent to
   Laon, 71; charters of, 84; death of, 89

 Richard the Good, 90; character of, 92; unruly subjects of, 96;
   first peer of France, 99; marriage of, 101; war with Burgundy, 106;
   war with Dreux, 108; death at Fecamp, 111

 Richard the Third Duke, 110; becomes duke, 112; is poisoned, 113

 Robert Curt-hose, 333; inherits Normandy, 339, 345; his character,
   350; goes on pilgrimage, 351; imprisonment, 357

 Robert of Eu, 282

 Robert of France, 98; wit of, 99

 Robert Guiscard, 134; reaches Amalfi, 141; becomes duke, 142

 Robert of Jumieges, 193

 Robert the Magnificent, 112; bad name of, 114; enemy of England,
   118; marries the tanner's daughter, 122; goes on pilgrimage, 125;
   dies, 129

 Robert the Staller, 273, 300

 Roger of Beaumont, 282, 322

 Roger of Toesny, 195; colony in Spain, 196

 Roegnwald, Jarl, of Moere, 31, 44

 Rolf Ganger, ships, 29; profession, 32; siege of Rouen, 35; good
   government, 41; made duke, 42; christened, 45; married Gisla, 45;
   death, 50; tomb at Rouen, typical character, 53; tower in Rouen,
   78; hall in Rouen, 121; Cnut's likeness to, 157, 278, 282, 306

 Romance language, 55

 /Roman de Rou/, 94, 112, 204, 209, 267, 340

 Roman roads, 92

 Rome, Church of, 118

 Rouen, 20; siege of, 35; Rolf's wedding in, 45; Rolf's palace
   in, 50; Richard the Fearless' coronation in, 69; ruins in, 86;
   reception of William and Matilda in, 236

 Rudolph of Burgundy, 57

 Rye, castle of, 200


 S

 Sagamen, 8

 Sandwich, 288

 Salle, 212

 Sanglac, battle of, 104

 Saxons, 287

 Scandinavian peninsula, 1-3

 Sea-kings, 9

 Senlac, 304, 309

 Shakespeare, 91

 Sicily, 131, 139; Norman ruins in, 145; aids William, 285;
   crusades of, 350

 Siward of Northumberland, 258

 Slavery, William's suppression of, 332

 Spain, 20, 25, 306

 Sperling, 80, 152

 Stamford Bridge, battle of, 293, 298, 305

 Stephen of Blois, 358

 Stephen of Boulogne, 358

 Stigand, 273

 St. Michel's Mount, 101

 Sturlesson, Snorro, 28

 St. Valery, 297

 Sussex, 288, 290, 299

 Swegen, King of Denmark, 175


 T

 Taillefer the minstrel, 306

 Taxes, 352

 Tennyson, Lord, 28

 /Terra Regis/, 318

 Thurkill the sacristan, 303

 Tillieres, 109; siege of, 136; castle of, 250

 Tostig, 287, 292

 Truce of God, 165

 Turf-Einar, 32


 V

 Val-es-dunes, battle of, 205; changes since, 247

 Valmeray, 205

 Valognes, William's escape from, 199

 Varaville, battle of, 251

 Vaudreuil, 152

 Venerable Bede, the, 218

 Venosa (tomb of the Hautevilles), 146

 Vermandois, Count of, 56; death of, 63

 Vexin, district of the, 125, 337, 348

 Vigr, island of, 29

 Vikings, 9, 366

 Vinland, 18


 W

 Wace, Master, 112, see /Roman de Rou/.

 Walter Giffard, 282

 Walter Tyrrel, 353

 Waltham, abbey of, 254, 303

 Waltheof, 320

 Westminster, 191, 269, 302, 311, 314, 353

 Wight, isle of, 288; Odo's rendezvous in, 336

 William the Conqueror, 104, 114; father of, 116; mother of, 122;
   homage of barons to, 126; typical character of, 149; purity of
   life, 167; Roger of Toesny an enemy to, 196; Guy of Burgundy's
   rebellion, 199; not a man of blood in a certain sense, 211; mastery
   in Normandy, 213; revenge upon Alencon, 214; meets Lanfranc, 229;
   marries Matilda, 237; goes to England, 242; receives news of
   Harold's shipwreck, 260; at Chateau d'Eu, 264; hears of Harold's
   coronation, 275; embassy to Harold, 280; council at Lillebonne,
   282; at Hastings, 299; march to London, 313; coronation at
   Westminster, 314; government of England, 316; returns to Normandy
   in triumph, 321; at Mantes, 337; last illness and death, 337

 William Fitz-Osbern, 250; at Rouen palace, 262; at Quevilly, 277,
   282; at Lillebonne, 284; made Count of Hereford, 324

 William of Jumieges, 112

 William Longsword, his youth, 43; education of, 56; his wife, 56;
   lands in Brittany, 58; politics of, 60; government of, 62; death,
   63; character of, 64; lingering enmity toward Flanders caused by
   his murder, 245

 William Malet, 310

 William of Malmesbury, 331

 William Rufus, 338; inherits the English crown, 339; goes to
   England, 345; is murdered, 353; is buried at Winchester, 353

 William, son of Richard the Fearless, 97

 William de Talvas, 124; the bastard's enemy, 152; rebels against
   William, 213

 William of Warren, 282

 Witanagemot, 270, 275, 280, 317, 353

 Women of Normandy, 101, 323, 326


 Y

 Yonge, Miss (Story of /The Little Duke/), 85

 York, 292




 [Illustration]




The Story of the Nations.


MESSRS. G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS take pleasure in announcing that they have
in course of publication, in co-operation with Mr. T. Fisher Unwin,
of London, a series of historical studies, intended to present in a
graphic manner the stories of the different nations that have attained
prominence in history.

In the story form the current of each national life is distinctly
indicated, and its picturesque and noteworthy periods and episodes are
presented for the reader in their philosophical relation to each other
as well as to universal history.

It is the plan of the writers of the different volumes to enter into
the real life of the peoples, and to bring them before the reader as
they actually lived, labored, and struggled--as they studied and wrote,
and as they amused themselves. In carrying out this plan, the myths,
with which the history of all lands begins, will not be overlooked,
though these will be carefully distinguished from the actual history,
so far as the labors of the accepted historical authorities have
resulted in definite conclusions.

The subjects of the different volumes have been planned to cover
connecting and, as far as possible, consecutive epochs or periods, so
that the set when completed will present in a comprehensive narrative
the chief events in the great STORY OF THE NATIONS; but it is, of
course, not always practicable to issue the several volumes in their
chronological order.

The "Stories" are printed in good readable type, and in handsome 12mo
form. They are adequately illustrated and furnished with maps and
indexes. Price, per vol., cloth, $1.50. Half morocco, gilt top, $1.75.

The following are now ready:

GREECE. Prof. Jas. A. Harrison.

ROME. Arthur Gilman.

THE JEWS. Prof. James K. Hosmer.

CHALDEA. Z. A. Ragozin.

GERMANY. S. Baring-Gould.

NORWAY. Hjalmar H. Boyesen.

SPAIN. Rev. E. E. and Susan Hale.

HUNGARY. Prof. A. Vambery.

CARTHAGE. Prof. Alfred J. Church.

THE SARACENS. Arthur Gilman.

THE MOORS IN SPAIN. Stanley Lane-Poole.

THE NORMANS. Sarah Orne Jewett.

PERSIA. S. G. W. Benjamin.

ANCIENT EGYPT. Prof. Geo. Rawlinson.

ALEXANDER'S EMPIRE. Prof. J. P. Mahaffy.

ASSYRIA. Z. A. Ragozin.

THE GOTHS. Henry Bradley.

IRELAND. Hon. Emily Lawless.

TURKEY. Stanley Lane-Poole.

MEDIA, BABYLON, AND PERSIA. Z. A. Ragozin.

MEDIAEVAL FRANCE. Prof. Gustave Masson.

HOLLAND. Prof. J. Thorold Rogers.

MEXICO. Susan Hale.

PH[OE]NICIA. Geo. Rawlinson.

THE HANSA TOWNS. Helen Zimmern.

EARLY BRITAIN. Prof. Alfree J. Church.

THE BARBARY CORSAIRS. Stanley Lane-Poole.

RUSSIA. W. R. Morfill.

THE JEWS UNDER ROME. W. D. Morrison.

SCOTLAND. John Mackintosh.

SWITZERLAND. R. Stead and Mrs. A. Hug.

PORTUGAL. H. Morse Stephens.

THE BYZANTINE EMPIRE. C. W. C. Oman.

SICILY. E. A. Freeman.

THE TUSCAN REPUBLICS. Bella Duffy.

POLAND. W. R. Morfill.

PARTHIA. Geo. Rawlinson.

JAPAN. David Murray.

THE CHRISTIAN RECOVERY OF SPAIN. H. E. Watts.

AUSTRALASIA. Greville Tregarthen.

SOUTHERN AFRICA. Geo. M. Theal.

VENICE. Alethea Wiel.

THE CRUSADES. T. S. Archer and C. L. Kingsford.

VEDIC INDIA. Z. A. Ragozin.

BOHEMIA. C. E. Maurice.

CANADA. J. G. Bourinot.

THE BALKAN STATES. William Miller.

BRITISH RULE IN INDIA. R. W. Frazer.

MODERN FRANCE. Andre Le Bon.

THE BUILDING OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE. Alfred T. Story.


 [Illustration]




Heroes of the Nations.

EDITED BY

EVELYN ABBOTT, M.A.,

FELLOW OF BALLIOL COLLEGE, OXFORD.


A series of biographical studies of the lives and work of a number
of representative historical characters about whom have gathered the
great traditions of the Nations to which they belonged, and who have
been accepted, in many instances, as types of the several National
ideals. With the life of each typical character will be presented a
picture of the National conditions surrounding him during his career.

The narratives are the work of writers who are recognized authorities
on their several subjects, and, while thoroughly trustworthy as
history, will present picturesque and dramatic "stories" of the Men
and of the events connected with them.

To the Life of each "Hero" will be given one duodecimo volume,
handsomely printed in large type, provided with maps and adequately
illustrated according to the special requirements of the several
subjects. The volumes will be sold separately as follows:

 Large 12 deg., cloth extra                $1 50
 Half morocco, uncut edges, gilt top    1 75

The following are now ready:

 "Nelson, and the Naval Supremacy of England." By W. CLARK RUSSELL,
   author of "The Wreck of the Grosvenor," etc.

 "Gustavus Adolphus and the Struggle of Protestantism for Existence."
   By C. R. L. FLETCHER, M.A., late Fellow of All Souls College.

 "Pericles, and the Golden Age of Athens." By EVELYN ABBOTT, M.A.

 "Theodoric the Goth, the Barbarian Champion of Civilisation." By
   THOMAS HODGKIN, author of "Italy and Her Invaders," etc.

 "Sir Philip Sidney, and the Chivalry of England." By H. R. FOX
   BOURNE, author of "The Life of John Locke," etc.

 "Julius Caesar, and the Organisation of the Roman Empire." By W. WARD
   FOWLER, M.A., Fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford.

 "John Wyclif, Last of the Schoolmen and First of the English
   Reformers." By LEWIS SERGEANT, author of "New Greece," etc.

 "Napoleon, Warrior and Ruler, and the Military Supremacy of
   Revolutionary France." By W. O'CONNOR MORRIS.

 "Henry of Navarre, and the Huguenots of France." By P. F. WILLERT,
   M.A., Fellow of Exeter College, Oxford.

 "Cicero, and the Fall of the Roman Republic." By J. L.
   STRACHAN-DAVIDSON, M.A., Fellow of Balliol College, Oxford.

 "Abraham Lincoln, and the Downfall of American Slavery." By NOAH
   BROOKS.

 "Prince Henry (of Portugal) the Navigator, and the Age of
   Discovery." By C. R. BEAZLEY, Fellow of Merton College, Oxford.

 "Julian the Philosopher, and the Last Struggle of Paganism against
   Christianity." By ALICE GARDNER.

 "Louis XIV., and the Zenith of the French Monarchy." By ARTHUR
   HASSALL, M.A., Senior Student of Christ Church College, Oxford.

 "Charles XII., and the Collapse of the Swedish Empire, 1682-1719."
   By R. NISBET BAIN.

 "Lorenzo de' Medici, and Florence in the 15th Century." By EDWARD
   ARMSTRONG, M.A., Fellow of Queens's College, Oxford.

 "Jeanne d'Arc. Her Life and Death." By MRS. OLIPHANT.

 "Christopher Columbus. His Life and Voyages." By WASHINGTON IRVING.

 "Robert the Bruce, and the Struggle for Scottish Independence." By
   SIR HERBERT MAXWELL, M.P.

 "Hannibal, Soldier, Statesman. Patriot; and the Crisis of the
   Struggle between Carthage and Rome." By W. O'CONNOR MORRIS, Sometime
   Scholar of Oriel College, Oxford.

 "Ulysses S. Grant, and the Period of National Preservation and
   Reconstruction, 1822-1885." By LIEUT.-COL. WILLIAM CONANT CHURCH.

 "Robert E. Lee, and the Southern Confederacy, 1807-1870." By PROF.
   HENRY ALEXANDER WHITE, of the Washington and Lee University.

 "The Cid Campeador, and the Waning of the Crescent in the West." By
   H. BUTLER CLARKE, Fellow of St. John's College, Oxford.

 /To be followed by/:

 "Moltke, and the Military Supremacy of Germany." By SPENCER
   WILKINSON, London University.

 "Bismarck. The New German Empire, How it Arose and What it
   Displaced." By W. J. HEADLAM, M.A., Fellow of King's Collage.

 "Judas Maccabaeus, the Conflict between Hellenism and Hebraism." By
   ISRAEL ABRAHAMS, author of the "Jews of the Middle Ages."

 "Henry V., the English Hero King." By CHARLES L. KINGSFORD,
   joint-author of the "Story of the Crusades."


G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS. NEW YORK AND LONDON.




TRANSCRIBER'S ENDNOTE.

In the List of Illustrations, corrected the page number for "OLD
HOUSES, DOL" to "265", and for the entry "FUNERAL OF EADWARD THE
CONFESSOR", to "273".

Page 32: changed "literture" to "literature".

Page 40: "whenever-they" to "whenever they".

Page 101: "separted" to "separated".

Page 142: the beginning quotation mark removed from "The medical and
philosophical schools ..."

Page 145: "almosts without number," to "almost without number,".

Page 161: opening quotation mark inserted before "First" in "The
candidates swore: First,".

Page 174: the close quotation mark is missing from the paragraph
beginning '1002. "In this year ...'. It is not entirely clear where it
belongs; perhaps after 'evil.', where it has been placed.

Page 178: The passage "all England south of the Thames--East Anglia and
Essex and London" seems wrong, as these areas are mostly north of the
Thames.

Page 183: "out-grown" is retained, although "outgrown" appears in five
places.

Page 222: "wordly" to "worldly".

Page 247: "chieftan" to "chieftain".

Page 320: "wordliness" to "worldliness".

Page 325: changed comma to period after "as the winter wore away", and
period to comma after "was the most conspicuous event".

Page 370: the page number for "Mantes" is changed to 337.

Page 371: "victory ta Varaville" changed to "victory at Varaville".

Page 372: "war with Burgundy, 106, with Dreux, 108;" to "war with
Burgundy, 106; war with Dreux, 108;". Also changed "Cnut's likeness
to, 157; 278. 282, 306" to "Cnut's likeness to, 157, 278, 282, 306".

Page 373: "character, of, 64;" to "character of, 64;".





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Normans, by Sarah Orne Jewett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NORMANS ***

***** This file should be named 44920.txt or 44920.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/4/9/2/44920/

Produced by RichardW, sp1nd and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
