The Project Gutenberg eBook, Allied Cookery, by Grace Glergue Harrison and
Gertrude Clergue


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Allied Cookery
       British, French, Italian, Belgian, Russian


Author: Grace Glergue Harrison and Gertrude Clergue



Release Date: February 17, 2014  [eBook #44947]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALLIED COOKERY***


E-text prepared by Emmy and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/cu31924003580838





ALLIED COOKERY

British
French
Italian
Belgian
Russian

Arranged by

GRACE CLERGUE HARRISON and GERTRUDE CLERGUE

_To Aid the War Sufferers in the Devastated Districts of France_

Introduction by
Hon. Raoul Dandurand
Commandeur de la Legion d'Honneur

Prefaced by
Stephen Leacock and Ella Wheeler Wilcox







G. P. Putnam's Sons
New York and London
The Knickerbocker Press
1916

Copyright, 1916
by
Grace Clergue Harrison

The Knickerbocker Press, New York




THE PURPOSE


of this little book is to procure funds in aid of the farmers in that
part of France which was devastated by the invasion of the German
armies and subsequently regained by the French.

This region, in part, one of the most fertile in France, and which
sustained hundreds of thousands of inhabitants engaged in agricultural
pursuits, has been left desolate, with all buildings destroyed and all
farming implements, cattle, and farm products taken off by the invaders
for military uses.

Its old men, women, and children, who survived the slaughter of
invasion, are now undertaking the labour of restoring their farms. To
help in the supply of seeds, farm implements, and other simple but
essential means of enabling these suffering people to regain by their
own efforts the necessaries of life, the compilers offer to the public
this book on Cookery.

Its proceeds will be distributed by Le Secours National, of France,
whose effective organization assures its best and most helpful
disposition.

An acknowledgment must be made for the kind assistance of friends
in securing desirable recipes. There are some that will be novel to
many households, and all of them will give satisfaction when exactly
followed.

The compilers will gladly answer requests for information from any one
wishing further to support this cause.

                                          MRS. WM. LYNDE HARRISON,
                                               Milestone House,
                                               Branford, Conn.

                                          MISS GERTRUDE CLERGUE,
                                            597 Sherbrooke Street West,
                                                Montreal.




CONTENTS


                                              PAGE
  INTRODUCTION. _Hon. R. Dandurand_              5
  ALLIED FOOD. _Stephen Leacock_                 8
  FOREWORD. _Ella Wheeler Wilcox_               12
  CHARLOTTE DE POMMES. _Elise Jusserand_        14

  SOUPS
    Bouillabaisse                               15
    Borcht                                      16
    Mushroom Soup                               17
    Serbian Chicken Soup                        17
    Vegetable Soup                              18
    Lettuce Soup                                19
    Pot-au-Feu                                  19
    Onion Soup                                  20
    Soldiers' Soup                              21
    Stschi                                      21
    Buraki                                      22
    Lentil Soup                                 22
    Black Bean Soup                             23
    Fish Chowder                                23

  FISH
    Roast Oysters                               24
    Raie au Beurre Noir                         24
    Salmon Tidnish                              25
    Aubergine Aux Crevettes                     25
    Lobster Beaugency                           26
    Scallops en Brochette                       26
    Filet of Sole Florentine                    26
    Salmon Teriyaki                             27
    Filet of Sole Marguery                      28
    Codfish with Green Peppers                  28
    Herring Roes, Baked                         29
    Creamed Fish                                30
    Mousseline of Fish                          30
    Haddock Mobile                              31
    Kedgaree                                    31
    Pickled Salmon                              31

  MEATS AND ENTREES
    Russian Pirog Kulbak                        33
    Carbonade Flamande                          33
    Blanquette of Veal                          34
    Blanquette of Chicken                       35
    Stracotto                                   35
    Duck St. Albans                             36
    Boned Turkey                                37
    Chicken and Cabbage                         37
    Leg-of-Mutton Pie                           38
    Russian Steaks                              38
    Another Russian Method for Beef-Steaks      39
    Stewed Kidneys                              39
    Chicken                                     40
    Baked Ham                                   40
    Rillettes de Tours                          41
    Rice and Mutton                             42
    Baked Eggs                                  42
    Tripe                                       42
    Tripe, Italian                              43
    Timbale of Partridges                       44
    Stewed Hare                                 44
    Indian Pilau                                46
    Stuffed Beef Steaks                         47
    Podvarak                                    47
    Ribs of Pork en Casserole                   48
    Salmis de Lapin                             48
    Sheep's Head                                49
    Macaroni Pie                                50
    Kidney and Mushrooms                        51

  CURRIES
    Indian Curry                                52
    Fricassee of Chicken                        52
    A Simpler Indian Curry                      53
    Another Curry Sauce                         54

  PASTES, CHEESE, ETC.
    Macaroni with Cheese                        56
    Macaroni                                    56
    Polenta with Cheese                         57
    Lentil Croquettes                           57
    Risotto                                     58
    Risotto Milanaise                           58
    Ravioli                                     59
    Egg Coquilles, with Spinach                 60
    Pirog of Mushrooms                          60
    Paste for Russian Pirog                     60
    Eggs Romanoff                               61
    Oeufs Poches Ivanhoe                        61
    Cheese Puffs                                61
    Moskva Cheesecakes                          62
    Cheese Fritters                             62
    Cheese Pudding                              63
    Chicory or Endive                           63
    Stewed Cos Lettuces                         63
    Asparagus                                   64
    Celery Croquettes                           65
    Ragout of Celery                            66
    Stuffed Onions                              67
    Onions, Venetian Style                      67
    Fried Pumpkin or Squash                     68
    Cucumbers                                   68
    Sarma                                       69
    Polenta Pasticciata                         70
    Fried Bread with Raisins                    71
    Polenta Croquettes                          72
    Rice with Mushrooms                         72
    Timbales of Bread with Parmesan Sauce       73

  SAUCES
    Cheese Sauce                                74
    Tomato Sauce                                74
    Another Tomato Sauce                        74
    Mustard Sauce                               75
    A Meat Sauce                                75
    Another Meat Sauce                          76
    Lombarda Sauce                              76
    Horse-Radish Sauce                          77
    Gnocchi di Semolina                         77

  SALADS
    Italian Salad                               79
    Lettuce Salad                               79
    Sandwich Dressing                           79
    Salad Dressing                              80
    Cheese Dressing                             80

  VEGETABLES
    Potato Cakes                                81
    Petits Pois                                 81
    String Beans                                81
    Red Cabbage                                 82
    Cabbage with Cheese Sauce                   82
    Glazed Onions                               83
    Spinach Souffle                             83

  PUDDINGS, CAKES, ETC.
    French Pancakes                             84
    Crepes Suzette                              84
    Sauce for Crepes Suzette                    84
    Another Suzette Pancake                     85
    Kisel                                       85
    Carrot Pudding                              86
    Old English Plum Pudding                    86
    Banana Trifle                               87
    Cream Tart                                  87
    Chocolate Pudding                           88
    Fried Apples                                89
    Orange Pudding                              89
    Oat Cakes                                   90
    Tea-Cakes                                   91
    Tea Pancakes                                91
    Canadian War Cake                           92
    Serbian Cake                                92
    Ravioli Dolce                               93
    Chestnuts                                   93
    Gnocchi of Milk                             94
    Almond Pudding                              94
    Chestnut Fritters                           95
    Chestnut Cream                              95
    Tapioca Pudding                             96
    Ginger Ice-Cream                            97
    Almond Cake                                 97
    Queen Cakes                                 98
    Francescas                                  98
    Oat Cakes                                   98
    Gateau Polonais                             99
    Anise Cakes                                 99
    Gordon Highlander Gingerbread              100
    Scotch Short Bread                         100
    Cramique                                   100
    Gaufres                                    101
    Pets de Nonne                              101
    Brioche de la Lune                         102
    Victoria Scones                            103
    Nut Bread                                  103
    Bran Muffins                               103
    Scotch Scones                              104
    Blinni                                     104
    Baked Hominy                               104
    Marrons Glaces                             105
    Small Cucumber Pickles                     105
    Preserved Strawberries                     106
    Rhubarb Jelly                              107
    Tomato Soup for Canning                    107
    Budo Cup                                   108




INTRODUCTION


    COMITE FRANCE-AMERIQUE
      (Section Canadienne)
    Chambre-31, Edifice "Duluth"
                                           Montreal, March 2, 1916.

    MRS. WM. LYNDE HARRISON,
    MISS G. CLERGUE.

    Mesdames:

Vous desirez faire quelque chose pour venir en aide aux victimes de la
guerre en France et, dans ce but, vous publiez un livre utile dont vous
faites tous les frais d'impression de maniere a ce que le produit total
de la vente soit verse au Comite de Secours National de Paris.

Le but que vous vous proposez est fort louable car les besoins sont
grands au pays de France. On a fait dernierement le recensement des
refugies belges et francais chasses de leurs demeures et recueillis
dans les diverses communes de France. Ils sont plus de 900,000 et
les allemands out renvoye en France par la voie de la Suisse plus
de 100,000 prisonniers--vieillards, femmes et enfants--qu'ils ne
voulaient plus nourrir et qui out ete rendus, denues de tout, a la
charite publique. Tous ces malheureux doivent etre vetus de la tete
aux pieds. Les Etats-Unis et le Canada out heureusement fait leur part
pour soulager cette grande infortune, grace aux appels reiteres de
l'American Relief Clearing House de Paris et de New-York et des divers
comites canadiens du Secours National de Paris, organises par le Comite
France-Amerique.

Les hopitaux francais reclament aussi, a bon droit, notre sollicitude,
car c'est la France qui supporte le plus fort de l'assaut teuton
sur la frontiere de l'Ouest et ses blesses doivent depasser le demi
million. Devant cette grande detresse la Croix-Rouge americaine et
la Croix-Rouge canadienne ne sont pas demeurees indifferentes et
des milliers de caisses out ete envoyees aux hopitaux francais.
Malheureusement la liste des calamites qui out fondu sur la France ne
s'arrete pas la: tout le territore envahi par les troupes allemandes,
dont elles out ete chassees, qui va de la Marne a l'Aisne, et que
couvraient des centaines de villages prosperes dans une des regions
les plus fertiles et les plus riches de la France, a ete ravage
par les troupes ennemies. Les proprietaires de ces milliers de
fermes--vieillards, femmes et enfants--sont revenus a leurs foyers
detruits pour relever leurs maisons et faire produire a la terre la
nourriture dont ils ont besoin. Ils ont tout perdu: maisons, meubles,
vetements, animaux, instruments aratoires. Ce sont ces derniers qui
attirent particulierement votre commiseration. En face de cette misere
effroyable tous les coeurs s'emeuvent et chacun veut apporter son
aide a ces braves gens. Vous donnez au public une occasion facile et
agreable de faire ce geste en mettant a sa portee un livre interessant
dont le prix ira soulager les nobles victimes de la guerre en France.

Je vous souhaite une forte recette. Veuillez agreer, mesdames, avec mes
felicitations, l'expression de mes sentiments distingues.

                                       [Illustration: R. Dandurand]

                                  _President du Comite France-Amerique
                                         Section Canadienne._




ALLIED FOOD


As soon as I heard of the proposed plan of this book I became
positively frantic to co-operate in it. The idea of a cookery book
which should contain Allied Recipes and Allied Recipes only, struck me
at once as one of the finest ideas of the day.

For myself I have felt for some time past that the time is gone, and
gone for ever, when I can eat a German Pretzel or a Wiener Schnitzel.

It gives me nothing but remorse to remember that there were days when
I tolerated, I may even say I enjoyed, Hungarian Goulash. I could not
eat it now. As for Bulgarian Boosh or Turkish Tch'kk, the mere names of
them make me ill.

For me, for the rest of my life, it must be Allied Food or no food at
all. One may judge, therefore, with what delight I received the news
of this patriotic enterprise. I at once telegraphed to the editors the
following words:

"Am willing to place at your service without charge entire knowledge of
cookery. Forty-six years' practical experience."

To this telegram I received no reply. I am aware that there is, even
in cooking circles, a certain amount of professional jealousy. It may
be that I had overpassed the line of good taste in offering my entire
knowledge. I should have only offered part of it.

I therefore resolved that instead of writing the whole book as I had at
first intended, I would content myself with sending to the editors, a
certain number of selected recipes of a kind calculated to put the book
in a class all by itself.

I sent, in all, fifty recipes. I regret to say that after looking over
the pages of the book with the greatest care, and after looking also on
the back of them, I do not find my recipes included in it. The obvious
conclusion is that while this book was in the press my recipes were
stolen out of it.

The various dishes that I had selected were of so distinctive a
character and the art involved in their preparation so entirely
_recherche_ that it seems a pity that they should be altogether lost.
They contained a certain _je ne sais quoi_ which would have marked them
out as emphatically the perquisite of the few. To say that they were
dishes for a king is to understate the fact.

It is therefore merely in the public interest and from no sense of
personal vanity that I reproduce the substance of one or two of them in
this preface. There was a whole section, for example, on Eggs, which I
am extremely loath to lose. It showed how by holding an egg down under
boiling water till it is exhausted, it may be first cooked and then be
passed under a flat iron until it becomes an Egg Pancake. It may be
then given a thin coat of varnish and served in a railway restaurant
for years and years.

I had also an excellent recipe for Rum Omelette. It read: "Take a
dipper full of rum and insert an omelette in it. Serve anywhere in
Ontario." I am convinced that this recipe alone would have been worth
its weight in rum.

But it would be childish of me to lay too much stress on my own
personal disappointment or regret. When I realized what had happened
I felt at once that my co-operation in this book must take some other
form. I therefore sent to the editors a second telegram which read:

"Am willing to eat free of charge all dishes contained in volume."

This offer was immediately accepted, and I am happy to assure readers
of this book that I have eaten each and every one of the preparations
in the pages that follow. To prevent all doubt I make this statement
under oath. I had intended to make merely an honest statement of the
fact but my friends tell me that a statement under oath is better in
such a case than a mere honest statement.

                                                   Stephen Leacock




FOREWORD

    God what a world! if men in street and mart
    Felt that same impulse of the human heart
    Which makes them in the hour of flame and flood
    Rise to the meaning of true Brotherhood!


THE heart of the world throbs with sympathy for the suffering women and
children in the war-devastated countries of Europe. He who does not
long to be a helper in this hour of vast need and unprecedented anguish
must be made of something more adamant than stone. America owes a large
debt to the culinary artists of Europe. Without their originality and
finished skill, in the creation of savory dishes for the table, the
art of entertaining in our land could never have attained its present
perfection.

Ever ready to incorporate in her own methods whatever other countries
had to offer as improvements, America has received from the epicurean
chefs of Europe conspicuous benefits. In every menu from coast to
coast, these facts make themselves evident. It is then fitting, that
at this crucial hour, we repay something of the debt we owe by
making this little cooking manual an instant and decided success,
knowing the proceeds from its sale will relieve such distress as we
in our sheltered homes can scarcely picture by the greatest effort of
imagination.

    Our souls should be vessels receiving
    The waters of love for relieving
      The sorrows of men.
    For here lies the pleasure of living:
    In taking God's bounties and giving
      The gifts back again.
                    Ella Wheeler Wilcox




CHARLOTTE DE POMMES


Prendre des pommes reinettes epepinees, emincees et sautees au beurre
avec quelques pincees du sucre et une demi-gousse de vanille.

De cette fondue de pommes qui ne doit pas etre trop cuite, on garnit
un moule a charlotte dont les parois auront ete revetues d'etroites
tranches de mie de pain trempees dans du beurre epure et saupoudre de
sucre.

Ces tranches de pain doivent etre placees dans le moule, se
chevauchant, les unes sur les autres.

Garnir le fond du moule d'une abaisse de pain de mie egalement beurree
et saupoudree de sucre.

Recouvrir la charlotte d'une abaisse prise dans la croute du pain de
mie afin de la proteger contre l'action trop vive du calorique.

Faire cuire la charlotte au four pendant 35 ou 40 minutes; la laisser
reposer pendant quelques minutes a l'etuve avant de la demouler, et la
servir avec une sauce a l'abricot, parfumee au Kirsch.

                                                   Elise Jusserand

    _Ambassade de France aux Etats-Unis._
               March 2, 1916.




Allied Cookery




Soups


BOUILLABAISSE

(The national dish of Marseille)

    Indeed, a rich and savory stew 'tis;
      And true philosophers, methinks,
    Who love all sorts of natural beauties,
      Should love good victuals and good drinks.
    And Cordelier or Benedictine
      Might gladly, sure, his lot embrace,
    Nor find a fast day too afflicting,
      Which served him up a Bouillabaisse.
                                   THACKERAY.

Cut off the best parts of 3 medium-sized flounders and 6 butterfish and
put them aside; the remaining parts of the fish--skin, bones, heads,
etc.--boil in water 20 minutes; this should make 1 quart of fish stock
when strained.

Put 3 tablespoons of olive oil in stew-pan, add 4 chopped onions, 3
cloves of chopped garlic, a few sprigs of parsley, 1 bayleaf, 1/4
teaspoon fennel, 1/4 teaspoon saffron, 1/2 teaspoon whole black pepper
ground, salt, fry until golden brown. Then add 3 or 4 tomatoes and a
pimento, 1/3 quart of white wine, 2/3 quart of water, boil 15 minutes.
Strain and return to the kettle; add the flounder and butterfish in
pieces as large as possible, 1/2 lb. of codfish tongues, 1 lb. of eel;
boil 10 minutes, add the fish stock, 1 lb. of scallops, boil 10 more
minutes. Rub together 1 oz. of flour and 1 oz. of butter; drop this in
the soup in little balls five minutes before serving. Then put in 1/2
lb. of shrimps and 1 large boiled lobster cut in large pieces. Rub with
garlic some round slices of bread and serve the Bouillabaisse on them.

This will serve 12 persons.

One is not able to obtain here the varieties of fish of the Midi, but
the above will make an excellent substitute.


BORCHT

(Russian)

Make a clear, light-coloured, highly seasoned stock of beef and veal or
of chicken. Strain and remove all fat. A Russian gourmet will say that
really good Borcht should be made with 2 ducks and a chicken in the
stock. Cut up some red beets and boil them in the stock; about 4 large
beets to 8 cups of stock. When the beets are cooked squeeze in enough
lemon-juice to give it a slightly acid flavour, then clear by stirring
in the whipped white of an egg and bringing it to the boiling point.
Strain carefully. Serve in cups with a spoonful of sour cream. If the
colour fails to be bright red, a few drops of vegetable colouring may
be added.


MUSHROOM SOUP

(French)

Three-quarters lb. of fresh mushrooms, 1 cup of water, 2 tablespoons
of butter, 2 tablespoons of flour, 4 cups of scalded milk, 1/2 cup of
cream, a few gratings of nutmeg, salt, and pepper.

Put the mushrooms in a stew-pan with 1 tablespoon of butter, a few
gratings of nutmeg, salt, and pepper, and 1 cup of water; cook over
a good fire 20 minutes, then pass through a coarse sieve. Cream 1
tablespoon of butter with 2 tablespoons of flour, add this to 4 cups of
scalded milk. When this thickens to a thin cream, add the mushrooms;
just before serving add 1/2 cup of cream.


SERBIAN CHICKEN SOUP

Cut a fowl in four or five pieces. Put in a kettle with about one
quart of water to each pound of fowl. When half cooked add salt and a
carrot, parsnip, some celery and parsley, an onion, and a few whole
black peppers.

In a separate pan put a tablespoon of lard and 1/2 tablespoon of flour.
Stir this until it is brown and add some paprika, according to taste.
Add this to the soup. Let it boil a few minutes. Just before serving
the soup stir in well the yolk of an egg beaten with three tablespoons
of cream.


VEGETABLE SOUP

(Minestrone alla Milanese)

One-half quart of stock, 2 slices of lean pork, or a ham bone; 2
tomatoes, fresh or canned; 1 cup of rice, 2 tablespoons of dried beans,
1 tablespoon of peas, fresh or canned; 2 onions.

Put into the stock the slices of pork, cut into small pieces; or, if
desired, a ham bone may be substituted for the pork. Add the tomatoes,
cut into small pieces also, the onions, in small pieces, and the rice.
Boil all together until the rice is cooked. Then add the beans and the
peas and cook a little longer. The soup is ready when it is thick. If
desired, this chowder can be made with fish broth instead of the stock,
and with the addition of shrimps which have been taken from their
shells.

This dish can be served hot or cold.


LETTUCE SOUP

(Zuppa di Lattuga)

One small lettuce, meat stock, 2 potatoes, the leaves of a head of
celery, 2 tablespoons of peas, fresh or canned, 1 heaping tablespoon of
flour.

Put the potatoes, cold boiled, into the stock when it boils, add the
celery leaves, the lettuce chopped up, the peas, and the flour mixed
well with a little cold stock or water. Boil for one hour and a half,
and serve with little squares of fried bread.


POT-AU-FEU

(French family soup)

Ingredients.--4 lbs. of brisket of beef, the legs and neck of a fowl,
1/2 a cabbage, 2 leeks, 1 large onion, 2 carrots, a bouquet-garni
(parsley, thyme, bay-leaf), 1 dessert-spoonful of chopped parsley, 4
cloves, 12 peppercorns, 1 tablespoonful of salt, 1/2 lb. of French
bread, 6 quarts of cold water.

Put the meat and water into a stock-pot or boiling pot; let it come
gently to boiling point, and skim well. Wash and clean the vegetables,
stick the cloves in the onion, tie up the cabbage and leeks, and put
all in with the meat. Add the carrots cut into large pieces, the
bouquet-garni, peppercorns, and salt, and let the whole simmer gently
for 4 hours. Just before serving cut the bread into thin slices, place
them in a soup tureen, and add some of the carrot, leeks, and onions
cut into small pieces. Remove the meat from the pot, season the broth
to taste, and strain it into the soup tureen. Sprinkle the chopped
parsley on the top, and serve. The meat and remaining vegetables may be
served as a separate course; they may also be used up in some form for
another meal. Or the meat and vegetables may be served and the broth
put aside and used on the following day as "Croute-au-pot."


ONION SOUP

(Soupe a l'Oignon)

Slice or chop two medium-sized onions; let them colour an instant in 1
oz. of butter; add a tablespoonful of flour; make a brown thickening.
The onions must on no account be allowed to burn. Add 2-1/2 quarts of
water, salt, and a pinch of pepper; stir on the fire until it boils;
let it cook five minutes. Cut some slices of bread very fine (like a
leaf); dry them in an open oven. Place in the tureen a layer of bread,
a layer of grated cheese, until the tureen is half full. Pass the soup
through a sieve into the tureen. Allow a few minutes to well soak the
bread; at the same time the soup must not be allowed to get cold. If
onions are not objected to do not strain them off.


SOLDIERS' SOUP

(Soupe a la Bataille)

Wash well and chop fine a small white cabbage or lettuce (cos
preferred), 1 carrot, 1 turnip, 3 leeks, 1 head of celery. Let these
vegetables take colour for about three minutes in 2 ozs. of good fat
or butter. Add 3 quarts of water and a pinch of salt; let it boil. Add
five raw potatoes cut like the vegetables, a handful of green French
beans cut up, the same quantity of green peas. Cook over a good fire
for two hours. The soup should be quite smooth; if it is not so, beat
it well with a whisk; if too much reduced add more water. Season to
taste; at the last add a little chopped chervil. A bone of ham or the
remains of bacon improve this soup immensely.


STSCHI

(Russian)

Cut up a cabbage, heat in butter, and moisten with 3 tablespoons of
stock. Add 2 lbs. of beef brisket, cut into large dice, 3 pints of
water, and cook 1-1/2 hours. Chop up 2 onions, 2 leeks, and a parsnip
in small dice, add 2 tablespoons of sour cream and 1 tablespoon of
flour. Add this mixture to the soup about 1/2 hour before serving.
Small buckwheat cakes are served with it.


BURAKI

(Russian)

Cut in cubes 4 or 5 lbs. of fat beef in enough water to make a good
bouillon and boil it well. Cut some raw beets into small thin slices
about an inch long, chop some onion, and with a tablespoon of butter
stew them until tender and somewhat brown; add to the beef bouillon 1
spoonful of flour mixed with 2 spoonsful of vinegar, the beets, and
onion and let all this cook in the oven until the beets and beef are
quite tender. It should be closely covered. Sausages and some pieces
of ham may be added if wished. Before you serve the bouillon, add some
sour cream.


LENTIL SOUP

(French)

Soak overnight 1 cup of lentils; the next day boil them until tender
enough to pass them through a sieve with 2 onions, 2 carrots, 2 leeks,
1 quart of water, 1 dessert-spoonful of salt. Cut some slices of bread
and place them in the bottom of a tureen and pour over them a little
olive oil. When ready to serve pour the strained soup over the slices
of bread.


BLACK BEAN SOUP

(Russian)

Soak 1 cup of black beans in cold water several hours. Pour off the
water and boil in 1 quart of fresh water until soft enough to rub
through a strainer; if it boils away, add more water to cover them.
There should be about 1 pint when strained. Add the same quantity of
stock or water and put on to boil again. When boiling, add 1 tablespoon
of corn-starch in a little cold water and cook 5 to 8 minutes. Season
with salt, pepper, a little mustard, juice of 1 lemon, or wine; serve
with fried bread cut in little squares and slices of hard boiled egg or
lemon.


FISH CHOWDER

(New England)

Four lbs. of fresh cod or haddock, 2 onions, 6 potatoes, 1/4 lb. of
salt pork, salt, pepper.

Put the onions and potatoes, sliced in layers, in a kettle, then a
layer of fish until all is used. Fry the pork, cut in small pieces,
brown, take the fat and pour over all. Cover with boiling water and
cook 20 minutes. Then mix 2 spoonsful of flour with a cup of cream,
stir into the boiling chowder, boil up, and serve.

Clams may be substituted for fish.




Fish


ROAST OYSTERS

Arrange the oysters on the half-shell in a pan of coarse salt. Squeeze
a little lemon-juice over each. Sprinkle with very little fine buttered
bread-crumbs and place on each oyster bits of butter the size of a pea.
Put under the grill until lightly browned. The flame must be over the
oysters and care taken that they are not over-cooked.

                                A. A. B., Chef, Mount Royal Club.


RAIE AU BEURRE NOIR

Boil a piece of skate slowly in well salted water. When done, remove
the skin and sprinkle with some blanched, that is, parboiled, capers.
Pour over the fish a good quantity of butter which has been well
browned in a frying pan; then a little boiling vinegar. Shake the
platter once to mix the sauce together.

It may not commonly be known that the skate, so neglected in this
country, takes very well the place of the delectable raie of Europe.

                                   H. S., Chef, Ritz-Carlton Hotel.


SALMON TIDNISH

(Canadian)

Scrape the fish and wash it. Rub in a tablespoon of salt; place the
fish in a baking pan and score it across 4 or 5 times. Mix 1 cup of
fine bread-crumbs, a dessert-spoon of minced parsley, 1/8 teaspoon of
whole black pepper ground, 2 dessert spoons of salt, milk to moisten
well, rub over the fish, and put good-sized lumps of butter in the
gashes. Cover the bottom of the pan with milk and put in a rather hot
oven, basting every 10 or 15 minutes with the milk, which must be
renewed in the pan often. When cooked lift from the pan onto a tin
sheet, then slide carefully into the dish on which it is to be served;
garnish with lemon and hard-boiled eggs, the gravy in the pan served
with it. A piece of halibut may be cooked in the same manner.


AUBERGINE AUX CREVETTES

Scoop out one egg-plant, leaving shell about half an inch thick;
parboil this and the shell for ten minutes. Chop the pulp and season
with salt and pepper. Cut up an onion, brown in 1/4 cup of butter, add
one cup of chopped, cooked, shrimp meat, fry for five minutes, then add
the chopped egg-plant; cook all together for ten minutes more. Add 1
egg and 1/2 cup of bread-crumbs, fill shell with the mixture, cover
with bread-crumbs, dot with butter, and brown in the oven.


LOBSTER BEAUGENCY

(St. James's Club specialty)

Boil a medium-sized lobster for 20 minutes; when cool, split in two.
Remove flesh from shells and cut in dice. Fry in butter, add a glass of
sherry. Add 2 tablespoonsful of cream sauce and 1/2 pint of cream, let
it boil slowly for 10 minutes; in the meantime have 2 yolks of eggs, a
few spoonsful of cream, an ounce of butter, mix slowly with the lobster
and season to taste. Fill shells to the brim with this preparation and
bake in oven.


SCALLOPS EN BROCHETTE

Alternate scallops and thin slices of bacon on skewers; place upright
on the rack in the oven; bake until the scallops are well browned.
Served on slices of buttered toast.


FILET OF SOLE FLORENTINE

After removing the skin put the fish in a plate with a slice of onion,
a little parsley, and a spoonful of butter, 1/2 cup of white wine,
salt, pepper, and cook for 10 minutes slowly; when cooked remove the
fish, take a long porcelain dish in which you lay some boiled spinach
fried a minute in butter with a suspicion of minced onion. Put the fish
on top of this spinach, add the juice of the fish in the plate to a
good white sauce, a spoonful of grated cheese, a pinch of cayenne, and
cover the fish with this sauce, put in oven, brown nicely and serve in
the same dish.

Any fine white fish may be similarly treated.


SALMON TERIYAKI

(Japanese)

Mix well together 1/2 cup of Japanese Shoyu, and 1 tablespoonful of
Mirin; put a salmon on the grill, and when nearly done spread the sauce
on the salmon with a brush freely, then put back on the grill and cook
until it browns. When that side is done, cook the other side the same
way.

NOTE.--Japanese Shoyu is made of wheat and beans; it may be obtained in
New York or in any city where there is a large Japanese Colony. Mirin
is cooking wine. These are most important ingredients for Japanese
cooking. Chinese sauce may be used instead of Shoyu which may be
obtained at any Chinese restaurant. Sauterne may be used instead of
Mirin in which case add 1 teaspoonful of sugar.


FILET OF SOLE MARGUERY

Poach the filet of sole or flounder in fish stock; pour over the dish a
rich white wine sauce garnished with shrimps and mussels and glaze in a
very hot oven.


CODFISH WITH GREEN PEPPERS

(Italian)

Remove the skin and bones from one-half pound of salted codfish which
has been soaked. Cut the codfish into small squares. Then dip it again
into fresh water, and put the squares onto a napkin to dry. The fish
may either be left as it is, or, before proceeding, you may roll it in
flour and fry it in lard or oil.

Then take two good-sized green peppers, roast them on top of the stove,
remove the skins and seeds, wash them, dry them, and cut them in narrow
strips. When this is done put three generous tablespoons of olive-oil
into a saucepan with one onion cut up, and fry the onion over a slow
fire. Take two big tomatoes, skin them, remove the seeds and hard
parts, and cut them into small pieces. When the onion has taken a good
colour, add the tomatoes, then add the peppers and a little salt and
pepper. If the sauce is too thick, add a little water. When the peppers
are half cooked, add some chopped-up parsley and the codfish. Cover up
the saucepan and let it simmer until the fish is cooked.


HERRING ROES, BAKED

(Manx)

Eight fresh soft roes, 3 tablespoonsful of thick brown sauce, 1
tablespoonful of lemon-juice, a few drops of anchovy essence, 1-1/2
ozs. of butter, 4 coarsely chopped button mushrooms, 1 very finely
chopped shallot, 1/2 a teaspoonful of finely chopped parsley, lightly
browned breadcrumbs, 8 round or oval china or paper souffle cases.

Brush the inside of the cases with clarified butter. Heat 1 oz. of
butter in a small stew-pan, put in the mushrooms, shallot, and parsley,
fry lightly, then drain off the butter into a saute pan. Add the brown
sauce, lemon-juice, and anchovy essence to the mushrooms, etc., season
to taste, and when hot pour a small teaspoonful into each paper case.
Re-heat the butter in the saute pan, toss the roes gently over the fire
until lightly browned, then place one in each case, and cover them with
the remainder of the sauce. Add a thin layer of bread-crumbs, on the
top place 2 or 3 morsels of butter, and bake in a quick oven for 6 or 7
minutes. Serve as hot as possible.


CREAMED FISH

One and a half cups of flaked halibut, or any cold boiled fish. 2
cups milk, 1/4 cup butter, 1 tablespoon of flour, bit of bayleaf,
dash of mace, sprig of parsley, 1 small onion, 1/2 cup of buttered
bread-crumbs, salt, pepper, 1 tablespoon of sherry.

Scald the milk with the onion, bay-leaf, mace, and parsley; remove the
seasonings, melt the butter, add the flour, salt, pepper, and gradually
the milk. Put the fish in a deep buttered dish (or in individual
dishes). Pour over it the sauce and cover with the buttered crumbs.
Just before taking from the oven make an opening in the crust of crumbs
and put in a tablespoon of sherry.


MOUSSELINE OF FISH

One lb. of raw halibut chopped very finely (any firm white fish can be
used).

Mix the whites of 4 eggs beaten stiff, 1 cup of bread-crumbs, very
fine, 1 cup of cream, 1/4 lb. of almonds cut in fine strips, a pinch
of mace, a little bit of onion juice or, if preferred, 1/4 teaspoonful
of lemon-juice, salt and pepper. Steam in a mould or bake in a pan of
water or in individual moulds for three-quarters of an hour. Serve with
a rich cream, or mushroom, or lobster sauce.

This is good cold in summer with a cucumber sauce or light mayonnaise.


HADDOCK MOBILE

Bone a good sized haddock and cut in pieces 4 inches square, place
them side by side in a deep buttered pan, add salt and pepper; arrange
1 lb. of tomatoes, cut in thick slices, on the pieces of fish, cover
with a thick layer of biscuit crumbs, put good sized lumps of butter at
frequent intervals on the crumbs, baste it often with 1/4 of a cup of
butter in a cup of water. Serve with a thin tomato sauce.


KEDGAREE

Put 1 oz. of butter in a stew-pan; when melted, add 4 oz. of boiled
rice (cold), stir for a minute, then add 8 or 10 oz. of cooked white
fish which should be flaked and free from bones, then add any kind of
fish sauce with the cut-up whites of 2 eggs hard boiled, and when quite
hot, pile on a hot dish and sprinkle over it the 2 yolks of the eggs
which have been passed through a sieve.

This is a good breakfast dish.


PICKLED SALMON

Salmon, 1/2 oz. of whole pepper, 1/2 oz. of whole allspice, 1
teaspoonful of salt, 2 bay-leaves, equal quantities of vinegar and the
liquor in which the fish was boiled.

After the fish comes from table and the bones have been removed, lay it
in a deep dish. Boil the liquor and vinegar with the other ingredients
for 10 minutes, let them stand to get cold, then pour them over the
salmon, and in 12 hours it will be ready for use.




Meats and Entrees


RUSSIAN PIROG KULBAK

Dissolve in a pint of tepid salted water, 1 yeast-cake mixed with
enough flour to make rather a stiff dough and let it rise until double
its size. Add to this 2 eggs and 1/2 lb. of butter. Knead thoroughly.
Put the paste in a warm place and let it rise again to double its size.
Roll it out about 1/2 inch thick and put in a buttered pie dish; cover
with cold boiled rice, then thin slices of smoked roe or smoked fish;
sprinkle over some pepper and nutmeg. The other half of the dough is
to be lapped over the filling and in giving to the Pirog the form of a
loaf close the edges with the white of an egg. When closed, spread it
over with beaten egg and bread-crumbs. Bake it a light brown.


CARBONADE FLAMANDE

In 1 tablespoonful of good drippings brown 2 lbs. of round steak (or
any good part of the beef). Remove the steak and brown 6 chopped onions
in the same fat. Replace the steak in the casserole, add 1 small clove
of garlic, salt, and pepper. Cover over with 1 or 2 slices of bread
that have been spread with French mustard. Add 1-1/2 cups of water and
cook, closely covered, slowly, 3 or 4 hours. Just before removing from
the oven, add 1 small dessert-spoonful of vinegar and I teaspoonful of
sugar to the gravy.


BLANQUETTE OF VEAL

(French)

Take 3 lbs. of veal, cut it in squares (about 2 inches). As this dish
is supposed to be very white, it is sometimes soaked half an hour in
tepid water. Put the pieces of veal into a saucepan; cover with water;
add a large pinch of salt, let it boil, skim. Add 1 onion stuck with
cloves, 1 carrot cut in half, a cupful of white wine, a bouquet of
laurel thyme, parsley, and cook half an hour. Strain the meat and save
the stock.

With 2 oz. of butter and 2 oz. of flour make a white sauce; moisten it
with veal stock, stir over the fire. The sauce must be perfectly smooth
and not thick. Add the meat without the vegetables, continue to cook
it until the meat is tender. The sauce should be reduced by one half.
Thicken at the last moment with 3 yolks of eggs, 1 oz. of butter, and
the juice of a lemon. Arrange the meat on the dish with the sauce.

This dish is sometimes garnished with small round balls of veal made
of raw minced veal seasoned with salt, and pepper, boiled about 1/2 an
hour with the other veal, and then fried in butter. The balls should be
only as big as marbles.


BLANQUETTE OF CHICKEN

(French)

One cold cooked chicken or fowl, 4 fresh mushrooms, the yolks of 2
eggs, 1 pint of chicken broth, salt and pepper to taste. Peel the
mushrooms, cut them into pieces, and simmer in the broth until tender.
Add the chicken sliced into thin delicate pieces. Cook gently until
heated when the beaten yolks of eggs should be stirred in gradually. As
soon as the sauce is smooth and creamy, season with salt and pepper and
a few drops of lemon-juice.


STRACOTTO

Place in a stewpan 5 or 6 lbs. of the round of beef. Cover with water
and allow to simmer until the scum rises. Skim and add a quart of
tomatoes (some people like also a clove of garlic), 5 or 6 onions, some
stalks of celery, 1 or 2 carrots cut in small pieces, salt, and pepper.

Let it cook slowly closely covered about 5 hours. An hour before
serving remove the beef (which is to be placed in a covered dish at the
side of the stove) and strain the gravy.

Cook one cup of rice in this gravy. When the rice is cooked replace the
beef in the stewpan and warm it.

Add 1/2 cup grated cheese and 2 tablespoons of butter to the rice and
pour around the beef on a platter.


DUCK ST. ALBANS

(English)

Roast a fat duck. When cold carve the breast in thin slices. Lay
these carefully aside. Break off the breastbone and cover the carcass
smoothly with the liver farce. Replace the sliced fillets, using a
little of the farce to bind them back into place on the duck. Coat the
whole well with half set aspic jelly.

FARCE.--1 lb. of calf's liver, 2 ozs. of butter, 1 slice of bacon, a
slice of onion, 1 carrot sliced. Fry these carefully and pound in a
mortar. Pass through a wire sieve. Then put in a basin and whisk in 1/2
pint of aspic jelly and a small teacupful of very thick cream. Season
with cayenne pepper and salt. Grapefruit and orange salad is served
with this.


BONED TURKEY

(English)

Bone a raw turkey, spread it flat on a board, season, and cover with
good fresh sausage meat. Lay a well-boiled tongue down the centre
and 2 long strips of fat bacon or ham, almonds, hard-boiled egg,
salt, pepper, and sprinkle over a tablespoonful of brandy. Roll up
carefully, taking care the various strips are not displaced. Tie firmly
in a greased cloth and sew up. Boil gently 2 hours for a large fowl
and 2-1/2 hours for a turkey. When boiled the cloth may need to be
tightened a little. Lay a light weight on the top and when quite cold
glaze with a meat glaze and then a good coating of half set aspic.
Decorate with chopped aspic.


CHICKEN AND CABBAGE

(A dish of Auvergne)

Put about 1/4 of a lb. of salt pork, cut in slices, in the bottom
of a kettle; when a little melted put in a fowl or a chicken or two
partridges stuffed as for roasting. Put in 1 large clove of garlic and
3 large onions sliced, salt and pepper. Dredge with flour, put in a
little water, and cover closely. Dredge and baste the fowl every 15
minutes, adding water each time. Have a cabbage ready cut into four
pieces and put in the kettle 1 hour before the fowl is cooked. A fowl
will take not less than 3 hours and allow 2 hours for a chicken.


LEG-OF-MUTTON PIE

(Canadian)

Butter a pie dish, place in the bottom a few slices of fried salt pork
and then slices of mutton cut from the leg; on top of this, lay slices
of cooked potatoes, season each layer with salt and pepper, minced
parsley and onions fried in butter; pour over some clear gravy. Moisten
the edge of the dish, lay a narrow band of paste, moisten, and cover
the whole with puff-paste, bake in moderate oven 1 hour and 20 minutes.


RUSSIAN STEAKS

Chop 1 lb. of round steak or any good part of the beef, season with
salt and pepper. Add by degrees with a wooden spoon 1/4 lb. of butter.
Roll into fat balls and place in a very hot frying pan. Give 3 minutes
to each side.

Serve with the following sauce: Mix together 2 tablespoonsful of oil
and 1 of butter, 1-1/2 tablespoons of flour, add 2 teaspoonsful of
onion juice, 1 teaspoonful of grated horse-radish, 1/4 teaspoonful of
mixed mustard, salt and pepper, then gradually 1-1/2 cups of stock
(one can use water instead), and cook 3 minutes, then take from the
fire and add 1/4 of a cup of cream and I teaspoonful of lemon-juice.


ANOTHER RUSSIAN METHOD FOR BEEFSTEAKS

Cut the steaks thin, season them with salt and paprika. Colour the
steaks in 2 oz. of butter, but they must not be completely cooked. Chop
up finely 2 onions, place half of the onions in a casserole that can
be sent to table. Arrange the steaks upon it. Sprinkle them with the
remainder of the onions. Throw the gravy from the pan, with stock or
water added, to allow the steaks to be half covered. Cook in the oven
1 or 2 hours in tightly covered casserole. Before serving pour over 1
cupful of sour cream.


STEWED KIDNEYS

(English)

Take away the skin from three lamb kidneys; split them lengthwise in
halves; take out the white nerve from the centre, and cut each half
into small slices. Put 3 ozs. of oil in a pan, colour in it a small
chopped onion, add the sliced kidneys, salt, pepper. Stir with a spoon
briskly over a good fire until all the pieces are equally coloured;
sprinkle with a tablespoonful of flour; mix and stir well. Add a cupful
of wine and one of gravy, stir until boiling. Cook two minutes longer;
taste if well seasoned; at the last add the juice of half a lemon and
chopped parsley.

NOTE.--Mushrooms stewed with the kidneys are an improvement.


CHICKEN

(Serbian)

Put a good slice of salt pork into a saucepan. When it has fried a
little add some chopped parsley root, carrot, onion, and a small clove
of garlic.

Joint the fowl and place it in the pan, add salt and pepper. Cook in
the oven about one hour, then add 3 or 4 peeled tomatoes with the seeds
removed. Continue to add in the pan enough water to baste the fowl
frequently. Cook until the fowl is tender and serve with rice to which
minced cooked ham or bacon has been added. Pour the gravy in the pan
over the chicken.


BAKED HAM

(York fashion)

Soak overnight; in the morning scrub it and trim away any rusty part;
wipe dry; cover the ham with a stiff paste of bread dough an inch
thick and lay upside down in a dripping pan with a little water; allow
in baking 25 minutes to the pound; baste a few times and keep water in
the pan. When a skewer will pierce the thickest part plunge the ham for
1 minute in cold water; remove the crust and outside skin, sprinkle
with brown sugar and fine cracker crumbs, and stick with cloves and
brown in the oven. Serve with a mustard sauce or white wine sauce if
eaten hot.


RILLETTES DE TOURS

(Cretons Canadiens)

Three lbs. shoulder of fresh pork, 3 lbs. cutlets of pork, 1 filet
of pork, 2 pork kidneys, 2 lbs. of kidney fat, 1 pint of water, 3
tablespoons of salt, pepper, and 4 onions minced fine with the pork
fat. Chop the meat into small dice, mince the fat and kidneys very
fine; let all boil gently for 4 hours. About 1/2 hour before removing
from the fire, add 1 teaspoonful of mixed spices and 1/4 lb. fresh
mushrooms cut in large pieces. Line a mould with half-set aspic; when
set, pour in the mixture, pour over more aspic.

This is excellent for a cold supper or can be used as _pate de foie
gras_, and it may be moulded in buttered dishes without the aspic.


A SERBIAN DISH OF RICE AND MUTTON

Cut 5 onions very fine, and 1/4 lb. of lean salt pork, in thin slices.
Put these into a deep pot to cook until the onions are a golden brown.
Add 2 lbs. of lamb or mutton cut in pieces, add salt, pepper, and 3
pimentos; just cover the meat with water and cook gently about an hour,
then add 1/2 cup of rice; cover tightly and let it stew 20 minutes more.


BAKED EGGS

(Bonhomme)

Put in a basin 2 dessert-spoonfuls of flour, a pinch of salt (or sugar
if preferred); break into it 6 whole eggs; beat them up with a pint of
milk. Pour this into a buttered dish, bake in a moderate oven. When the
eggs have acquired a good colour serve directly. If this dish has been
flavoured with salt send grated Parmesan or Gruyere cheese to table
with it.


TRIPE

(Tripe a la Poulette)

Cut in filets or small squares 2 lbs. of tripe well boiled. Chop 1
onion finely; put it in a stew-pan with 1-1/2 ozs. of butter; colour
lightly; mix in a good dessert-spoonful of flour; moisten with stock
and half a glass of white wine to make a thin sauce; season with salt,
pepper, and nutmeg. Add the tripe; cook for an hour; the sauce must be
reduced one-half. At the moment of serving thicken the ragout with two
yolks of eggs mixed with the juice of a lemon, 1 oz. of fresh butter,
and chopped parsley. Garnish the tripe on the dish with six croutons of
bread cut in shape of half a heart and fried in butter.


TRIPE

(Italian)

Two pounds of tripe well cooked; cut in thin strips, put them in a
stew-pan with 2 ozs. of butter, 3 ozs. of chopped mushrooms, salt,
pepper, half a tumblerful of good gravy or stock; cover, and let all
cook until the liquid is entirely reduced. Spread upon a fireproof dish
that has been well buttered, a layer of tripe, a layer of tomato sauce
rather thick; sprinkle each layer with grated cheese; finish with the
tomato. Sprinkle the top with grated cheese and bread-crumbs, then
pour over a little butter melted to oil. Put the dish in the oven for
fifteen minutes.


TIMBALE OF PARTRIDGES

(French)

Mince the raw flesh of two partridges, season, cut some truffles in
small squares, ornament with them a buttered timbale-mould, half fill
it with the farce, make a hollow in the centre of it allowing the farce
to cover the sides of the mould to the top. Have ready a small ragout
of partridges, with slices of foie gras or truffles; the sauce should
be thick, pour it into the empty centre of the mould, cover the whole
with the remainder of the farce, then with a buttered paper. Poach the
timbale in a covered bain-marie for thirty minutes in boiling water.
Turn it upon a dish and pour Madeira sauce round.


STEWED HARE

(Belgian)

After having emptied the hare put aside the liver, carefully separated
from the gall, and the blood in a basin; add to it a few drops of
vinegar to prevent it curdling. Cut the hare into pieces of medium
size; warm 3 ozs. of butter in a stew-pan, add to 1/4 lb. of lean bacon
cut in dice, colour them in the butter, add 3 ozs. of flour, make it
all into a brown thickening, and put in the pieces of hare; moisten
with a bottle of red wine and a quart of stock, salt, and pepper. Stir
without leaving it, with a wooden spoon, until it boils; the sauce
should cover the meat and not be too thick; add a bouquet of herbs, an
onion with cloves in it. Cover the stew-pan and leave it to stew until
the hare is tender. A young hare will take from an hour and a quarter
to an hour and a half, an old one may cook for three hours without
becoming tender. The sauce should by this time be reduced to half;
take out the onion and herbs, taste if sufficiently seasoned; mix the
blood with a teacupful of thick cream, throw over the hare; shake the
stew-pan briskly to allow all to mix well, but it must not boil; at the
last moment add the liver, which has been sliced and sauted (shaken)
for two minutes in hot butter over the fire. Arrange in an entree dish,
pour the sauce over and garnish round with croutons of fried bread.

NOTE.--This dish may be rendered more highly flavoured, if desired, by
steeping the pieces of hare for some hours in the following marinade
or pickle: a bottle of red wine, a cupful of vinegar, salt, pepper, a
bouquet of herbs, and an onion stuck with cloves. Leave the hare in
this preparation four or five hours, then when the thickening is made,
put in the hare with this marinade, then the stock, and finish as
above. Small button onions or mushrooms may be added before the hare is
tender; if onions are cooked with it they must be previously boiled
for a few minutes.


INDIAN PILAU

(English)

Six onions, 4 ozs. butter, 2 Indian mangoes, a chicken.

Peel and chop the onions, and put them into a stew-pan with the butter,
and mangoes cut into shreds; on the top of these ingredients place the
joints of a chicken previously fried in butter, and let this stew over
a slow fire for about 1 hour. When done arrange the pieces of chicken
on the rice lightly piled in a dish; stir the sauce to mix it, and pour
it over the pilau. Serve very hot.

RICE FOR PILAU.--Wash and parboil for 5 minutes 1/2 lb. of rice, then
drain it free from water; put it into a stew-pan with 2 ozs. of butter,
and stir, over the fire until the rice acquires equally in every grain
a light fawn colour, then add a 1/2 pint of stock, cayenne pepper, and
a very little curry powder; put the lid on the stew-pan, and set the
rice to boil, or rather simmer, very gently over a slow fire till done.
Stir it lightly with a fork, to detach the grains. A few raisins added
are an improvement.


STUFFED BEEF STEAKS

(Sicilian fashion)

Take three-quarters of a pound of beef, two ounces of ham, one
tablespoon of butter, some bread, some parsley, and a piece of onion.
Chop the onion fine and put it in a saucepan with the butter. When it
is coloured, put in the parsley and the ham cut up into little pieces,
at the same time add the bread cut up into three or four small dice,
salt, pepper, and a dash of nutmeg. Mix all together well. Cut the meat
into six slices, pound them to flatten out; salt slightly, and when the
other ingredients are cooked, put a portion on each slice of meat. Then
roll up the meat like sausages, put them on skewers, alternating with
a piece of fried bread of the same size. Butter well, roll in fresh
bread-crumbs, and broil on the gridiron over a slow fire.


PODVARAK

(Serbian)

Put in a pan 3 tablespoons of lard; when it is hot add 3 lbs. of
sauerkraut.

Place a piece of ribs of pork or a small turkey in the pan and bake in
the oven until the meat is cooked.


RIBS OF PORK IN CASSEROLE

UYNVECHE

(Serbian)

Fry 3 sliced onions in 1 tablespoon of lard. Mix this with 1 lb. of
rice. Remove the seeds and cut in halves 3 green peppers. Add these to
the rice; also 3 or 4 sliced tomatoes and 2 potatoes sliced. Place this
rice mixture in a casserole and put on top a piece of ribs of pork of
about 2 lbs. Pour in water enough to well cover the rice. Bake in the
oven.


SALMIS DE LAPIN

(French)

Cut up your rabbit into neat pieces, removing as much of the bone as
possible. Have an iron saucepan ready, in which you have put a good
quarter of a pound of fat bacon. Put in your pieces of rabbit, which
you fry until they become a nice golden brown, and which the French
call dore; just before they are this colour add 2 tablespoonsful of
rum, or of cognac, according to taste, also 2 echalotes cut up into
very small pieces, which you must see do not burn.

FOR THE GRAVY.--Take the trimmings of the rabbit, the head, and
liver, and pound them all up in a mortar. When pounded, add a
heaping spoonful of flour and pound it in. Now measure out a pint and
a half of white ordinary wine (hock), to which you will add a good
breakfastcupful of good bouillon, or gravy. Into this put what you
have already pounded up and mix it in, then pass it all through a
sieve (passoire). When ready pour it over the pieces of rabbit, now
that they are become of a golden colour, and let it simmer with them
in a covered saucepan by the side of the fire for a good two hours and
more, so as to have it very tender. Salt and pepper to taste. Bouquet
garni--which means thyme, and if one likes the flavour, a leaf of bay
laurel--but for the latter just to let it be in an instant only, as it
has such a strong flavour. Many prefer just the thyme, which is more
delicate. Half an hour before the rabbit is cooked, add a good spoonful
of vinegar[1]; two, should the vinegar not be strong. Add a piece of
butter of the size of a walnut whilst it is simmering or stewing by the
side of the fire.


FOOTNOTE:
[1] The vinegar is quite optional.


SHEEP'S HEAD

(Scotch)

Choose a nice sheep's head, get it slightly singed, then have it sawn
up the middle, steep it all night with a little soda in the water,
then clean it thoroughly, take out the brains, put on with cold water,
slowly bring to boil, and boil slowly for three hours. Boil the brains
in a cloth for a quarter of an hour, then mince small, make a white
sauce, stir in the minced brains, lay the head flat on a dish and pour
sauce over. Decorate with a few small bits of parsley.


MACARONI PIE

(Italian)

Three-quarters lb. of cold beef, or mutton, 1/2 an onion, 3 or 4
tomatoes, 1/4 lb. of macaroni, bread-crumbs, grated cheese, stock,
salt, pepper, nutmeg.

Cut the beef or mutton into thin slices, peel the onion and slice it
thinly, slice the tomatoes, and boil the macaroni in slightly salted
water until tender. Cool and drain the macaroni, and cut it up into
small pieces. Line a buttered baking-dish with macaroni, and arrange
the meat, onion, and tomato slices in layers on the baking-dish. Season
with salt, pepper, and nutmeg, pour over a little stock, and cover the
top with macaroni. Sprinkle over some bread-crumbs, and grated cheese,
and bake for about 20 minutes in a hot oven.


KIDNEY AND MUSHROOMS

(English)

Take some sheep's kidneys, skin, halve, and core them, sprinkle each
piece with pepper, salt, and saute them in butter till a good brown;
have a large mushroom peeled and cored for each half kidney, fry in the
same fat as the kidney; lay the mushrooms in a hot dish, on each put a
piece of tomato heated in the oven, then a half kidney, put a little
pat of butter on each, and serve with either a pile of mashed potatoes
or spinach in centre of dish.




Curries


INDIAN CURRY

Most of the curry powder or paste to be found in this part of the world
is a mixture of 1/4 of dried chilli, 1/4 coriander, 1/2 dagatafolum;
but the native curry cook uses a much larger variety of spices and
likes to grind them himself fresh daily between two stones. The spices
commonly used are:

    Red chilli (roasted)
    Coriander seed (roasted)
        "      "  (fresh)
    Cinnamon
    Nutmeg
    Baked garlic
    Scraped cocoanut
    Dagatafolum
    Caraway seed
    Yellow pimentos
    Red pimentos
    Cardamon seeds
    Curcuma (saffron root)


A FRICASSEE OF CHICKEN

(Ceylon style)

Cut 2 good-sized chickens in 8 pieces. Season with salt and pepper;
put in a saucepan with about 1 quart of cocoanut milk; add to this
a little cinnamon, 1/4 teaspoon fresh coriander, 1/4 teaspoon of
powdered saffron, a little red pimento, and boil until tender; at the
last minute thicken the sauce with 4 yolks of eggs mixed well with 1/2
pint cocoanut cream; keep hot but do not boil, as the richness of the
ingredients would make it curdle. As this curry is not hot it is served
with a sambo which consists of small dishes on one tray containing such
savories as plain scraped cocoanut, pimento paste, and chopped onion
with a red pepper sauce.

To obtain cocoanut cream, use the same process as that for ordinary
cream;--as for the milk: have 3 fresh cocoanuts scraped very fine to
which you add 3 pints of water, stir together for a few moments, then
strain, let this milk stand for 3 hours to obtain the cream.


A SIMPLER INDIAN CURRY

One lb. of beef, mutton, fish, or vegetables, as desired. One
tablespoon of curry powder, 1 heaping tablespoon of butter, 1 onion,
1/2 fresh cocoanut, juice of half a lemon, salt to taste. Curry powder
to be mixed in 2 ozs. of water. Onion to be finely chopped. Cocoanut to
be scraped and soaked in a teacup of boiling water, then squeezed, and
the milk (or the liquid) to be put in the curry. First cook the butter
till it bubbles, put in the onion and let it brown, add the curry
powder, and let that cook a few minutes; if it becomes too dry and
sticks to the pan add a little hot water. Then put in the meat (raw),
cut in small pieces, fish, or vegetables, and fry them, add salt, and
if dry, add a little more water, let all simmer till meat is thoroughly
done; when about half done, add the cocoanut milk and the lemon-juice.

If not convenient to use the cocoanut milk, ordinary milk can be used,
and the mixture thickened with a little flour. Cocoanut milk thickens
without flour. When the butter separates and shows itself in the gravy,
the curry is ready for serving. Curry should be served with plain
boiled rice. Pass rice first, then curry.

If Indian chutney is served with curry it is a great addition. A banana
may be cut up in pieces about half-inch thick, and added to the curry
mixture while cooking, and is a pleasant addition to the flavour.


ANOTHER CURRY SAUCE

Chop 1 onion and 1 apple and cook them in 1 oz. of butter about 10
minutes, but do not let them brown. Add 1 dessert-spoonful of mild
curry powder, the grated rind and juice of 1/2 a lemon, 1/2 pint of
water or stock, some salt, and 1 tablespoonful of seedless raisins,
and simmer until the onion is quite tender. Unless added to rice or
paste put in 1 dessert-spoonful of flour after the onion and apple have
cooked about 10 minutes.




Pastes, Cheese, Etc.


MACARONI WITH CHEESE

(Italian)

Into 2-1/2 quarts of boiling water, well salted, throw 1/2 lb. of
macaroni broken up into pieces. Let it boil 25 minutes, then drain it
upon a sieve; replace in a stewpan with 3 ozs. of fresh butter cut in
small pieces, 2 ozs. of grated cheese, and a pinch of pepper; mix all
with a fork. The macaroni must not be broken. Add 1/2 cup of cream.
Serve hot.

NOTE:--Macaroni should be tender but not pasty; it should possess a
certain crispness; obtain this by passing cold water over it when it is
in the sieve and quickly returning it to the saucepan.


MACARONI

(Milanaise)

Break up 1/2 lb. macaroni into pieces about 1/4 of an inch long. Boil
in salted water 25 minutes. Drain on a sieve. Put it back in the
stewpan with a cupful of tomato sauce and 2 oz. of ham cut into dice.
Let it simmer a few minutes, then add 2-1/2 oz. of butter and the same
of grated cheese.


POLENTA WITH CHEESE

(Italian)

Add to 1-1/2 pints of salted, boiling water, 1/2 lb. of Indian meal,
sprinkling it in a little at a time. Let it cook until thick.

With a tablespoon form it into small lumps; arrange them on a dish,
sprinkle them with grated cheese, and pour over them some butter cooked
brown, but not burnt. Put the dish in the oven a few minutes to melt
the cheese before serving.


LENTIL CROQUETTES

Put in cold water 1/2 a cup of dried beans or lentils and let soak
overnight. Boil them 1-1/2 hours or until tender. Pass them through
a sieve; add 1/2 of a cup of fine bread-crumbs and 3 tablespoons of
cream or butter, 1 egg, a grated onion, a pimento chopped, a little
mace or nutmeg, 1 teaspoon of salt, and a pinch of cayenne. Make into
croquettes and roll in bread-crumbs, then beaten egg and bread-crumbs,
and fry in oil or butter. If baked in the oven in a loaf, baste
occasionally with oil or butter.

Serve with a tomato or horse-radish sauce.

This is a nourishing substitute for meat.


RISOTTO

Colour for an instant in butter a chopped onion, add to it 1/2 lb. of
rice; stir an instant over the fire until it begins to frizzle, but
do not colour; add stock to 3 times the quantity of rice, a cupful of
tomato sauce, a pinch of saffron, one of pepper, let it boil, cover
the saucepan, and let it cook by the side of the fire for 20 minutes.
If the rice becomes dry before it is sufficiently tender add a little
more stock. Place the saucepan on the corner of the stove away from the
hot fire, then add to the rice 2 ozs. of grated Parmesan cheese and the
same amount of butter. Arrange the rice on a dish and pour over it some
good gravy and serve very hot.

The brown rice now procurable in most large cities is liked by gourmets
cooked in this manner and served with partridge and other game.


RISOTTO MILANAISE

Fry a tablespoon of minced onion in a good bit of butter; when slightly
browned, add 4 or 5 tomatoes and 1 pimento; after cooking pass through
a sieve and replace in the casserole with pepper, salt, and a dash of
cinnamon, 2 or 3 chicken livers, or some beef cut into small pieces.
Add 1 cup of rice and 1 qt. of stock or, lacking stock, water will do;
boil until the rice is tender, when add 1/4 lb. of cheese grated.


RAVIOLI

Prepare a paste made of 4/5 of a lb. of flour, a pinch of salt, 5
eggs, 2 spoonfuls of water. Cover with a cloth and let stand at least
15 minutes. Make a farce with cooked chicken or veal minced--about 2
cups--1 tablespoonful of finely minced cooked ham, 1/2 of a calf's
brain cooked, yolks of 2 eggs, a dash of nutmeg, 1 dessert-spoon of
grated Parmesan cheese. Take 1/2 the paste, roll out thin into a large
square; place a ball of the farce every 2-1/2 inches apart about the
size of a walnut, moisten with a brush the paste between the balls of
farce. Roll the rest of the paste and place it over the farce; press
edges together and between each ball. Cut with a round cutter or into
squares as preferred and cook in boiling water 7 or 8 minutes, drain
them and sprinkle with grated Parmesan cheese. Put on a dish and pour a
tomato sauce around them.


EGG COQUILLES, WITH SPINACH

(French)

One-half lb. of prepared and seasoned spinach, 1 breakfastcupful of
cream, 6 eggs, pepper, and salt.

Have 6 very small coquille or marmit pots, or china souffle cases,
butter them, and put 1 tablespoonful of spinach in each. Upon this put
about 1 dessert-spoonful of cream. Break 1 egg in each, season with
salt and pepper, and bake carefully in a moderately heated oven for 8
minutes. Serve quickly.


PIROG OF MUSHROOMS

Boil mushrooms until they are tender, chop them and mix them in the pan
with butter, pepper and salt. Roll out the paste, put on one side of
the dough cold boiled rice, then the mushrooms, hashed meat of boiled
veal, chopped hard-boiled eggs, chopped onions, pepper, salt, and
nutmeg. When filling is placed on half of the dough lap the other half
over it, close the edges with the white of an egg, spread over some
beaten egg, and bake in the oven light brown.


PASTE FOR RUSSIAN PIROG

One cup of milk, 3 eggs, 1-1/2 cups of butter, a little salt mixed with
flour to make a soft dough. Knead it thoroughly, first with hands and
then half an hour more with a wooden spoon.


EGGS ROMANOFF

Cover hard-boiled eggs with a stiff mayonnaise. Put a little highly
flavoured aspic jelly in the bottom of individual moulds. When the
jelly is firm add a spoonful of caviare and place the mayonnaised egg
on the top. Pour in more jelly. When it is cold turn from the mould and
serve on a garniture of lettuce. This is good for a cold supper.


OEUFS POCHES IVANHOE

Cook a piece of finnan haddie in milk, then add 2 tablespoons of sauce
(a good cream sauce) with a few fresh mushrooms, salt, pepper, a bit
of cayenne, and 1 tablespoon of Parmesan cheese. Put this through a
fine sieve, and in nests of this paste on slices of toast, slip poached
eggs. Sprinkle with grated cheese and place for a moment in a hot oven
to glaze.


CHEESE PUFFS

Bring to a boil 2/3 of a cup of water, 1-1/2 oz. of butter, a pinch of
salt, a pinch of pepper, then add 1/4 of a lb. of flour and stir to a
smooth paste, then stir in, one at a time, 3 eggs, 3-1/2 oz. of grated
cheese (Parmesan preferred). Add 1/4 teaspoon of English mustard;
when all is well mixed, drop by tablespoonfuls on a baking tin and
place on top of each a slice of Gruyere cheese. Put in a moderate oven
increasing the heat gradually. Cook from 15 to 20 minutes. Serve hot.


MOSKVA CHEESECAKES

Line tartlet moulds with short paste. Take 2 tablespoons of thick white
sauce, well seasoned, add a good pinch of cayenne pepper, bring it to a
boil, add 2 yolks of eggs, 4 tablespoons of grated cheese. Again bring
to a boil and remove from the fire, add 1 white of egg beaten stiff.
Fill the tartlet moulds with this mixture, put in a hot oven for 10
minutes, serve immediately.


CHEESE FRITTERS

Boil 1/2 pint of water, 1 oz. of butter, pinch of salt, pepper. Remove
from fire and add 3 oz. flour. Stir until a smooth paste is made, then
add 3 oz. of grated cheese and 1 oz. chopped cooked ham; when the
mixture is half cold add 3 eggs, one by one, stirring well.

Drop by spoonfuls into hot, not boiling fat; increase the temperature
of the fat, turning the fritters often.

When golden brown drain and serve.


CHEESE PUDDING

(A simple and nutritious Welsh dish)

Chop 1/2 lb. of cheese. Toast and butter four slices of bread. Put two
slices in the bottom of a dish, cover with half the cheese, sprinkle
a little salt and pepper, put in the dish the other two slices of
buttered bread and cover with the remaining cheese.

Pour over 1 pint of milk, let it stand for five minutes, then bake in a
warm oven 20 minutes.


CHICORY OR ENDIVE

Chicory or endive is scalded the same as spinach, but needs a little
longer time in the boiling water. It is prepared the same in brown
butter, gravy, or cream.


STEWED COS LETTUCES

(French)

Take off the outer leaves; wash them carefully, keeping them as whole
as possible; boil for ten minutes in boiling salted water; pour cold
water through them; drain. Extract the water from them by pressing each
lettuce lightly with two hands; split them in halves lengthwise; take
off the stalk; sprinkle with salt and pepper. Put them in a stew-pan,
placing each half lettuce partly over the other round the pan. The
latter must be well buttered before putting in the lettuces, or in
place of butter some very good gravy from which all grease has been
taken. Add stock to half the height of the lettuces; cover and cook
them gently for an hour. The lettuces should be tender and the liquid
much reduced.

NOTE.--Lettuces may be cooked in the same manner with a little lean
bacon, ham, or sausage; in the latter case water may be used instead of
stock. They can be served as a vegetable or for garnishing.


ASPARAGUS

(French)

One bundle or 100 heads of asparagus, 1 pint of milk (or equal
quantities of milk and water), 1 head of lettuce finely shredded
and cut into short lengths, 1 medium-sized onion par-boiled and
finely chopped, 1 bay leaf, one sprig of thyme, 1-1/2 oz. of butter,
2 tablespoonsful of flour, the yolks of 2 eggs, 1 teaspoonful of
lemon-juice, salt and pepper, croutes of buttered toast or fried bread,
chopped parsley, strips of cucumber.

Wash and trim the asparagus, and tie it into 3 or 4 bundles. Bring
the milk to boiling point, put in the asparagus, lettuce, onion,
bay-leaf, thyme, and salt, and simmer gently for about 20 minutes.
Drain the asparagus well, cut off the points and the edible parts of
the stalks, and keep them hot. Strain the milk and return it to the
stew-pan, add the butter and flour previously kneaded together, and
stir until a smooth sauce is obtained. Beat the yolks of eggs slightly,
add them to the sauce, and stir until they thicken, but do not allow
the sauce to boil, or the yolks may curdle. Season to taste, and add
the lemon-juice. Pile the asparagus on the croutes, cover with sauce,
garnish with strips of cucumber, and a little chopped parsley, and
serve as a vegetable entremet or as an entree for a vegetarian dinner.


CELERY CROQUETTES

Two heads of celery, stock, 1 oz. of butter, 1 oz. of flour, 1 shallot,
1 gill of milk, seasoning, 2 yolks of eggs, egg and bread-crumbs, fat
for frying.

Trim and wash the celery, and cut into short pieces, blanch them
in salted water, and drain, then cook till tender in well-seasoned
stock. Drain the cooked celery, and chop it rather finely. Melt the
butter in a stew-pan, add the shallot (chopped), and fry a little,
stir in the flour, blend these together, and gradually add a gill of
milk. Stir till it boils, and put in the chopped celery. Season with
salt and pepper, and cook for 15 minutes, add the egg-yolks at the
last. Spread the mixture on a dish and let it get cold. Make up into
croquettes--cork or ball shapes--egg and crumb them, fry in hot fat to
a golden colour, drain them on a cloth or paper, and dish up.


RAGOUT OF CELERY

Two or 3 heads of celery, 1 pint of white stock, 1/2 pint of milk,
2 tablespoonsful of cream, 1 medium-sized Spanish onion, 24 button
onions, 1 dessert-spoonful of finely chopped parsley, 2 ozs. of butter,
2 ozs. of flour, salt, and pepper.

Wash and trim the celery, cut each stick into pieces about 2 inches
long, cover with cold water, bring to the boil, and pour the water
away. Put in the stock, the Spanish onion finely chopped, season with
salt and pepper, and cook gently for about 1/2 an hour. Meanwhile, skin
the onions, fry them in hot butter, but very slowly, to prevent them
taking colour, drain well from fat, and keep them hot. Add the flour
to the butter, and fry for a few minutes without browning. Take up the
celery, add the strained stock to the milk, pour both on to the roux or
mixture of flour and butter, and stir until boiling. Season to taste,
add the cream and 1/2 the parsley, arrange the celery in a circle on
a hot dish, pour over the sauce, pile the onions high in the centre,
sprinkle over them the remainder of the parsley, and serve. The celery
may also be served on croutes of fried or toasted bread arranged in
rows with the onions piled between them. A nice change may be made by
substituting mushrooms for the onions.


STUFFED ONIONS

(Italian)

Remove from 6 onions the centres with an apple-corer and fill them up
with the following stuffing: One tablespoon of grated Parmesan cheese
mixed with 2 hard-boiled eggs and chopped parsley. Boil them first,
then roll them in flour and fry them in olive-oil or butter. Then put
them in a baking-dish with 1/2 tablespoon of grated Parmesan cheese
and 1 tablespoon of melted butter. Put them in the oven and bake until
golden.


ONIONS

(Venetian style)

Remove the centres of 6 small onions. Boil them for a few moments,
drain them, and stuff them with the following: Take a piece of bread,
dip it in milk, squeeze out the milk, and mix the bread with 1
tablespoon of grated Parmesan cheese, the yolks of 2 hard-boiled eggs.
Mix well together, then add some fine-chopped parsley, a pinch of
sugar, salt, and pepper, and the yolk of 1 raw egg; mix again well,
and then stuff the onions with the mixture. Dip them in flour and in
egg, and fry them in lard. Put them on a platter and serve with a
piquante sauce made as follows: Chop up fine some pickles, capers, and
peppers, and 1/2 cup of water. When these are cooked, add 1 tablespoon
of butter and cook a little while longer, then pour over the onions and
serve.


FRIED PUMPKIN OR SQUASH

(Italian)

Take a slice of pumpkin or squash, remove the rind and the seeds. Cut
it into fine strips. Roll in flour and dip in egg, and fry in boiling
lard or olive-oil.

If desired as garnishing for meat, cut the pumpkin exceedingly fine,
roll in flour, but not in egg, and fry.


CUCUMBERS

(Italian)

Peel and boil 3 or 4 cucumbers in salted water for 5 minutes. Drain and
cut them into pieces 1 inch thick and put them in a frying-pan with 1
ounce of butter, a little flour, and 1/2 pint of stock; stir well, and
add some salt and pepper. Reduce for about 15 minutes, stirring until
it boils; add 1 teaspoon of chopped parsley, 1/2 a teaspoon of grated
nutmeg, 1/2 a cup of cream, and the beaten-up yolks of 2 eggs. Put on
the fire again for 3 or 4 minutes. Do not let boil, and serve hot.


SARMA

(Serbian)

Put a cabbage in boiling water. Let it stand while preparing the rest
of the dish.

Fry 4 onions in 1 tablespoon of lard. Mix 2 lbs. of chopped pork and 2
lbs. of chopped beef with the onions. Stir into this 4 raw eggs. Add
1/2 lb. of rice, salt and pepper.

Remove the cabbage from the water, tear off the leaves and put into
each leaf two tablespoonsful of the meat and rice mixture, wrapping it
so that the contents should not come out.

Put a little sauerkraut in a pot, then a layer of the filled cabbage
leaves, continue doing this until the pot is filled. Cook slowly about
1 hour.

Make a sauce putting 1 tablespoon of lard in a saucepan on the fire,
and add a chopped onion. When a golden brown, add 1 tablespoonful of
browned flour and paprika to taste. Add a cup of water. Pour this sauce
into the pot and cook about half an hour longer. Some sour cream may be
added if liked on serving.


POLENTA PASTICCIATA

(Italian)

Three-quarters of a cup of Indian meal and 1 quart of milk.

Boil the milk, and add the Indian meal, a little at a time, when milk
is boiling. Cook for one-half an hour, stirring constantly. Add salt
just before taking off the fire. The Indian meal should be stiff when
finished. Turn it onto the bread-board, and spread it out to the
thickness of two fingers. While it is cooking prepare a meat sauce, and
a Bechamel sauce as follows:

MEAT SAUCE

Take a small piece of beef, a small piece of ham, fat and lean, 1
tablespoon of butter, a small piece of onion, a small piece of carrot,
a small piece of celery, a pinch of flour, 1/2 cup of bouillon (or
water), pepper. Cut the meat into small dice; chop up fine together
the ham, onion, carrot, and celery. Put these into a saucepan with the
butter, and when the meat is brown, add the pinch of flour, and the
bouillon a little at a time, and cook for about one-half an hour. This
sauce should not be strained.

BECHAMEL SAUCE

Take 1 tablespoon of flour, and 1-1/2 tablespoon of butter. Put them
into a saucepan and stir with a wooden spoon until they have become a
golden-brown colour. Then add, a little at a time, 1 pint milk; stir
constantly until the sauce is as thick as custard, and is white in
colour.

Now take the cold Indian meal and cut it into squares about two inches
across. Take a baking-dish of medium depth, butter well, then put in a
layer of squares of Indian meal close together, to entirely cover the
bottom of the dish. Sprinkle over it grated cheese; then pour on the
top enough meat sauce to cover the layer (about 2 tablespoons), then on
the top of this add a layer of Bechamel sauce. Then put another layer
of the squares of Indian meal, sprinkle with grated cheese as before,
add meat sauce, then Bechamel sauce, and continue in this way until the
baking-dish is full, having for the top layer the Bechamel sauce. Put
the dish into a moderate oven, and bake until a golden brown.


FRIED BREAD WITH RAISINS

(Italian)

Take some rather stale bread, cut it into slices, removing the crust.
Fry the bread in lard, and then arrange it on a platter; meanwhile
prepare the raisins as follows: Take a small saucepan and put into it 2
tablespoons of raisins, a slice of raw ham chopped into small pieces,
and a leaf of sage, also chopped up, 1 tablespoon of granulated sugar,
and 2 tablespoons of vinegar. Put these ingredients on the fire, and as
soon as you have a syrup pour the raisins on the pieces of fried bread,
and the sauce around.


POLENTA CROQUETTES

(Italian)

Boil 1/2 cup of corn-meal, and before removing from the fire add a
piece of butter and a little grated cheese and mix well. Take it then
by spoonfuls and spread it on a marble-top table. These spoonfuls
should form little balls about the size of a hen's egg. On each of
these croquettes place a very thin slice of Gruyere cheese, so that the
cheese will adhere to the corn-meal. Then allow them to cool, and when
cold dip into egg; then into bread-crumbs, and fry in boiling lard.


RICE WITH MUSHROOMS

(Italian)

Five or six mushrooms and 3/4 of a cup of rice.

Chop up a little onion, parsley, celery, and carrot together, and put
them on the fire with 2 tablespoons of good olive-oil. When this sauce
is coloured, add 2 tablespoons of tomato paste, thinned with hot water.
Season with salt and pepper. Cut the mushrooms into small pieces, and
add them to the sauce. Cook for 20 minutes over a medium fire. Put on
one side and prepare the rice as follows:

Fry the rice with a lump of butter until dry; then add hot water, a
little at a time, and boil gently. When the rice is half cooked (after
about 10 minutes) add the mushrooms and sauce, and cook for another 10
minutes. Add grated Parmesan cheese before serving.


TIMBALES OF BREAD WITH PARMESAN SAUCE

Soak half an hour 2 cups bread-crumbs in 1 cup thin cream (milk will do
with butter added).

To this add grated rind half lemon; 1 tablespoon minced parsley; 1
tablespoon minced chives; 1 teaspoon salt; pepper; yolks two eggs.

Fill buttered timbale moulds or one large mould with this mixture,
cover with buttered paper, and bake 20 minutes in moderate oven in a
pan half filled with hot water.

Remove from moulds and pour cheese sauce around it.




Sauces


CHEESE SAUCE

Put 2 tablespoons butter on fire. Add 2 tablespoons flour and blend
to a paste. Add 1/2 teaspoon salt and a dash of cayenne. Then add
gradually 1 cup milk. Cook five minutes, then add 1 cup grated cheese.
Do not allow it to boil after adding the cheese but serve at once.


TOMATO SAUCE

(Italian)

Take 3 chopped shallots, put them in a stew-pan with a tablespoonful of
olive oil, salt, pepper, a dash of ground ginger, a very little ground
nutmeg. Let the shallots take a good colour without burning; add 6
tomatoes skinned and all the pits well squeezed out. Let them cook very
gently until all the moisture has disappeared. They should take the
consistency of jam.

This sauce may be eaten hot or cold.


ANOTHER TOMATO SAUCE

Cut in two 5 or 6 tomatoes, squeeze out the seeds, put in a stew-pan
with 1 cup of stock; salt and pepper, a bit of tarragon, laurel thyme,
parsley, a chopped onion, and a dash of cinnamon. Cook until the
moisture has disappeared, then pass through a sieve. Prepare a white
thickening with 1 oz. of butter, the same of flour. Add the puree of
tomatoes to it; thin the sauce with stock. Let it cook 10 to 15 minutes
and finish with a pinch of sugar and 1 oz. of butter.


MUSTARD SAUCE

Two tablespoons of butter, 1-1/2 tablespoons of flour, 1 cup of scalded
milk, 1/4 teaspoon of salt, 1/2 teaspoon of mustard, 1/2 teaspoon of
vinegar.

Blend the butter and flour in a saucepan and pour on the milk little by
little, then add the salt, mustard, and vinegar.

A spoonful of mixed capers is sometimes added.


A MEAT SAUCE

(Italian)

Put into a saucepan 1 pound of beef and 1/2 an onion chopped up with 3
ounces of lard, some parsley, salt, pepper, 1 clove, and a very small
slice of ham. Fry these over a hot fire for a few minutes, moving them
continually, and when the onion is browned add 4 tablespoons of red
wine, and 4 tablespoons of tomato sauce (or tomato paste). When this
sauce begins to sputter add, little by little, some boiling water.
Stick a fork into the meat from time to time to allow the juices to
escape. Take a little of the sauce in a spoon, and when it looks a
good golden colour, and there is a sufficient quantity to cover the
meat, put the covered saucepan at the back of the stove and allow it
to simmer until the meat is thoroughly cooked. Then take out the meat,
slice it, prepare macaroni, or any paste you desire, and serve it with
the meat, and the sauce poured over all, and the addition of butter and
grated cheese.


ANOTHER MEAT SAUCE

(Italian)

Chop up some ham fat with a little onion, celery, carrot, and parsley.
Add a small piece of beef and cook until beef is well coloured. Then
add 1-1/2 tablespoons of red wine (or white), cook until wine is
absorbed, then add 1 tablespoon of tomato paste diluted with water, or
4 fresh tomatoes, and boil 15 minutes.


LOMBARDA SAUCE

Put 2 cups of white sauce and 1 of chicken stock into a saucepan,
reduce, and add 3 yolks of eggs mixed with 2 ounces of butter and the
juice of 1/2 a lemon. Before it boils take the saucepan off the fire
and add 1 cup of thick tomato sauce, strain, and just before serving
add 1 tablespoon of sweet herbs minced fine.


HORSE-RADISH SAUCE

Cook about half an hour in a double boiler 1-1/2 cups of milk, 1
dessert-spoon of sugar, 1/3 cup of bread-crumbs, and 1/3 cup of grated
horse-radish root, 1/4 cup of butter, half a teaspoon of salt.


GNOCCHI DI SEMOLINA

One pint of milk, 2 eggs, 1/2 cup of farina, butter and cheese.

Put the milk on, and when it boils add salt. Take a wooden spoon and,
stirring constantly, add the farina little by little. Cook for 10
minutes, stirring constantly. Take off the fire and break into the
farina 2 eggs; mix very quickly, so that the egg will not have time to
set. Spread the farina about on a marble slab about 1/2 inch thick.
Allow it to cool, then cut it into squares or diamonds about 2 or 3
inches across. Butter well a baking-dish, and put in the bottom a layer
of the squares of farina; sprinkle over a little grated cheese, and
here and there a small lump of butter. Then put in another layer of the
squares of farina; add cheese and butter as before. Continue in this
way until your baking-dish is full, having on the top layer butter and
cheese.

Bake in a hot oven until a brown crust forms. Serve in the baking-dish.




Salads


ITALIAN SALAD

Cut 1 carrot and 1 turnip into slices, and cook them in boiling soup.
When cold, mix them with 2 cold boiled potatoes and 1 beet cut into
strips. Add a very little chopped leeks or onions, pour some sauce,
"Lombardo," over the salad, and garnish with watercress. Boiled
Jerusalem artichokes cut into slices are a good addition.


LETTUCE SALAD

Mix one spoonful of thick mayonnaise, 1/2 spoonful of chilli sauce, a
little finely hashed pimento, a sprinkling of finely hashed chives,
add a few drops of tarragon vinegar, 1 teaspoon of A. I. sauce, and a
little paprika.

Cut a firm head of tennis-ball lettuce in 4 parts. Put one part on a
plate and pour the dressing over it. This recipe is enough for 1 person.


SANDWICH DRESSING

Cream 1/2 lb. of butter and add to it 1 dessert-spoonful of mixed
mustard, 3 tablespoons of olive oil, a little salt, and the yolk of 1
egg; one may add to this 1/4 cup of very thick cream. Mix thoroughly
and set away to cool. To make sandwiches, spread the bread with this
mixture and put in very finely chopped ham, or chicken and celery, or
cream cheese and chopped nuts, or green peppers and mustard and cress,
or lettuce, or "Indian relish," or cucumber, or tomato or anything else
you happen to have and may like.


SALAD DRESSING

(For grapefruit or orange)

Mix well 2 tablespoonfuls of Escoffier Sauce Diable and 1 tablespoonful
of Escoffier Sauce Robert and then add olive oil, a little at a time.
When it becomes thick, season with salt and pepper and vinegar.


CHEESE DRESSING

One quarter of a lb. of Roquefort cheese and 2 tablespoons of thick
cream mixed to a smooth paste; stir in, little by little, enough
olive oil to give the consistency of mayonnaise; season with tarragon
vinegar, salt, and pepper. This is especially good for string beans,
lettuce, or endive. One may fill celery stalks with this dressing made
into a thick paste.




Vegetables


POTATO CAKES

(Russian)

Peel and grate 6 raw potatoes, season with salt and pepper, 1 egg.
Mix all together. Drop onto a well-buttered griddle, spoonsful of
the mixture, leaving space between to flatten them; continue to add
a little butter to the griddle. Cook a golden brown on both sides.
Arrange in a crown on a dish with a sprig of parsley in the centre.


PETITS POIS

Fry some finely shredded onion in about a tablespoonful of oil, with
salt, pepper, and a sprig of tarragon. Lay the heart and best leaves
of a head of lettuce at the bottom of a stew-pan with a quart of very
young peas. Add a pint of stock. Stew gently. A little sugar is always
an improvement to peas.


STRING BEANS

Cut off the ends of the string beans, slice them in three parts, cook
them until three quarters done, then put them into cold water and dry
them. Cook an onion in butter and put the beans into a pan and simmer
half an hour. Shake at intervals but do not stir them. Take out and
pour over a little stock thickened with a very little flour and cream.

Peas may be done in the same way.


RED CABBAGE

(Flemish)

Chop 4 onions and cook in 1 tablespoonful of butter, add 1 large
red cabbage chopped. Cover this with 6 chopped apples, next add 1
tablespoonful of rice, 2 cups of water, 1 dessert-spoonful of vinegar,
1 teaspoonful of sugar, 1-1/2 teaspoonfuls of salt, pepper. Do not stir
but cook slowly 4 hours or longer removing the cover occasionally to
let out the steam.


CABBAGE WITH CHEESE SAUCE

Cabbage, cauliflower, or cucumbers boiled in salted water are excellent
served with cheese sauce. (See Sauces.)


GLAZED ONIONS

Boil onions in water until they are half cooked, then strain. Put them
in the stew-pan with a piece of butter, a pinch of powdered sugar,
salt, and a cupful of stock; let them finish cooking. The liquid will
be reduced and the onions coloured. Young carrots are glazed in the
same way.


SPINACH SOUFFLE

(Italian)

Boil some spinach in salted water. When cooked drain and chop it. There
should be about 2 cupfuls when chopped.

Put into a saucepan on the fire 2 tablespoonsful of butter and 1-1/2
level tablespoonsful of flour. When these are blended add the 2 cupfuls
of spinach and one cup of cream. Cook five minutes, stirring carefully.
Then mix into this the yolks of 3 eggs and remove the saucepan at once
from the fire. When the mixture is cool stir into it the 3 whites of
eggs, well beaten. Pour into a buttered souffle dish, or individual
dishes, and bake about twenty minutes in a moderate oven.




Puddings, Cakes, Etc.


FRENCH PANCAKES

Mix 1 teaspoonful of flour and 1 teaspoonful of sifted sugar with 1/2
pint of cream or rich milk. Beat 3 eggs separately and stir into the
cream. Bake in a quick oven in 3 large saucers. When brown, place one
cake on top of the other and spread jam between.


CREPES SUZETTE

Mix well 1 lb. of flour, 5 ozs. of powdered sugar, a pinch of salt,
10 eggs; add 1/4 pint of cream, 1/4 pint of milk, 2 spoonsful of
whipped cream, a liqueur glass Curacoa and a few drops of essence of
mandarines. Three or 4 tablespoons of this mixture are enough for
one pancake. Cook in a pan and when brown on both sides put in a hot
covered dish.


SAUCE FOR CREPES SUZETTE

Cream 1/4 lb. of butter, add 1/4 lb. of powdered sugar, 3 liqueur
glasses of Curacoa, 1 liqueur glass of essence of mandarines, the
juice of 1/2 a lemon, and 1/8 of an oz. of hazelnut milk (_Noisette de
beurre d'aveline_).

Put one spoonful of the sauce in a chafing dish, and when the sauce is
hot, put in a pancake, fold it over twice, turn it in the sauce, and
serve very hot. Prepare each pancake separately in this manner.


ANOTHER SUZETTE PANCAKE

Mix 3 cups of flour, 1-1/2 tablespoons of baking powder, 1/4 cup of
sugar, and 1 teaspoon of salt. Add 2 cups of milk slowly, then a
well-beaten egg, and 2 tablespoonsful of melted butter.

Cook in the same manner as the first Suzette pancake with the following
sauce: Cream together 1/4 cup of brown sugar and 1/2 cup of butter, add
the juice of 1/2 orange and 1 pony of Curacoa and 1 pony of brandy.
Serve from the chafing dish as described for the first Crepe Suzette.


KISEL

(Russian)

Mix three cups of any kind of fruit syrup, add a little water if the
syrup is very thick, sugar and vanilla according to taste, and 1/2
cup of potato flour. Cook them in a double boiler until a very thick
cream. Served hot or cold with cream and powdered sugar.


CARROT PUDDING

Mix 1 cup of grated carrots, 1 cup of bread-crumbs, 1 cup of minced
suet, 1 cup of currants, 1 cup of chopped raisins, 1 cup of flour, 1
cup of milk, 1 teaspoon of salt, 1/4 of a teaspoon of soda. Steam 4
hours, the longer the better.

Serve with the following sauce: 1/4 cup of butter, 1 cup of powdered
sugar, 1/2 cup of cream, 2 tablespoons of sherry or 1 teaspoonful
of vanilla. The butter must be worked soft before adding the sugar
gradually, then the cream and flavouring, little by little, to prevent
separating.


OLD ENGLISH PLUM PUDDING

Two lbs. raisins stoned, 2 lbs. currants, 1-1/2 lbs. Sultanas, 1 lb.
mixed peel chopped fine, 2 lbs. brown sugar, 2 lbs. breadcrumbs, 2
lbs. chopped suet, 1-1/2 lemons grated with the juice, 4 ozs. chopped
almonds blanched, 2 nutmegs grated, 1/2 teaspoon of mixed spice,
1/4 teaspoon crushed clove, pinch of salt, 6 eggs whisked, 1/4 pint
(generous) brandy.

Mix all together thoroughly, boil 12 hours, the longer the better on
the first day and 2 hours just before serving. This is the secret for
making it black and light. This makes about 1 two-quart and 5 one-quart
puddings. This recipe makes excellent plum cake, black and rich, by
substituting flour for the crumbs and lard for the suet.


BANANA TRIFLE

Put thin slices of bread and butter into a glass dish, then cut 3 or
4 bananas into round slices and place them on the top of bread and
butter. Make a pint of sweet custard well flavoured with Madeira and
pour over. Beat stiff 1/2 pint of cream and put on top of the trifle
when cold.


CREAM TART

Make a puff paste and cut it into 3 round pieces; it must be very thin
and a few holes pierced to keep it from rising too high. Make a cream
filling and spread over each piece, placing one on top of the other. On
the top layer sprinkle chopped pistachio nuts (or any chopped nuts) on
the cream as a frosting.

Filling: Mix 2/3 of a cup of fine sugar with 1/3 of a cup of flour,
add the yolks of 3 eggs and 1 whole egg, 1 cup of scalded milk, 1/4
of a teaspoonful of salt, cook in double boiler 15 minutes. Add 2
tablespoons of butter, 2 tablespoons of either cocoanut or almond
macaroons, crumbed, 2/3 teaspoonful of vanilla, and 1/2 teaspoonful of
lemon extract.

This may be put between simply two crusts, a bottom and a top, and
served in a pie plate.


CHOCOLATE PUDDING

(French)

Grate 1/4 pound of chocolate. In a separate basin soften 1/2 pound
of butter at the entrance of the oven; work it well with a spoon
for 5 minutes; add little by little to it 1 whole egg, 5 yolks,
and the grated chocolate, 1/4 lb. of white powdered sugar, and a
dessert-spoonful of dried bread pounded. Beat up to a froth with 5
whites of eggs, add them delicately and gently to the mixture with two
dessert-spoonfuls of dried and sifted flour. Pour into a mould that
has been buttered and sprinkled with baked bread-crumbs. Boil in a
stew-pan, the water to reach half-way up the mould; leave the stew-pan
open, and boil from 35 to 45 minutes. This pudding may also be baked.
Serve with cream and chocolate sauce.

SAUCE CREME AU CHOCOLAT.--Dissolve a tablet of chocolate in 2
dessert-spoonfuls of hot water; add 2 ozs. of powdered sugar and 3
yolks of eggs, working the mixture for an instant with the spoon, then
add very gradually 1/4 pint of hot milk. Stir over the fire until it
commences to thicken and stick to the spoon; it must not boil. Pass it
through a hair-sieve.


FRIED APPLES

(New England)

Cut 4 or 5 apples of fine flavour into quarters, then divide again
until the pieces are about 1 inch in width--do not remove the skin.
Throw into cold water.

Put into a saucepan 1 teaspoonful of lard. When this is hot heap all
the apples into the pan; spread over the apples 1 cup darkest brown
sugar; cover closely. Cook rather slowly about 15 minutes; then turn
each piece with a fork. Cover closely again and cook 15 minutes more.

The apples should keep their shape and look clear with a rich syrup.


ORANGE PUDDING

(French)

Put into an enamel saucepan 1/4 lb. of butter, the same of white sugar,
a dessert-spoonful of flour, seven yolks of eggs, the juice of an
orange, the same of lemon, and the grated rind of an orange. Stir all
over a slow fire as you would an ordinary custard, not allowing it to
boil, nor must there be any lumps. Pour this custard into a basin of
earthenware--it must not be put into any tin vessel; mix with the seven
whites of eggs beaten to a firm froth, pour into a plain earthenware
mould, and cook in the oven for 30 to 35 minutes. The mould must be
placed in a bain-marie--that is to say, in a deep dish or vessel half
full of boiling water. This pudding must be served quickly, and with a
custard flavoured with orange.


OAT CAKES

(Scotch)

Two lbs. of oatmeal, 6 ozs. of flour, 2 ozs. of sugar, 1/2 lb. of
butter and lard, 1/2 oz. of carbonate of soda, 1/4 oz. of tartaric
acid, a little salt, milk.

Weigh the flour and meal onto the board, take the soda, acid, and salt,
and rub these ingredients through a fine hair sieve onto the flour and
meal; then add the sugar and fat, and rub together until smooth; make
a bay or hole in the centre and work into a smooth paste with milk,
taking care not to have it too dry or tight, or considerable trouble
will be experienced in rolling out the cakes, as they will be found
very short. Having wet the paste take small pieces about the size of
an egg, and roll these out thin and round with a small rolling-pin,
dusting the board with a mixture partly of oatmeal and flour. When
rolled down thin enough, take a sharp knife and cut them in four, place
them on clean, flat tins, and bake in a warm oven. These cakes require
very careful handling or they will break all to pieces.


TEA-CAKES (HOT)

(Scotch)

One-half lb. flour, 1/4 lb. butter, 1 oz. sugar, 1 saltspoon salt, 1
teaspoon baking-powder, 1 egg, and some sweet milk.

Make the ingredients into a nice soft dough with the milk, cut into
rounds about 1/2 an inch thick, and bake for 10 minutes in a quick
oven; split open with your fingers, butter, and eat hot.


TEA PANCAKES

(Scotch)

Two eggs, 1 lump of butter, 1/2 teacup sugar, 1 heaping teaspoon
carbonate of soda, 1 lb. of flour, salt, 1 heaping teaspoon cream of
tartar, 1 pint milk (or milk and water).

Rub together the dry ingredients. Beat up eggs and mix well with the
milk, beating both together also. Then dredge in gradually with the
hand the dry ingredients, stirring all the time. Heat griddle well,
rub over till quite greasy with a piece of bacon fat. Drop the mixture
on griddle in spoonfuls from a tablespoon. A minute or two will brown
them. Then turn over and cook other side.


CANADIAN WAR CAKE

Two cups brown sugar, 2 cups hot water, 2 tablespoons lard, 1 lb.
raisins, cut once, 1 teaspoon salt, 1 teaspoon cinnamon, 1 teaspoon
cloves.

Boil these ingredients 5 minutes after they begin to bubble. When cold
add 1 teaspoon soda dissolved in 1 teaspoon hot water, and 3 cups of
flour.

Bake in 2 loaves, 45 minutes in a slow oven.


SERBIAN CAKE

Mix together the yolks of 8 eggs, 1 cup of sugar, 7 tablespoons of
pounded hazelnuts, 1 cup flour. Add the beaten whites of the eggs. Cook
this in shallow pans and put between the layers and on the top a cream
made as follows:

Boil 10 minutes 1/4 lb. pounded nuts with 1 cup of milk. Put aside to
cool. Cream 1/4 lb. butter, add 2 tablespoons of rum and 1 teaspoon
vanilla. Mix this with the boiled milk and nuts. Add fine sugar until
stiff enough to put between the layers of cake and then add more sugar
to make it stiff enough for the top. Sprinkle the top and sides of the
cake with chopped nuts.


RAVIOLI DOLCE

Take 1/2 pound of flour, 1 tablespoon of butter, and 2 tablespoons of
lard. Work this into a paste and roll out thin.

Take 1/2 pound of curds, add 1 egg, and the yolk of a second egg, 2
tablespoons of granulated sugar, a few drops of extract of vanilla. Mix
well together and add to the paste as for other ravioli. Then fry in
lard until a golden brown. Serve with powdered sugar.


CHESTNUTS

(Italian)

Take 40 chestnuts and roast or boil them over a slow fire. Remove the
shells carefully, put them in a bowl, and pour over them 1/2 a glass of
rum and 3 tablespoons of powdered sugar. Set fire to the rum and baste
the chestnuts constantly as long as the rum will burn, turning the
chestnuts about so they will absorb the rum and become coloured.


GNOCCHI OF MILK

One cup of milk, 1 level tablespoon of powdered starch, 1/2 teaspoon of
vanilla, 2 yolks of eggs; 2 tablespoons of sugar.

Put all these ingredients together into a saucepan and mix together
with a wooden spoon for a few minutes. Then put on the back of the
stove where it is not too hot, and cook until the mixture has become
stiff. Cook a few minutes longer; then turn out onto a bread-board
and spread to a thickness of an inch. When cold cut into diamonds or
squares. Butter a baking-dish, and put the squares into it overlapping
each other. Add a few dabs of butter here and there. Put another layer
of the squares in the dish, more dabs of butter, and so on until the
dish is full. Brown in the oven.


ALMOND PUDDING

(Italian)

Two ozs. of ground almonds, sugar to taste, 3 eggs, 1/2 pint of cream,
1 dessert-spoonful of orange-juice, blanched almonds, shredded candied
peel.

Separate the yolks of the eggs, add 1 tablespoonful of castor-sugar,
the ground almonds, and the cream gradually. Whisk the whites stiffly,
stir them lightly in, and add more sugar if necessary. Have ready
a mould well buttered and lightly covered with shredded almonds and
candied peel, then pour in the mixture. Steam gently for 1-1/2 hours,
and serve with a suitable sauce.


CHESTNUT FRITTERS

(Italian)

Take 20 chestnuts and roast them on a slow fire. Remove the shells and
put them into a saucepan with 1 level tablespoon of powdered sugar and
1/2 glass of milk and a little vanilla. Cover the saucepan and let it
cook slowly for more than a half-hour. Then drain the chestnuts and
pass them through a sieve. Put them back in a bowl with one tablespoon
of butter, the yolks of 3 eggs, and mix well without cooking. Allow
them to cool, and then take a small portion at a time, the size of a
nut, roll them, dip them in egg, and in bread-crumbs, and fry in butter
and lard, a few at a time. Serve hot with powdered sugar.


CHESTNUT CREAM

(A favourite Florentine pudding)

Cut 1 lb. of chestnuts lightly with a knife; put them in a saucepan and
cover with cold water; boil 5 minutes. The outer and inner skins should
now peel easily.

Cover the peeled chestnuts with milk, add a little vanilla, let them
boil in a covered pan until tender and the milk reduced. Now crush the
chestnuts in the saucepan and add 1/4 lb. powdered sugar. If the puree
is too thick add a little milk, but it should be stiff enough to form
into a border around the dish in which it is to be served.

In the centre of the dish heap whipped cream lightly sweetened
and flavoured with vanilla. The chestnut border may be made in an
ornamental form by a pastry bag and tube.


TAPIOCA PUDDING

(French)

Boil 1-1/2 pints of milk with 3 oz. of sugar and two even tablespoons
of butter. Stir in gradually 3 oz. of fine tapioca.

Place the saucepan on a slow fire and simmer 15 minutes.

Pour the mixture into a basin and add 1/2 cup stoned raisins, the
grated rind of 1 lemon, 1-1/2 oz. finely cut candied orange-peel, one
whole egg, 3 yolks; mix all together. Beat the 3 whites stiff and add
to the mixture.

Pour into a mould which has been buttered and well sprinkled with
powdered sugar and steam 45 minutes. Serve with any sweet sauce.

With a larger quantity of raisins this resembles an old time "Whisper
Pudding." So called because the plums were close together.


GINGER ICE-CREAM

(Canadian)

Make a pint of custard. When it is cold add 1/2 pint unsweetened
condensed milk, 1/2 pint unsweetened condensed cream, 2 tablespoons of
chopped preserved Canton ginger, and 4 tablespoons of the syrup from
the ginger jar.

Freeze.


ALMOND CAKE

(Canadian)

The ingredients are: Whites of 10 eggs, 1 cup of flour, 1-1/2 cups of
sugar, 1 teaspoonful of cream tartar; the method of mixing similar to
angel cake. Bake in 3 layers.

For the filling: Yolks of 4 eggs, 1 tablespoon of sugar, 2 teaspoons of
corn-starch mixed in enough milk to moisten, 1 pint of cream. Heat the
cream in a double boiler, then add other ingredients, stir constantly
and do not let it thicken too much; add a few drops of almond
flavouring and 1/2 cup of chopped almonds.

For the frosting: White of 1 egg beaten stiff, 1 cup of sugar with
enough water to melt it. Boil 2 minutes. Stir half of it into the egg,
let the remainder boil thick. Add all together and beat to the right
consistency; flavour with sherry or Madeira.


QUEEN CAKES

(English)

Melt 4 oz. of butter, then add 4 oz. of corn flour, 4 oz. flour, 6
oz. sugar, 3 eggs, 1/8 of a teaspoonful of lemon-juice, 1/8 of a
teaspoonful of lemon extract, 1 small teaspoonful of baking powder.
Beat well for 10 minutes and then bake in well-buttered patty pans in a
warm oven.


FRANCESCAS

Mix together 2 eggs, 1 cup of sugar, 1/2 cup of butter, 1/2 cup of
flour (scant), 2 squares of melted bitter chocolate, and 1 cup of
chopped (not too finely) walnuts. Bake on well-buttered paper in
moderate oven. Cut in squares while hot.


OAT CAKES

(Canadian)

Cream 1 cup of sugar with 1 tablespoonful of butter, add 2 cups of
rolled oats, a few drops of bitter almond, 2 scant teaspoons of baking
powder, then the yolks of 2 eggs, lastly the whites beaten stiff. Drop
on buttered paper and bake until a good brown.


GATEAU POLONAIS

Proportions: 1/4 lb. of almonds, 1/4 lb. of sifted sugar, 2 tablespoons
of orange water, 2 dessert-spoons of water. Pound the almonds,
moistening them with the water and orange water; mix in the sugar. Take
1/2 lb. of puff paste, divide it into two parts one a little larger
than the other. Roll the smaller piece to the thickness of 1/8 inch,
lay it at the bottom of a round baking sheet, spread on it the almond
paste to within 1/2 inch of the border, moisten the border; roll the
other piece of pastry to twice the thickness of the lower piece, place
it over the almonds, join by pressing lightly on the edges of the two
pieces of pastry; brush over the top with yolk of egg. Bake in a good
oven from 25 to 30 minutes; an instant before taking out, powder some
sugar on the top to glaze it.


ANISE CAKES

(French)

Beat well together 1/2 lb. flour, 1/2 lb. sugar, and 3 eggs. Add
aniseed to taste. Drop on buttered pans, making small round cakes and
bake slowly.


GORDON HIGHLANDER GINGERBREAD

Put in a mixing bowl 1/2 a lb. of flour, 2 oz. of brown sugar, 2 oz.
peel, 3/4 of an egg or 1 small egg, well beaten, 1/2 teaspoonful of
soda mixed with 1/4 of a cup of milk, 1/4 oz. each of ginger, mace,
and cinnamon, then beat into this slowly 3 oz. of butter that has been
warmed in 1/2 pint of molasses.

Bake very slowly in a tin lined with buttered paper.


SCOTCH SHORT BREAD

Beat to a cream 1/2 lb. of butter and 1 lb. of flour and 5 oz. of sugar
(fine), add 4 oz. ground almonds, mixing all thoroughly together. Roll
out into 3 cakes about 1/2 inch thick. Ornament around the edges and
prick the top with a fork. Bake in a moderate oven until a nice brown,
about 20 to 30 minutes.


CRAMIQUE

(Belgium)

Mix together 1/4 of a cup of sugar, 1/3 of a cup of butter, 1 cup of
milk, 1/2 teaspoonful of salt, 1 yeast cake dissolved in 1/2 a cup of
warm water, 2 pounded cardamon seeds, and let rise. When light add 1
cup of seeded raisins and enough flour to make a stiff batter. Let this
rise until it is twice the size, then shape in a round loaf and bake.
Brush over the top with the yolk of an egg.


GAUFRES

1/2 lb. flour, 1/4 lb. sugar, a little salt, 1/4 lb. butter, 2 whole
eggs, 1 yolk, 1 teaspoonful brandy, 1 teaspoonful warm water, 1/2 pint
milk.

Mix all in basin to a liquid paste, beat well until creamy.

Heat the waffle irons, butter them lightly, pour into the middle a
teaspoonful of the mixture; cook to a golden brown on both sides of the
cakes. When done, should be quite thin like an ice cream wafer. These
are delicious but it is necessary to have the proper irons.


PETS DE NONNE

Proportions: 2-1/2 cups water, 3 oz. butter, 1-1/4 oz. sugar, a pinch
salt, grated rind 1 lemon, 1/2 lb. flour, 4 whole eggs. Boil together
the water, butter, sugar, and salt for two minutes.

When the liquid is boiling remove the stewpan from fire and add the
flour all at once, then the lemon peel. When half cool add the eggs
one by one.

Drop by spoonfuls in hot frying fat, which must not be too hot. When a
golden brown remove from fire, drain, and roll in fine sugar.


BRIOCHE DE LA LUNE

Dissolve 2 yeast cakes in 1 cup of warm water; mix this into 1/4 lb.
of flour, a pinch of salt, 1 even tablespoon of sugar and 2 pounded
cardamon seeds. Put 2 dessert-spoonsful of warm water in a bowl and
place the dough in it and put in a very warm place to rise. Then work
soft 3/4 of a lb. of butter and mix into it 8 eggs and 3/4 of a lb. of
flour by degrees so that a smooth paste is obtained; when the paste is
smooth and shining add to it the yeast, butter, and 1 dessert-spoonful
of cream.

Leave in gentle temperature 4 or 5 hours or until the dough has risen
to twice its size.

Roll out on a board 1/4 of an inch thick, spread thinly with softened
butter, then turn the edges over to the center to make 3 layers. Roll
out 1/2 an inch thick. Cut into small squares. With a wet finger make a
hole in the center of each; into this hole put a piece of the dough in
the shape of a little pear; brush the top lightly with the yolk of egg.
Let it rise again and then bake in a moderate oven about 20 minutes.


VICTORIA SCONES

(English)

Two cups of flour, 4 teaspoonsful of baking powder, 2 teaspoonsful of
sugar, 1/2 teaspoon of salt, 4 tablespoonsful of butter, 2 eggs, 1/3
cup of cream.

Mix and sift together flour, baking powder, sugar, and salt. Rub in
butter, add beaten eggs and cream. Roll out on floured board 3/4 in.
thick, cut out with a small biscuit cutter, and brush over with white
of egg. Bake in a hot oven 15 minutes.


NUT BREAD

(New England)

Mix 3 cups of flour with 4 teaspoonsful of baking powder and 1
teaspoonful of salt.

In another bowl beat together 1/2 cup of sugar, 1 egg, 1 cup of milk,
and 1 cup of English walnuts broken in pieces. Add the dry ingredients
to this mixture and let rise 20 minutes, then bake in a loaf 30 to 40
minutes.


BRAN MUFFINS

(New England)

Mix 2 cups of bran, 1 cup of flour, 1 cup of milk, 1/2 cup molasses, 1
teaspoon of soda, and a pinch of salt.

Bake 20 minutes.

To this may be added some chopped nuts and raisins.


SCOTCH SCONES

Mix 3 teaspoons of baking powder with 3 cups of flour. Rub in 1
tablespoon of butter, add 1 cup of currants or raisins, 1 beaten egg,
and enough milk to make a paste to roll out. Cut into squares or rounds
and bake in a quick oven.


BLINNI

(Russian)

Mix together 2-1/2 cups of tepid milk, 4 cups of flour with 1/2 a
yeast cake and put in a warm place to rise 6 or 8 hours. One hour
before cooking add 2 cups of warm milk and 1 tablespoon of salt. Fry
like ordinary pan cakes. Serve very hot one on top of the other, well
buttered.

Blinni are spread with soured cream, and smoked salmon or caviare is
usually served with them.


BAKED HOMINY

(New England)

A good way to prepare any cereal for children. Put a pint of milk with
2 teaspoons of sugar and one of salt in a saucepan on the fire--when at
the boiling point add 6 oz. of hominy; let it cook about ten minutes.

Remove the saucepan from the fire, add a tablespoonful of butter and
three eggs. Pour this into a baking pan and bake about 20 minutes.

Baked hominy may be served with meats or fish.


MARRONS GLACES

Put the chestnuts on the fire in cold water, boil 5 minutes, take them
out, and while hot strip them of their outer and inner skins. Put them
in a big saucepan containing a syrup of the proportion of 1/2 lb. of
sugar to 1 quart water and 1 teaspoonful of butter, when they come to
the boiling point remove to the back of the stove. Use a large quantity
of the syrup to the quantity of chestnuts. This syrup should diminish
very slowly. When it has become very thick take out the chestnuts
and drain them, add a little vanilla to the syrup. Now pour boiling
water over the chestnuts to remove the syrup which covers them. Dry
them well. Beat the thick syrup until it is opaque, then roll the dry
chestnuts in it; remove with a skimmer and let them dry on a sieve.

Prunes may be treated in the same way.


SMALL CUCUMBER PICKLES

Put 1 pint of salt on 1/2 of a bushel of small green cucumbers, cover
them with boiling water, and let them stand over night. Drain off
the water and put them on the stove, a gallon at a time, in cold
vinegar, to which add a lump of alum the size of a small hickory nut.
Let them come to a boil, then take out and place in a stone jar. Have
on the stove a gallon of the best cider vinegar, to which add about 2
lbs. of brown sugar, let come to a good boil. Take out the seeds of
4 red peppers and 2 green peppers, cut them in rings, cut in pieces
1 horse-radish root, pour boiling water over them, and let stand 15
minutes; drain off, add 1/2 cup of white mustard seed, a few whole
cloves, and some cinnamon sticks. Then put all of this mixture on the
pickles, cover them with boiling vinegar, and put away. Two or three
cloves of garlic put in the jar are an addition.


PRESERVED STRAWBERRIES

(French)

These berries will remain whole. Prepare a basin of lime water. When
the lime water is cool put in the strawberries and let them stand 1/4
of an hour, then rinse them an instant in fresh water, drain them,
taking care not to bruise the fruit. Take an equal amount of sugar to
the amount of berries. To each pound of sugar, add 1 cup of water, boil
until a very thick syrup, then add the berries. Cook 5 minutes, pour
into sterilized jars and seal.


RHUBARB JELLY

(English)

Rhubarb, sugar, and 1 teaspoonful powdered alum.

Wash and cut the rhubarb in small pieces; wash again, and boil it over
a slow fire with a breakfastcupful of water till well cooked and all
the juice extracted; let it drip all night through a jelly bag; to each
good 1/2 pint of juice add 1 lb. of sugar, and add the alum to the
whole; stir till it comes to the boil, and let it boil for 10 minutes;
pour into pots.


TOMATO SOUP FOR CANNING

(New England)

Put in a preserving kettle 1/2 bushel of ripe tomatoes, 2 bunches of
celery (leaves and all), 30 sprays of parsley, 4 or 5 sweet green
peppers, 20 onions, 1 clove of garlic, 12 whole cloves, 1/2 stick of
cinnamon, 30 bay leaves, 1 teaspoonful of whole black pepper; boil this
4 hours, strain through a sieve, and add 1-1/2 cups of flour, one cup
of sugar, 1 lb. of butter, and 5 tablespoonsful of salt. Cook 1/2 hour
longer and seal in sterilized jars.

This is a good soup and will keep all winter.


BUDO CUP

To 1 pint bottle of dry ginger ale, add 1 pint bottle of grape juice,
juice of 1 orange, 1 lemon, 2 tablespoonsful of Jamaica rum, and 1
bottle of effervescent water.




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's note:

Varied hyphenation was retained.

This text uses the spelling of Curacoa in place of the more usual
Curacao.

Page 16, "excelent" changed to "excellent" (make an excellent)

Page 71, "Bechamel" changed to "Bechamel" (layer of Bechamel)



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALLIED COOKERY***


******* This file should be named 44947.txt or 44947.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/4/9/4/44947



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
