The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Complete Poems of Sir John Davies.
Volume 1 of 2., by John Davies

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Complete Poems of Sir John Davies. Volume 1 of 2.

Author: John Davies

Editor: Alexander B. Grosart

Release Date: February 22, 2014 [EBook #44977]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS OF SIR JOHN DAVIES (1/2) ***




Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






 Transcriber's Note:

 In this etext the following are represented by:--

 Italics > _underscore_
 Macron > [=r]
 Superscript > ^
 oe ligature > [oe]
 ornate font > $

 Greek language is shown in phonetics.

       *       *       *       *       *


  Early English Poets.

  SIR JOHN DAVIES.


  PRINTED BY ROBERT ROBERTS,
  BOSTON.




  Early English Poets.

  THE

  COMPLETE POEMS

  OF

  SIR JOHN DAVIES.

  EDITED,

  WITH

  Memorial-Introduction and Notes,

  BY THE

  REV. ALEXANDER B. GROSART.


  [Illustration]


  _IN TWO VOLUMES.--VOL. I._


  London:
  CHATTO AND WINDUS, PICCADILLY.
  1876.




  To
  THE RIGHT HONOURABLE W. EWART
  GLADSTONE, M.P., &c., &c.

  SIR,

I had the honour to place in your hands the complete Poems of SIR
JOHN DAVIES in the Fuller Worthies' Library. In now publishing
these Poems for a wider circle of readers and students, I re-dedicate
them to you.

That I should have wished (and wish) to inscribe the Works of a man
famous as a prescient and practical Statesman, as a philosophic
Thinker, as an Orator, as a Lawyer, and as a Poet, to you, is
extremely natural; for in you, Sir,--in common with all Great Britain
and Europe, and America,--I recognize his equal, and England's
foremost living name, in nearly every department wherein the elder
distinguished himself; while transfiguring and ennobling all, is
your conscience-ruled and stainless Christian life. That you gave me
permission so to do, with appreciative and kindly words, adds to my
pleasure. Trusting that my fresh 'labour of love' (for which 'love of
labour' has been necessary) on this Worthy may meet your continued
approval,

  I am, Sir,
  With high regard and gratitude,
  Yours faithfully and truly,
  ALEXANDER B. GROSART.




_Preface._


My edition of the Complete Poems of Sir John Davies in the Fuller
Worthies' Library in 1869; since being followed up with a similarly
complete collection of his much more extensive Prose, as Volumes II.
and III. of his entire Works--met with so instant a Welcome, that very
speedily I had to return the answer of 'out of print' to numerous
applicants. Accordingly it was with no common satisfaction I agreed
to the request of the Publishers that Sir John Davies' complete Poems
should succeed Giles Fletcher's in their Early English Poets.

In the preparation of this new edition I have carefully re-collated
the whole of the original and early editions, with the same advantage
and for the same reasons, as in Giles Fletcher's. I have likewise been
enabled to make some interesting additions, as will appear in the
respective places.

I wish very cordially to re-thank various friends for their continued
helpfulness. Several I must specify: To Dr. Brinsley Nicholson I
am indebted for many suggestions, and spontaneous research towards
elucidating the Poems. I would specially thank B. H. Beedham, Esq.,
Ashfield House, Kimbolton, for not only making a transcript of the
holograph copy of the "Twelve Wonders" in Downing College Library,
Cambridge, and of the Lines to the King in All Souls' College,
Oxford--both Colleges readily allowing this--but for his old-fashioned
enthusiasm and carefulness of scrutiny of every available source, far
and near. Biographical results will be utilized more fully elsewhere,
viz. in the Memorial-Introduction to be prefixed to the Prose in the
complete Works; but meantime and here I cannot sufficiently acknowledge
Mr. Beedham's kindness or my obligation to him. To Colonel Chester, of
Bermondsey, for ready and most useful help in family-Wills, &c., I am
as often deeply obliged. His Grace the Duke of Northumberland, was good
enough to allow me the leisurely use of his MS. of "Nosce Teipsum" at
Alnwick Castle. Dr. David Laing, of Edinburgh, again entrusted me his
Davies MSS. (See Note, Vol. II., p. 119.)

The Poetry of Sir John Davies, weighty and imperishable though it be,
bears so small a proportion to his entire works and activities in many
departments, that it would be out of keeping to give a lengthened Life
herein. Still, in the present Memorial-Introduction will be found
very much more of accurate detail than hitherto, and corrections of
long-transmitted and accepted mistakes.

The discovery of extremely important MSS.--including State-Papers,
and official and private Letters--in H.M. Public Record Office, the
Bodleian, Oxford, the British Museum, etc., delays my completion of
the Prose Works and the full Life; but within this year it is my hope
and expectation to issue the whole to my constituents of the Fuller
Worthies' Library. _En passant_--for the sake of others it may be
stated that the complete Works (Verse and Prose: 3 vols.) will be
readily accessible in all the leading public Libraries of the Kingdom,
and of the United States.

I send forth this new edition of a great Poet assured that he has not
yet gathered half his destined renown:--

  "Ah! weak and foolish men are they
  Who lightly deem of Poet's lay,
  That turns e'en winter months to May,
      And makes the whole year warm:
  'Tis this that brings back Paradise,
  Reveals its bowers by Art's device,
  Instructs the fool, delights the wise,
      And gives to Life its charm.

  (STEPHEN JENNER.)

  ALEXANDER B. GROSART.

  _St. George's Vestry,
  Blackburn, Lancashire._




_Contents._

Those marked with [*] are herein printed for the first time, or
published for the first time among Davies' Poems.


                                                      PAGE

  DEDICATION                                             i

  PREFACE                                              iii

  MEMORIAL-INTRODUCTION--I. BIOGRAPHICAL                xi

     "          "       II. CRITICAL                  lvii

     "          "      III. POSTSCRIPT                 cvi

  NOSCE TEIPSUM                                      1-118

  NOTE                                                   3

  ROYAL DEDICATION                                       9

  *DEDICATION OF A GIFT-COPY (IN MS.) IN THE POSSESSION
  OF HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF NORTHUMBERLAND,
  AT ALNWICK CASTLE                                     12

  OF HUMANE KNOWLEDGE                                   15

  OF THE SOULE OF MAN AND THE IMMORTALITIE THEREOF      25

  What the soule is                                     29

  That the soule is a thing subsisting by it selfe
  without the body                                      29

  That the soule is more then a perfection or reflection
  of the sense                                          35

  That the Soule is more then the Temperature of
  the Humors of the Body                                39

  That the Soule is a Spirit                            41

  That it cannot be a Body                              42

  That the Soule is created immediately by God          45

  Erronious opinions of the Creation of Soules          46

  Objection:--That the Soule is Extraduce               47

  The Answere to the Obiection                          49

  Reasons drawne from Nature                            49

  Reasons drawne from Diuinity                          52

  Why the Soule is United to the Body                   60

  In what manner the Soule is united to the Body        61

  How the Soul doth exercise her Powers in the Body     63

  The Vegetatiue or quickening Power                    63

  The power of Sense                                    64

  Sight                                                 65

  Hearing                                               67

  Taste                                                 68

  Smelling                                              69

  Feeling                                               70

  The Imagination or Common Sense                       70

  The Fantasie                                          71

  The Sensitiue Memorie                                 72

  The Passions of Sense                                 73

  The Motion of Life                                    74

  The Locall Motion                                     74

  The intellectuall Powers of the Soule                 75

  The Wit or Understanding                              75

  Reason, Vnderstanding                                 76

  Opinion, Judgement                                    76

  The Power of Will                                     78

  The Relations betwixt Wit and Will                    78

  The Intellectuall Memorie                             79

  An Acclamation                                        81

  That the Soule is Immortal, and cannot Die            82

  Reason I--Drawne from the desire of Knowledge         83

  Reason II--Drawn from the Motion of the Soule         85
      The Soul compared to a Riuer                      85

  Reason III--From Contempt of Death in the
    better Sort of Spirits                              90

  Reason IV--From the Feare of Death in the
    Wicked Soules                                       92

  Reason V--From the generall Desire of Immortalitie    93

  Reason VI--From the very Doubt and Disputation
  of Immortalitie                                       95

  That the Soule cannot be destroyed                    96

  Her Cause ceaseth not                                 96

  She hath no Contrary                                  96

  Shee cannot Die for want of Food                      97

  Violence cannot destroy her                           98

  Time cannot destroy her                               98

  Objections against the Immortalitie of the Soule      99

  Objection I                                          100

  Answere                                              100

  Objection II                                         104

  Answere                                              105

  Objection III                                        106

  Answere                                              106

  Objection IV                                         108

  Answere                                              109

  Objection V                                          110

  Answere                                              110

  The Generall Consent of All                          111

  Three Kinds of Life answerable to the three
  Powers of the Soule                                  113

  An Acclamation                                       114

  APPENDIX--REMARKS PREFIXED TO NAHUM TATE'S
  EDITION (1697) OF 'NOSCE TEIPSUM'                    118

  HYMNES TO ASTRAEA                                    125

  NOTE                                                 127

  Of Astraea                                           129

  To Astraea                                           130

  To the Spring                                        131

  To the Moneth of May                                 132

  To the Larke                                         133

  To the Nightingale                                   134

  To the Rose                                          135

  To all the Princes of Europe                         136

  To Flora                                             137

  To the Moneth of September                           138

  To the Sunne                                         139

  To her Picture                                       140

  Of her Minde                                         141

  Of the Sun-beames of her Mind                        142

  Of her Wit                                           143

  Of her Will                                          144

  Of her Memorie                                       145

  Of her Phantasie                                     146

  Of the Organs of her Minde                           147

  Of the Passions of her Heart                         148

  Of the innumerable vertues of her Minde              149

  Of her Wisdome                                       150

  Of her Justice                                       151

  Of her Magnanimitie                                  152

  Of her Moderation                                    153

  To Enuy                                              154

  ORCHESTRA, OR A POEME OF DAUNCING                    155

  NOTE                                                 157

  DEDICATIONS.--I. TO HIS VERY FRIEND, MA. RICH.
  MARTIN                                               159

    II. TO THE PRINCE                                  160

  ORCHESTRA, OR A POEME OF DAUNCING                    161




_Memorial-Introduction._

I. BIOGRAPHICAL.


As in other instances, the first thing to be done in any Life of our
present Worthy, is to distinguish him from other two contemporary Sir
John Davieses--non-attention to which has in many biographical and
bibliographical works led to no little confusion. There was

I. Sir John Davis (or Davys or Davies) of Pangbourne, Berkshire,
who 'sleeps well' under a chalk-stone monument in the parish church
there. He was mixed up with the 'Plots' (alleged and semi-real),
of the Elizabethan-Essex period. Many of his Letters--various very
long and matterful and pathetic--are preserved at Hatfield among the
Cecil-Salisbury MSS. The Blue-Book report of the "Royal Commission on
Historical Manuscripts" (3rd, 1872), makes a strange jumble of our Sir
John and this Sir John's Letters (see Index, s. n.). He was Master
of the Ordnance 31st January, 1598, and was knighted at Dublin 12th
July, 1599. His Will is dated 6th April, 1625, and it was proved at
London ... May, 1626. Our Sir John was appointed one of his executors.
Arms: _Sable_, a griffin, segt., _or._ He is supposed to have been of
Shropshire descent.

II. Sir John Davies (or Davys or Davis) Knight-Marshal of Connaught and
Thomond: temp. Elizabeth. He had large grants of lands in Roscommon.
He is now represented by the family of Clonshanville (or Loyle) in
Roscommon, who are of Shropshire descent (see Archdall's Peerage of
Ireland.) His Will is dated 14th February, 1625. He died 13th April,
1626. His Will was not proved (at Dublin) until 17th November, 1628.
Arms: Sable, on a chevron, argent, three trefoils slipped, _vert._:
crest; a dragon's head erased, _vert._

According to Mr. J. Payne Collier, the following entry is found in the
register of S. Mary, Aldermanbury: "Buried Sir John Davyes, Knight, May
28, 1624." (Bibliographical Account of Early English Literature, i.,
193). If there be no mistake here, we have another contemporary Sir
John Davies. Certainly it was not ours, and as certainly neither of the
two preceding.[1]

[Footnote 1: Through B. H. Beedham, Esq., as before, I have many
details on the two contemporary Sir John Davieses from Sir Bernard
Burke Ulster King at Arms, &c., &c., and J. N. C. Atkinson Davis,
Esqr., Dublin; and the same acknowledgment has to be made on many
points in the Life.]

The spelling of the family name, which is now Davies, varies very much.
I have found it as Dyve, Dayves, Davyes, Dauis, Davis, and Davies.
Usually our Worthy signs 'Dauyes;' but in his books changes, e.g., in
'Nosce Teipsum' of 1599, to the verse-dedication to Elizabeth, it is
'Dauies;' in 1602 'Dauys,' and in 1608 'Davis,' and so diversely in his
Prose.

Among the Carte Papers in the Bodleian are rough jottings by the
Historian for a Memoir of our Sir John Davies, wherein it is stated
that the family came originally from South Wales to Tisbury, Wiltshire.
The words are: "His family had continued several generations in y^{e}
place, though descended from a family of that name in South Wales: but
planted heere in England Temp. Hen. 7: accompanying at that time y^{e}
Earle of Pembrooke out of Wales.[2]

[Footnote 2: Carte Papers, folios 330-334: Vol. XII. The particular
MS. is headed "Notes of the life of Sr John Dauys. May 2d. 1674."
These Notes are not very accurate. To begin with, the father's name is
mistakenly given as Edward instead of John.]

The 'estate' of the Davieses at Tisbury was named Chicksgrove
(sometimes spelled Chisgrove.) Only a small fragment of the Manor-house
remains "unto this day." The Tisbury parish registers, however, yield
abundant entries of the family-names under the wonted three-fold
'Baptisms,' 'Marriages,' 'Burials;' and the church itself, in tablets
and communion plate, and other memorials, possesses various evidences
of their influential position for many generations, and in many lines
of descent and local intermarriage. It must suffice here briefly to
summarize the Pedigree, and to extract the entries immediately bearing
on our present Life.

Confirming the Carte statement of a Welsh descent, one John Davys,
of ... wyn, in Shropshire, temp. Henry VIII., recorded by Carney
(1606) in the Visitation of Dublin in Ulster Office, and according to
Chalmers settled at Tisbury, temp. Edward VI., came from Wales with
the Earl of Pembroke, and was living in 1517 and 1541.[3] This John
Davys married Matilda, daughter of ... Bridemore, who was buried as
"Maud, Master Davys widow, 18 May, 1570." There was a numerous family
of sons and daughters from this union.[4] We have only now to do
with their eighth, and youngest son, John, who was living in 1517
and 1541.[5] He was of 'New Inn,' London; and thus, like his more
famous son, was brought up to the study of the Law. This will appear
authoritatively onward; but at this point it is needful to correct and
explain a long-continued error, originated by ANTHONY a-WOOD "Athenae,"
by Dr. Bliss, Vol. ii., p. 400) apparently, viz. that the father was
"a wealthy tanner," and so Sir John, of "low extraction," etc., etc.
I do not know that there should have been reason for shame had the
paternal Davies been a 'tanner,' wealthy or otherwise, if otherwise
he was that Christian gentleman which all reports represent. But the
matter-of-fact is that through the premature deaths of his elder
brothers, John Davyes, of Chisgrove, seems to have inherited the family
possessions and wealth, and to have been in the front rank of the
country gentry. The explanation of the mistake as to his having been a
'tanner,' is unexpectedly found in the Will of Thomas Bennett, brother
(as we shall see) of Sir John Davies' mother. Among other things he
leaves "a certain mess, or tent, in West Hatch now (1591) in the use of
Edward Scannell, and all lands thereto belonging, [to] be held by John
Bennett my son, Thomas Rose and Nicholas Graye as trustees to my own
use for life, and after my decease to the use and behoof" of various
relatives, of whom one is described as "Edward Davys of Tyssebury,
_tanner_." This Edward Davys, tanner, was no doubt of the Chisgrove
family; and hence the confusion. In all probability he was one of the
younger sons, and so brother of our Sir John. When he came to make his
Will (now before me), though engaged in trade, he asserts his gentility
by styling himself 'gentleman.' So much in correction of a second
important biographical mistake.

[Footnote 3: In MS. F 4, 18, Trinity College, Dublin, the same origin
is given, but the place beyond ... 'wyn' is illegible in both.]

[Footnote 4: Hoare's Wilts. gives many names; but his pedigrees are
rarely trustworthy; as a rule, are exceedingly untrustworthy.]

[Footnote 5: The MSS. of note _supra_.]

John Davyes, of Chisgrove, was married to Mary, daughter of John
Bennett (alias Pitt) of Pitt House, Wilts., (Visitation of Wilts.,
1563) by Agnes his wife, daughter of ........ Toppe, of Fenny Sutton,
in Wilts. Hoare[6] and others, give ample proof of the almost lordly
position of the Bennetts. Woolrych observes (1869) "The Bennetts of
Pyt, have been well known in our own time. The struggles of Bennet
and Astley for the representation of the county are remembered as
severe and costly."[7] Thus if Davyes of Chisgrove was of good blood
in the county, he certainly advanced himself when he wooed and won
a daughter of the house of Bennett (or Benett). They had at least
three sons. The first was Matthew, who became D.D., Vicar of Writtle,
Essex. Hoare (as before) calls him second son, and states that he died
unmarried. Both are inaccuracies. The Tisbury Register shews that
he was the eldest not the second son; and the Will of our Sir John
remembers his family.[8] The second son was (probably) the Edward who
became a "tanner." He was baptized at Tisbury 6th December, 1566. He
too is named in our Sir John's Will. The third was the subject of our
Memorial-Introduction. The following is his baptismal entry from (_a_)
the paper or scroll-copy, (_b_) the parchment or extended register of
Tisbury--_literatim_:

[Footnote 6: Wilts., as before, on Davies, Vol. IV. part I., p. 136; on
Bennetts, Vol. III., part II., p. 107.]

[Footnote 7: Lives of Eminent Serjeants, 2 vols., 8vo. (1869). By
H. William Woolrych, Sergeant-at-Law: Vol. I., p. 187. Considerable
industry is shown in this work, but it literally swarms with blunders.]

[Footnote 8: In the fuller Life to be prefixed to the Prose Works, I
hope to furnish more details.]

 (_a_) Paper MS.: 1569 Aprill xvj. John the sonne of John Dauy was
 crysten'd.

 (_b_) Parchment MS.: Anno dni 1569 Aprill 16 John the sonne of John
 Davis bapt.[9]

There were two sisters, Edith and Maria. Master John was in his 11th
year only when he lost his father, who died in 1580. The Carte MS.
"Notes" (as before) tell us: "his father dyed when hee was very young
and left him with his 2 brothers to his mother to bee educated. She
therefore brought them vpp all to learning." The same "Notes" state
"y^{t} Iohn off whom we now write, being designed for a lawyer,
neglected his learning, butt being first a scholar in Winchester
Colledge, was afterwards removed to New Colledge in Oxford." According
to Chalmers (History of Oxford: I. p. 105) he became in Michaelmas term
1585, a Commoner of Queen's College, Oxford. From thence he removed
in 1587 (not 1588 as usually stated e.g. by Wood to George Chalmers
and Woolrych). The Admission Register of the Middle Temple contains
his entry, and it is interesting additionally as establishing that his
father was of the New Inn, London, and so of the legal profession:

  f. 193 D.
  Teio Die februarij A^o 1587:

 Mr Iohes Davius filius tertius Johis Davis de Tisburie in Com Wiltes
 gen de nov hospitio gen admissus est in societate medij Templi et
 obligat^r vna m ' m^r is Lewes et Raynolde et dat p fine--xx^s.[10]

[Footnote 9: In the same I intend to give account of these Registers,
and the many Davies entries, &c.]

[Footnote 10: From the original books, as _supra_. See Pearce's Inns
of Court, p. 293, where it is stated that the elder Davies was a legal
practitioner in Wilts.]

This 'entry' renders null all speculations as to whether by 'New
Inn' were not intended 'New Hall' Oxford, &c. &c.; and it is a third
correction of important biographical errors hitherto.

It is to be regretted that other Records of New Inn commence only with
the year 1674. So that we are without light on the residence in the
Middle Temple.

In 1590 the saddest of all human losses came on the young law-student
by the death of his mother, who was buried at Tisbury "XXVth
of Marche, 1590." In this year he is again at the University of
Oxford; for in the "Fasti" (by Bliss, Vol. ii., p. 250) he is entered
under 1590 as taking the degree of Bachelor of Arts. I fear that with
the death of his lady-mother there ensued a full plunge into the
frivolities and gaities of the University and Inns of Court society.
It was a 'fast' period; and while his after-books prove conclusively
that he must have studied Law widely and laboriously, there can be
little doubt that there were outbursts of youthful extravagance and
self-indulgence. None the less is it equally certain--rather is in
harmony therewith--that very early he mingled with the poets and wits
of the day. There is not a tittle of evidence warranting the ascription
of "Sir Martin Mar People his Coller of Esses Workmanly wrought by
Maister Simon Soothsaier, Goldsmith of London, and offered to sale upon
great necessity by John Davies. Imprinted at London by Richard Ihones.
1590 (4^to),"[11] to him; nor can any one really study "O Vtinam 1
For Queene Elizabeths securitie, 2 For hir Subiects prosperitie, 3
For a general conformitie, 4 And for Englands tranquilitie. Printed
at London, by R. Yardley and P. Short, for Iohn Pennie, dwelling in
Pater noster row, at the Grey hound. 1591 (16mo),"[12] and for a
moment concede his hastily alleged authorship. But in 1593 his poem of
"Orchestra, or a Poeme of Dauncing," was "licensed to Iohn Harison" the
elder. No earlier edition than that of 1596 has been proved; but the
"license" assures us that Harrison had negotiated for its publication
in 1593. The title-page of the 1596 edition is followed by a dedicatory
sonnet "To his very friend, Ma. Rich. Martin." The Reader may turn
to it "an' it please" him (Vol. I. p. 159): and "thereby hangs a
tale." The dedicatory sonnet, it will be seen, while characterizing
"Orchestra" as "this dauncing Poem," this "suddaine, rash, half-capreol
of my wit," informs us that his "very friend" Martin was the "first
mouer and sole cause of it, and that he was the Poet's "owne selues
better halfe," and "deerest friend." We have the time employed on it
too:--

[Footnote 11: There is a copy at Lambeth.]

[Footnote 12: There is a copy in the Bodleian.]

    "You know the modest Sunne full fifteene times
    Blushing did rise, and blushing did descend,
    While I in making of these ill made rimes,
    My golden howers unthriftily did spend:
      Yet, if in friendship you these numbers prayse,
      I will mispend another fifteene dayes."

All this receives tragi-comical illumination from the fact that this
same "very friend" and "better halfe," and he who so sang of him, had
soon a deadly quarrel and estrangement. RICHARD MARTIN became
Recorder of London, and one memorial of him is a Speech to the King
which, if it partakes of the oddities of Euphues, must also be allowed
to contain weighty and bravely-outspoken counsel: and thus he has come
down to posterity as a grave and potent seignior. Moreover, he became
Reader of his Society, and M.P. for first Barnstaple, and later for
Cirencester. He appears, too, as the associate of Ben Jonson, John
Selden, and others of the foremost.[13]

[Footnote 13: See Woolrych, as before, and the authorities therein
given. At the end of Thomas Coriate's "Traveller for the English Wits,"
W. Jaggard, 1616 (4to), is a list of his acquaintances, to whom he
desires "the commendations of my dutiful respects." Among them occurs
"Mr. Richard Martin, Counsellor."]

But as a youthful law-student he was 'wild.' He fell under the lash of
the Benchers, having been expelled from the Middle Temple in February,
1591, for the part he took in a riot at the prohibited festival of the
Lord of Misrule. He was fast of tongue and ribald of wit, with a dash
of provocative sarcasm. Evidently he was one of those men who would
rather (as the saying puts it) lose his friend than his joke (however
poor the joke and rich the friend). A consideration of the whole facts
seems to show that again restored to the Middle Temple he had let loose
his probably wine-charged sarcasms at his friend Davies. Whether it
was so or not, he was ignobly punished. For against all "good manners"
not to speak of the "law" and discipline of the Court, Master Davies
came into the Hall with his hat on, armed with a dagger, and attended
by two persons with swords. Master Martin was seated at dinner at the
Barristers' Table. Davies pulling a bastinado or cudgel from under his
gown, went up to his insulter and struck him repeatedly over the head.
The chastisement must have been given with a will; for the bastinado
was shivered to pieces--arguing either its softness or the head's
asinine thickness. Having "avenged" himself, Davies returned to the
bottom of the Hall, drew one of the swords belonging to his attendants,
and flourished it repeatedly over his head, turning his face towards
Martin, and then hurrying down the water-steps of the Temple, threw
himself into a boat.[14] This extraordinary occurrence happened at the
close of 1597 or January of 1598. In 1595 he had been called to the
bar; but in February 1598 Davies was expelled by a unanimous sentence;
"disbarred" and deprived for ever of all authority to speak or consult
in law.[15] These "outbreaks" and expulsions were familiar incidents;
and make us exclaim with Othello: "O thou invisible spirit of wine, if
thou hast no name to be known by, let us call thee devil"--"O God, that
men should put an enemy in their mouths to steal away their brains!
that we should with joy, pleasure, revel and applause, transform
ourselves into beasts" (ii. 3). This is the all-too-plain solution
of these "high jinks." It was a disaster of the most ominous kind.
Nevertheless the dark cloud that thus fell across the noon of the
full-and-hot-blooded young Barrister folded in it a "bright light:"
or--if we may fetch an illustration from Holy Scripture, as Moses the
great Lawgiver of ancient Israel through the slaying of the Egyptian
was compelled to be a fugitive in the wilderness and therein to master
his native impulsiveness and passion, so was the "offender" in the
Hall of the Middle Temple through the disgrace and penalties incurred
forced into retirement and introspection. It was a costly price to
pay. But it is to be doubted whether if the enforced return to Oxford
and the self-scrutiny and penitence that calm reflection wrought there
had not arrested him, he ever would have given our literature "Nosce
Teipsum." His great poem bears witness to very poignant self-accusation
and humiliation. Towards the close you seem to catch the echo of sobs
and the glistening of tears; nor is it "preaching" to recognize a
diviner element still--his unrest and burden alike laid on Him Who
alone can sustain and help a "wounded spirit" in its trouble. Besides
the hazardous as disastrous incident with Martin, his "Epigrams"
by their _abandon_ and general allusiveness reveal that he was the
associate of the "young gallants" of the city and lived "fast"; and so
give significance and interpretation to his later passionate regrets,
self-accusations and self-rebuke. How abased and yet in touches how
noble is this!

[Footnote 14: Lord Stowell wrote an elaborate Paper on the whole
matter, and the restoration of Davies. It appeared in "Archaeologia,"
Vol. XXI. I propose to write the narrative _in extenso_ in my fuller
Life, as before.]

[Footnote 15: Lord Stowell, as before.]

    "O ignorant poor man! what dost thou beare
      Lockt vp within the casket of thy brest?
      What iewels and what riches hast thou there!
      What heauenly treasure in so weake a chest!

    Looke in thy soule, and thou shalt beauties find,
      Like those which drownd Narcissus in the flood:
      Honour and Pleasure both are in thy mind,
      And all that in the world is counted good.

    Thinke of her worth, and think that God did meane,
      This worthy mind should worthy things imbrace;
      Blast not her beauties with thy thoughts vnclean,
      Nor her dishonour with thy passions base:

    Kill not her quickning powers with surfettings,
      Mar not her sense with sensualitie;
      Cast not her serious wit on idle things:
      Make not her free-will, slaue to vanitie.

    And when thou think'st of her eternitie,
      Thinke not that death against her nature is,
      Thinke it a birth; and when thou goest to die,
      Sing like a swan, as if thou went'st to blisse.

           *       *       *       *       *


    Take heed of over-weening, and compare
      Thy peacock's feet with thy gay peacock's traine;
      Study the best and highest things that are,
      But of thyselfe an humble thought retaine."[16]

"Expelled" and "disbarred," he retired to Oxford and there "followed
his studies, although he wore a cloak." (Wood's _Athenae_, as before,
ii. 401). To lighten severer studies he now leisurely composed that
"Nosce Teipsum" from which has just been quoted the remarkable close.
His vein must have been a "flowing" one; for it was published within
a year of his disgrace, viz. in 1599.[17] It was dedicated to the
"great Queen;" without the all-too-common contemporary hyperbole of
laudation, yet showing the strange magnetism of her influence to win
allegiance from the greatest, even in her old age:--

  "Loadstone to hearts and loadstone to all eyes."

The Carte "Notes" (as before) thus tell the whole story and ratify
Anthony-a-Wood:--"Vpon a quarrell between him and Mr. Martin before
y^{e} Judges, where he strooke Mr. Martin hee was confined and made a
prisoner: after w^{ch} in discontentment he retired to y^{e} countrye,
and writt y^{t} excellent poeme of his Nosce Teipsum, w^{ch} was so
well aprooved of by the Lord Mountioy after Lord Deputy of Ireland and
Earle of Devonshire, that by his aduise he publisht it and dedicated
it to Queen Elizabeth, to whom hee presented it, being introduced by
y^{e} aforesaide Lord his pattron, and y^{e} first essay of his pen
was so well relisht y^{t} y^{e} Queen encouraged him in his studdys,
promising him preferment, and had him sworn her servant in ordinary."
"Nosce Teipsum" was not his "first essay" so that perchance the meaning
is that its verse-dedication was his "first essay" in addressing the
Queen--his second being the Hymns to Astraea. The "Hymns to Astraea"
appeared in quick succession to "Nosce Teipsum" in the same year 1599.
They are dainty trifles; but from all we know of Elizabeth would be
received as "sweet incense." If they seem to us to-day flattering not
to say adulatory, it must be remembered that such was the _mode_. Much
later, Epistles-dedicatory from Bacon and others of the mighties,
and not to Elizabeth but to James--are infinitely fulsome compared
with the ideal praises of an ideal Elizabeth--that Elizabeth who had
stirred the nation's pulses through her great patriotic words when
"The Armada" threatened--in the most superlative of these "Hymnes."
Their workmanship is as of diamond-facets. The "bright light" of
olden promise was now "lining" the dark cloud. The discipline of
his retirement to Oxford did him life-long good. Speedily outward
events dove-tailed with the deepened ethical experience and resultant
character.

[Footnote 16: Vol. I., pp. 115-116, "Nosce Teipsum."]

[Footnote 17: See Vol. I., pp. 9-11. The date 1592, sometimes
(modernly) appended to the dedication of "Nosce Teipsum," has
no authority, and is in contradiction with all the known facts
and circumstances. Equally erroneous and misleading is the
ultra-rhetorically given chronology in "Court and Society from
Elizabeth to Anne," (2 Vols., 8vo., 1864), which bears the name of
the present Duke of Manchester, as thus:--"This Templar ... who wrote
a noble work on the immortality of the soul in the very hey-day of
his young blood, who afterwards became famous for his gravity as a
judge, his wisdom as a politician, and his soundness as a statesman,
terminated his literary career as the author of a poem in praise of
dancing," (Vol. I., p. 289). This is precisely the reverse of the fact.
In his earlier hot-blooded days he threw off his gay and self-named
"light" verses. In an interval of penitent self-inspection and worthier
aspiration, he wrote "Nosce Teipsum," and he followed this up by
ever-deepened grave, wise and weighty (prose) books. It is a pity
(perhaps) to spoil your brilliant bits of antithetic scandal; and more
pity that they should be hazarded for inevitable spoiling. Or put it in
another way: it is too bad to have your cook serving up the Roast Beef
of Old England as if it were strawberries (and cream). One need not use
severer terms, knowing the ducal editorship is a blind. Campbell in his
"Specimens," preceded in the blundering.]

For despair and disgrace there came hope and help. For a career
that seemed arrested, a higher, and wider, and nobler opened out in
inspiriting perspective. In 1599-1600 he was in all men's mouths as a
Poet. The "Poetical Rhapsody" of Davison of these years would have been
rendered incomplete without contributions from "I. D.;" and so there
went to it those Minor Poems, that are read still with pleasure. So
early as 1595 George Chapman had printed his "Ovid's Banquet of Sence,"
with lines from "I. D." More important still, "Secretary Cecil" became
his friend and patron. "_By desire_" he prepared certain dialogues and
scenes for entertainments to the Queen. Three of these remain. The
first is "A Dialogue between a Gentleman Usher and a Poet."[18] The
second is "A Contention betwixt a Wife, a Widdow, and a Maide."[19]
The third is "A Lottery: presented (as the heading states) before
the late Queene's Maiesty at the Lord Chancelor's House, 1601."[20]
These indicate that the recluse of Oxford was once more restored to
society, and that the supremest. The favour of the aged Queen was
capricious; but the "Lottery" that formed part of the entertainment
at the Lord Chancellor's marked the turning of the tide, in flood not
ebb. Through Ellesmere steps were taken to cancel the "expulsion" and
"disbarring." He addressed a respectful and manly Petition to "his
Society." It was considered at a "Parliament of the Society, held on
the 30th October 1601." He had "presented" it in Trinity Term; but it
was adjourned until now. In the interval he had attended "the Commons"
and in November after making the admission and satisfaction required by
four Benches, it was unanimously agreed that he should be "restored to
his position at the bar and his seniority." He publicly pronounced his
"repentance" in due form on the feast of All Saints. This was done in
the Hall in the presence of Chief Iustice Popham, Chief Baron Periam,
Judge Fenner, Baron Savil, Sergeant Harris, Sergeant Williams, and the
Masters of the Bench." The legal or ceremonial part being completed,
and the Apology read in English, Davies turned to "Mr. Martin," then
present, and as he could offer no sufficient satisfaction to him,
entreated his forgiveness, promising sincere love and affection in all
good offices towards him for the future." "Mr. Martin" accepted the
tender thus made, and the re-instatement was completed.[21] That the
reconciliation between Davies and Martin was formal rather than real
has been too hastily assumed. True, that when in 1622 Davies collected
his Poems, the Sonnet to Martin was withdrawn and a _hiatus_ left
towards the close of "Orchestra." But both these things are otherwise
explainable. Both Elizabeth and Martin were now dead--the latter in
1618. Besides, it was only natural that the living friend should be
willing to remove all memory of the quarrel. The name should only
have revived it. This, and not a many-yeared carrying of an unclosed
wound is my judgment in charity. The restored 'Barrister' never forgot
his indebtedness to the Lord Chancellor. His dedication of his great
"Reports" of Irish Law Cases and their correspondence remain to attest
this--remain too to attest the reciprocal admiration, if a tenderer
word were not fitter, of Ellesmere.[22] His words in the 'Reports'
dedication are more than respectful.

[Footnote 18: In Memorial-Introduction to Poems, as before, pp. 15-21.]

[Footnote 19: See Vol. II., pp. 72-86.]

[Footnote 20: Ibid, pp. 87-95. See on this in second division of this
Memorial-Introduction: Postscript.]

[Footnote 21: See Lord Stowell's Paper, in Archaelogia, Vol. XXI., pp.
107-112, and our fuller Life, as before.]

[Footnote 22: See Prose Works, as before, Vol. II. With reference to
the Lines to the Lord Chancellor on the death of his "second wife"
(Vol. I. pp. 112-3) it may be noted that he married (1) Elizabeth,
d. of Thomas Ravenscroft of Bretton, co. Flint, Esq., (2) Elizabeth,
sister of Sir George More of Loseley co. Surrey, Kt., and widow of
Sir John Wolley of Pirford, Surrey, Kt., and before him of Richard
Polsted, Esq., of Aldbury, co. Surrey. Her second husband Sir John
Wolley (sometimes spelled Wooley) died in February or March 1595-6 and
was buried in St. Paul's Cathedral. She appears to have remarried (viz.
the Lord Chancellor) in the same year: so that she did not live long
thereafter; for she died on 20th January 1599-1600 and was buried with
her second husband. The Lord Chancellor was in profound grief (as the
Lines of Davies confirm); but he got over it sufficiently to marry (3)
Alice, d. of Sir John Spencer of Althorpe co. Northampton, Kt., and
widow of Ferdinando, 5th Earl of Derby, on 21st October of the same
year (1599-1600) exactly nine months after the death of his (lamented)
second wife. She survived the Lord Chancellor until 26th January 1636-7
and was buried at Harefield, co. Middlesex. Of Ellesmere himself these
_data_ may be given: Sir Thomas Egerton was created Lord Ellesmere 21
July 1603, upon his appointment as Lord High Chancellor of England.
He was further created Viscount Brackley 7th Nov. 1616, and was about
being made Earl of Bridgewater when he died 15th March 1616-7. His son
John was so created 27th May 1617.]

It would appear from the MS. dedication of a corrected MS. of "Nosce
Teipsum" to "the right noble, valorous, and learned Prince Henry, Earle
of Northumberland" that he must have joined in the intercession for
restoration, e.g.

    "Then to what spirit shall I these noates commend,
      But unto that which doth them best expresse;

    Who will to them more kind protection lend,
      Than Hee which did protect me in distresse."[23]

[Footnote 23: Vol. I., pp. 12-13.]

Contemporaneous with his full Restoration to his privileges at the
Bar, the student-lawyer--through influence that has not come down to
us--found his way into Parliament as M.P. for Corfe Castle. The House
'sat' for "barely two months"--October 27th to December 29th" (1601).
It was the last Parliament of Elizabeth. The records of it are meagre
and unsatisfying, but sufficient is preserved to inform us that untried
and inexperienced in Parliament as he was, the member for Corfe Castle
at once came to the front. A long-continued warfare on the part of
the Commons against monopolies found in him a vehement defender of
the privileges of the House. The wary Queen, who always knew when to
give way, withdrew certain "patents" that had been granted and led to
grievous abuses; and Davies was appointed one of the "Grand Committee"
to thank her Majesty[24]. He had spoken stoutly for procedure by "bill"
and not by "petition." Richard Martin supported the monopolies.

[Footnote 24: The Carte "Notes," as before, make Davies go to the
Scottish Court on the birth of Prince Henry; but this is an obvious
mistake: and yet it is noticeable that among the hitherto unpublished
poems is one to the King, wherein contemporary allusion is made to his
Majesty's visit to Denmark for his Queen.]

In 1602 a second edition "newly corrected and amended" of "Nosce
Teipsum" appeared. Still prefixed to it--and to his honour continued in
the third edition of 1608 when she was gone--was the verse-dedication
to the Queen. But it was now "the beginning of the end" with her.
Somewhat cloudily and thundrously was the great orb westering. She
died on 24th March 1603. It argues that Davies had advanced in various
ways that he accompanied Lord Hunsdon to Scotland when that nobleman
went with the formal announcement of James' accession to the throne. A
pleasant anecdote has survived that when "in the presence" Lord Hunsdon
announced John Davies, the King--who if a fool was a learned one and
capable of discerning genius--straightway asked "whether he were 'Nosce
Teipsum'" and on finding he was its author, "embraced him and conceived
a considerable liking for him."[25] That his position was regarded as a
potential one with the new King is incidentally confirmed by letters to
him from no less than Bacon, who addressing him in Scotland sought his
good influences in his behalf, using in one a sphinx-like expression
of "concealed poets" that it is a marvel Delia Bacon did not lay hold
of to buttress her egregious argument on the Baconian authorship of
Shakespeare's Plays.

[Footnote 25: Wood, as before, ii., p. 401.]

Accompanying the King southward, Davies held his own at the English
court. The royal 'liking' grew: and the royal brain--small no doubt yet
alert and in a sense animated with patriotic feeling--was in earnest
study of what has till to-day proved England's difficulty--Ireland.
Mountjoy (later Earl of Devonshire and husband of Sidney's
"Stella"[26]) was sent as Lord-Deputy, and Davies accompanied him as
Solicitor-General for Ireland, for which office the "patent" is dated
25th November, 1603. Immediately almost on his arrival at Dublin, viz.
on 18th December, 1603, he was knighted. The date hitherto given has
been "at Theobald's 11th February 1607," but the records of the Ulster
King of Arms make it certain that the knighthood was conferred on 18th
December, 1603. On the same occasion his "crest" is described as "On a
mount _vert_, a Pegasus, _or_, winged, gules."[27]

[Footnote 26: See my edition of Sir Philip Sidney, being prepared for
reproduction from the Fuller Worthies' Library in the present Series.]

[Footnote 27: Sir Bernard Burke and J. N. C. Atkins Davis, Esq.,
communications through Mr. Beedham, as before.]

I know no more noble story than the Work of Sir John Davies in and
for Ireland. Our collection of his Prose Works, wherein his State
Papers and Correspondence will appear _in extenso_--from H. M. Public
Record Office and other sources--will make it clear as day that
beyond all comparison he was the foremost man in the Government.
With the sheer hard toil of humblest attorney slaving for his daily
bread, there was a breadth of view, a self-denying resoluteness of
purpose to benefit his adopted country, a prescience of outlook
into the future combined with fearless and magnanimous dealing with
contemporary problems, a high-hearted resistance in the face of
manifold temptations to slacken effort, and a fecundity of resource
and fulness of knowledge and vigilance of observation, that ought to
be written on a white page of our national history. It is scarcely
possible to exaggerate the consuming labours and the actual and solid
results of Davies' almost ubiquitory activities in Ireland. In my full
Life of him I hope to make good to the uttermost this high praise.
Here and now a few outward facts alone can be stated. In 1606, by
patents dated successively 29th May, 1606, and 29th May, 1609,[28] he
was promoted to be Attorney-General for Ireland, and was also created
Sergeant-at-Arms.[29] He went as "Judge of Assize." His Reports
and State Papers, and "Pleadings" and Letters, from 1603 onward,
demonstrate how firm was his grasp of circumstance, and how statesmanly
he marked out his plans, while his forensic appearances astonish with
the omniverousness of his legal reading and knowledge of precedents.
Throughout he was 'backed' and cheered by his superiors in Ireland and
by the King and his ministers. So early as 9th September, 1604, the
Lord Chancellor thus wrote to Davies:--

[Footnote 28: See Smith's Law Officers of Ireland, _s.n._ The Patent of
29th May, 1609, I propose to give _in extenso_ in the Life, as before.
It is extremely interesting.]

[Footnote 29: As Sergeant-at-Law he ought to have been resident in
London, but the King gave him "dispensation" that he might return to
Ireland.]

 Y^{r} lett^{r} written at Cavan the |13 of Julij Last I receyude
 the 28 of August. I am gladde to heare of yo^{r} [illegible] & wysh
 yo^{r} seruice & successe therein may be aunswerable to yo^{r} owne
 expectations & best hopes. You maye haue comfort that you serue so
 gracious a soueraigne, so religious & replete w^{th} all Royall
 virtues, and so redy & wyllinge to acknowledge & remunerate the
 services & dueties of his meanest servantes farre beyonde their
 desertes. I doubt not but yo^{r} diligence & care will be such as
 wyll be very acceptable to his Ma^{tie}. In the Discourse w^{ch} you
 haue sent me, I fynde not only a very lovinge respcte w^{ch} you have
 towardes me (for w^{ch} I owe you heartie thankes). But also a very
 wyse & judicious obseruacon of the state of this wasted kingdome & the
 condicon of the people. God staye his hande from further afflictinge
 them. They haue alreadye fealte the scourge of Warre & oppresion & now
 are vnder the grevous scourge of famine & pestilence. God gyue them
 his grace and make them imprest as true Christians ought. To become
 truly Religious towarde God, Loyall and faythfull to their Soueraigne,
 constantly obedient to his lawes & to the effecting thereof. I euer
 wysh & praye that they may haue religious virtuous & godly magistrates
 sette ouer them. To yo^{r} selfe I wish all happines, and wherein
 you shall haue occasion to vse mee, you shall alwayes finde me redy &
 wyllinge to stande you in the best stede I can. And so w^{th} my very
 swete comendacons I comitt you to the Almightye. And rest yo^{r} very
 assured Loving frende

  T. ELLESMERE, Canc.

  At[torn]feile
    9 Septembris 1604.

 To the right wo^{r} my very Loving frende, Sr. John Davis Knight, his
 Ma^{ties} Solict. generall in his Realme of Ireland.[30]

A few years later--1608--one Letter in full--like all our MSS.,
now for the first time printed,--from the Lord Deputy--the noble
Chichester--must suffice as a specimen of many kindred.

[Footnote 30: Carte MSS. ff. 315-6.]

 Noble Mr. Attornie,

 Since your departure hence I haue received two ioynt letters from you,
 and Sr. James Ley, and one from your selfe alone, for w^{ch} I am not
 your debter vnlesse it be in the matter, w^{ch} I confesse bringes
 more life w^{th} it comming freshe out of the stoorehouse of neewes
 and noveltie, for I have written as manie and more vnto you both.

 Albeyt I expect you w^{th} the first passage (for so the lordes haue
 promised by their letters) yet can I not leaue you vnremembred,
 assuringe you thoe you have greater friendes, none respects you better
 then my selfe, nor can be more readie to make demonstration therof
 accordinge to the meanes I haue. I praye bringe w^{th} you the lordes
 directions for Sr. Neale Odonnell, and the rest of the prisoners.
 Sr. Neale and Ocatiance [O'Sullivan?] had contriued their escape
 and woulde haue as desperately attempted it, had I not preuented it
 within these sixe nightes by a discoverie made vnto me, albeyt I keep
 20 men euerie neight for the guarde of the Castle ouer and aboue the
 warde of the same, whereof two or three lye in each of their chambers.
 Their horses were come to the towne, and all thinges else in readines.
 Sure these men doe goe beyond all nations in the worlde for desperate
 escapes, Shane Granie Ocarratan [O'Sullivan?] after he was acquited
 of three indictments, and as most men conceiued free from all danger
 of the lawe, did on fridaye the 27th of Januarie cast himselfe out of
 a wyndow in the topp of the Castle by the heelpe of a peece of rotten
 match, and his mantell w^{ch} brake before he was halfe waye downe,
 and thoe he were presently discovered yet he escaped about supper tyme.

 When I had written thus far worde was brought me that a passadge
 [_sic_] was come from Hollyheade w^{ch} made me to pause for a tyme
 hopinge you or some other w^{th} letters, or other directions, was
 arriued, but beinge advertised that the Recorder of this Cyttie only
 w^{th} a fewe other passengers had in this fayre weather wrought out a
 passage by longe lyeinge att sea, although the wyndes were contrarie,
 and that they came from London before Christmas and had no written
 letters or message but in theise particulars, I fell to you againe.

 And do now praye you to geue your best assystance and furtherance to
 such matters tuchinge my perticulare as John Strowd or Annesley shall
 acquaint you w^{th} all, for w^{ch} you shall finde me verie thankfull
 vnto you.

 I haue written to the lordes in the behalfe of the howse servitors
 here, that they maye be remembered vpon the deuysion and plantation of
 the scheated lands in Ulster. I am discreadited amonge them if they
 should be forgotten, and sure the plantation woulde be weake w^{th}
 out them, for they must be the pyllers to support it. Those that
 shall come from thence wyll not affect it in that kynde as these do,
 to make it a settlement for them and theirs; and in respect of their
 wourthier deserts and paynfull labors, and that I haue vpon my promise
 to speake effectually for them preuayled so farre as to staye them
 from resortinge thither, w^{ch} they woulde doe in great multitudes
 if I woulde haue given way to their desire. I wysh that an honorable
 consideration maye be had of them before the diuision be concluded.
 I knowe that worke is of great moment and on it dependes much of the
 prosperitie, and good estate of the whole kingdome. I haue sayd enough
 to one that vnderstandes so well: And so beinge called vpon sooner
 then I expected I must end w^{th} the page, but wyll euer be found

  Your trewe affected friend
  ARTHUR CHICHESTER.

  Att Dublyn Castle the 7th of
    februarie 1608.

 I send here w^{th} the proceedinge of the Court of Kinges bench in
 the cause of the Carrolans w^{ch} was violently prosecuted by the l.
 of Howth. I send them by reason it is thought by the Judges that the
 Baron will exclaime of their proceedinges here.

 To my verie wourthie friend Sr John Davis Knight his

  Ma^{ties} Attornie in the Realme of Irelande.[31]

[Footnote 31: Carte, as before, Vol. 62, ff. 313-14.]

Two short letters from Bacon--not before printed, having escaped
even Mr. Spedding's Argus-eyes--in the same Carte MSS.--show Davies's
pleasant relations with his great contemporary. They are as follow:--


(I. Carte MS. Vol. 62, ff. 317-18.)

 Good Sr Jh. Davies yo^{r} mistaking shall not be imputed to you (for
 the difference is not much). Yo^{r} gratulacons for my marrige I take
 kyndly. And as I was all waies delighted w^{th} the fruites of yo^{r}
 [illegible] so I would be gladde of yo^{r} [illegible] so as you plant
 not yo^{r} self to[o] farre of[f]. For I had rather you should be a
 laborer than a plant in that State. You giue me no occasion to wryte
 longer in that you impart not by yo^{r} l^{rs} any occurrence of
 y^{rs}. And so w^{th} my very lov^{g} consid^{n} towards you

  I remayne
    Yo^{r} assured friend
      FR. BACON.

  from Graies Inn,
  this 26th of Dec. 1606.

 To my very good Frend Sr Jh. Davis Knt Attorny g'rall to his M. in
 Ireland.

  (II. Ibid ff, 328-9.)

 Mr. Atturny,

 I thanke you for yo^{r} l^{re} and the discourse you sent of this mere
 accident, as thinges then appeared. I see manifestly the begynnyng of
 better or woorse. But me thinketh it is first a tender of the better,
 and woorse foloweth but vpon refusall or default. I would haue been
 gladd to see you hear, but I hope occasion restreineth o^{r} meeting
 for a vacation when we may haue more fruite of conference. To requite
 yo^{r} proclamacon (w^{ch} in my judgment is wysely and seriously
 penned) I send you [illegible] w^{h} [illegible] w^{ch} happened to be
 in my hands when y^{os} came.

 I would be gladde to hear oft from you and to be advertized how
 [illegible] passe whereby to haue some occasion to thinke some good
 thoughts though I can doe lyttell. At least it wilbe a contynuance in
 exercise of o^r frendshippe w^{ch} on my part remayneth increased by
 that I hear of yo^{r} service and the good respects I find towards my
 self. And so in extreme hast I remayne

  Yo^{r} very [illegible] frend
    FR. BACON.

  from Graies Inn this
  23th of Oct. 1607.

  To the R. W. his verie Lovinge frende Sr Iohn Dauys
  Knight, his Ma^{ties} Atturnye in Irelande.

During one of his 'circuits' in Ireland, he met Eleanor, daughter
of Lord Audley (afterwards Earl of Castlehaven) and was married to
her--though the date has not been traced. Her later years were darkened
with insanity of a strangely voluble type. It is to be feared she was
an ill "help-meet" for her husband. There is pathos, if also inevitable
comedy, in her career--not here to be entered on.[32]

[Footnote 32: See Life to be prefixed to Prose Works for quotations
from her writings in verse and prose, and for further details.]

While intensely occupied with his official duties, Sir John Davies did
not neglect his literary gift. He was making history every year--so
fundamental and permanent was the part he filled in Ireland--but the
Past was gone back on that he might fetch from it monition for the
Present, and hope for the Future. His imperishable book: "A Discourse
of the true reasons why Ireland has neuer been entirely subdued till
the beginning of His Majesty's reign," (4to)[33] will reward the most
prolonged study to-day. It was published in 1612. In the same year
he was made King's Sergeant and also elected M.P. for Fermanagh,
being the first representative for that county in the Irish House of
Parliament. He was likewise chosen to be Speaker of the House; but not
without a characteristically violent struggle between the Catholics
and Protestants.[34] He delivered a notable speech "to the House" on
its opening in 1613.[35] In 1614 he appears in the House of Commons in
England as M.P. for Newcastle-under-Lyne:[36] and his attendance in
England was preparatory to final retirement from Ireland. "Grants of
lands" there from the "forfeitures,"--which, if ever any righteously
acquired, he did[37]--gave him a special interest in Ireland as a
proprietor; but after all, for such a man, at such a time, to be
limited to Ireland, was but a splendid exile. It is not, therefore, to
be wondered at that having practically achieved all, and more than all,
he had been given to do, or himself originated, he sought to return.
It is usually stated (e.g. Chalmers, Woolrych, &c., &c.) that he so
returned in 1616; but it was not until 1619 that he did so finally and
absolutely; for in a letter under date "21 June, 1619," to Buckingham,
he is found still only pleading for retirement and for the transference
of his office to a relative.[38] It is one of the treasures of the
Fortescue MSS, in the Bodleian,[39] and is as follows:

[Footnote 33: See Prose, Vol. II.]

[Footnote 34: See fuller Life, as before, for a complete narrative from
contemporary documents.]

[Footnote 35: Ibid, Vol. III.]

[Footnote 36: Willis's Nat. Parl., Vol. III., p. 173.]

[Footnote 37: In the Life, as before, will be given full details of the
Grants, with a curious paper of his daughter long afterwards making
inquiries as to what had become of the Irish estates, &c., &c.]

[Footnote 38: It will be observed that in the Letter Sir John does
not name the gentleman he wishes to succeed him. It was no doubt Sir
William Ryves, who actually was appointed. The "neere alliance" was
through the family of Mervyn, and is shown in the following details
drawn up for me by Mr. B. H. Beedham, from information communicated by
Mr. J. N. C. Davis, as before:

 George Touchet, Earl of Castlehaven |  Lucy, d. of Sir James Mervyn,
                                     |  Fonthill, Wilts.
     3-------------------------------^---------------------------2
 Sir John Davies           Lady Eleanor Touchet           Edward Davys
                                                          Joan Cave
                                                             |
                                              ---------------^------
                                        Matthew Davys        |Ann d. of
                                        b. 1595 ob. 1678.    |Edward Mervyn
                                                             |of Fonthill,
                                                             |ob. 8th
                                                             |Nov. 1657.
                              -------------------------------^
 John Ryves of Daunsey Court  |  Elizabeth d. of John Mervyn
                              |  (several children)
           6------------------^------------------8th son.
 Sir William Ryves settled           Sir Thomas Ryves, Master
 in Ireland; had numerous            in Chancery: Judge of the
 appointments, and made              Prerogative Court there.
 large purchases of estates;
 Attorney General.]

[Footnote 39: No. 245. For a notice of the collection from which
the above Letter is for the first time printed, see Preface to "The
Fortescue Papers ... Edited ... by Samuel R. Gardiner, for the Camden
Society (1871). My friend Mr. Gardiner must have overlooked Davies's
important letter.]

 My most honored Lord,

 I praesent my most humble Thanks to y^{r} L^{p} for praesenting mee
 to his Ma^{ty} the last Day, at Wansted; & for y^{r} noble favour
 in furthering the suit I then made, as well for mine owne stay in
 England, as for my recommending a fitt man to my place of service in
 Ireland.

 The Gentleman to whom I wish this place now, is much obliged to y^{r}
 L^{p} already, & well worthy of y^{r} L^{ps} favours, & besides his
 owne worthines (hee being a Reader & Judge of a circuit, of w^{ch}
 degree & quality never any before was sent out of England to supply
 that place), hee is of neere alliance vnto mee. So as, where there
 is concurrence of meritt & kinred, y^{r} L^{p} may conjecture that I
 deale w^{th} him like a gentleman & a friend, & not like a marchent.
 Albeit I wi^{ll} leave a good place there, w^{th}out any praesent
 praeferment heer (whereof none of my profession have failed at their
 return out of Ireland) I might, perhaps w^{th} some reason expect
 some Retribution, to recompence the charge of Transporting my famely
 from thence, & of setling it heer in this Kingdome, where I am become
 almost an Alien by reason of my long absence.

 For this particular favour of transferring my place to so well
 deserving a successor, I doo wholly depend vppon y^{r} L^{p} as I
 shall euer doo vpon all other occasions, while I live, as one that
 have separated my self from all other dependancies, beeing entirely
 devoted to doo y^{r} L^{p} all humble & faythful service

  Jo: Dauys.

 21 Junij 1619.

 if my long service may induce favour, y^{r} L^{p} may bee pleased to
 looke vppon the noate enclosed.

  To the right honorable my very good lord
    my lord the Marques of Buckingham, &c.

It is to be regretted that the "noate" of the postscript has not been
preserved. It probably enumerated his public services.

Sir William Ryves succeeded as Attorney-General for Ireland by Patent
dated 30th October, 1619.[40] From 1619 onward, Sir John Davies is
found in the House of Commons (still for Newcastle-under-Lyne) and "on
circuit" as a Judge. His "Charges"--to be given in his Prose Works--as
"one of the Justices of Assize for the Northerne Circute"--are very
characteristic, being full of legal 'precedents,' and noticeable in
their tracing up the verdict sought to abiding principles. He took
part in the memorable "case" of Frances, Countess of Somerset, for the
poison-murder of Sir Thomas Overbury. In the House of Commons he spoke
seldom; but when anything that concerned Irish interests came up he
never failed to contend in behalf of Ireland.[41]

[Footnote 40: By inadvertence the Patent describes Sir John Davies
as "deceased." Unless used as = departed (from Ireland), or = having
ceased to fill the office, it is a singular oversight.]

[Footnote 41: In the Life, as before, his appearances in Parliament
will be noted and illustrated.]

Lightening his legal employments were a large correspondence and
'fellowship' with his most eminent contemporaries, and the collection
of his Poetical Works, in so far as he wished them to go down to
posterity. Of the former I select one undated letter to the illustrious
Sir Robert Cotton, with whom he had been early acquainted, and
associated in 1614, in re-establishing the Society of Antiquaries,
originally founded in 1590. One of these is a sprightly and pleasant
letter, and all the more welcome that most of his correspondence that
remains is official and grave. The lighter letter is as follows, from
MSS. Cotton: Julius C. III., p. 14: now paged 133, British Museum:

 Sweet Robin, for a few sweet words, a client of mine hath presented me
 w^{th} sweet meates, to what end I know not except it be, as Chaucer
 speakes,

 To make mine English sweet uppon my tongue, that I may pleade the
 better for him to morrow at the Seale.

 Not w^{th} standing, the best vse that I can make of it, is to
 preesent you w^{th} it, especially at this time when you ar in
 Physick, that you may sweeten your tast after the Rhewbarb. I have
 been a little distracted w^{th} vnexpected busines these two or three
 last dayes, that I cold not performe my officious promise to visit
 you in this voluntary sicknes of yours; but [erased] now I am faine
 to make my hands to excuse my feet from travayling vnto you, because
 being the servant of the multitude I am not mine owne man. Make much
 of your self, & make y^{r} self speedily well, that I may have your
 company towards Cambridge, from whence I will go w^{th} you to see the
 ancient Seat of Robt. le Bruis; so wishing you a prosperous operation
 of your Phisick, at least that you may Imagine so, for it is the
 Imagination that doth good, & not the Physick, w^{ch} I ever thought a
 meere imposture; I cease to troble you least the intention of to much
 Reading hinder the working of those vertuous drugs.

  Y^{rs} all & ever
    J. Dauis.

  (Endorsed) To my worthy friend
      Rob: Cotton esquier.

A second letter runs thus, from MSS. Cotton: Julius C. III., p. 32:--

 Noble S^{r} Robert: the ordinary subject of letters is, newes, whereof
 this kingdome since the warres, hath been very barren; therefore I
 must write vnto you that w^{ch} is no newes, that is, that I love you,
 & hold a kind & dear memory of you.

 according to my promise to y^{r} self & Mr. Solliciter of England
 who is now, I hear, a Judge, I have caused this bearer to draw some
 Mapps of o^{r} principal Cittyes of Ireland; & he having occasion to
 go for England, I have thought fitt to direct him vnto you. he is an
 honest ingenuous yong m[=a] & of y^{r} owne Name. I hear not yet of
 y^{e} Antiquities out of Cumberland; if they be brought hither I will
 take care to transmitt th[=e] to London, & so in speciall hast, being
 ready to go my circuit ov^{r} all Munster I leave you to y^{e} divine
 p'servation.

  Y^{s} to do you Service,
    Io: Dauys.

  Dublin 4 Martij 1607.
    I desire to be affectionately remembred to Mr.
      Justice Doddridge & Mr. Clarencieux.

His Poems, as finally collected by him, appeared in a thin octavo
in 1622. His Prose Works he never collected, but allowed them to be
re-published separately. His "True Cause" passed through several
editions during his own life-time. One of his most important
prose-books after the "True Cause" brings us to the closing event
of his busy and various-coloured life. It is entitled in the first
issue, which was posthumous[42]--"The Question concerning Impositions,
Tonnage, Poundage, Prizage, Customs, &c. Fully stated and argued, from
Reason, Law, and Policy. Dedicated to King James in the latter end of
his Reign." (1656.)

[Footnote 42: Woolrych, as before, splits the one work into several,
and mistakes MSS. of it for distinct works. Vol. I., pp. 209-10.]

This historically-memorable treatise has already been reproduced in the
Prose Works.[43] Elsewhere I examine it critically.[44] It must suffice
here to state that later the King (Charles I.), having an impoverished
exchequer, had recourse to forced loans of various amounts. Hating the
control of Parliament, he persisted in substituting his will for law,
his "proclamation" for statute. Feeling the treacherousness of his
standing-ground of prerogative, the Judges were applied to, and with
loyalty to the monarch rather than to their country, they somewhat
favoured the King's 'demands.' Charles deemed their "opinion" to have
a somewhat "uncertain sound," and presented to the Judges a paper for
their signature, recognising the legality of the collection. This was
refused. One of the victims of the sovereign's wrath was Chief-Justice
Crew, who was "discharged" on the 9th of November, 1626 (Foss's
Judges, vi., p. 291). Sir John Davies was appointed as his successor;
and one cannot help recognising that the opinions revealed in his "Jus
Imponendi" contributed to the succession. For one, I should rather
have found Sir John Davies on the other side, spite of his great array
of "precedents" and ingenious applications to the then circumstances
and exigencies, and necessarily ignorant of the lengths Charles as
distinguished from James, was to proceed. Technically, there had been
"precedents" no doubt; but long "use and wont" had rendered so-called
regal rights obsolete, and it was insanity to revive them, as Charles
I.,--who inherited James's high notions of regal authority,--found out
when too late. But, passing to Davies, the "lean fellow" called Death
was nearer the Knight than was the Chief-Justiceship. Purple and ermine
robes were actually bought, but they were not to be donned. He had told
a Mr. Mead that he was at supper with the Lord Keeper on the 7th of
December,[45] and that he fully expected the great promotion. The air
was thick with "reports" to the same effect. He was found dead in his
bed on the morning of the 8th December, cut down, it has been supposed,
by apoplexy. Three days after, he was interred in S. Martin's Church,
London. Later a double inscription for himself and his widow (who was
re-married to Sir Archibald Douglas,) long hung on the third pillar,
near the grave. The original Latin, with our translation, are as
follow:[46]--

[Footnote 43: Vol. III., pp. 1-116.]

[Footnote 44: In the fuller Life, as before.]

[Footnote 45: Pearce's "Inns of Court," p. 293.]

[Footnote 46: See Stow's "Environs of London," by Strype, Book VI., p.
72. But our text of the Inscriptions is from the Carte MSS. Dr. E. F.
Rimbault's MS. in the autograph of John Le Neve, as published in Notes
and Queries, 1st series, Vol. V., p. 331, is inexplicably imperfect and
blundering.]

D. O. M. S.

  Johannes Davys Equestris ordinis quondam Attornati
  Regii Generalis amplissima prudentia in regno
  Hyberniae functus, inde in patriam revocatus
  inter servientes Domini Regis ad Legem primum
  Locum obtinuit; post varia in utrone munere prae
  clare gesta ad ampliora jam designatus, repente
  spem suorum destituit suam implevit ab humanis
  honoribus ad c[oe]lestem gloriam evocatus
                      AEtatis anno 57.^{o}
              Vir ingenio compto, rara facundia
          Oratione cum soluta tum numeris restricta
                      Felicissimus.
  Juridicam severitatem morum elegantia et ameniore eruditione temperavit.
              Iudex incorruptus; Patronus fidus
    Ingenuae pietatis amore et anxiae superstitionis contemptu
                      Iuxta insignis.
          Plebeiarum animarum in religionis negotio
        Pervicacem [Greek: mikropsuchian] ex edito despiciebet
              Fastidium leniente miseratione.
  Ipse magnanime probus, religiosus, liber, et c[oe]lo admotus
    Uxorem habuit Dominam Eleanoram Honoratissimi
      Comitis de Castlehaven Baronis Audley filiam
    Unicam ex ea prolem superstitem haeredem reliquit
          Luciam illustrissimo Ferdinando Baroni
          Hastings Huntingdoniae Comiti nuptam.
          Diem Supremam obiit 8^{o} idus Decembris
                  Anno Domini 1626.
    Apud nos exemplum relinquens, hic resurrectionem justorum expectat.
      Accubat dignissimo marito incomparabilis uxor
                  Quae illustre genus
                Et generi pares animos
            Christiana mansuetudine temperavit
                  Erudita super sexum
                  Mitis infra sortem
                  Plurimis Major
                  Quia humilior
            In eximia forma sublime ingenium
        In venusta comitate singularem modestiam
            In femineo corpore viriles animos
          In rebus adversissimis serenam mentem
  In impio saeculo pietatem et rectitudinem inconcussam
                        Possedit.
    Non illi robustam animam aut res lauta laxavit, aut
    Angusta contraxit, sed utramque sortem pari vultu
        Animoque non excepit modo sed rexit
          Quippe Dei plena cui plenitudini
            Mundus nec benignus addere
            Nec malignus detrahere potuisset
    Satis Deum jamdudum spirans et sursum aspirans sui
  Ante et Reip. fati praesaga, salutisque aeternae certissima
    Ingente latoque ardore in Servatoris dilectissimi sinum
          Ipsius sanguine lotam animam efflavit
      Rebus humanis exempta immortalitatem induit
        III. Non. Quintilis Anno Salutis 1652.
                      Ps. 16. 9.
        Etiam caro mea habitat secure qua non es
          Derelicturus animam meam in sepulchro.


D(eo) O(ptimo) M(aximo) S(acrum)

        To God the Best and Greatest: Sacred.
      John Davys of knightly rank, having formerly
    discharged with prudence the highest duties of
  King's Attorney General in the realm of Ireland:
    thence having been recalled to his own country,
      secured the first place among the servants
    of his lord the King, at the Law. After various
  services nobly rendered in each office, being now
  nominated to more distinguished (appointments)
    he suddenly frustrated the hope of his friends
      but fulfilled his own--being called away
        from human honours to celestial glory,
              in the year of his age 57.
    A man for accomplished genius, for uncommon
    eloquence, for language whether free or bound
                     in verse,
                    Most happy.
    Judicial sternness with elegance of manners
              and more pleasant learning
                    he tempered.
                An uncorrupt Judge, a faithful Patron
  For love of free-born piety and contempt of fretting superstition
                          alike remarkable.
    He looked down from on high on the obstinate narrowness
              of plebeian souls in the matter of religion,
                      pity softening his disdain.
  Himself magnanimously just, religious, free, and moved by heaven,
    Had for wife the Lady Eleanor of the Right Honble.
      Earl of Castlehaven, Baron Audley, daughter:
    His only surviving offspring by her he left as heiress,
      Lucy, to the most illustrious Ferdinand Baron
        Hastings, Earl of Huntingdon, married.
        He spent his last day the 8th December
            In the year of our Lord 1626.
  With us leaving an example: here for the resurrection
                  of the Just, he waits.

         *       *       *       *       *

  Near to her most worthy husband lies his incomparable Wife:
                    Who her illustrious birth
                  And spirit equal to her race
                With Christian mildness tempered.
                    Learned above her sex,
                      Meek below her rank,
                  Than most people greater
                      Because more humble,
        In eminent beauty She possessed a lofty mind,
          In pleasing affability, singular modesty:
            In a woman's body a man's spirit,
        In most adverse circumstances a serene mind,
      In a wicked age unshaken piety and uprightness.
    Not for her did Luxury relax her strong soul, or
  Poverty narrow it: but each lot with equal countenance
          And mind, she not only took but ruled.
        Nay she was full of God, to which fulness
        Neither a smiling world could have added,
      Nor from it a frowning world have taken away.
    Now for a long time sufficiently breathing of God
            and aspiring above, of her own
    And the Commonwealth's fate divining beforehand,
          And most sure of Eternal Salvation
  With a mighty and huge ardour into her Beloved Saviour's
  breast, She breathed forth her soul washed in His own blood.
    Taken away from things human she put on immortality
      on the fifth of July, in the year of Salvation, 1652.
                             Ps. 16. 9.
    My flesh also dwells securely because Thou wilt not
              leave my soul in the sepulchre.

One is willing to accept the "golden lies" of these Epitaphs in either
case.

Sir John Davies had several children. One, who was semi-idiotic, was
drowned in Ireland. Others alleged to have been born, have not been
traced. His daughter Lucy, of the Inscriptions, and by whom, no doubt,
they were procured, became famous in her generation as Countess of
Huntingdon. We have to deplore that while we have a fine portrait
of her, none, as yet, has been found of her Father. His Will and
Charities, and their singular after-history, will be given in my fuller
Life (as before). Pass we now to




II. CRITICAL.


I shall limit myself in this second half of the Memorial-Introduction
to a brief statement and examination of certain characteristics of
the Poetry of Sir John Davies--the limitation being imposed by the
contents of the present volumes.[47] There are Poets whose truest and
most certain fame rests on so-called minor poems; and yet commonly
their bulkier productions have over-shadowed these. From Milton to
Wordsworth it is to be lamented that to the many they should be
represented by "Paradise Lost" and "The Excursion"; or to descend,
that Thomas _Campbell_ and Samuel _Rogers_ should have so hidden
behind their "Pleasures of Hope" and "Pleasures of Memory" their rare
and real faculty as Poets--for while in the larger poems of Milton
and Wordsworth there is of the imperishable stuff that only genius
of a lofty type weaves, it is rather (_meo judicio_) in "purple
patches" than in the web as a whole. In Milton and Wordsworth you do
not read them at their high_est_ in their Epics but in their shorter
poems; while Campbell and Rogers should long since have died out of
men's hearts had they left nothing behind them save the smooth and
prize-poem-like common-places of their "Pleasures." In Milton the
remark requires modification, for only in "Paradise Lost" has he put
forth to uttermost daring his Imagination--than which no writer of
all time has approached him for grandeur of vision and splendour of
utterance. But substantially I think that those capable of discernment
will agree with me that if Time may shut and leave unread except by
an elect few, many pages of the 'great' and volume-filling poems, the
lesser will assuredly draw more and more homage, and abide the regalia
of our Literature.

[Footnote 47: His Prose is of no common order; and will be critically
examined in the fuller Life, along with his Prose Works in the Fuller
Worthies' Library, as before.]

It is different with Sir John Davies. His "Orchestra" and "Hymnes to
Astraea" and Minor Poems, preceded considerably his "Nosce Teipsum," but
it was his "Nosce Teipsum" that made King James I. prick up his ears on
hearing his name, and it is "Nosce Teipsum" that is the poem that will
secure immortality to Sir John Davies. His other poetry has special
remarkablenesses--as will appear--but in "Nosce Teipsum" alone have
we the inspiration and spontaneity, the insight and speculation, the
subtlety and yet definiteness, the "burden" (in the prophetic sense)
and the melody of the Poet as distinguished from the versifier or
verse-Rhetorician.

I value "Nosce Teipsum" as a first thing for its _deep and original
thinking_, i.e. for its _intellectual strength_--all the more
remarkable that as the former part of the Memorial-Introduction
shows, he was only in his 28th-29th year when he composed it. Of
its art I shall have somewhat to say anon: but regarding it as a
"_philosophical_ poem" and as a contribution to metaphysic, I place
foremost the THOUGHT in it, as at once a characteristic and a
merit (if merit be not too poor a word). DAVIES (along with
FULKE GREVILLE, LORD BROOKE and DONNE)
simply as Thinker on the profoundest problems of nature and human
nature, seems to me to stand out pre-eminently, and in saying this, I
regard it as sheer nonsense to exalt the workmanship at the expense
of the material--to ask me to recognize in a bit of tin ingeniously
and painstakingly etched into a kind of miracle of execution something
co-equal with a solid bar of gold as it gleams i' the face of the sun
in its purged and massive simpleness; or to put it unmetaphorically,
I must pronounce judgment on the rank of a Poet _qua_ a Poet
fundamentally on the kind and quality of the thought on higher and
deeper things that he puts into his verse and that he strikes out in
others. Your mere artist-Poet is surely third-rate and must even go
beneath the music-composer of to-day.

"Nosce Teipsum" as it was practically the earliest so it remains the
most remarkable example of deep reflective-meditative thinking in verse
in our language or in any language. The student of this great poem will
very soon discover that within sometimes homeliest metaphors there is
folded a long process of uncommon thought on the every-day facts of our
mysterious existence. I call the thinking deep, because "Nosce Teipsum"
reveals more than eyes that looked on the surface--reveals penetrative
and bold descent to the roots of our being and reachings upward to the
Highest. Your mere realistic word-painter of what he sees, is shallow
beside a Poet who passes beneath the surface and circumstance and
fetches up from sunless depths or down from radiant altitudes fact and
facts--each contributory to that ultimate philosophy which while it
shall accept every proved fact, will not rush off hysterically shouting
"eureka," with ribald accusations of all that generations have held to
be venerable and sustaining. I call the thinking original, for there
is evidence everywhere in "Nosce Teipsum" that the penitent recluse of
Oxford made his own self his study--as really if not as avowedly as
Wordsworth.

I am aware in claiming originality for Davies that in that huge
waste-basket of our Literature--Nichols' Literary Illustrations
(Vol. IV. pp. 549-50) there is a letter from an Alexander Dalrymple,
Esq., who is designated "the great hydrographer" to "Mr. Herbert"
(the Bibliographer I opine) wherein he takes different ground. We
must traverse his charge. He thus writes:--"Dear Sir, I have lately
purchased the following old books" (he enumerates several).... "I have
also got 'Wither's translation of Nemesius de Natura hominis' by which
I find Sir John Davies's poem on the Immortality of the Soul is chiefly
taken from Nemesius" ... "I have picked up a tract in 4to. by Thomas
Jenner, with some very good plates, the marginal notes of which seem
to be what the heads of Tate's edition of Sir John Davies's are taken
from."

Were this true it would utterly take from "Nosce Teipsum" the first
characteristic and merit I claim for it--deep and original thought. But
it is absolutely untrue, an utter delusion, as any one will find who
takes the pains that I have done to read, either the original Nemesius,
or what this sapient book-buyer mentions, Wither's translation. With my
mind and memory full of "Nosce Teipsum" and the poem itself beside me,
I have read and re-read every page, sentence and word of Nemesius and
Wither (and there is a good deal of Wither in his translation: 1636)
and I have not come upon a single metaphor or (as the old margin-notes
called them) "similies," or even observation in "Nosce Teipsum" drawn
from Nemesius or Wither. The only element in common is that necessarily
Nemesius adduces and discusses the opinions of the Heathen Philosophers
on the many matters handled by him, and Sir John Davies does the same
with equal inevitableness. But to base a charge of plagiarism against
"Nosce Teipsum" on this, is to reason on the connection between
Tenterden Steeple and Goodwin Sands (if the well-worn folly be a
permissible reference). The following is the title-page of the quaint
old tome and as it is by no means scarce, any reader can cross-question
our witness: "The Nature of Man. A learned and useful Tract written
in Greek by Nemesius, surnamed the Philosopher; sometime Bishop of a
City in Ph[oe]necia, and one of the most ancient Fathers of the Church.
Englyshed, and divided into Sections, with briefs of their principle
contents by Geo. Wither. London: Printed by M. F. for Henry Taunton in
St. Duncan's Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1636." (12^{o} 21 leaves and
pp. 661.) Chronologically--Wither's translation was not published until
1636, while "Nosce Teipsum" was published in 1599; but Nemesius' own
book no more than Wither's warrants any such preposterous statements as
this Alexander Dalrymple makes. Even in the treatment of the "opinions"
of the Heathen Philosophers which come up in Nemesius, and in "Nosce
Teipsum," the latter while 'intermedling' with the same returns wholly
distinct answers in refutation. The "opinions" themselves as being
derived of necessity from the same sources are identical; but neither
their statement nor refutation. Nemesius is ingenious and well-learned,
but heavy and prosaic. Sir John Davies is light of touch and a light
of poetic glory lies on the lamest "opinion." The "Father of the
Church" goes forth to war with encumbering armour: the Poet naked
and unarmed beyond the spear wherewith he 'pierces' everything, viz.
human consciousness. Jenner's forgotten book had perhaps been read by
Tate, but that concerns Tate not Sir John Davies. I pronounce it a
hallucination to write "Sir John Davies' poem on the immortality of
the Soul is chiefly taken from Nemesius." Not one line was taken from
Nemesius.

Before passing on it may be well to illustrate here from the "contents"
of two chapters (representative of the whole) in Wither's Nemesius,
the merely superficial agreement between them and "Nosce Teipsum." In
the Poem under "The Soule of Man and the Immortalitie thereof" various
opinions of its 'nature' are thus summarized:

    "One thinks the _Soule_ is _aire_; another _fire_;
      Another _blood_, diffus'd about the heart;
      Another saith, the _elements_ conspire,
      And to her _essence_ each doth giue a part.

    _Musicians_ thinke our _Soules_ are _harmonies_,
      _Phisicians_ hold that they _complexions_ bee;
      _Epicures_ make them swarmes of _atomies_,
      Which doe by chance into our bodies flee." (p. 26.)

In Nemesius, c. 2. Sec. I, the 'headings' are: "I. The severall and
different Opinions of the Ancients concerning the Sovl, as whether it
be a Substance; whether corporeall, or incoporeall, whether mortal
or immortal P. II. The confutation of those who affirme in general
that the Sovl is a corporeall-substance. III. Confutations of their
particular Arguments, who affirme that the Sovl is Blood, Water, or
Aire." These are all common-places of ancient 'opinion' and of the
subject; and anything less poetical than Nemesius' treatment of them is
scarcely imaginable. Here if anywhere Davies' indebtedness must have
been revealed; but not one scintilla of obligation suggests itself to
the Reader. Again in the Poem, after a subtle and very remarkable
'confutation' of the notion that the Soul is a thing of 'Sense' only,
there comes proof "That the Soule is more than the Temperature of the
humours of the Body;" and nowhere does Davies show a more cunning
hand than in his statement of the 'false opinion.' Turning once more
to Nemesius c. II. Sec. 3, these are its 'headings:'--"I. It is here
declared, that the Soul is not (as Galen implicitly affirmeth) a
Temperature in general. II. It is here proved also, that the Soul is no
particular temperature or quality. III. And it is likewise demonstrated
that the Soul is rather governesse of the temperatures of the Body,
both ordering them, and subduing the vices which arise from the bodily
tempers." Here again we would have expected some resemblances or
suggestions; but again there is not a jot or tittle of either. Thus
is it throughout. One might as well turn up the words used in "Nosce
Teipsum" in a quotation-illustrated Dictionary of the English Language
(such as Richardson's) and argue 'plagiarism' because of necessarily
agreeing definitions, as from a few scattered places in "Nosce Teipsum"
discussing the same topics, allege appropriation of Nemesius. Your mere
readers of title-pages and contents, or glancers over indices are
constantly blundering after this fashion. Dalrymple was one of these.

The headings of the successive sections--removed in our text from
the margins to their several places--suffice to inform us of the
original lines of thought and research and illustration pursued in
"Nosce Teipsum" and thither I refer the Reader. The merest glance
will show that in "Nosce Teipsum" you have the whole breadth of the
field traversed--and that for the first time in Verse. I can only very
imperfectly illustrate either the depth or the originality of the poem.
Almost as at the opening of the book, take these uniting both:--

    "And yet alas, when all our lamps are burnd,
      Our bodyes wasted, and our spirits spent;
      When we haue all the learned _Volumes_ turn'd,
      Which yeeld mens wits both help and ornament:

    What can we know? or what can we discerne?
      When _Error_ chokes the windowes of the minde,
      The diuers formes of things, how can we learne,
      That haue been euer from our birth-day blind?

    When _Reasone's_ lampe, which (like the _sunne_ in skie)
      Throughout _Man's_ little world her beames did spread;
      Is now become a sparkle, which doth lie
      Vnder the ashes, halfe extinct, and dead:

    How can we hope, that through the eye and eare,
      This dying sparkle, in this cloudy place,
      Can recollect these beames of knowledge cleere,
      Which were infus'd in the first minds by grace?

    So might the heire whose father hath in play
      Wasted a thousand pound of ancient rent;
      By painefull earning of a groate a day,
      Hope to restore the patrimony spent.

    The wits that diu'd most deepe and soar'd most hie
      Seeking Man's pow'rs, haue found his weaknesse such:
      "Skill comes so slow, and life so fast doth flie,
      "We learne so little and forget so much.

    For this the wisest of all morall men
      Said, '_He knew nought, but that he nought did know_';
      And the great mocking-Master mockt not then,
      When he said, '_Truth was buried deepe below_.'

    For how may we to others' things attaine,
      When none of vs his owne soule vnderstands?
      For which the Diuell mockes our curious braine,
      When, '_Know thy selfe_' his oracle commands.

    For why should wee the busie Soule beleeue,
      When boldly she concludes of that and this;
      When of her selfe she can no iudgement giue,
      Nor how, nor whence, nor where, nor what she is?

    All things without, which round about we see,
      We seeke to knowe, and how therewith to doe;
      But that whereby we _reason, liue and be_,
      Within our selues, we strangers are thereto.

    We seeke to know the mouing of each spheare,
      And the strange cause of th' ebs and flouds of _Nile_;
      But of that clock, within our breasts we beare,
      The subtill motions we forget the while.

    We that acquaint our selues with euery _Zoane_
      And passe both _Tropikes_ and behold the _Poles_,
      When we come home, are to our selues vnknown,
      And vnacquainted still with our owne _Soules_.

    We study _Speech_ but others we perswade;
      We _leech-craft_ learne, but others cure with it;
      We interpret _lawes_, which other men haue made,
      But reade not those which in our hearts are writ."

    (pp. 18-20.)

Again:--


IN WHAT MANNER THE SOULE IS UNITED TO THE BODY.

    But how shall we this _union_ well expresse?
      Nought ties the _soule_; her subtiltie is such
      She moues the bodie, which she doth possesse,
      Yet no part toucheth, but by _Vertue's_ touch.

    Then dwels shee not therein as in a tent,
      Nor as a pilot in his ship doth sit;
      Nor as the spider in his web is pent;
      Nor as the waxe retaines the print in it;

    Nor as a vessell water doth containe;
      Nor as one liquor in another shed;
      Nor as the heat doth in the fire remaine;
      Nor as a voice throughout the ayre is spread:

    But as the faire and cheerfull _Morning light_,
      Doth here and there her siluer beames impart,
      And in an instant doth herselfe vnite
      To the transparent ayre, in all, and part:

    Still resting whole, when blowes th' ayre diuide:
      Abiding pure, when th' ayre is most corrupted;
      Throughout the ayre, her beams dispersing wide,
      And when the ayre is tost, not interrupted:

    So doth the piercing _Soule_ the body fill,
      Being all in all, and all in part diffus'd;
      Indiuisible, incorruptible still,
      Not forc't, encountred, troubled or confus'd.

    And as the _sunne_ aboue, the light doth bring,
      Though we behold it in the ayre below;
      So from th' Eternall Light the _Soule_ doth spring,
      Though in the body she her powers doe show.

    (pp. 61-2.)

Further, "An Acclamation":--


AN ACCLAMATION.

    O! what is Man (great Maker of mankind!)
      That Thou to him so great respect dost beare!
      That Thou adornst him with so bright a mind,
      Mak'st him a king, and euen an angel's peere!

    O! what a liuely life, what heauenly power,
      What spreading vertue, what a sparkling fire!
      How great, how plentifull, how rich a dower
      Dost Thou within this dying flesh inspire!

    Thou leau'st Thy print in other works of Thine,
      But Thy whole image Thou in Man hast writ;
      There cannot be a creature more diuine,
      Except (like Thee) it should be infinit.

    But it exceeds man's thought, to thinke how hie
      _God_ hath raisd _Man_, since _God a man_ became;
      The angels doe admire this _Misterie_,
      And are astonisht when they view the same.

    (pp. 81-2.)

Again:--


THAT THE SOULE IS IMMORTAL, AND CANNOT DIE.

    Nor hath he giuen these blessings for a day,
      Nor made them on the bodie's life depend;
      The _Soule_ though made in time, _suruives for aye_,
      And though it hath beginning, sees no end.

    Her onely _end_, is _neuer-ending_ blisse;
      Which is, _th' eternall face of God to see_;
      Who _Last of Ends_, and _First of Causes_, is:
      And to doe this, she must _eternall_ bee.

    How senselesse then, and dead a soule hath hee,
      Which _thinks_ his _soule_ doth with his body die!
      Or _thinkes_ not so, but so would haue it bee,
      That he might sinne with more securitie.

    For though these light and vicious persons say,
      Our _Soule_ is but a smoake, or ayrie blast;
      Which, during life, doth in our nostrils play,
      And when we die, doth turne to wind at last:

    Although they say, '_Come let us eat and drinke_';
      Our life is but a sparke, which quickly dies;
      Though thus they _say_, they know not what to think,
      But in their minds ten thousand doubts arise.

    Therefore no heretikes desire to spread
      Their light opinions, like these _Epicures_:
      For so the staggering thoughts are comforted,
      And other men's assent their doubt assures.

    Yet though these men against their conscience striue,
      There are some sparkles in their flintie breasts
      Which cannot be extinct, but still reuiue;
      That though they would, they cannot quite bee _beasts_;

    But who so makes a mirror of his mind,
      And doth with patience view himselfe therein,
      His _Soule's_ eternitie shall clearely find,
      Though th' other beauties be defac't with sin.

    (pp. 82-3.)

Further, "An Acclamation":--


AN ACCLAMATION.

    O ignorant poor man! what dost thou beare
      Lockt vp within the casket of thy brest?
      What iewels, and what riches hast thou there!
      What heauenly treasure in so weak a chest!

    Looke in thy _soule_, and thou shalt _beauties_ find,
      Like those which drownd _Narcissus_ in the flood:
      _Honour_ and _Pleasure_ both are in thy mind,
      And all that in the world is counted _Good_.

    Thinke of her worth, and thinke that God did meane.
      This worthy mind should worthy things imbrace;
      Blot not her beauties with thy thoughts vnclean,
      Nor her dishonour with thy passions base;

    Kill not her _quickning power_ with surfettings,
      Mar not her _Sense_ with sensualitie;
      Cast not her serious wit on idle things:
      Make not her free-_will_, slaue to vanitie.

    And when thou think'st of her _eternitie_,
      Thinke not that _Death_ against her nature is;
      Thinke it a _birth_; and when thou goest to die,
      Sing like a swan, as if thou went'st to blisse.

    And if thou, like a child, didst feare before,
      Being in the darke, where thou didst nothing see:
      Now I haue broght thee _torch-light_, feare no more;
      Now when thou diest, thou canst not hud-winkt be.

    And thou, my _Soule_, which turn'st thy curious eye,
      To view the beames of thine owne forme diuine;
      Know, that thou canst know nothing perfectly,
      While thou art clouded with this flesh of mine.

    Take heed of _ouer-weening_, and compare
      Thy peacock's feet with thy gay peacock's traine;
      Study the best, and highest things, that are,
      But of thy selfe, an humble thought retaine.

    Cast down thy selfe, and onely striue to raise
      The glory of thy Maker's sacred Name;
      Vse all thy powers, that Blessed Power to praise,
      Which giues the power to _bee_, and _use the same_.

    (pp. 114-16.)

Finally, here is a simile well-wrought in itself and accidentally to be
for ever associated with a celebrated criticism:--


THE MOTION OF THE SOULE.

    .... how can shee but immortall bee?
      When with the motions of both _Will_ and _Wit_,
      She still aspireth to eternitie,
      And neuer rests, till she attaine to it?

    Water in conduit pipes, can rise no higher
      Then the wel-head, from whence it first doth spring:
      Then sith to eternall GOD shee doth aspire,
      Shee cannot be but an eternall thing.

    (p. 85.)

The second stanza contains a metaphor that was stolen and murdered as
well, by Robert Montgomery. Concerning _his_ use of it Macaulay thus
wrote in his merciless review:--"We would not be understood, however,
to say that Mr. Robert Montgomery cannot make similitudes for himself.
A very few lines further on we find one which has every mark of
originality and on which we will be bound, none of the poets whom he
has plundered will ever think of making reprisal:--

    'The soul aspiring, pants its source to mount,
    As streams meander level with their fount.'

"We take this to be on the whole the worst similitude in the world.
In the first place, no stream meanders, or can possibly meander level
with its fount. In the next place, if streams did meander level with
their fount, no two motions can be less like each other than that of
meandering level and that of mounting upwards." True; but none the less
is the original 'spoiled' and despoiled metaphor, accurate and vivid.

If the Reader will surrender himself to the task, he will be rewarded
for studying and re-studying the entire poem of "Nosce Teipsum;" and,
unless I very much mistake, will then regard Hallam's judgment on it
as inadequate rather than exaggerate, as (with intercalated remarks),
thus: "A more remarkable poem [than Drayton's and Daniel's] is that
of Sir John Davies, afterwards Chief Justice of Ireland [a mistake],
entitled, 'Nosce Teipsum,' published in 1599, usually, though rather
inaccurately, called 'On the Immortality of the Soul.' Perhaps no
language can produce a poem, extending to so great a length, of
more condensation of thought, or in which fewer languid verses will
be found. Yet, according to some definitions [of poetry] the 'Nosce
Teipsum' is wholly unpoetical, inasmuch as it shows no passion [a
greater blunder still] and little fancy [a third mistake]. If it
reaches the heart at all, it is through the reason. But since strong
argument in terse and correct style fails not to give us pleasure in
prose, it seems strange that it should lose its effect when it gains
the aid of regular metre to gratify the ear and assist the memory.
Lines there are in Davies which far out-weigh much of the descriptive
and imaginative poetry of the last two centuries, whether we estimate
them by the pleasure they impart to us, or by the intellectual vigour
they display. Experience has shown that the faculties familiarly
deemed poetical are frequently exhibited in a considerable degree,
but very few have been able to preserve a perspicuous beauty without
stiffness or pedantry (allowance made for the subject and the times),
in metaphysical reasoning, so successfully as Sir John Davies."[48]
The alleged "no passion" is contradicted by the various pathetic
autobiographic introspections and confessions brought out in this
Memorial-Introduction, and not less so by the outbursts of adoration
and praise that thunder up like the hosannahs before the great White
Throne. The similarly alleged "little fancy" is one of manifold proofs
that the critic was the most superficial of all imaginable readers with
so much pretention. "Nosce Teipsum" is radiant as the dew-bedabbled
grass with delicacies of fancy, not a few of the "fancies" being as
exquisitely touched as divine work.

[Footnote 48: Introduction to the Literature of Europe in the 15th,
16th, and 17th Centuries: Vol. II., p. 227, edn. 1860.]

Campbell in his "Essay on English Poetry" (prefixed to his
"Specimens") may be read with interest after Hallam. Accepting from
Johnson as Johnson from Dryden the name of "metaphysical poets," he
observes:--"The term of metaphysical poetry would apply with much more
justice to the quatrains of Sir John Davies and those of Sir Fulke
Greville, writers who, at a later period, found imitators in Sir Thomas
Overbury and Sir William Davenant. Davies's poem on the Immortality
of the Soul, entitled "_Nosce teipsum_," will convey a much more
favourable idea of metaphysical poetry than the wittiest effusions of
Donne and his followers. Davies carried abstract reasoning into verse
with an acuteness and felicity which have seldom been equalled. He
reasons undoubtedly with too much labour, formality, and subtlety,
to afford uniform poetical pleasure. The generality of his stanzas
exhibit hard arguments interwoven with the pliant materials of fancy so
closely, that we may compare them to a texture of cloth and metallic
threads, which is cold and stiff, while it is splendidly curious. There
is this difference, however, between Davies and the commonly-styled
metaphysical poets, that _he_ argues like a hard thinker, and _they_,
for the most part, like madmen. If we conquer the drier parts of
Davies' poem, and bestow a little attention on thoughts which were
meant, not to gratify the indolence, but to challenge the activity of
the mind, we shall find in the entire essay fresh beauties at every
perusal: for in the happier parts we come to logical truths so well
illustrated by ingenious similes, that we know not whether to call the
thoughts more poetically or philosophically just. The judgment and
fancy are reconciled, and the imagery of the poems seems to start more
vividly from the surrounding shades of abstraction."

The 'coldness' of 'cloth and metallic threads' which the critic applies
to the 'hard arguments' of _Nosce Teipsum_ is a mere imagination. But
besides, the 'metallic threads' are not for warmth but for splendour.
The lining of the 'splendidly curious' garment is to be looked for for
warmth. Similarly the 'hard arguments' would have been unpoetical as
unphilosophical had they been 'warm' with the warmth of the 'clothing'
in similes and fancies. The 'hardness' is where it ought to be--in
the thinking: but it is a hardness like the bough that is green with
leafage and radiant with bloom and odorous with 'sweet scent' and
pliant to every lightest touch of the breeze. The leaf and bloom start
from the 'hard' bough rightly, fittingly 'hard' to its utmost twig. The
alleged 'too much labour' is singularly uncharacteristic. As for the
'madness' I can but exclaim--Oh for more of such 'fine lunacy' as in
Donne is condemned! His and compeers' 'madness' is worth cart-loads of
most men's sanity.

In our own day Dr. George Macdonald has spoken more wisely if still
somewhat superficially of "_Nosce Teipsum_" in his charming "England's
Antiphon." Having explained that by "Immortality of the Soul" is
intended "the spiritual nature of the soul, resulting in continuity
of existence," he proceeds:--"It [_Nosce Teipsum_] is a wonderful
instance of what can be done for metaphysics in verse, and by means
of imaginative or poetic embodiment generally. Argumentation cannot
of course naturally belong to the region of poetry, however well
it may comport itself when there naturalized; and consequently,
although there are most poetic no less than profound passages in the
treatise, a light scruple arises whether its constituent matter can
properly be called poetry. At all events, however, certain of the
more prosaic measures and stanzas lend themselves readily, and with
much favour, to some of the more complex of logical necessities. And
it must be remembered that in human speech, as in the human mind,
there are no absolute divisions: power shades off into feeling; and
the driest logic may find the heroic couplet render it good service."
(pp. 105-6). The 'scruple' must be 'light' indeed that has to decide
whether the 'reasoning' of "Nosce Teipsum" be or be not 'poetry.' It
is astounding that at this time o' day any should attempt to exclude
the highest region of the intellect and its noblest occupation from
poetry. Poetry I must hold absolutely is poetry, whatever be its matter
and form if the thinking be glorified by imagination or tremulous with
emotion. It is sheer folly to refuse to the Poet any material within
the compass of the universe. Especially deplorable is it to have to
argue for possibilities of poetry in the greatest of all thinking,
viz., metaphysics, in the face of such actualities of achievement as in
Davies and Lord Brooke and Donne.

A second characteristic of "Nosce Teipsum" that calls for notice
is its _perfection of workmanship_ shown in the _mastery of an
extremely difficult stanza_, as well as its solidity of material.
Here unquestionably Sir John Davies far excels Lord Brooke and Donne,
and later, Sir William Davenant in "Gondibert." The two former are
occasionally (it must be granted) semi-inarticulate, and the last
is very often monotonous and trying. "Nosce Teipsum" is throughout
articulate and unmistakeable, and never flags. You have a fear o'
times that a metaphor will prove grotesque or mean: or a vein of
thought pinch and go out from ore to bare limestone. But invariably an
imaginative touch, or a colour-like epithet, or a thrill of emotion,
lifts up the mean into a transfiguring atmosphere as of sun-set purples
and crysolites, and gives to grotesquest gargoyles (as of cathedrals)
a strange fitness. Then when a thought or illustration seems about
to end, debasedly, another forward-carrying and ennobling, swiftly
succeeds.

There is more than dexterity, there is consummate art--the art of a
conscious master--in the inter-weaving of the lines and stanzas of
"Nosce Teipsum." Professor Craik recognised the difficulty and the
triumph, but fails by ultra-ingenuity in accounting for either the
selection of the measure or the miracle of its continuous success.
His criticism is worth recalling, thus:--"A remarkable poem of this
age ... is the 'Nosce Teipsum' of Sir John Davies ... a philosophical
poem, the earliest of the kind in the language. It is written in rhyme,
in the common heroic ten-syllable verse, but disposed in quatrains,
like the early play of Misogonus, already mentioned, and other poetry
of the same era, or like Sir Thomas Overbury's poem of 'The Wife,'
the 'Gondibert' of Sir William Davenant, and the 'Annus Mirabilis' of
Dryden, at a later period. No one of these writers has managed this
difficult stanza so successfully as Davies: it has the disadvantage
of requiring the sense to be in general closed at certain regularly
and quickly-recurring turns, which yet are very ill adapted for an
effective pause; and even all the skill of Dryden has been unable to
free it from a certain air of monotony and languor,--a circumstance of
which that poet may be supposed to have been himself sensible, since he
wholly abandoned it after one or two early attempts. Davies, however,
has conquered its difficulty; and, as has been observed, 'perhaps no
language can produce a poem, extending to so great a length, of more
condensation of thought, or in which fewer languid verses will be
found.' (Hallam, as before.) In fact, it is by this condensation and
sententious brevity, so carefully filed and elaborated, however, as
to involve no sacrifice of perspicuity or fulness of expression, that
he has attained his end. Every quatrain is a pointed expression of a
separate thought, like one of Rochefoucault's maxims; each thought
being, by great skill and painstaking in the packing, made exactly to
fit and to fill the same case. It may be doubted, however, whether
Davies would not have produced a still better poem if he had chosen a
measure which would have allowed him greater freedom and real variety;
unless, indeed, his poetical talent was of a sort that required the
suggestive aid and guidance of such artificial restraints as he had to
cope with in this; and what would have been a bondage to a more fiery
and teeming imagination, was rather a support to his."[49]

[Footnote 49: _A Compendious History of English Literature_, &c., Vol.
I., p. 577, edn. 1866.]

Most of this must be read _cum grano salis_. Davies elected his
measure and stanza with evidently entire spontaneity; and it is an
odd reversal of the simple matter of fact to ascribe the 'artificial
restraints' chosen, to an absence 'of a fiery and teeming imagination,'
when, as all observation demonstrates, the more fiery and fecund
the imagination of a Poet, the more exquisitely obedient is he to
the subtlest and most intricate movements of his measure--just as
the bluest-blooded race-horse is a law to itself whereas your stolid
dray-cart or plough-drawer needs the "artificial restraints" of all
kinds of gear, and the constraint of whip and blow and vociferation. I
can well suppose that but for the "Fairy Queen" Sir John Davies might
have chosen its stanza, but just as to-day "In Memoriam" has taken
to itself its form and music to the exclusion of every other--though
a very ancient English measure--so Spenser's immortal poem precluded
"Nosce Teipsum" following in the same. I cannot admit "artificial
restraints" in the sense of needed restraints or aid. There was the
stanza, and the genius of Sir John Davies appropriated it--since
Spenser's, in all worship, could not be taken--and, like a great Vine,
clad its natural slenderness and poorness of build with wealth of
bright green leafage and clustered fruitage. The nicety and daintiness
of workmanship, the involute and nevertheless firmly-completed and
manifested imagery of "Nosce Teipsum" wherewith this nicety and
daintiness are wrought, place Sir John Davies artistically among the
finest of our Poets. Southey wrote decisively on this:--"Sir John
Davies and Sir William Davenant, avoiding equally the opposite faults
of too artificial and too careless a style, wrote in numbers which, for
precision and clearness, and felicity and strength, have never been
surpassed." For 'felicity' I should have said 'flexibility.'[50]

[Footnote 50: To Southey's praise be it remembered, that he was the
first emphatically to regret that there had been no collective edition
of Sir John Davies's Works, as thus: "It may be regretted that he did
not leave representatives who would have thought it a duty and an
honour to publish all that could be collected of his writings; thus
erecting the best and most enduring monument to his memory." (British
Poets: Chaucer to Jonson: p. 686). Our edition of his Prose and Verse
fulfils Southey's wish.]

Again our examples of the mastery and perfection of workmanship must be
brief; but take these:--

    "Nor can her wide imbracements filled bee;
      For they that most, and greatest things embrace,
      Inlarge thereby their minds' capacitie,
      As streames inlarg'd, inlarge the channel's space.

    _All things receiu'd, doe such proportion take,
      As those things haue, wherein they are receiu'd_:
      So little glasses little faces make,
      And narrow webs on narrow frames be weau'd;

    Then what vast body must we make the _mind_
      Wherin are men, beasts, trees, towns, seas, and lands;
      And yet each thing a proper place doth find,
      And each thing in the true proportion stands?

    Doubtlesse this could not bee, but that she turnes
      Bodies to spirits, by _sublimation_ strange;
      As fire conuerts to fire the things it burnes
      As we our meats into our nature change.

    From their grosse _matter_ she abstracts the _formes_,
      And draws a kind of _quintessence_ from things;
      Which to her proper nature she transformes,
      To bear them light on her celestiall wings:

    This doth she, when, from things _particular_,
      She doth abstract the _universall kinds_;
      Which bodilesse and immateriall are,
      And can be lodg'd but onely in our minds:

    And thus from diuers _accidents_ and _acts_,
      Which doe within her obseruation fall,
      She goddesses, and powers diuine, abstracts:
      As _Nature_, _Fortune_, and the _Vertues_ all."

    (pp. 42-44.)

Again:--

    _Are they not sencelesse_ then, that thinke the Soule
      Nought but a fine perfection of the _Sense_;
      Or of the formes which _fancie_ doth enroule,
      A _quicke resulting_, and a _consequence_?

    What is it then that doth the _Sense_ accuse,
      Both of _false judgements_, and _fond appetites_?
      What makes vs do what _Sense_ doth most refuse?
      Which oft in torment of the _Sense_ delights?

    _Sense_ thinkes the _planets_, _spheares_ not much asunder;
      What tels vs then their distance is so farre?
      _Sense_ thinks the lightning borne before the thunder;
      What tels vs then they both together are?

    When men seem crows far off vpon a towre,
      _Sense_ saith, th'are crows; what makes vs think them men?
      When we in _agues_, thinke all sweete things sowre,
      What makes vs know our tongue's false iudgement then?

    What power was that, whereby _Medea_ saw,
      And well approu'd, and prais'd the better course,
      When her rebellious _Sense_ did so withdraw
      Her feeble powers, as she pursu'd the worse?

    Did _Sense_ perswade _Vlisses_ not to heare
      The mermaid's songs, which so his men did please;
      As they were all perswaded, through the eare
      To quit the ship, and leape into the _seas_?

    Could any power of _Sense_ the _Romane_ moue,
      To burn his own right hand with courage stout?
      Could _Sense_ make _Marius_ sit vnbound, and proue
      The cruell lancing of the knotty gout?

    Doubtlesse in _Man_ there is a _nature_ found,
      Beside the _Senses_, and aboue them farre;
      'Though most men being in sensuall pleasures drownd,
      'It seems their _Soules_ but in their _Senses_ are.'

    If we had nought but _Sense_, then onely they
      Should haue sound minds, which haue their _Senses_ sound;
    But _Wisdome_ growes, when _Senses_ doe decay,
      And _Folly_ most in quickest _Sense_ is found.

    If we had nought but _Sense_, each liuing wight,
      Which we call _brute_, would be more sharp then we;
      As hauing _Sense's apprehensiue might_,
      In a more cleere, and excellent degree.

    But they doe want that _quicke discoursing power_,
      Which doth in vs the erring _Sense_ correct;
      Therefore the _bee_ did sucke the painted flower,
      And _birds_, of grapes, the cunning shadow, peckt.

    _Sense_ outsides knows; the Soule throgh al things sees;
      _Sense_, _circumstance_; she, doth the _substance_ view;
      _Sense_ sees the barke, but she, the life of trees;
      _Sense_ heares the sounds, but she, the concords true.

    (pp. 35-38.)

Once more:--

    I know my bodie's of so fraile a kind,
      As force without, feauers within can kill;
      I know the heauenly nature of my minde,
      But 'tis corrupted both in wit and will:

    I know my _Soule_ hath power to know all things,
      Yet is she blinde and ignorant in all;
      I know I am one of Nature's little kings,
      Yet to the least and vilest things am thrall.

    I know my life's a paine and but a span,
      I know my _Sense_ is mockt with euery thing:
      And to conclude, I know my selfe a MAN,
      Which is a _proud_, and yet a _wretched_ thing.

    (p. 24.)

    If the pathos and grandeur of Pascal be anticipated in
    these lines, Pope has certainly appropriated Davies'
    favourite metaphor of the 'spider.' Witness the Sense
    of Feeling illustrated:--

    Much like a subtill spider, which doth sit
      In middle of her web, which spreadeth wide;
      If ought doe touch the vtmost thred of it,
      Shee feeles it instantly on euery side.

    (p. 70).

So in the _Essay of Man_:--

    "The spider's touch, how exquisitely fine,
      Feels at each thread, and lives along the line."

Another now familiar 'metaphor' also occurs in "Nosce Teipsum":--

  "Heere _Sense's apprehension_, end doth take;
    As when a stone is into water cast,
    One circle doth another circle make,
    Till the last circle touch the banke at last."

  (p. 72.)

These two characteristics, viz., (1) _deep and original thinking_,
(2) _perfection of workmanship, or mastery of an extremely difficult
stanza_--embrace that in "Nosce Teipsum," regarded broadly, which
I am anxious to have the Reader recognize and 'prove' for himself.
Subsidiary to them is one other thing--not shared with many of
our Poets and therefore demanding specific statement--viz. its
_condensation throughout_. Hallam and Craik have called attention to
this; and the student cannot fail to be struck with it. It is not
simply that the stanzas are as so many rings of gold each complete in
itself--much as Proverbs are--but that whether it be idea or opinion or
metaphor there is no beating of it out, as though yards of gold-leaf
or tin-foil were more valuable than the relatively small solid ore
that has been so manipulated: or the common mistake of imagining that
a pound of feathers is heavier than a pound of lead. From Dean Donne
until now "comparisons are odious." Nevertheless when one recalls
the attenuated thought and the blatant verbiage of not a few of our
Poets, this resolute sifting out of everything extraneous is not less
noticeable than commendable. It assures us that the Poet was conscious
of his resources--of his unused wealth of thought and imagination and
fancies. He who compacts his carbon into a Koh-i-noor has infinite
supplies of it. Similarly a Poet who could and did so lavishly add
great thought to great thought and vivid metaphor to vivid metaphor,
and still go on adding in smallest possible compass, declares his
intellect to be of the highest. I take two stanzas as illustrative
equally of condensed thought and condensed metaphor concerning our
First Parents:--

    When their reasons eye was sharpe and cleare,
      And (as an eagle can behold the sunne)
      Could haue approcht th' Eternall Light as neare,
      As the intellectuall angels could haue done:

    Euen then to them the _Spirit of Lyes_ suggests
      That they were blind, because they saw not ill;
      And breathes into their incorrupted brests
      A curious _wish_, which did corrupt their _will_.

Your Rhetorician-poet would have expatiated on his 'Eagle' through
a hundred lines. Your mere Metaphysician would have entangled
himself with distinctions between 'wish' and 'will' endlessly.
Similarly how succinctly memorable is this of man's un-willinghood
to know himself--every stanza a perfect circle but all the circles
interlinked:--

    We study _Speech_ but others we perswade;
      We _leech-craft_ learne, but others cure with it;
      We interpret _lawes_, which other men haue made,
      But reade not those which in our hearts are writ.

    Is it because the minde is like the eye,
      Through which it gathers knowledge by degrees--
      Whose rayes reflect not, but spread outwardly:
      Not seeing it selfe when other things it sees?

    No, doubtlesse; for the mind can backward cast
      Vpon her selfe, her vnderstanding light;
      But she is so corrupt, and so defac't,
      As her owne image doth her selfe affright.

    As in the fable of the Lady faire,
      Which for her lust was turnd into a cow;
      When thirstie to a streame she did repaire,
      And saw her selfe transform'd she wist not how:

    At first she startles, then she stands amaz'd,
      At last with terror she from thence doth flye;
      And loathes the watry glasse wherein she gaz'd,
      And shunnes it still, though she for thirst doe die:

    Euen so _Man's Soule_ which did God's image beare,
      And was at first faire, good, and spotlesse pure;
      Since with her _sinnes_ her beauties blotted were,
      Doth of all sights her owne sight least endure:

    For euen at first reflection she espies,
      Such strange _chimeraes_, and such monsters there;
      Such toyes, such _antikes_, and such vanities,
      As she retires, and shrinkes for shame and feare.

    And as the man loues least at home to bee,
      That hath a sluttish house haunted with _spirits_;
      So she impatient her owne faults to see,
      Turnes from her selfe and in strange things delites.

    For this few _know themselues_: for merchants broke
      View their estate with discontent and paine;
      And _seas_ are troubled, when they doe reuoke
      Their flowing waues into themselues againe.

    (pp. 20-22.)

How daintily-put and how divinely ennobled by the sacred reference
is this of the soul's yearning after that higher ideal that is ever
receding horizon-like to our vision:--

    Then as a _bee_ which among weeds doth fall,
      Which seeme sweet flowers, with lustre fresh and gay;
      She lights on that, and this, and tasteth all,
      But pleasd with none, doth rise, and soare away;

    So, when the _Soule_ finds here no true content,
      And, like _Noah's_ doue, can no sure footing take;
      She doth returne from whence she first was sent,
      And flies to _Him_ that first her wings did make. (p. 87)

For condensed and close-packed thought and imagery the 'Reasons' for
the 'Immortalitie of the Soule' (pp. 83-99) are not to be equalled
anywhere.

We may not linger over "Nosce Teipsum." Passing to the "Hymnes to
Astraea" and "Orchestra, or a Poeme of Dauncing" while they have the
same characteristics with "Nosce Teipsum," they yet suggest another
characteristic in Davies as a Poet--_unexpectedness of brilliant and
great things_. You count on the Lark's up-springing and the Lark's
idyllic song, if you are traversing its bladed or daisied possession;
but you are startled if it rise from the mired or dusty street or
the inodorous slum. You look for the eagle when you have climbed
Shehallion and other Highland mountain fastnesses; but suppose it
were to flap out upon you as you paced into your semi-suburban villa.
So in "Nosce Teipsum," as seen, deep thought perfectly worked is what
knowing the Poet you look for therein; but even in "Hymnes to Astraea"
and "Orchestra" you very soon discover that it is still the Poet of
"Nosce Teipsum" who sings. The moods of thought are airier and more
vivacious substantively, but the thinking and shaping and colouring of
imagination is the same; and 'unexpected' is really _the_ word that
seems to me to express the out-flashing of the higher faculty. Turning
to the "Hymnes to Astraea," how exquisite are the fancy and the flattery
of Hymne V., "To the Larke," as she is wooed by the Poet-Courtier to be
his minstrel to 'sing' of Elizabeth. You do not for a moment feel the
'artificial restraint' of the margin-letters that go to form Elizabetha
Regina:--

    Earley, cheerfull, mounting Larke,
    Light's gentle vsher, Morning's clark,
    In merry notes delighting;
    Stint awhile thy song, and harke,
    And learn my new inditing.

    Beare vp this hymne, to heau'n it beare,
    Euen vp to heau'n, and sing it there,
    To heau'n each morning beare it;
    Haue it set to some sweet sphere,
    And let the Angels heare it.
    Renownd Astraea, that great name,
    Exceeding great in worth and fame,
    Great worth hath so renownd it;
    It is Astraea's name I praise,
    Now then, sweet Larke, do thou it raise,
    And in high Heauen resound it.

    (p. 133.)

Meet companion to this is Hymne VII., "To the Rose:"--

    Eye of the Garden, Queene of flowres,
    Love's cup wherein he nectar powres,
    Ingendered first of nectar;
    Sweet nurse-child of the Spring's young howres,
    And Beautie's faire character.

    Best iewell that the Earth doth weare,
    Euen when the braue young sunne draws neare,
    To her hot Loue pretending;
    Himselfe likewise like forme doth beare,
    At rising and descending.

    Rose of the Queene of Loue belou'd;
    England's great Kings diuinely mou'd,
    Gave Roses in their banner;
    It shewed that Beautie's Rose indeed,
    Now in this age should them succeed,
    And raigne in more sweet manner.

    (p. 135.)

That the large and intense homage of Davies (among his illustrious
contemporaries), in these "Hymnes" was genuine not simulated,
spontaneous not mercenary, the apostrophe to Envy protests. With an
echo of the old 'exegi monumentum' or reminiscence of Shakespeare's
then not long published Sonnets, he thus writes:--

    Enuy, goe weepe; my Muse and I
    Laugh thee to scorne; thy feeble eye
    Is dazeled with the glory
    Shining in this gay poesie,
    And little golden story.

    Behold how my proud quill doth shed
    Eternall _nectar_ on her head;
    The pompe of coronation
    Hath not such power her fame to spread,
    As this my admiration.

    Respect my pen as free and franke
    Expecting not reward nor thanke,
    Great wonder onely moues it;
    I never made it mercenary,
    Nor should my Muse this burthen carrie
    As hyr'd, but that she loues it.

    (p. 154.)

Then in "Orchestra" you are again and again reminded that, mere sport
of wit though it be, "suddaine, rash, half-capreol of my wit," as he
himself calls it to Martin (p. 159), it is a man of rare genius who
sports. So much so that ever and anon you perceive, as Cleopatra of her
Anthony:

                    ------"his delights
    Were dolphin-like; _they show'd his tack above_
    _The element they lived in_." (v. 2.)

That is, even among the trivialities about 'Dauncing' and the
frivolities of laudation, you are re-called to grander things--as in
the Summer one sees breaks of blue in the over-arching sky above some
miserable Pick-nick party desecrating some glorious forest-dell. I cull
two out of manifold examples of the unexpectedness that I now wish to
point out--as thus of the antiquity yet vitality of 'Dauncing':--

    "Thus doth it equall age with age inioy,
    And yet in lustie youth for euer flowers;
    Like loue his sire, whom Paynters make a boy,
    Yet is the eldest of the heau'nly powers;
    Or like his brother Time, whose winged howers
      Going and comming will not let him dye,
      But still preserve him in his infancie."

    (p. 169.)

That is 'brilliant' but this is 'great,' indeed magnificent, of the
Sea:--

    "Loe the _Sea_ that fleets about the Land,
    And like a girdle clips her solide waist,
    Musicke and measure both doth vnderstand;
    For his great chrystall eye is always cast
    Vp to the Moone, and on her fixed fast;
      And as she daunceth in her pallid spheere,
      So daunceth he about her Center heere." (p. 179.)

I know not where, outside of Milton, to match that personification of
the Sea, with its "great chrystall eye"; and 'palid' is as tenderly
delicate as the other is grand. Coleridge must have carried it in his
omniverous memory, for surely one of the most memorable of the stanzas
in his "Ancient Mariner" drew its inspiration thence, as thus:--

    "Still as a slave before his lord,
    The ocean hath no blast;
    His great bright eye most silently
    Up to the Moon is cast--
    If he may know which way to go;
    For she guides him smooth or grim.
    See, brother, see! how graciously
    She looketh down on him."
       (Pt. VI.)

At this point it may interest some to read Sir John Harington's welcome
to the Poet on the publication of 'Orchestra', thus:--


_Of Master_ John Dauies _Booke of Dancing_. _To Himselfe._

    While you the Planets all doe set to dancing,
    Beware such hap, as to the Fryer was chancing:
    Who preaching in a Pulpit old and rotten,
    Among some notes, most fit to be forgotten:
    Vnto his Auditory thus he vaunts,
    To make all Saints after his pype to dance:
    It speaking, which as he himselfe aduances,
    To act his speech with gestures, lo, it chances,
    Downe fals the Pulpit, sore the man is brused,
    Neuer was Fryer and Pulpit more abused.
    Then beare with me, though yet to you a stranger,
    To warne you of the like, nay greater danger.
    For though none feare the falling of those sparkes,
    (And when they fall, t'will be good catching Larkes)
    Yet this may fall, that while you dance and skip,
    With female Planets, sore your foote may trip,
      That in your lofty Caprioll and turne
      Their motion may make your dimension burne."

    (Epigrams, Book II. 67.)

I am tempted to further critical examination of this very remarkable
Poetry; but feel constrained by already transgressed limits to withhold
them for the present. But I must say something on the Epigrams
and Minor Poems. I have 'compunctious visitings' in re-publishing
them, even though they have been included by Dyce and by Colonel
Cunningham in their successive editions of Marlowe. In my Note (Vol.
II., pp. 3-6), I give bibliographical and other details concerning
these Epigrams; and I correct a mis-assignation of certain by Dyce
to Davies that belong to Henry Hutton. It must be conceded that the
Epigrams have dashes of the roughness, even coarseness, of the age.
They self-drevealingly belong to the wild-oats sowing of the Poet's
youthful period. Nevertheless, I have ventured their reproduction in
integrity for four reasons:--

 (_a_) These Epigrams, from their subjects and style, are valuable, as
 expressing the _tone_ of society at the time.

 (_b_) It would be _suppressio veri_ to withhold them, toward an
 accurate estimate of their Author. They furnish elements of judgment.

 (_c_) They were what gained the Poet 'a name': even when tartly spoken
 of by Guilpin he is called the 'English Martial' from them.

 (_d_) These Epigrams belong to a section of our early Literature
 that contemporaneously was abundant; and it were advantageous if
 characteristics of particular periods were more recognised in literary
 criticism.

Besides Guilpin, a very rare volume of early Verse by Ashmore,
furnishes a hitherto overlooked Epigram, wherein "Nosce Teipsum" and
the Epigrams, are noticed with well-put praise. I am fortunate enough
to be able to give it, which I do in its English form only, the Latin
being poor and inaccurate. It is inscribed "Ad D. Io. Davies, Milite
Iudicem Itinerium" and thus runs:--

    "If Plato lived and saw those heaven-breathed Lines
    Where thou the Essence of the Soule confines;
    Or merry Martiale read thy Epigrammes,
    Where sportingly, these looser times thou blames:
      Though both excel, yet (in their severall wayes)
      They both ore-come, would yeeld to thee the Prise."[51]

[Footnote 51: Ashmore (J). Certain Selected Odes of Horace Englished,
with Poems of divers Subiects translated. Whereunto are added, both
in Latin and English, sundry new Epigrammes, Anagrammes, Epitaphes.
1621 sm. 4^{o}. As this Volume is seldom to be met with, I take the
opportunity of adding here the Anagram to Bacon, which does not appear
to have been known to his Editors or Biographers.

To the Right Honourable, Sir Francis Bacone, Knight, Lord High
Chancelor of England.

  Anagr  { Bacone
         { Beacon

  Thy Vertuous Name and Office, joyne with Fate,
  To make thee the bright Beacon of the State.

I just observe, as my book passes through the Press, that ANTHONY
A-WOOD quotes (probably) above, without naming the author.]


His name-sake, John Davies of Hereford similarly saluted him. His
'Lines' with others, will appear more fitly in the fuller 'Life.'
Meanwhile, as carrying within it, perhaps the most memorable
circumstance appertaining to these 'Epigrams,' I must ask attention
here, to one of Wordsworth's finest minor poems--his


"POWER OF MUSIC.

    An Orpheus! an Orpheus! yes, Faith may grow bold,
    And take to herself all the wonders of old;--
    Near the stately Pantheon you'll meet with the same,
    In the street that from Oxford hath borrowed its name.

    His station is there; and he works on the crowd,
    He sways them with harmony merry and loud;
    He fills with his power all their hearts to the brim--
    Was aught ever heard like his fiddle and him?

    What an eager assembly! what an empire is this!
    The weary have life, and the hungry have bliss;
    The mourner is cheered, and the anxious have rest;
    And the guilt-burthened soul is no longer opprest.

    As the Moon brightens round her the clouds of the night,
    So He, where he stands, is a centre of light;
    It gleams on the face, there, of the dusky-browed Jack,
    And the pale-visaged Baker's, with basket on back.

    That errand-bound 'Prentice was passing in haste--
    What matter! he's caught--and his time runs to waste;
    The Newsman is stopped, though he stops on the fret;
    And the half-breathless Lamp-lighter--he's in the net!

    The Porter sits down on the weight which he bore;
    The Lass with her barrow wheels hither her store;--
    If a thief could be here he might pilfer at ease;
    She sees the Musician, 'tis all that she sees!

    He stands, backed by the wall; he abates not his din;
    His hat gives him vigour, with boons dropping in,
    From the old and the young, from the poorest; and there!
    The one-pennied Boy has his penny to spare.

    O blest are the hearers, and proud be the hand
    Of the pleasure it spreads through so thankful a band;
    I am glad for him, blind as he is!--all the while
    If they speak 'tis to praise, and they praise with a smile.

    That tall Man, a giant in bulk and in height,
    Not an inch of his body is free from delight;
    Can he keep himself still, if he would? oh, not he!
    The music stirs in him like wind through a tree.

    Mark that Cripple who leans on his crutch; like a tower
    That long has leaned forward, leans hour after hour!--
    That Mother, whose spirit in fetters is bound,
    While she dandles the Babe in her arms to the sound.

    Now, coaches and chariots! roar on like a stream;
    Here are twenty souls happy as souls in a dream:
    They are deaf to your murmurs--they care not for you,
    Nor what ye are flying, nor what ye pursue!

What is this but a glorified version of a portion of Epigram 38? Here
it is:--

    "As doth the Ballad-singer's auditory,
    Which hath at Temple-barre his standing chose,
    And to the vulgar sings an Ale-house story:
    First stands a Porter: then, an Oyster-wife
    Doth stint her cry, and stay her steps to heare him;
    Then comes a Cut-purse ready with a knife,
    And then a Countrey-clyent passeth neare him;
    There stands the Constable, there stands the whore,
    And, listening to the Song, heed not each other;
    There by the Serjeant stands the debitor,
    And doth no more mistrust him than his brother:
    Thus Orpheus to such hearers giveth musick
    And Philo to such patients giveth physic."

Any charge of plagiarism were an outrage on Genius: but the coincidence
is remarkable. It is just possible that the later Poet may have found
the 'Epigrams' in his bookish friend SOUTHEY'S library,
and that the rough lines lingered semi-unconsciously in his memory.
The earlier is to the later, as a photograph of the actual coarse
street-group to the idealizations of the Artist: nevertheless it has
its own interest and value, neither are the Characters ill-chosen, nor
without humour.

But on the other hand Davies, in his 47th Epigram, was no doubt
influenced by a remembrance of Sidney's 30th Stella sonnet. The
likeness as to the countries mentioned is remarkable.[52]

[Footnote 52: See my edition of Sidney, Vol. I.]

One flagrant appropriater of Davies' Epigrams must be nailed-up, in
the person of William Winstanley in his "The Muses Cabinet stored with
variety of Poems, both pleasant and profitable. London 1655." Thus we
read "On Rembombo":--

    "Rembombo having spent all his estate
    Went to the wars to prove more fortunate.
    Being return'd, he speaks such warlike words,
    No dictionary half the like affords:
    He talks of flankers, gabions and scalados,
    Of curtneys, parapets & palizados,
    Retreats & triumphs & of carnisadoes,
    Of sallies, halfe moones & of ambuscadoes:
    I to requite the fustian termes he uses,
    Reply with words belonging to the Muses;
    As Spondes, Dactiles & Hexameters,
    Stops, commas, accents, types, tropes, & pentameters,
    Madrigalls, Epicediums, elegies,
    Satyres, Iambicks, & Apostrophes,
    Acrosticks, Aquiuoques, & epigrams:
    Thus talking and being understood by neither,
    We part wise as when we came together."

    (p. 43)

Let the Reader compare this with Davies' Epigram (Vol. II., p. 23-4).
Various others are similarly transmogrified; and John Heath also is
'spoiled' (in a double sense). Yet has Winstanley the impudence to
close his volume bitingly thus:--

    "Cease Muse, here comes a criticke, close thy page,
    These lines are not strong enough for this age;
    The nice new-fangled readers of these times
    Will scarcely relish thy plain country rimes."

The Minor Poems, not hitherto collected, will reward critical perusal.
Some of them are noticeable: quaint fancies, glances of wit and
wisdom, felicitous epithet, racy similes, aphoristic sayings, bird-like
notes of genuine music, and now and then, powerful sarcasm, will meet
the studious reader. The HITHERTO UNPUBLISHED MSS., which
include, besides secular poems, his long vainly-sought Metaphrase
of certain Psalms, speak for themselves. And so I leave the Reader
to raise the lid of the casket of gems now put into his hands. It
demands robustness of brain and sensibilities of spirit to appreciate
adequately Sir John Davies as a Poet; but if, in all humility of
receptiveness and open-eyedness, these volumes be read, no one
competent can go away unimpressed. Whether as Thinker or Singer he must
be placed among the rare few who have enriched our highest Literature.

  ALEXANDER B. GROSART.




POSTSCRIPT.

MINOR POEMS, ETC.


There are several things relative to the Minor Poems of Sir John Davies
that require statement and elucidation; and I deem it well to give such.

 I. The Ten Sonnets to Philomel and Hymn to Music.

 II. The Entertainment to Elizabeth at Harefield by the Countess of
 Derby.

 III. The Poem to King James 1st.

 IV. Dacus not Samuel Daniel.

 V. Marston and "Orchestra," &c.

 VI. Hymnes to Astraea.

_I. The Ten Sonnets to Philomel and Hymn to Music._ In my Fuller
Worthies' Library edition of Davies, I admitted "Canzonet: a Hymne
in praise of Musick" among his Poems (pp. 297-9) because in the
"Rhapsody" it bore his initials I. D. precisely as his other accepted
pieces therein did. But I excluded the 'Ten Sonnets to Philomel' from
their having the signature originally of "Melophilus," and I. D. only
subsequently. I too hastily agreed with Sir Egerton Brydges (in his
edition of the "Rhapsody" 2 Vols., 1826) in assigning them to Dean
Donne. I could not discern Donne's manner in the 'Canzonet,' and so
had no difficulty in rejecting Brydges' alleged 'internal evidence' in
respect of it, initialled as it was. Neither did I find the 'internal
evidence' in the 'Ten Sonnets' for its Donne authorship, but, in
addition to the early signature "Melophilus," there was a note of
"Manuscripts to get" by Davison, from Donne, that has seemed to warrant
the "Ten Sonnets" being regarded as his contribution, and the later I.
D. as representing J[ohn] D[onne], and not Sir John Davies. My friend
Dr. Brinsley Nicholson has satisfied me that Davison's List of MSS.
to be received could not refer to his "Rhapsody," but to some other
intended work or private collection; and so the one point in favour
of Donne falls to the ground. The evidence as communicated to myself,
and since, in a lengthy communication to the _Athenaeum_ (January 22d,
1876), may be thus summarized, (1) There is nothing in Davison's
notings which even hints that he was thinking of the "Rhapsody." (2)
The greater number of the MSS. mentioned never appeared even by a
specimen in the "Rhapsody." (3) The second entry is of

  "Sports, Masks, and Entertainments to y^{e} { late Queen
                                              { the King," &c.

Therefore it was written in or after 1603. But the first edition of
the "Rhapsody" containing the "Hymn to Music" signed I. D., and the
"Ten Sonnets" signed "Melophilus," and in the subsequent editions I.
D., was published in 1602, (4) There is not in the subsequent editions
a single piece by any of these memorandum-noted authors that is not in
the first--so shewing further that the memorandum had no reference to
the "Rhapsody." Of Donne and Constable there are in the editions 1608,
1611, 1621, only those given in 1602, and in no edition at all is there
a single specimen of Ben Jonson, Hodgson, Harington, Joseph Hall, &c.,
&c. There remains thus only (5). The I. D. evidence, e.g.:

               1602.         1608.          1611.              1621.
  Hymn         I. D.         I. D.          I. D.            Unsigned.
  Sonnets    Melophilus.     I. D.          I. D.              I. D.
  12 Wonders  }  Not      John Dauis    Sir John Dauis    Sir John Davies
  Lottery     }  in          I. D.          I. D.            Sir I. D.
  Contention  }  1st      Jonn Dauis       Sir John          Unsigned.
              }  edn.                       Dauis.
  Absence hear this my protestation. Unsigned in all four editions.

That two are unsigned in the 1621 edition is probably due to omission
made during the thorough re-distribution of the pieces into books of
Odes, &c., &c. Further (6) the "Hymn to Music" and the "Ten Sonnets"
follow consecutively, and are the very first among the "pieces by
sundry others." So in editions of 1608 and 1611 the "Twelve Wonders,"
"Lottery," and "Contention" are the first of the new pieces, in
fact, open the book and follow one another successively in a group of
three--John Dauis--I. D.--John Davies. (7) We gather from inspection
of the "Table" that (_a_) the "Lottery," I. D., is John Davies; (_b_)
that Davison put I. D. after the "Lottery," knowing that he had already
appropriated I. D. to the author of the "Hymne;" and what is more, he
chose to put I. D. to the "Lottery" just when he associated the "Ten
Sonnets" with I. D. and John Davies' poems by altering Melophilus to
I. D.; (_c_) at the same time he left "Absence hear," &c., unsigned;
(_d_) what has been said under (5) and (6) suggests that Davies was a
personal friend of Davison's, and this is strengthened by there being
no MS. of Davies noted as "to get." If so, Davison was still less
likely to use ambiguous initials for anything by Davies. Once more (8)
When we add to this that the "Hymne" must go with the "Ten Sonnets" and
that it is clearly by the author of "Orchestra"; and that neither the
"Hymne" nor the "Ten Sonnets" appear in any collection of Donne's poems
printed or in MS. the external evidence in favour of Sir John Davies
as author of the work is as strong as it well can be. Internally the
student of "Orchestra" and the "Hymnes to Astraea" will readily see the
"fine Roman hand" that wrote them in the "Hymne to Music" and related
"Ten Sonnets to Philomel." There is none of the style, or conceits, or
wording, or rhythm of Donne. I add finally (9) If the "Ten Sonnets to
Philomel" were based on real love experiences, we can understand how
at first at any rate the disguise of "Melophilus" might be preferred
to I. D. It does not seem probable that they were addressed to her who
became his wife. In accord with all this both the "Hymne to Music" and
the "Ten Sonnets to Philomel" are now included among Sir John Davies's
Poems (Vol. ii. pp. 96-106.)

II. _The Entertainment to Elizabeth at Harefield by the Countess of
Derby._ In the foot-notes to the "Lottery," (Vol. II., pp. 87-94)
several variations from Manningham's "Diary" are accepted as decided
improvements, especially those in VII., XIX.,
and XXI., which were probably taken from a revised or
autograph MS. That Manningham had full information on the "Lottery"
is proved by the list he gives of the persons to whom the 'lots'
went, viz., I., To hir M^{tie}. III. La[dy]
Scroope. XXVII. La[dy] Scudamore. VI. Lady Francis.
VII. Earle of Darby's countes. VIII. Lady Southwell,
II. Countess of Darby dowager: [the Lord Keeper's wife].
XII. Countess of Kildare. XIII. La[dy] Effingham.
XIX. La[dy] Newton. XXI. Not named. XXII.
La[dy] Warwike. XXV. La[dy] Dorothy. XXXIII. La[dy]
Susan ... XXXII. La[dy] Kidderminster. XXXI. Blank.
But there remains an interesting question to be settled, viz., the
date of this "Lottery." Nichols, apparently on the sole authority of
the "Rhapsody," gives it to a visit to the Lord Keeper's town-house
[York House] in 1601; and assigns it to York House because Sir Thomas
Egerton did not buy Harefield till 1602, and clearly by the speeches
in the "Entertainment" the Queen had never been there before August,
1602. But the "Rhapsody" date is a slip of Davison's pen or of his
printer for 1602, and the "Lottery" took place at Harefield as part of
the "Entertainment." Notices in the "Lottery" itself guide us to this
conclusion, e.g., it was about August, for in Lot 22 we read:--

    "'Tis Summer yet,...
    But 'twill be winter one day, doubt you not."

and the visit to Harefield was in August. Then there is this to
be noted that the masquer is "A Mariner ... supposed to come from
the Carrick." Let 'the' be marked '_the_ Carrick.' The allusion is
historical. The Queen sent out Sir Richard Levison (or Lawson) and Sir
William Morrison on 19th and 26th March, 1602 to intercept the plate
fleet and do any other damage along the Spanish coast. They did not
get the Fleet and were wholly unsuccessful till 1st June, when they
came upon an immense 'carrick' from the East Indies of 1,600 tons
flanked on one side by a castle and on the other by eleven Spanish and
Portugese galleys. On the 2nd the admirals with five men of war and
two merchantmen Easterlings, beat the gallies and silenced the castle,
and on the 3rd the carrick surrendered with a cargo estimated by the
Portugese at a million of ducats. Our killed in this brilliant exploit
was six seamen (see Camden's Annals and Monson's Naval Tracts). This
proves that the Verses were _vers d'occasion_. We have '_the_ carrick'
and Cynthia who sent forth Fortune to the sea, and many a "jewel and a
gem" brought, and Fortune so commanded

    ------"as makes me now to sing
    There is no fishing to the sea, no service to the King."

Further, the Queen writing to Lord Mountjoy (Deputy to Ireland) 15th
July 1602 says "... first to assure you that we have sent a fleet
to the coast of Spain, notwithstanding our former fleet returned
with the Carrick," which shows two things (1) That Lawson and Monson
had returned prior to the 15th of July (2) that the Queen had sent
out another fleet at once; and thus Davies' verses were the more
appropriate as being not only a remembrance of good luck but an
anticipation of continued good fortune.

These proofs of date which require no confirmation are confirmed by
this, that Manningham after the "Lottery," and on the same leaf,
gives a "dialogue betweene the bayly and a dairy mayd" before "her
Mtis coming to the house," quoting a sentence from it as found in the
"Entertainment." This leads me to state why I have given the entire
"Entertainment" to Sir John Davies. It certainly is contrary to natural
expectation that the "Lottery" verses are not introduced into the
"Entertainment," and but for other considerations the inference might
have been that only the "Lottery" was by Davies, and the rest by some
other. But there is this explanation of the absence of the "Lottery"
verses, that evidently they formed part of the amusement of one of
the rainy days--for it was a wet S^{t}. Swithin--when the speeches
and other things of the "Entertainment" took place without doors,
and distinct from the "Lottery." Then on reading the "Entertainment"
itself, there are manifold marks that the whole came from one pen,
and that pen Davies's; for throughout there is likeness of style and
thought to his avowed writings. Take these few examples: (1) "If thou
knewest the cause, thou wouldst not wonder; for I stay to entertaine
the Wonder of this time," &c. ("Entertainment," &c., Vol. II., pp.
249-50.) Cf. this with "Orchestra" st. 120, "wonder of posteritie"
(i.e., of her own time): (2) "The Guest that wee are to entertaine doth
fill all places with her divine vertues, as the Sunne fills the World
with the light of his beames." (_Ibid_, p. 250). Cf. Hymnes to Astraea,
XIV., stanza 2:--

    "Behold her in her vertues' beames,
    Extending sun-like to all realities."

Again, XV., st. 1:--

    "Eye of that mind most quicke and cleere,--
    Like Heaven's eye, which from his spheare
    Into all things prieth;
    Sees through all things euery where,
    And all their natures trieth."

(3) "Though her selfe shall eclipse her soe much, as to suffer her
brightness to bee shadowed in this obscuere and narrow _Place_, yet the
sunne beames that follow her, the traine I meane that attends vpon her,
must, by the necessitie of this _Place_, be deuided from her." (_Ibid_,
p. 251). Cf. XIX., st. 1:--

    "Eclipsed she is, and her bright rayes,
    Lie under vailes, yet many wayes
    Is her faire forme reuealed."

'Beams' and 'sunbeams' are favourite words with Davies: so too
'mirror.' (4) "Time weare very vngratefull, if it should not euer stand
still, to serue and preserue, cherish and delight her, that is the
glory of her time, and makes the Time happy wherein she liueth" (_Ibid_
p. 251). Cf. II. st. 3, ll. 1-3.

    "Right glad am I that now I live:
    Even in these days whereto you give
    Great happiness and glory."

(5) "What if she make thee a contynewell holy-day, she makes me [Place]
a perpetuall sanctuary" (_Ibid_ p. 251). Cf. IV., st. 1:--

    "Each day of time, sweet moneth of May,
    Love makes a solemne holy-day."

(6) "Doth not the presence of a Prince make a Cottage a Court, and the
presence of the Gods make euery place Heaven?" (_Ibid_ pp. 251-2). Cf.
Dedication of "Nosce Teipsum":--

    "Stay long (sweet spirit) ere thou to Heauen depart,
    Which makest each place a heauen wherein thou art."

In the Verse (pp. 253-4) there are abundant parallels. I must content
myself with references. With the 1st stanza

    "Beauties rose, and vertues booke, &c."

compare Hymnes to Astraea VII., st. 3: XVII., st. 2-3 and the
"Contention" (_ad. fin._) and XIII. st. 2: XV. st. 2. Also IV. last 2
lines: VII. st. 3. ll. 1-3: X. last 4 lines. Similar results are found
on a comparison of the "Entertainment" with the "Dialogue between a
Gentleman Usher and a Poet" (Fuller Worthies' Library edn. of Davies'
Poems: pp. 15-21.)

I have accordingly given the whole "Entertainment" as belonging to
Sir John Davies. It is to be regretted that the Satyrs Verses are
unaccompanied by the rest of the Masque to which apparently they
belong. Harefield has the further light of glory on it of having been
the scene of Milton's "Arcades" and of the famous elm-aisle celebrated
by him in imperishable verse. The Countess of Derby, afterwards the
Lord Keeper's third wife, was the early friend of Spenser and of
Milton, and of all her eminent literary contemporaries.[53]

[Footnote 53: As for much more I am indebted to Dr. Brinsley Nicholson
(as before) for most of the details of the above statement. He has
likewise favoured me with these additional illustrations of a refrain
in the introduction to the "Lottery." In the Queen's Entertainment at
Cawdray (Lord Montacute's), in 1591, an angler says, "Madame, it is an
olde saying, There is no fishing to the sea nor service to the King:
but it holdes when the sea is calme and the King vertuous" (Nichols'
Progresses). Greene also uses it in his James IV., when the schemer who
has gained by flattering the King, says (I. 2)

    "Now may I say as many often sing,
    No fishing to the sea nor service to a King."

See Note to the "Lottery," Vol. II., p. 88. It was surely an error
of judgment of the late Mr. John Bruce, in reproducing Manningham's
"Diary," to leave out the "Lottery," and related entries, on the weak
plea that the former had been printed in Shakespeare and Percy Society
publications. It may be here mentioned that Manningham, in giving some
of the "Lottery" verses, writes on a leaf which is followed by one of
the date of 1601; but as Mr. Collier remarks, either the leaves of
the Diary got misplaced, or else he was in the habit of using up at
after times leaves that he had left blank. Further: Chamberlain, in
a letter of October 2, 1602, mentions the visit to the Lord Keeper's
at Harefield as part of the late "Progress." The original M.S. of the
Entertainment belonged to Sir Roger Newdegate, but is now missing.
Finally: I over-looked to annotate _in loco_ in the "Entertainment"
itself, that as the Dairy house was to the left while the "House" (of
Harefield) was to the right, the Dairymaid ridicules the idea of the
Bailiff taking such a party to what she calls a Pigeon house for its
size, and which was moreover at that moment in the carpenters' hands.
In effect the Queen had to be separated from at least the greater part
of her suite.]

III. "_Yet other Twelve Wonders of the World._" In foot-note (Vol. II.,
p. 67) I promise an account of an autograph MS. of this characteristic
set of verses. It finds more fitting place here than in the Preface.
The MS. is preserved at Downing College, Cambridge, and having been
described on p. 325 of the "Third Report of the Historical MSS.
Commissioners," Mr. Beedham, (as before) was kind enough to make a
_literatim_ transcript for me (with the permission of the College
authorities). The MS. is headed "Verses giuen to the L. Treasurer vpon
Newyeares day vpon a dosen of Trenchers by Mr. Davis." In the margin
against "The Lawyer," in the same handwriting as the Verses, is this:
"This is misplaced, it should be before the physis^{n}," and similarly
against "The Country Gentleman," also in the same handwriting, is:
"This is misplaced, in the original it is before the m^{r} chant."
There is nothing to give any clue as to the precise New Year's day upon
which the Verses were furnished to the Lord Treasurer; but unless I
very much mistake, they were the "cobweb" of his "inuention" enclosed
in that letter which Mr. J. Payne Collier supposed to have gone with a
gift-copy of "Nosce Teipsum." The letter speaks for itself:--

 "Mr. Hicks. I have sent you heer inclosed that cobweb of my
 invention which I promised before Christmas: I pray you present
 it, commend it, and grace it, as well for your owne sake as mine:
 bycause by your nominacion I was first put to this taske, for which
 I acknowledge my self beholding to you in good earnest, though the
 imployment be light and trifling, because I am glad of any occasion
 of being made knowne to that noble gentl. whom I honore and admire
 exceedingly. If ought be to be added, or alter'd; lett me heare from
 you. I shall willingly attend to doo it, the more speedily if it
 be before the terme. So in haste I commend my best service to you.
 Chancery Lane, 20 Jan. 1600. Yours to do you service very willingly,
 Jo. Davys." (Bibl. Account, V. I., pp. 193-4; no specification of
 source beyond S. P. O.)

The handwriting of the copy in Downing College belongs to the close
of the 16th or to the earliest years of the 17th century. The second
marginal note above would seem to show that the transcript was made
from the original, then perhaps being circulated from hand to hand.
Specimens of variations may interest. In "The Courtier," l. 1, for
'liu'd' the MS. reads 'serued': l. 4, "from them that fall" for "such
as fall": l. 5, "my" for "a rich array": in the "Divine," l. 1, "one
cure doth me contente" for "and I from God am sent": l. 3, "true kinde"
for "kind true": l. 5, "Nor followe princes' Courts" for "Much wealth
I will not seeke ": "The Souldier," l. 6, "brag" for "boast": "The
Physitian," l. 1, "prolonge" for "vphold" and "life" for "state": l. 2,
"I" for "me" (_bis_): l. 6, "time & youth" for "youth and time": "The
Lawyer," l. 1, "My practice is the law" for "the Law my calling is":
ll. 5-6,

  "Some say I haue good gifts, and love where I doe take
  Yet never tooke I fee, but I advisd or spake,"


                        for


  "Nor counsell did bewray, nor of both parties take,
  Nor euer tooke I fee for which I neuer spake."

"The Merchant" l. 2, "vnknowne worlds ... kingdomes doth" for "unknowne
coasts ... countries to": "The Married Man," l. 4, "choise" for
"chance": "The Wife," l. 1, "my" for "our": l. 2, "Thither am I ...
where firste" for "I thither am ... from whence": l. 3,

  "I goe not maskd abroad to visit, when I do
  My secrets I bewray to none but one or two,"

                        for

  "I doe not visite oft, nor many, when I doe,
  I tell my mind to few, and that in counsell too."

"The Widowe" l. 1, "dyinge" _is_ inserted here before "husband": l.
3, "love" for "haue": l. 6, "Nor richer then I am, nor younger would
I seeme" for "Nor younger then I am, nor richer will I seeme": "The
Maide," l. 4, "of" for "on": l. 5, "but" for "yet." These embrace all
save orthographical and other slight variants. As derived from an
authentic _autograph_ MS. the Downing College copy is interesting and
its variants serve further to illustrate the letter to Hicks wherein
Davies expresses his willingness to make any changes--which alone
might have led Mr. Collier to see that he could not possibly refer to
"Nosce Teipsum," which was then published.

IV. _Dacus not Samuel Daniel._ Turning to Epigrams 30 and 45 (pp.
30, 45) the reader will find in Dyce's note to the latter that he
identified 'Dacus' with Daniel, and the passage whereon he based the
identification. I passed his note though not at all satisfied with
the parallel of "dumb eloquence" to the Epigram's "silent eloquence."
Epigram 30 points rather to a rhymster of the John Taylor Water-Poet
type, and if one had patience to make the search "silent eloquence"
should doubtless be found in one or other of his many books--clumsily
appropriated from Sir Philip Sidney. Then the "dumb eloquence" of the
Complaint of Rosamond which Dyce quotes, was to the King _not_ "to his
Mistress"--even if it were what the Epigram hints "silent eloquence."
_En passant_ the phrases and variants on it was one of the aped phrases
of the gallants and poetasters of the day. Jonson who disliked Daniel,
ridicules the stanza in a way that informs us it was affected by them.
Griffin in his _Fidessa_ also has it in his "dumb message of my hidden
grief." Further: Davies of Hereford in his "Scourge of Folly" who must
have known his namesake's use of Dacus calls him Dacus the pot-poet
and speaks as much against his character as our Davies does against his
rhymes--all of which was curiously inapplicable to Samuel Daniel. At
the time Davies of Hereford wrote Daniel was a gentleman of the Queen's
bed-chamber. Lastly--and conclusively--Sir John Davies praises three
English poets in his "Orchestra" (Elizabethan edn.) of whom one is
Daniel:--

    "O that I could old Gefferie's Muse awake
    Or borrow Colin's fayre heroike stile,
    Or smooth my rimes with Delia's servant's file."

(Vol. I. p. 212). It is a pleasure to be able to vindicate Sir John
Davies from abuse of so genuine a Poet-contemporary as Daniel, and
Daniel from so weighty an adverse judgment, had it really been
Davies's. To the same good friend who has so helped me elsewhere--Dr.
Brinsley Nicholson--I owe thanks for these too-long-delayed corrections.

V. _Marston and 'Orchestra.'_ But if Harrington and Davies of Hereford
praised, there were others who had their jeers at Orchestra, e.g. John
Marston in his 11th Satire of his Scourge of Villanie, in ridiculing
the gallant who thinks of nothing but dancing, as he afterwards does
Luscus, who talks of nothing but Plays, and vents only play-scraps,
says (1599).

    "Who ever heard spruce skipping Curio
    Ere prate of ought but of the whirle on toe.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Praise but Orchestra, and the skipping art,
    You shall command him, faith you have his hart
    Even capring in your fist."

Then there follows (_meo judicio_) a reminiscence or two of the poem
itself, and a laugh at the "worthy poet." Thus in 'Orchestra,' st. 59,
we have

    "According to the musicke of the spheres,"

and st. 60,

    "And imitate the starres caelestiall."

and st. 71, speaking of Castor and Pollux:

    "Where both are carried with an equall pace
    Together iumping in their turning race,"

and where, though 'iumping' is of course used in the sense not of our
'jumping' (leaping) but in that of equal or agreeing, as in "jump where
may find Cassio," or as where the folio (I. 1) has "just as this same
hour" the 4^{o} Hamlet has "jump at this dead hour"; yet it has for the
context an unlucky sound and association. Hence Marston wickedly and
waggishly continues:

                          "A hall, a hall
    Roome for the spheres, the orbs celestiall
    Will daunce Kemps jigge; they'le revel with neate jumps;
    A worthy poet hath put on their pumps.
    O wits quick traverse but _sance ceo's_ slowe,
    Good faith 'tis hard for nimble Curio.
    Ye gracious orbes, keepe the old measuring
    All's spoilde if once yee fall to capering."

VI. _Hymnes to Astraea._ I adhere to Sir John Davies' own form of
Astraea in the collective edition of 1621. Doubtless he and the Printer
meant it for "ae' not '[oe]' inasmuch as besides Astraea's mythological
reign in the golden age over a people that became too wicked for her,
she became the constellation Virgo, as celebrated, among others, by
Barnfield in his _Cynthia_.[54] The whole of Hy. I. shows this, where
the flattery was specially apt to the subject on account of making
Astraea the daughter of Aurora: and so Hy. V. of the Lark: and Hy. XXI.

  A. B. G.

[Footnote 54: See my edition of his Complete Poems for the Roxburghe
Club.]




  THE

  COMPLETE POEMS

  OF

  SIR JOHN DAVIES:

  I. NOSCE TEIPSUM.




NOTE.

'Nosce Teipsum' was originally published in 1599 (4to). The following
is its title-page and collation:

  Nosce teipsum

  _This Oracle expounded in two
  Elegies_

  1. Of Humane knowledge.

  2. Of the Soule of Man, and the immortalitie
  thereof.

  [Wood-engraving of an anchor within a
  border and the motto Anchora Spei.]

  London,
  Printed by _Richard Field_ for _Iohn Standish_,
  1599. [4to.]

Title-page--Dedication pp. 2--Of humane Knowledge pp. 1-8--Of the
soule of man and the immortalitie thereof pp. 9-101. A second edition
appeared in 1602, whereof the following are title-page and collation:--

  Nosce teipsum,

  _This Oracle expounded in two
  Elegies_.

  1. Of Humane knowledge.

  2. Of the Soule of Man, and the immortalitie
  thereof.

  _Newly corrected and amended._

  London,
  Printed by _Richard Field_ for _Iohn Standish_.
  1602. [4to.]
  Title-page--Dedication pp. 2, signed 'Dauys':
  poem pp. 101.

A third edition was issued in 1608. I give its title-page also:

  Nosce teipsum

  _This Oracle expounded in two
  Elegies_.

  1. Of Humane Knowledge.

  2. Of the Soule of Man and the immortalitie
  thereof.

  _Written by_ Sir Iohn Davis, _his Maiesties
  Atturney generall in Ireland_.

  London,
  Printed by Henry Ballard for
  _Iohn Standish_. 1608. [4to.]

  Collation same with the others, _supra_.

The next edition known to me, bears the date of 1618, along with
Orchestra and Hymnes to Astraea: and the last during the life-time of
the Author, was in the sm. 8vo of 1622, which volume contained the same
Poems with that of 1618.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our text is a faithful reproduction, including the significant and
suggestive italics, of the last edition published by Sir John Davies,
viz., that of 1622, with the few various readings from the first and
subsequent editions. The following is the title-page and collation of
1622 edn.

  _Nosce Teipsum_

  This Oracle expounded in two
  _Elegies_.

  1. Of Humane Knowledge.

  2. Of the Soule of Man, and the immortalitie
  thereof.

  Hymnes of _Astraea_ in
  Acrosticke Verse.

  ORCHESTRA,

  OR,

  _A Poeme of Dauncing_.

  In a Dialogue betweene _Penelope_
  and one of her Wooers.

  _Not finished._

         *       *       *       *       *

  London,

  Printed by _Augustine Mathewes_ for _Richard
  Hawkins_, and are to be sold at his Shop in
  Chancery Lane, neere Serieants
  Inne. 1622. [8vo.]

Title-page--Dedic^{n} pp 2--Of Humane Knowledge pp 1-8--Of the
Soule of Man and the Immortalitie thereof pp 9-81. Hymnes pp 20
[unpaged]--Orchestra pp 47 [unpaged].

In my first edition of Sir John Davies' Poems in the Fuller Worthies'
Library, I printed, perhaps with too hasty decision, at the bottom
of each page, certain slight MS. notes written by the famous Bp.
Hacket, in his copy of Nosce Teipsum (1599). When it was too late to
stop progress, the mere curiosity of the jottings was perceived. I do
not deem it expedient to reproduce them here; but a specimen may be
acceptable, and here and there in the places, a few. I limit myself to
the Dedication:

 Heading, 'soveraigne': Emmanuel [but Elizabeth was meant].

 L. 1, 'maiestie': Elizabetha: and near it [meaningless] Richar[d]
 Yeorck.

 L. 1, 'North': Scotland [but erased], and so against 'sunne' (l. 2)
 James, but erased.

 L. 3, 'heauenly worth': Shewes for thy glory.

 L. 5, 'alone': Supported by none but God.

 L. 6, 'great States': Great affaires.

 L. 8, 'the Almightie's hand': Per me reges regnant et dixi dii estis.

 L. 10, 'Nature's dowre': Arte's excellence the gift of nature.

 L. 13, 'Great Spirit': Deus.

 L. 16, 'Cynthia': Luna.

 L. 30, 'angell': Angellus Pommi.

 L. 32, 'angell': [Greek: [Ag]gellos Photos].

 L. 33, 'Heauen': Superior: to the higher heauen.

 L. 34, 'heauen': Inferior.

These suffice to show how carefully, if not always accurately, the
good Bishop read the poem, but also how unimportant his notes are.
On the title-page opposite the words "This Oracle," &c., is written
"written in the temple of Apollo, letters commendatory." On _verso_ of
the title-page, is this memorandum by a former owner: "This Edition
is extremely scarce. Vide Smith's Catgue. Iron Bridge, 1822. Pr. O.
16. O. This Book came out of Mr. Hacket's Library, a Descendant of Bp.
Hacket, whose Book it was, and the MS. notes are by him." The book is
now in the library of my excellent fellow-collector, G. W. Napier,
Esq., of Merchiston House, Alderley Edge, Manchester, to whom I owe its
re-use, as well as of other early editions of Davies. G.




I. $Royal Dedication$

TO MY MOST GRACIOVS DREAD SOVERAIGNE.


    _To that cleere maiestie which in the North
      Doth, like another Sunne in glory rise;
      Which standeth fixt, yet spreads[55] her heauenly worth;
      Loadstone to hearts, and loadstarre to all eyes._

    _Like Heau'n in all; like th' Earth in this alone,
      That though[56] great States by her support doe stand,
      Yet she herselfe supported is of none,
      But by the finger of the Almightie's hand:_

    _To the diuinest and the richest minde,
      Both by Art's purchase and by Nature's dowre,
      That euer was from Heau'n to Earth confin'd,
      To shew the vtmost of a creature's power:_

    _To that great Spirit,[57] which doth great kingdomes mooue,
      The sacred spring whence $right$ and $honor$ streames,
      Distilling $Vertue$, shedding $Peace$ and $Loue$,
      In euery place, as $Cynthia$ sheds her beames:_

    _I offer up some sparkles of that fire,
      Whereby wee $reason, liue, and moue, and be$;
      These sparkes by nature euermore aspire,
      Which makes them to so $high$ an $highnesse$ flee._

    _Faire $Soule$, since to the fairest body knit,[58]
      You giue such liuely life, such quickning power,
      Such sweet celestiall influences to it,[59]
      As keepes it still in youth's immortall flower:_

    _(As where the sunne is present all the yeere,
      And neuer doth retire his golden ray,
      Needs must the Spring bee euerlasting there,
      And euery season like the month of May.)_

    _O! many, many yeeres may you remaine,
      A happy angell to this happy Land;
      Long, long may you on Earth our empresse raigne,
      Ere you in Heauen a glorious angell stand._

      _Stay long (sweet spirit) ere thou to Heauen depart,
      Which mak'st each place a heauen wherein thou art._


 Her Maiestie's least and vnworthiest Subiect[60]

  IOHN DAVIES.[61]

[Footnote 55: Spreds in 1st edn. G.]

[Footnote 56: Thomas Davies, as before, misprints 'thro.' G.]

[Footnote 57: Bp. Hacket writes 'Deus' against 'Spirit': but perhaps
the Queen only was (flatteringly) intended, as her poetic name of
Cynthia would seem to indicate. This word 'Spirit' is misprinted by
Thomas Davies and by Southey and usually, 'spring'. G.]

[Footnote 58: Misprinted by Davies and Southey, as before, 'join'd'. G.]

[Footnote 59: Davies and Southey misread

    'And influence of such celestial kind'

which I find supported by none of the author's own texts. G.]

[Footnote 60: Davies and Southey, as before, misread 'Her
Maiesty's Devoted Subject and Servant' from Tate (1697). See our
Memorial-Introduction. G.]

[Footnote 61: In 1599 edition 'Dauies,' and in 1608 edition 'Davis' and
also in its title-page: in 1622 edition, as above. G.

[asterism]: TATE, and after him THOMAS DAVIES,
dates this Dedication 'July 11th, 1592.' It is possible that the 'Poem'
was then in manuscript: but it was not printed or published until 1599,
and there is no date to the Dedication either in that edition or in
those of 1602, 1608 or 1622. G.]




II. ANOTHER DEDICATION OF A GIFT-COPY (IN MS.) IN THE POSSESSION OF
HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF NORTHUMBERLAND, AT ALNWICK CASTLE.[62]

[Footnote 62: On this MS. of Nosce Teipsum see our Preface. G.]

 _To the right noble, valorous, and learned Prince Henry, Earle of
 Northumberland_:


    The strongest and the noblest argument
      To proue the soule immortall, rests in this:
    That in no mortall thing it finds content,
      But seekes an object that aeternall is.

    If any soule hath this immortall signe,
      (As every soule doth show it, more or lesse),
    It is your spirit, heroeick and diuine;
      Which this true noate most liuely doth expresse;

    For being a prince, and hauing princely blood,
      The noblest of all Europe in your vaines;
    Having youth, wealth, pleasure, and every good,
      Which all the world doth seek, with endlesse paynes.

    Yet can you never fixe y^{r} thoughts on these,
      These cannot with your heavenly mind agree;
    These momentary objects cannot please,
      Your winged spirit, which more aloft doth flee.

    It only longs to learne and know the truth,
      The truth of every thing, which never dies;
    The nectar which praeserves the soule in youth;
      The manna which doth minds immortalize.

    These noble studdies, more ennoble you,
      And bring more honor to your race and name
    Than Hotspur's fier, which did the Scots subdew,
      Then Brabant's scion, or great Charles his name.

    Then to what spirit shall I these noates commend,
      But unto that which doth them best expresse;
    Who will to them more kind protection lend,
      Then Hee which did protect me in distresse?




_Of Humane Knowledge._


    Why did my parents send me to the Schooles,
      That I with knowledge might enrich my mind?
      Since the _desire to know_ first made men fools,
      And did corrupt the root of all mankind:

    For when God's hand had written in the hearts
      Of the first Parents, all the rules of good,
      So that their skill infusde did passe all arts
      That euer were, before, or since the Flood;

    And when their reason's eye was sharpe and cleere,
      And (as an eagle can behold the sunne)
      Could haue approcht th' Eternall Light as neere,
      As the intellectuall angels could haue done:

    Euen then to them the _Spirit of Lyes_ suggests
      That they were blind, because they saw not ill;
      And breathes into their incorrupted brests
      A curious _wish_, which did corrupt their _will_.

    For that same ill they straight desir'd to know;
      Which ill, being nought but a defect of good,
      In[63] all God's works the Diuell could not show
      While Man their lord in his perfection stood.

    So that themselues were first to doe the ill,
      Ere they thereof the knowledge could attaine;
      Like him that knew not poison's power to kill,
      Vntill (by tasting it) himselfe was slaine.

    Euen so by tasting of that fruite forbid,
      Where they sought _knowledge_, they did _error_ find;
      Ill they desir'd to know, and ill they did;
      And to giue _Passion_ eyes, made _Reason_ blind.

    For then their minds did first in Passion see
      Those wretched shapes of _Miserie_ and _Woe_,
      Of _Nakednesse_, of _Shame_, of _Pouertie_,
      Which then their owne experience made them know.

    But then grew _Reason_ darke, that _she_ no more,
      Could the faire formes of _Good[64]_ and _Truth_ discern;
     _Battes_ they became, that _eagles_ were before:
      And this they got by their _desire_ to _learne_.

    But we their wretched of-spring, what doe we?
      Doe not we still taste of the fruit forbid
      Whiles with fond[65] fruitlesse curiositie,
      In bookes prophane we seeke for knowledge hid?

    What is this _knowledge_ but the sky-stolne fire,
      For which the _thiefe[66]_ still chain'd in ice doth sit?
      And which the poore rude _Satyre_ did admire,
      And needs would kisse but burnt his lips with it.[67]

    What is it? but the cloud of emptie raine,
      Which when _Ioue's_ guest imbrac't, hee monsters got?[68]
      Or the false _payles_[69] which oft being fild with paine[70],
      Receiv'd the water, but retain'd it not!

[Footnote 63: Misprinted 'and' in 1st edition and in 1608. G.]

[Footnote 64: 'God' in 1st edition. G.]

[Footnote 65: Foolish. G.]

[Footnote 66: In 1st edition 'Thief' is misprinted 'shie' and Bp.
Hacket writes here: 'Prometheus stole fire: qui in tulit in terram
malum.' G.]

[Footnote 67: Fable in AEsop [Babrius]. G.]

[Footnote 68: Ixion. G.]

[Footnote 69: Danaides. G.]

[Footnote 70: Painstaking. G.]

    Shortly, what is it but the firie coach
      Which the _Youth_ sought, and sought his death withal?[71]
      Or the _boye's_ wings, which when he did approch
      The _sunne's_ hot beames, did melt and let him fall?[72]

    And yet alas, when all our lamps are burnd,
      Our bodyes wasted, and our spirits spent;
      When we haue all the learned _Volumes_ turn'd,
      Which yeeld mens wits both help and ornament:

    What can we know? or what can we discerne?
      When _Error_ chokes the windowes of the minde,
      The diuers formes of things, how can we learne,
      That haue been euer from our birth-day blind?[73]

    When _Reasone's_ lampe, which (like the _sunne_ in skie)
      Throughout _Man's_ little world her beames did spread;
      Is now become a sparkle, which doth lie
      Vnder the ashes, halfe extinct, and dead:

    How can we hope, that through the eye and eare,
      This dying sparkle, in this cloudy place,
      Can recollect these beames of knowledge cleere,
      Which were infus'd in the first minds by grace?

    So might the heire whose father hath in play
      Wasted a thousand pound of ancient rent;
      By painefull earning of a[74] groate a day,
      Hope to restore the patrimony spent.

[Footnote 71: Phaethon. Hacket.]

[Footnote 72: Icarus. Hacket.]

[Footnote 73: Anima tanquam tabula, Aris[totle]. Hacket.]

[Footnote 74: 'One' in 1599 and 1608 editions. G.]


    The wits that diu'd most deepe and soar'd most hie
      Seeking Man's pow'rs, haue found his weaknesse such:
      "Skill comes so slow, and life so fast doth flie,
      "We learne so little and forget so much.

    For this the wisest of all morall[75] men
      Said, '_He knew nought, but that he nought did know_';
      And the great mocking-Master mockt not then,
      When he said, '_Truth was buried deepe[76] below_.'

    For how may we to others' things attaine,
      When none of vs his owne soule vnderstands?
      For which the Diuell mockes our curious braine,
      When, '_Know thy selfe_' his oracle commands.[77]

[Footnote 75: 'Mortal' in 1599 and 1608 editions. G.]

[Footnote 76: Misprinted 'here' but corrected in the errata of 1622
edition, as above, from 1599 and 1608 editions. G.]

[Footnote 77: Oraculum Appollinis [f]uit Diabolicum. Hacket.]

    For why should wee the busie Soule beleeue,
      When boldly she concludes of that and this;
      When of her selfe she can no iudgement giue,
      Nor how, nor whence, nor where, nor what she is?

    All things without, which round about we see,
      We seeke to knowe, and how therewith to doe;
      But that whereby we _reason, liue and be_,
      Within our selues, we strangers are thereto.

    We seeke to know the mouing of each spheare,
      And the strange cause of th' ebs and flouds of _Nile_;
      But of that clocke within our breasts we beare,
      The subtill motions we forget the while.

    We that acquaint our selues with euery[78] _Zoane_
      And passe both _Tropikes_ and behold the _Poles_,
      When we come home, are to our selues vnknown,
      And vnacquainted still with our owne _Soules_.

    We study _Speech_ but others we perswade;
      We _leech-craft_ learne, but others cure with it;
      We interpret _lawes_, which other men haue made,
      But reade not those which in our hearts are writ.

    Is it[79] because the minde is like the eye,
      Through which it gathers knowledge by degrees--
      Whose rayes reflect not, but spread outwardly:
      Not seeing it selfe when other things it sees?

[Footnote 78: Thomas Davies, as before, misprints 'each' G.]

[Footnote 79: Misprinted 'It is': corrected by H... G.]

    No, doubtlesse; for the mind can backward cast
      Vpon her selfe, her vnderstanding light;
      But she is so corrupt, and so defac't,
      As her owne image doth her selfe affright.

    As in the fable of the Lady faire,
      Which for her lust was turnd into a cow;[80]
      When thirstie to a streame she did repaire,
      And saw her selfe transform'd she wist not how:

    At first she startles, then she stands amaz'd,
      At last with terror she from thence doth flye;
      And loathes the watry glasse wherein she gaz'd,
      And shunnes it still, though she for thirst doe die:

    Euen so _Man's Soule_ which did God's image beare,
      And was at first faire, good, and spotlesse pure;
      Since with her _sinnes_ her beauties blotted were,
      Doth of all sights her owne sight least endure:

    For euen at first reflection she espies,
      Such strange _chimeraes_, and such monsters there;
      Such toyes, such _antikes_, and such vanities,
      As she retires, and shrinkes for shame and feare.

[Footnote 80: Io. G.]

    And as the man loues least at home to bee,
      That hath a sluttish house haunted with _spirits_;[81]
      So she impatient her owne faults to see,
      Turnes from her selfe and in strange things delites.

    For this few _know themselues_: for merchants broke
      View their estate with discontent and paine;
      And _seas_ are troubled, when they doe reuoke
      Their flowing waues into themselues againe.

    And while the face of outward things we find,
      Pleasing and faire, agreeable and sweet;
      These things transport, and carry out the mind,
      That with her selfe her selfe[82] can neuer meet.

    Yet if _Affliction_ once her warres begin,
      And threat the feebler _Sense_ with sword and fire;
      The _Minde_ contracts her selfe and shrinketh in,
      And to her selfe she gladly doth retire:

    As _Spiders_ toucht, seek their webs inmost part;
      As _bees_ in stormes vnto their hiues returne;
      As bloud in danger gathers to the heart;
      As men seek towns, when foes the country burn.

    If ought can teach vs ought, _Afflictions_ lookes,
      (Making vs looke[83] into our selues so neere,)
      Teach vs to _know our selues_ beyond all bookes,
      Or all the learned Schooles that euer were.

    This _mistresse_ lately pluckt me by the eare,
      And many a golden lesson hath me taught;
      Hath made my _Senses_ quicke, and Reason cleare,
      Reform'd my Will and rectifide my Thought.

    So doe the _winds_ and _thunders_ cleanse the ayre;
      So working lees[84] settle and purge the wine;
      So lop't and pruned trees doe flourish faire;
      So doth the fire the drossie gold refine.

    Neither _Minerua_ nor the learned Muse,
      Nor rules of _Art_, not _precepts_ of the wise;
      Could in my braine those beames of skill infuse,
      As but the glance of this _Dame's_ angry eyes.

    She within _lists_[85] my ranging minde hath brought,
      That now beyond my selfe I list[86] not goe;
      My selfe am _center_ of my circling thought,
      Onely _my selfe_ I studie, learne, and know.

    I know my bodie's of so fraile a kind,
      As force without, feauers within can kill;
      I know the heauenly nature of my minde,
      But 'tis corrupted both in wit and will:

    I know my _Soule_ hath power to know all things,
      Yet is she blinde and ignorant in all;
      I know I am one of Nature's little kings,
      Yet to the least and vilest things am thrall.

    I know my life's a paine and but a span,
      I know my _Sense_ is mockt with euery thing:
      And to conclude, I know my selfe a MAN,
      Which is a _proud_, and yet a _wretched_ thing.

[Footnote 81: In 1599 and 1608 more accurately 'sprites'. G.]

[Footnote 82: Davies and Southey substitute 'the mind'. G.]

[Footnote 83: Davies and Southey, as before, mis-substitute 'pry.' G.]

[Footnote 84: An overlooked misprint here is 'seas': found in all the
author's own editions, and repeated until now, _e.g._ by Thomas Davies
and Southey, as before. G.]

[Footnote 85: Bounds: as in Race-courses. G.]

[Footnote 86: Thoms Davies, as before, mis-reads 'will'. G.]


OF THE SOULE OF MAN AND THE IMMORTALITE THEREOF.


    _The lights of heau'n_ (which are the World's fair eies)
      Looke downe into the World, the World to see;
      And as they turne, or wander in the skies,
      Suruey all things that on this _Center_ bee.

    And yet the _lights_ which in my _towre_ do shine,
      Mine _eyes_ which view all obiects, nigh and farre;
      Looke not into this little world of mine,
      Nor see my face, wherein they fixed are.

    Since _Nature_ failes vs in no needfull thing,
      Why want I meanes my inward selfe to see?
      Which sight the knowledg of my self might bring,
      Which to true wisdome is the first degree.

    That _Power_ which gaue me eyes the World to view,
      To see my selfe infus'd an _inward light_;
      Whereby my _Soule_, as by a mirror true,
      Of her owne forme may take a perfect sight,

    But as the sharpest _eye_ discerneth nought,
      Except the _sunne_-beames in the ayre doe shine;
      So the best _Soule_[87] with her reflecting thought,
      Sees not her selfe without some light diuine.

    _O Light_ which mak'st the light, which makes the day!
      Which setst the eye without, and mind within;
      'Lighten my spirit with one cleare heauenly ray,
      Which now to view it selfe doth first begin.

    For her true forme how can my sparke discerne?
      Which dimme by _nature_, _Art_ did neuer cleare;
      When the great wits, of whom all skill we learn,
      Are ignorant both _what_ shee is, and _where_.

    One thinks the _Soule_ is _aire_; another, _fire_;
      Another _blood_, diffus'd about the heart;
      Another saith, the _elements_ conspire,
      And to her _essence_ each doth giue a part.

    _Musicians_ thinke our _Soules_ are _harmonies_,
      _Phisicians_ hold that they _complexions_ bee;
      _Epicures_ make them swarmes of _atomies_,
      Which doe by chance into our bodies flee.

    Some thinke one generall _Soule_ fils euery braine,
      As the bright _sunne_ sheds light in euery starre;
      And others thinke the name of _Soule_ is vaine,
      And that we onely _well-mixt_ bodies are.

    In judgement of her _substance_ thus they vary;
      And thus they vary in iudgement of her _seat_;
      For some her chaire vp to the braine doe carry,
      Some thrust it downe into the _stomackes_ heat.

    Some place it in the root of life, the _heart_;
      Some in the _liuer_[88], fountaine of the veines;
      Some say, _Shee is all in all, and all in part_:
      Some say, She is not containd but all containes.

    Thus these great clerks their little wisdome show,
      While with their doctrines they at _hazard_ play,
      Tossing their light opinions to and fro,
      To mocke the _lewd_, as learn'd in this as they.

    For no craz'd braine could euer yet propound,
      Touching the _Soule_, so vaine and fond a thought,
      But some among these masters haue been found,
      Which in their _Schooles_ the self-same thing haue taught.

    _God onely wise_, to punish pride of wit,
      Among men's wits hath this confusion wrought,
      As the proud _towre_ whose points the clouds did hit,
      By tongues' confusion was to ruine brought.

    But _Thou_ which didst _Man's soule_ of nothing make,
      And when to nothing it was fallen agen,
      "To make it new, the forme of man didst take,
      "And _God_ with _God_, becam'st a _Man_ with men.

    Thou, that hast fashioned twice this _Soule_ of ours,
      So that she is by double title Thine;
      Thou onely knowest her nature and her pow'rs,
      Her subtill forme Thou onely canst define.

    To iudge her selfe she must her selfe transcend,
      As greater circles comprehend the lesse;
      But she wants power, her owne powers to extend,
      As fettered men can not their strength expresse.

    But Thou bright Morning Star, Thou rising _Sunne_,
      Which in these later times hast brought to light
      Those mysteries, that since the world begun,
      Lay hid in darknesse, and eternall night:

    Thou (_like the sunne_) dost with indifferent ray,
      Into the _palace_ and the _cottage_ shine,
      And shew'st the _soule_ both to the clerke and lay[89],
      By the cleare _lampe_ of Thy _Oracle_ diuine.

[Footnote 87: 'Sense' in 1st edn. G.]

[Footnote 88: Davies and Southey misprint egregiously 'river.' G.]

[Footnote 89: Laymen. G.]

    This Lampe through all the regions of my braine,
      Where my _soule_ sits, doth spread such beames of grace,
      As now, me thinks, I do distinguish plain,
      Each subtill line of her immortall face.


WHAT THE SOULE IS.

    _The soule a substance_, and a _spirit_ is,
      Which _God_ Himselfe doth in the body make;
      Which makes the _Man_: for euery man from this,
      The _nature_ of a _Man_, and _name_ doth take.

    And though this[1] spirit be to the body knit,
      As an apt meane her powers to exercise;
      Which are _life_, _motion_, _sense_, and _will_, and _wit_,
      Yet she _suruiues_, although the body _dies_.


THAT THE SOULE IS A THING SUBSISTING BY IT SELFE WITHOUT THE
BODY.

    _She is a substance_, and a reall thing,
      Which hath it selfe an actuall working might;
      Which neither from the Senses' power doth spring,
      Nor from the bodie's humors, tempred right.

    She is a _vine_, which doth no propping need,
      To make her spread her selfe or spring vpright;
      She is a _starre_, whose beames doe not proceed
      From any _sunne_, but from a _natiue_ light.

    For when she sorts things _present_ with things _past_,
      And thereby things to _come_ doth oft foresee;
      When she doth _doubt_ at first, and _chuse_ at last,
      These acts her owne, without her body bee.

    When of the deaw,[90] which the _eye_ and _eare_ doe take
      From flowers abroad, and bring into the braine,
      She doth within both waxe and hony make:
      This worke is her's, this is her proper paine.[91]

    When she from sundry acts, one skill doth draw,
      Gathering from diuers fights one art[92] of warre,
      From many cases like, one rule of Law;
      These her collections, not the _Senses_ are.

[Footnote 90: Dew: and so spelled also by the Fletchers and other
contemporaries. G.]

[Footnote 91: Painstaking. G.]

[Footnote 92: Misprinted 'act' in the 1st edn. G.]

    When in th' effects she doth the causes know,
      And seeing the stream, thinks wher the spring doth rise;
      And seeing the branch, conceiues the root below;
      These things she views without the bodie's eyes.

    When she, without a _Pegasus_, doth flie
      Swifter then lightning's fire from _East_ to _West_,
      About the _Center_ and aboue the _skie_,
      She trauels then, although the body rest.

    When all her works she formeth first within,
      Proportions them, and sees their perfect end,
      Ere she in act does anie part begin;
      What instruments doth then the body lend?

    When without hands she doth thus[93] _castles_ build,
      Sees without eyes, and without feet doth runne;
      When she digests the world, yet is not fil'd:
      By her owne power these miracles are done.

[Footnote 93: In 1st edition 'she thus doth.' G.]

    When she defines, argues, diuides, compounds,
      Considers _vertue_, _vice_, and _generall things_,
      And marrying diuers principles and grounds,
      Out of their match a true conclusion brings.

    These actions in her closet all alone,
      (Retir'd within her selfe) she doth fulfill;
      Vse of her bodie's organs she hath none,
      When she doth vse the powers of Wit and Will.

    Yet in the bodie's prison so she lies,
      As through the bodie's windowes she must looke,
      Her diuers powers of _sense_ to exercise,
      By gath'ring notes out of the _World's_ great book.

    Nor can her selfe discourse or iudge of ought,
      But what the _Sense_ collects and home doth bring;
      And yet the power of her discoursing thought,
      From these collections, is a diuers thing.

    For though our eyes can nought but colours see,
      Yet colours giue them not their powre of sight;
      So, though these fruits of _Sense_ her obiects bee,
      Yet she discernes them by her proper light.

    The workman on his stuffe his skill doth show,
      And yet the stuffe giues not the man his skill;
      _Kings_ their affaires do by their seruants know,
      But order them by their owne royall will.

    So, though this cunning mistresse and this queene,
      Doth, as her instrument, the _Senses_ vse,
      To know all things that are _felt_, _heard_, or _seene_,
      Yet she her selfe doth onely _iudge_ and _chuse_:

    Euen as our great wise _Empresse_[94] that now raignes
      By _soueraigne_ title ouer sundry Lands;
      Borrowes in meane affaires her _subiects_ paines,
      Sees by their eyes, and writeth by their hands;

    But things of waight and consequence indeed,
      Her selfe doth in her chamber them debate;
      Where all her Counsellers she doth exceed
      As farre in iudgement, as she doth in State.

    Or as the man whom she doth now aduance,[95]
      Vpon her gracious _mercy-seat_ to sit;
      Doth common things, of course and circumstance,
      To the reports of common men commit:

[Footnote 94: Q. Eliz[abeth]. H. [Davies and Southey, as before,
substitute 'a prudent emperor.' G.]]

[Footnote 95: Davies and Southey, as before, substitute 'whom princes
do.' Ellesmere. See sonnet addressed to him among 'Minor poems.' G.]

    But when the cause it selfe must be decreed,
      Himselfe in person, in his proper Court,
      To graue and solemne hearing doth proceed,
      Of euery proofe and euery by-report.

    Then, like God's angell he pronounceth right,
      And milke and hony from his tongue doth flow;
      Happie are they that still are in his sight,
      To reape the wisedome which his lips doe sow.

    Right so the _Soule_, which is a lady free,
      And doth the iustice of her _State_ maintaine;
      Because the senses ready seruants be,
      Attending nigh about her Court, the braine:

    By them the formes of outward things she learnes,
      For they returne into the fantasie,
      What euer each of them abroad discernes,
      And there inrole it for the Minde to see.

    But when she sits to iudge the good and ill,
      And to discerne betwixt the false and true;
      She is not guided by the _Senses'_ skill,
      But doth each thing in her owne mirrour view.

    Then she the _Senses_ checks, which oft do erre,
      And euen against their false reports decrees;
      And oft she doth condemne what they preferre,
      For with a power aboue the _Sense_, she sees.

    Therefore no _Sense_ the precious ioyes conceiues,
      Which in her priuate contemplations bee;
      For then the rauish't spirit the _Senses_ leaues,
      Hath her owne powers, and proper actions free.

    Her harmonies are sweet, and full of skill,
      When on the Bodie's instrument she playes;
      But the proportions of the _wit_ and _will_,
      Those sweete accords, are euen the angel's layes.

    These tunes of _Reason_ are _Amphion's_ lyre,
      Wherewith he did the _Thebane_ citie found;
      These are the notes wherewith the heauenly _quire_,
      The praise of Him which made[96] the heauen doth sound.

[Footnote 96: 'Spreads' in 1st edn. G.]

    Then her _selfe-being nature_ shines in this,
      That she performes her noblest works alone;
      "The _worke_, the touch-stone of the _nature_ is,
      "And by their operations, things are knowne.


THAT THE SOULE IS MORE THEN A PERFECTION OR REFLECTION OF THE
SENSE.

    _Are they not sencelesse_ then, that thinke the Soule
      Nought but a fine perfection of the _Sense_;
      Or of the formes which _fancie_ doth enroule,
      A _quicke resulting_, and a _consequence_?

    What is it then that doth the _Sense_ accuse,
      Both of _false judgements_, and _fond appetites_?
      What makes vs do what _Sense_ doth most refuse?
      Which oft in torment of the _Sense_ delights?

    _Sense_ thinkes the _planets_, _spheares_ not much asunder;
      What tels vs then their distance is so farre?
      _Sense_ thinks the lightning borne before the thunder;
      What tels vs then they both together are?

    When men seem crows far off vpon a towre,
      _Sense_ saith, th'are crows; what makes vs think them men?
      When we in _agues_, thinke all sweete things sowre,
      What makes vs know our tongue's false iudgement then?

    What power was that, whereby _Medea_ saw,
      And well approu'd, and prais'd the better course,
      When her rebellious _Sense_ did so withdraw
      Her feeble powers, as she pursu'd the worse?[97]

    Did _Sense_ perswade _Vlisses_ not to heare
      The mermaid's songs, which so his men did please;
      As they were all perswaded, through the eare
      To quit the ship, and leape into the _seas_?

    Could any power of _Sense_ the _Romane_ moue,
      To burn his own right hand with courage stout?[98]
      Could _Sense_ make _Marius_ sit vnbound, and proue
      The cruell lancing of the knotty gout?[99]

    Doubtlesse in _Man_ there is a _nature_ found,
      Beside the _Senses_, and aboue them farre;
      "Though most men being in sensuall pleasures drownd,
      "It seemes their _Soules_ but in their _Senses_ are.

    If we had nought but _Sense_, then onely they
      Should haue sound minds, which haue their _Senses_ sound;
      But _Wisdome_ growes, when _Senses_ doe decay,
      And _Folly_ most in quickest _Sense_ is found.

    If we had nought but _Sense_, each liuing wight,
      Which we call _brute_, would be more sharp then we;
      As hauing _Sense's apprehensiue might_,
      In a more cleere, and excellent degree.

    But they doe want that _quicke discoursing power_,
      Which doth in vs the erring _Sense_ correct;
      Therefore the _bee_ did sucke the painted flower,
      And _birds_, of grapes, the cunning shadow, peckt.[100]

    _Sense_ outsides knows; the Soule throgh al things sees;
      _Sense_, _circumstance_; she, doth the _substance_ view;
      _Sense_ sees the barke, but she, the life of trees;
      _Sense_ heares the sounds, but she, the concords true.

    But why doe I the _Soule_ and _Sense_ diuide?
      When _Sense_ is but a power, which she extends;
      Which being in diuers parts diuersifide,
      The diuers formes of obiects apprehends?

    This power spreds outward, but the root doth grow
      In th' inward _Soule_, which onely doth perceiue;
      For th' _eyes_ and _eares_ no more their obiects know,
      Then glasses know what faces they receiue.

    For if we chance to fixe our thoughts elsewhere,
      Although our eyes be ope, we cannot see;
      And if one power did not both see and heare,
      Our sights and sounds would alwayes double be.

    Then is the _Soule_ a nature, which containes
      The powre of _Sense_, within a greater power
      Which doth imploy and vse the _Senses_ paines,
      But sits and rules within her priuate bower.


[Footnote 97: Meliora proboq ... iora ... sequor ... Sen'a. H. [Rather
Ovid vii. 20.

  ... Video meliora, proboque
  Deteriora sequor'

Pathetically quoted by BYRON in his remarkable Letter to
JOHN SHEPPARD. G.]]

[Footnote 98: The allusion is to Mutius Scaevola, who was taken in an
attempt to assassinate Porsena, and thrust his hand into the fire to
prove his fortitude: Livy II. 12. G.]

[Footnote 99: The story is told by Plutarch in his Life of Marius c.
VI. 415. G.]

[Footnote 100: Pliny XXXV. 36 Sec. 3: told of a picture of
Zeuxis, as that of the horse neighing is of another by Apelles (_ib_ Sec.
17.) G.]


THAT THE SOULE IS MORE THEN THE TEMPERATURE[101] OF THE HUMORS OF
THE BODY.

    _If shee doth then_ the subtill _Sense_ excell,
      How gross are they that drown her in the blood!
      Or in the bodie's humors tempred well,
      As if in them such high perfection stood?

    As if most skill in that _Musician_ were,
      Which had the best, and best tun'd instrument;
      As if the pensill neate[102] and colours cleare,
      Had power to make the Painter excellent.

    Why doth not beautie then refine the wit?
      And good complexion rectifie the will?
      Why doth not health bring wisdom still with it?
      Why doth not sicknesse make men bruitish still?

    Who can in _memory_, or _wit_, or _will_,
      Or _ayre_, or _fire_, or _earth_, or _water_ finde?
      What alchymist can draw, with all his skil,
      The _quintessence_ of these, out of the mind?

    If th' _elements_ which haue nor _life_, nor _sense_,
      Can breed in vs so great a powre as this;
      Why giue they not themselues like excellence,
      Or other things wherein their mixture is?

    If she were but the Bodie's qualitie
      Then would she be with it _sicke_, _maim'd_ and _blind_;
      But we perceiue where these priuations be
      A _healthy_, _perfect_, and _sharpe-sighted_ mind.

    If she the bodie's nature did pertake,
      Her strength would with the bodie's strength decay;
      But when the bodie's strongest sinewes slake,
      Then is the _Soule_ most actiue, quicke and gay.

    If she were but the bodie's accident,
      And her sole _being_ did in it subsist;
      As _white in snow_; she might her selfe absent,
      And in the bodie's substance not be mist.

    But _it_ on _her_, not _shee_ on _it_ depends;
      For _shee_ the body doth sustaine and cherish;
      Such secret powers of life to it she lends,
      That when they faile, then doth the body perish.

    Since then the _Soule works by her selfe alone,
      Springs not from Sense, nor humors, well agreeing_;
      Her nature is peculiar, and her owne:
      She is a _substance_, and a _perfect being_.

[Footnote 101: Misprinted 'temparature.' G.]

[Footnote 102: Clean, pure. G.]


THAT THE SOULE IS A SPIRIT.

    But though this substance be the root of _Sense_,
      _Sense_ knowes her not, which doth but _bodies_ know;
      _Shee is a spirit_, and heauenly influence,
      Which from the fountaine of God's Spirit doth flow.

    Shee is a Spirit, yet not like _ayre_, or _winde_,
      Nor like the _spirits_ about the _heart_ or _braine_;
      Nor like those spirits which alchymists do find,
      When they in euery thing seeke gold in _vaine_.

    For shee all _natures_ vnder heauen doth passe;
      Being like those spirits, which God's bright face do see;
      Or like _Himselfe_, Whose _image_ once she was,
      Though now (alas!) she scarce His _shadow_ bee.

    Yet of the _formes_, she holds the first degree,
      That are to grosse materiall bodies knit;
      Yet shee her selfe is _bodilesse_ and free;
      And though confin'd, is almost infinite.


    THAT IT CANNOT BE A BODY.

    Were she a _body_ how could she remaine
      Within this body, which is lesse then she?
      Or how could she the world's great shape contain,
      And in our narrow brests contained bee?

    All _bodies_ are confin'd within some place,
      But _she_ all place within her selfe confines;
      All _bodies_ haue their measure, and their space,
      But who can draw the _Soule's_ dimensiue lines?

    No _body_ can at once two formes admit,
      Except the one the other doe deface;
      But in the _soule_ ten thousand formes do sit,
      And none intrudes into her neighbour's place.

    All _bodies_ are with other bodies fild,
      But she receiues both heauen and earth together;
      Nor are their formes by rash incounter spild,
      For there they stand, and neither toucheth either.

    Nor can her wide imbracements filled bee;
      For they that most, and greatest things embrace,
      Inlarge thereby their minds' capacitie,
      As streames inlarg'd, inlarge the channel's space.[103]

    _All things receiu'd, doe such proportion take,
      As those things haue, wherein they are receiu'd_:
      So little glasses little faces make,
      And narrow webs on narrow frames be weau'd;

    Then what vast body must we make the _mind_
      Wherin are men, beasts, trees, towns, seas, and lands;
      And yet each thing a proper place doth find,
      And each thing in the true proportion stands?

    Doubtlesse this could not bee, but that she turnes
      Bodies to spirits, by _sublimation_ strange;
      As fire conuerts to fire the things it burnes
      As we our meats into our nature change.

    From their grosse _matter_ she abstracts the _formes_,
      And drawes a kind of _quintessence_ from things;
      Which to her proper nature she transformes,
      To bear them light on her celestiall wings:

    This doth she, when, from things _particular_,
      She doth abstract the _universall kinds_;
      Which bodilesse and immateriall are,
      And can be lodg'd but onely in our minds:

    And thus from diuers _accidents_ and _acts_,
      Which doe within her obseruation fall,
      She goddesses, and powers diuine, abstracts:
      As _Nature_, _Fortune_, and the _Vertues_ all.

    Againe, how can she seuerall _bodies_ know,
      If in her selfe a _bodie's_ forme she beare?
      How can a mirror sundry faces show,
      If from all shapes and formes it be not cleare?

    Nor could we by our eyes all colours learne,
      Except our eyes were of all colours voide;
      Nor sundry tastes can any tongue discerne,
      Which is with grosse and bitter humors cloide.

    Nor may a man of _passions_ iudge aright,
      Except his minde bee from all passions free;
      Nor can a _Iudge_ his office well acquite,
      If he possest of either partie bee.

    If lastly, this quicke power a body were,
      Were it as swift as is[104] the _winde_ or _fire_;
      (Whose atomies doe th' one down side-waies beare,
      And make the other in _pyramids_ aspire:)

    Her nimble body yet in time must moue,
      And not in instants through all places slide;
      But she is nigh, and farre, beneath, aboue,
      In point of time, which thought cannot deuide:

    She is sent as soone to _China_ as to _Spaine_,
      And thence returnes, as soone as shee is sent;
      She measures with one time, and with one paine,
      An ell of silke, and heauen's wide spreading tent.

    As then the _Soule_ a substance hath alone,
      Besides the Body in which she is confin'd;
      So hath she not a _body_ of her owne,
      But is a _spirit_, and _immateriall minde_.

[Footnote 103:

    'Time but the impression stronger makes
      As streams their channels deeper wear.'

    BURNS: to Mary in Heaven.]

[Footnote 104: Southey misprints 'in.' G.]


THAT THE SOULE IS CREATED IMMEDIATELY BY GOD.

    _Since body and soule_ haue such diuersities,
      Well might we muse, how first their match began;
      But that we learne, that He that spread the skies,
      And fixt the Earth, first form'd the _soule_ in man.

    This true _Prometheus_ first made Man of earth,
      And shed in him a beame of heauenly fire;
      Now in their mother's wombs before their birth,
      Doth in all sonnes of men their _soules_ inspire.

    And as _Minerua_ is in fables said,
      From _Ioue_, without a mother to proceed;
      So our true _Ioue_, without a mother's ay'd,
      Doth daily millions of _Mineruas_ breed.


ERRONIOUS OPINIONS OF THE CREATION OF SOULES.

    Then neither from eternitie before,
      Nor from the time when _Time's_ first point begun;
      Made He all _souls_: which now He keepes in store,
      Some in the moone, and others in the sunne:

    Nor in a _secret cloyster_ doth Hee keepe
      These virgin-spirits, vntill their marriage-day;
      Nor locks them vp in chambers, where they sleep,
      Till they awake, within these beds of clay.

    Nor did He first a certaine number make,
      Infusing part in _beasts_, and part in _men_,
      And, as vnwilling further paines to take,
      Would make no more then those He framed then.

    So that the widow _Soule_ her _body_ dying,
      Vnto the next-borne _body_ married was;
      And so by often changing and supplying,
      Mens' _soules_ to beasts, and beasts to men did passe.

    (These thoughts are fond; for since the bodies borne
      Be more in number farre then those that dye;
      Thousands must be abortiue, and forlorne,
      Ere others' deaths to them their _soules_ supply.)

    But as _God's handmaid_, _Nature_, doth create
      Bodies in time distinct, and order due;[105]
      So God giues _soules_ the like successiue date,
      Which _Himselfe_ makes, in bodies formed new:

    Which _Him selfe_ makes, of no materiall thing;
      For vnto angels He no power hath giuen,
      Either to forme the shape, or stuffe to bring
      From _ayre_ or _fire_, or _substance of the heauen_.

    Nor He in this doth _Nature's_ seruice vse;
      For though from bodies, she can bodies bring,
      Yet could she neuer soules from Soules _traduce_,
      As fire from fire, or light from light doth spring.


OBJECTION:--THAT THE SOULE IS EXTRADUCE.

    Alas! that some, that were great lights of old,
      And in their hands the _lampe_ of God did beare;[106]
      Some reuerend Fathers did this error hold,
      Hauing their eyes dim'd with religious feare!

    For when (say they) by Rule of Faith we find,
      That euery _soule_ vnto her _body_ knit,
      Brings from the mother's wombe, the _sinne of kind_,
      The roote of all the ill she doth commit.

    How can we say that God the _Soule_ doth make,
      But we must make Him author of her sinne?
      Then from man's soule she doth beginning take,
      Since in man's soule corruption did begin.

    For if God make her, first He makes her ill,
      (Which God forbid our thoghts should yeeld vnto!)
      Or makes the body her faire forme to spill,[107]
      Which, of it selfe it had no power to doe.

    Not _Adam's body_ but his _soule_ did sinne
      And so her selfe vnto corruption brought;
      But the poore _soule_ corrupted is within,
      Ere shee had sinn'd, either in act, or thought:

    And yet we see in her such powres diuine,
      As we could gladly thinke, _from God she came_;
      Faine would we make Him Author of the wine,
      If for the dregs we could some other blame.

[Footnote 105: Misprinted in 1608 and 1622 edition 'other:' correctly,
as above, in 1599 edition. G.]

[Footnote 106: Holy Scriptures. G.]

[Footnote 107: = Spoil. G.]


    THE ANSWERE TO THE OBIECTION.

    _Thus these_ good men with holy zeale were blind,
      When on the other part the truth did shine;
      Whereof we doe cleare demonstrations find,
      By light of _Nature_, and by light _Diuine_

    None are so grosse as to contend for this,
      That soules from bodies may traduced bee;
      Betweene whose natures no proportion is,
      When roote and branch in nature still agree.

    But many subtill wits haue iustifi'd,
      That _soules_ from _soules_ spiritually may spring;
      Which (if the nature of the _soule_ be tri'd)
      Will euen in Nature proue as grosse a thing.


REASONS DRAWNE FROM NATURE.

    For all things made, are either made of nought,
      Or made of stuffe that ready made doth stand;
      Of nought no creature euer formed ought,
      For that is proper to th' Almightie's hand.

    If then the _soule_ another _soule_ doe make,
      Because her power is kept within a bound,
      Shee must some former stuffe or _matter_ take;
      But in the soule there is no _matter_ found.

    Then if her heauenly Forme doe not agree
      With any _matter_ which the world containes;
      Then she of nothing must created bee,
      And to _create_, to God alone pertaines.

    Againe, if _soules_ doe other _soules_ beget,
      'Tis by themselues, or by the bodie's power;
      If by themselues, what doth their working let,
      But they might _soules_ engender euery houre?

    If by the body, how can _wit_ and _will_
      Ioyne with the body onely in this act?
      Sith[108] when they doe their other works fulfill,
      They from the body doe themselues _abstract_?

    Againe, if _soules_ of _soules_ begotten were,
      Into each other they should change and moue;
      And _change_ and _motion still corruption_ beare;
      How shall we then the _soule_ immortall proue?

    If lastly, _soules_ doe[109] generation vse,
      Then should they spread incorruptible seed;
      What then becomes of that which they doe lose,
      When th' acts of generation doe not speed?

    And though the _soule_ could cast spirituall seed,
      Yet _would_ she not, because she _neuer dies_;
      For mortall things desire their _like_ to breed,
      That so they may their kind immortalize.

    Therefore the angels, sonnes of God are nam'd,
      And marry not, nor are in marriage giuen;
      Their spirits and ours are of one _substance_ fram'd,
      And haue one Father, euen the _Lord of heauen_:

    Who would at first, that in each other thing,
      The _earth_ and _water_ liuing _soules_ should breed;
      But that _man's soule_ whom He would make their king,
      Should from Himselfe immediatly proceed.

    And when He took the _woman_ from _man's_ side,
      Doubtlesse Himselfe inspir'd her _soule_ alone;
      For 'tis not said, He did _man's soule_ diuide,
      But took _flesh of his flesh, bone of his bone_.

    Lastly, God being made Man for man's owne sake,
      And being like Man in all, except in sin,
      His body from the _virgin's_ wombe did take;
      But all agree, _God form'd His soule within_.

    Then is the _soule_ from God; so _Pagans_ say,
      Which saw by _Nature's_ light her heauenly kind;
      Naming her _kin to God, and God's bright ray_,
      A citizen of Heauen to Earth confined.

    But now, I feele, they plucke me by the eare
      Whom my young _Muse_ so boldly termed blind;
      And craue more heauenly light, that cloud to clear,
      Which makes them think God doth not make the mind.

[Footnote 108: Here and elsewhere, the 1622 edn. alters 'since' of the
1599 and 1608 edns. to the earlier form 'sith': on which see Wright's
Bible Word-Book. _s.v._ G.]

[Footnote 109: In 1599 and 1608 edns., 'did.' G.]



REASONS DRAWNE FROM DIUINITY.

    God doubtlesse makes her, and doth make her good,
      And graffes her in the body, there to spring;
      Which, though it be corrupted, flesh and blood
      Can no way to the _Soule_ corruption bring:

    And yet this _Soule_ (made good by God at first,[110]
      And not corrupted by the bodie's ill)
      Euen in the wombe is sinfull, and accurst,
      Ere shee can _iudge_ by _wit_ or _chuse_ by _will_.[111]

[Footnote 110: By an unhappy oversight, the whole of this stanza is
dropped out of 1697 edition: and thence, by Davies, and generally. G.]

[Footnote 111: Davies and Southey, as before, substitute 'ill.' G.]

    Yet is not God the Author of her sinne
      Though Author of her _being_, and _being there_;
      And if we dare to iudge our _Iudge_ herein,[112]
      He can condemne vs, and Himselfe can cleare.

[Footnote 112: Davies and Southey, as before, substitute 'Maker's
will.' G.]

    First, God from infinite eternitie
      _Decreed_, what _hath beene_, _is_, or _shall bee_ done;
      And was resolu'd, that euery man should bee,
      And in his turne, his race of life should run:

    And so did purpose all the _soules_ to make,
      That euer _have beene_ made, or _euer shall_;
      And that their _being_ they should onely take
      In humane bodies, or not _bee_ at all.

    Was it then fit that such a weake euent
      (_W[e]aknesse it selfe_,--the sinne and fall of Man)
      His counsel's execution should preuent,
      Decreed and fixt before the World began?

    Or that one _penall law_ by _Adam_ broke,
      Should make God breake His owne _eternall Law_;
      The setled order of the World reuoke,
      And change all forms of things, which He foresaw?

    Could _Eue's_ weake hand, extended to the tree,
      In sunder rend that _adamantine chaine_,
      Whose golden links, _effects_ and causes be,
      And which to God's owne chair doth fixt remaine.[113]

    O could we see, how cause from cause doth spring!
      How mutually they linkt and folded are!
      And heare how oft one disagreeing string
      The harmony doth rather make then marre?

    And view at once, how _death_ by _sinne_ is brought,
      And how from _death_, a better _life_ doth rise,
      How this God's _iustice_, and His _mercy_ tought:
      We this decree would praise, as right and wise.

    But we that measure times by first and last,
      The sight of things successiuely, doe take;
      When God on all at once His view doth cast,
      And of all times doth but one _instant_ make.

    All in _Himselfe_ as in a _glasse_ Hee sees,
      For _from Him, by Him, through Him, all things bee_:
      His sight is not discoursiue, by degrees,
      But seeing the whole, each single part doth see.[114]

[Footnote 113: Homer, Iliad, VIII. 19: and _cf._ Tennyson ('Morte d'
Arthur,' p. 200: edition 1848.)

    'For so the whole round world is every way

    Bound by gold chains about the feet of God.' G.]

[Footnote 114: It is noticeable that the supreme Divine and Thinker of
America--Jonathan Edwards--accepts this symbol of the 'Tree,' and works
it out marvellously in his great treatise on 'Original Sin.' G.]

    He lookes on _Adam_, as a _root_, or _well_,
      And on his heires, as _branches_, and as _streames_;
      He sees _all_ men as _one_ Man, though they dwell
      In sundry cities, and in sundry realmes:

    And as the _roote_ and _branch_ are but one _tree_,
      And _well_ and _streame_ doe but one _riuer_ make;
      So, if the _root_ and _well_ corrupted bee,
      The _streame_ and _branch_ the same corruption take:

    So, when the root and fountaine of Mankind
      Did draw corruption, and God's curse, by sin;
      This was a charge that all his heires did bind,
      And all his offspring grew corrupt therein.

    And as when the hand doth strike, the Man offends,
      (For _part from whole, Law seuers not in this_)
      So _Adam's_ sinne to the whole kind extends;
      For all their natures are but part of his.

    Therefore this _sinne of kind_, not personall,
      But reall and hereditary was;
      The guilt whereof, and punishment to all,
      By course of Nature, and of Law doth passe.

    For as that easie Law was giuen to all,
      To ancestor and heire, to first and last;
      So was the first transgression generall,
      And all did plucke the fruit and all did tast.

    Of this we find some foot-steps in our Law,
      Which doth her root from God and Nature take;
      Ten thousand men she doth together draw,
      And of them all, one Corporation make:

    Yet these, and their successors, are but one,
      And if they gaine or lose their liberties;
      They harme, or profit not themselues alone,
      But such as in succeeding times shall rise.

    And so the ancestor, and all his heires,
      Though they in number passe the stars of heauen,
      Are still but one; his forfeitures are theirs,
      And vnto them are his aduancements giuen:

    His ciuill acts doe binde and bar them all;
      And as from _Adam_, all corruption take,
      So, if the father's crime be _capitall_
      In all the _bloud_, Law doth _corruption_ make.

    Is it then iust with vs, to dis-inherit
      The vnborn nephewes for the father's fault?
      And to aduance againe for one man's merit,
      A thousand heires, that have deserved nought?

    And is not God's decree as iust as ours,
      If He, for _Adam's_ sinne, his sonnes depriue,
      Of all those natiue vertues, and those powers,
      Which He to him, and to his race did giue?

    For what is this contagious sinne of kinde
      But a priuation of that grace within?
      And of that great rich dowry of the minde
      Which all had had, but for the first man's sin?

    If then a man, on light conditions gaine
      A great estate, to him and his, for euer;
      If wilfully he forfeit it againe
      Who doth bemone his heire or blame the giuer?

    So, though God make the _Soule_ good, rich and faire,
      Yet when her forme is to the body knit,
      Which makes the Man, which man is _Adam's heire_
      Iustly forth-with He takes His grace from it:

    And then the soule being first from nothing brought,
      When God's grace failes her, doth to nothing fall;
      And this _declining pronenesse unto nought_,
      Is euen that sinne that we are borne withall.

    Yet not alone the first good qualities,
      Which in the first _soule_ were, depriued are;
      But in their place the contrary doe rise,
      And reall spots[115] of sinne her beauty marre.

    Nor is it strange, that Adam's ill desart
      Should be transferd vnto his guilty Race;
      When Christ His grace and iustice doth impart
      To men vniust, and such as haue no grace.

    Lastly, the _Soule_ were better so to bee
      Borne slaue to sinne, then not to be at all;
      Since (if she do belieue) One sets her free,
      That makes her mount the higher for her fall.

    _Yet this_ the curious wits will not content;
      They yet will know (sith[116] God foresaw this ill)
      Why His high Prouidence did not preuent
      The declination of the first man's will.

    If by His Word He had the current staid
      Of _Adam's_ will, which was by nature free;
      It had bene one, as if His Word had said,
      I will henceforth that _Man no man shall bee_.

    For what is Man without a moouing mind,
      Which hath a iudging _wit_, and chusing _will_?
      Now, if God's power should her election bind,
      Her motions then would cease and stand all still.

    And why did God in man this _soule_ infuse,
      But that he should his Maker _know_ and _loue_?
      Now, if _loue_ be compeld and cannot chuse,
      How can it gratefull or thankeworthy proue?

    Loue must free-hearted be, and voluntary,
      And not enchanted, or by Fate constraind;
      Nor like that loue, which did _Ulisses_ carry,
      To _Circe's_ ile, with mighty charmes enchaind.

    Besides, were we vnchangeable in _will_,
      And of a _wit_ that nothing could mis-deeme;
      Equall to God, Whose wisedome shineth still,
      And neuer erres, we might our selues esteeme.

    So that if Man would be vnuariable,
      He must be God, or like a rock or tree;
      For euen the perfect Angels were not stable,
      But had a fall more desperate then wee.

    Then let vs praise that Power, which makes vs be
      _Men_ as we are, and rest contented so;
      And knowing Man's fall was curiositie,
      Admire God's counsels, which we cannot know.

    And let vs know that God the Maker is
      Of all the _Soules_, in all the men that be:
      Yet their corruption is no fault of His,
      But the first man's that broke God's first decree.

[Footnote 115: Misprinted in 1622 'sports:' 'spots' from 1599, 1602 and
1608. G.]

[Footnote 116: 'Since,' as before in 1599 and 1608 editions. G.]


WHY THE SOULE IS UNITED TO THE BODY.

  _This substance_, and this _spirit of God's owne making_,
    Is in the body plact, and planted heere;
    "That both of God, and of the world partaking,
    "Of all that is, Man might the image beare.

    Then other things, which mindlesse bodies be;
    Last, He made Man, th' _horizon_ 'twixt both kinds,
    In whom we doe the World's abridgement see.[117]

  Besides, this World below did need _one wight_,
    Which might thereof distinguish euery part;
    Make vse thereof, and take therein delight,
    And order things with industry and art:

  Which also God might in His works admire,
    And here beneath, yeeld Him both praier and praise;
    As there, aboue, the holy angels quire
    Doth spread His glory[118] with spirituall layes.

  Lastly, the bruite, unreasonable wights,
    Did want a _visible king_ on[119] them to raigne:
    And God, Himselfe thus to the World vnites,
    That so the World might endlesse blisse obtaine.

[Footnote 117: One of Heylin's numerous books is called
'_Microcosmus_:' a little Description of the great World. Oxon: 1st
edn., 1622. The word is met with in other old title-pages and in
theological (Puritan) writings. G.]


IN WHAT MANNER THE SOULE IS UNITED TO THE BODY.

    "But how shall we this _union_ well expresse?
      Nought ties the _soule_; her subtiltie is such
      She moues the bodie, which she doth possesse,
      Yet no part toucheth, but by _Vertue's_ touch.

    Then dwels shee not therein as in a tent,
      Nor as a pilot in his ship doth sit;
      Nor as the spider in his[120] web is pent;
      Nor as the waxe retaines the print in it;

    Nor as a vessell water doth containe;
      Nor as one liquor in another shed;
      Nor as the heat doth in the fire remaine;
      Nor as a voice throughout the ayre is spread:

    But as the faire and cheerfull _Morning light_,
      Doth here and there her siluer beames impart,
      And in an instant doth herselfe vnite
      To the transparent ayre, in all, and part:

    Still resting whole, when blowes th' ayre diuide;
      Abiding pure, when th' ayre is most corrupted;
      Throughout the ayre, her beams dispersing wide,
      And when the ayre is tost, not interrupted:

    So doth the piercing _Soule_ the body fill,
      Being all in all, and all in part diffus'd;
      Indiuisible, incorruptible[121] still,
      Not forc't, encountred, troubled or confus'd.

    And as the _sunne_ aboue, the light doth bring,
      Though we behold it in the ayre below;
      So from th' Eternall Light the _Soule_ doth spring,
      Though in the body she her powers doe show.

[Footnote 118: Davies and Southey, as before, insert 'forth' here. G.]

[Footnote 119: Davies and Southey, as before, substitute 'o'er:' but
'on' is the Poet's own word here and elsewhere. G.]

[Footnote 120: In 1599 and 1608 editions, 'her.' G.]

[Footnote 121: In 1598 and 1608 editions, 'vncorruptible.' G.]


HOW THE SOUL DOTH EXERCISE HER POWERS IN THE BODY.

    _But as_ the[122] world's _sunne_ doth effects beget,
      Diuers, in diuers places euery day;
      Here _Autumnes_ temperature, there _Summer's_ heat,
      Here flowry _Spring-tide_, and there _Winter_ gray:

    Eere _Euen_, there _Morne_, here _Noone_, there _Day_, there _Night_;
      Melts wax, dries clay, mak[e]s flowrs, som quick,[123] som dead;
      Makes the _More_ black, and th' _Europ[oe]an_ white,
      Th' _American_ tawny, and th' _East-Indian_ red:

    So in our little World: this _soule_ of ours,
      Being onely one, and to one body tyed,
      Doth vse, on diuers obiects diuers powers,
      And so are her effects diuersified.


THE VEGETATIUE OR QUICKENING POWER.

    _Her quick'ning_ power in euery lining part,
      Doth as a nurse, or as a mother serue;
      And doth employ her _oeconomicke art_,
      And busie care, her houshold to preserue

    Here she _attracts_, and there she doth _retaine_,
      There she _decocts_, and doth the food prepare;
      There she _distributes_ it to euery vaine,
      There she _expels_ what she may fitly spare.

    This power to _Martha_ may compared be,[124]
      Which busie was, the _houshold-things_ to doe;
      Or to a _Dryas_, liuing in a tree:[125]
      For euen to trees this power is proper too.

    And though the Soule may not this power extend
      Out of the body, but still vse it there;
      She hath a power which she abroad doth send,
      Which views and searcheth all things euery where.

[Footnote 122: 'This' in 1599 edition. G.]

[Footnote 123: Living. G.]


THE POWER OF SENSE.

    _This power is Sense_, which from abroad doth bring[126]
      The _colour_, _taste_, and _touch_, and _sent_,[127] and _sound_;
      The _quantitie_, and _shape_ of euery thing
      Within th' Earth's center, or Heauen's circle found.

    This power, in parts made fit, fit obiects takes,
      Yet not the things, but forms of things receiues;
      As when a seale in waxe impression makes,
      The print therein, but not it selfe it leaues.

    And though things sensible be numberlesse,
      But onely fiue the _Senses'_ organs be;
      And in those fiue, all things their formes expresse,
      Which we can _touch_, _taste_, _feele_, or _heare_, or _see_.

    These are the windows throgh the which she views
      The _light of knowledge_, which is life's loadstar:
      "And yet while she these spectacles doth vse,
      "Oft worldly things seeme greater then they are.

[Footnote 124: St. Luke, x. 40, 41. G.]

[Footnote 125: On the Dryads Cf. Paus. viii. 4. Sec. 2 Apollon. Rhod. ii.
447, &c. G.]

[Footnote 126: Misprinted 'spring,' but corrected in the errata of 1622
edition, as above. G.]

[Footnote 127: Scent. G.]


SIGHT.

    First, the two _eyes_ that haue the _seeing_ power,
      Stand as one watchman, spy, or sentinell;
      Being plac'd aloft, within the head's high tower;
      And though both see, yet both but one thing tell.

    These mirrors take into their little space
      The formes of _moone_ and _sun_, and euery _starre_;
      Of euery body and of euery place,
      Which with the World's wide armes embraced are:

    Yet their best obiect, and their noblest vse,
      Hereafter in another World will be;
      When God in them shall heauenly light infuse,
      That face to face they may their _Maker_ see.

    Here are they guides, which doe the body lead,
      Which else would stumble in eternal night;
      Here in this world they do much knowledge _read_,
      And are the casements which admit most light:

    They are her farthest reaching instrument,
      Yet they no beames vnto their obiects send;
      But all the rays are from their obiects sent,
      And in the _eyes_ with pointed angles end:

    If th' obiects be farre off, the rayes doe meet
      In a sharpe point, and so things seeme but small;
      If they be neere, their rayes doe spread and fleet,
      And make broad points, that things seeme great withall.

    Lastly, nine things to _Sight_ required are;
      The _power_ to see, the _light_, the _visible_ thing,
      Being not too _small_, too _thin_, too _nigh_, too _farre_,
      _Cleare_ space, and _time_, the forme distinct to bring.

    Thus we see how the _Soule_ doth vse the eyes,
      As instruments of her quicke power of sight;
      Hence do th' Arts _opticke_ and faire _painting_ rise:
      _Painting_, which doth all gentle minds delight.


HEARING.

    Now let vs heare how she the _Eares_ imployes:
      Their office is the troubled ayre to take,
      Which in their mazes formes a sound or noyse,
      Whereof her selfe doth true distinction make.

    These wickets of the _Soule_ are plac't on hie
      Because all sounds doe lightly mount aloft;
      And that they may not pierce too violently,
      They are delaied with turnes, and windings oft.

    For should the voice directly strike the braine,
      It would astonish and confuse it much;
      Therfore these plaits and folds the sound restraine,
      That it the organ may more gently touch.

    As streames, which with their winding banks doe play,
      Stopt by their creeks, run softly through the plaine;
      So in th' Eares' labyrinth the voice doth stray,
      And doth with easie motion touch the braine.

    It is the slowest, yet the daintiest _sense_;
      For euen the _Eares_ of such as haue no skill,
      Perceiue a discord, and conceiue offence;
      And knowing not what is good, yet find the ill.

    And though this _sense_ first gentle _Musicke_ found,
      Her proper obiect is _the speech of men_;
      But that speech chiefely which God's heraulds sound,
      When their tongs vtter what His Spirit did pen.

    Our _Eyes_ haue lids, our _Eares_ still ope we see,
      Quickly to heare how euery tale is prooued;
      Our _Eyes_ still moue, our _Eares_ vnmoued bee,
      That though we hear quick we be not quickly moued.

    Thus by the organs of the _Eye_ and _Eare_,
      The _Soule_ with knowledge doth her selfe endue;
      "Thus she her prison, may with pleasure beare,
      "Hauing such prospects, all the world to view.

    These conduit-pipes of knowledge feed the Mind,
      But th' other three attend the Body still;
      For by their seruices the _Soule_ doth find,
      What things are to the body, good or ill.


TASTE.

    The _bodie's_ life with meats and ayre is fed,
      Therefore the _soule_ doth vse the _tasting_ power,
      In veines, which through the tongue and palate spred,
      Distinguish euery relish, sweet and sower.

    This is the bodie's _nurse_; but since man's wit
      Found th' art of _cookery_, to delight his _sense_;
      More bodies are consum'd and kild with it,
      Then with the sword, famine, or pestilence.


SMELLING.

    _Next_, in the nosthrils she doth vse the _smell_:
      As God the _breath of life_ in them did giue,
      So makes He now this power in them to dwell,
      To iudge all ayres, whereby we _breath_ and _liue_.

    This _sense_ is also mistresse of an Art,
      Which to soft people sweete perfumes doth sell;
      Though this deare Art doth little good impart,
      "Sith[128] they smell best, that doe of nothing smell.

    And yet good _sents_[129] doe purifie the braine,
      Awake the fancie, and the wits refine;
      Hence old _Deuotion_, _incense_ did ordaine
      To make mens' spirits apt for thoughts diuine.

[Footnote 128: In 1599 and 1608 editions, 'since,' as before. G.]

[Footnote 129: Scents. G.]


FEELING.

    _Lastly, the feeling power_, which is Life's root,
      Through euery liuing part it selfe doth shed;
      By sinewes, which extend from head to foot,
      And like a net, all ore the body spred.

    Much like a subtill spider, which doth sit
      In middle of her web, which spreadeth wide;
      If ought doe touch the vtmost thred of it,
      Shee feeles it instantly on euery side.

    By _Touch_, the first pure qualities we learne,
      Which quicken all things, _hote_, _cold_, _moist_ and _dry_;
      By _Touch_, _hard_, _soft_, _rough_, _smooth_, we doe discerne;
      By _Touch_, _sweet pleasure_, and _sharpe paine_, we try.

           *       *       *       *       *

    These are the outward instruments of Sense,
      These are the guards which euery thing must passe
      Ere it approch the mind's intelligence,
      Or touch the Fantasie, _Wit's looking-glasse_.


THE IMAGINATION OR COMMON SENSE.

    And yet these porters, which all things admit,
      Themselues perceiue not, nor discerne the things;
      One _common_ power doth in the forehead sit,
      Which all their proper formes together brings.

    For all those _nerues_, which _spirits of Sence_ doe beare,
      And to those outward organs spreading goe;
      Vnited are, as in a center there,
      And there this power those sundry formes doth know.

    Those outward organs present things receiue,
      This inward _Sense_ doth absent things retaine;
      Yet straight transmits all formes shee doth perceiue,
      Vnto a higher region of the _braine_.


THE FANTASIE.

    Where _Fantasie_, neere _hand-maid_ to the mind,
      Sits and beholds, and doth discerne them[130] all;
      Compounds in one, things diuers in their kind;
      Compares the black and white, the great and small.

    Besides, those single formes she doth esteeme,
      And in her ballance doth their values trie;
      Where some things good, and some things ill doe seem,
      And neutrall some, in her _fantasticke_[131] eye.

    This busie power is working day and night;
      For when the outward _senses_ rest doe take,
      A thousand dreames, fantasticall and light,
      With fluttring wings doe keepe her still awake.[132]


[Footnote 130: Misprinted 'then' in 1622 edition, but as above
correctly in 1599 and 1608 editions. G.]

[Footnote 131: Misprinted 'Fancasticke' in 1622 edition. G.]


THE SENSITIUE MEMORIE.

    Yet alwayes all may not afore her bee;
      Successiuely, she this and that intends;
      Therefore such formes as she doth cease to see,
      To _Memorie's_ large volume shee commends.

    The _lidger-booke_ lies in the braine behinde,
      Like _Ianus'_ eye, which in his poll was set;
      The _lay-man's tables, store-house of the mind_,
      Which doth remember much, and much forget.

    Heere _Sense's apprehension_, end doth take;
      As when a stone is into water cast,
      One circle doth another circle make,
      Till the last circle touch the banke at last.[133]

[Footnote 132: Cf. Milton's Il Penseroso, lines 5-10. G.]

[Footnote 133: Cf. Phineas Fletcher: Purple Island c. v., stanza 47.
G.]


THE PASSIONS OF SENSE.

    But though the _apprehensiue[134] power_ doe pause,
      The _motiue_ vertue then begins to moue;
      Which in the heart below doth PASSIONS cause,
      _Ioy_, _griefe_, and _feare_, and _hope_, and _hate_, and _loue_.

    These passions haue a free commanding might,
      And diuers actions in our life doe breed;
      For, all acts done without true Reason's light,
      Doe from the passion of the _Sense_ proceed.

    But sith[135] the _braine_ doth lodge the powers of _Sense_,
      How makes it in the heart those passions spring?
      The mutuall loue, the kind intelligence
      'Twixt heart and braine, this _sympathy_ doth bring.

    From the kind heat, which in the heart doth raigne,
      The _spirits_ of life doe their begining take;
      These _spirits_ of life ascending to the braine,
      When they come there, the _spirits of Sense_ do make.

    These _spirits of Sense_, in Fantasie's High Court,
      Iudge of the formes of _obiects_, ill or well;
      And so they send a good or ill report
      Downe to the heart, where all affections dwell.

    If the report bee _good_, it causeth _loue_,
      And longing _hope_, and well-assured _ioy_:
      If it bee _ill_, then doth it _hatred_ moue,
     And trembling _feare_, and vexing _grief's_ annoy.

    Yet were these naturall affections good:
      (For they which want them, _blockes_ or _deuils_ be)
      If _Reason_ in her first perfection stood,
      That she might _Nature's_ passions rectifie.

[Footnote 134: Misprinted 'apprehension;' corrected in the errata of
1622 edition from 1599 and 1608 editions. G.]

[Footnote 135: In 1599 and 1608 editions 'since,' as before. G.]


THE MOTION OF LIFE.

    Besides, another _motiue_-power doth rise
      Out of the heart; from whose pure blood do spring
      The _vitall spirits_; which, borne in _arteries_,
      Continuall motion to all parts doe bring.


THE LOCALL MOTION.

    This makes the pulses beat, and lungs respire,
      This holds the sinewes like a bridle's reines;
      And makes the Body to aduance, retire,
      To turne or stop, as she them[136] slacks, or straines.

    Thus the _soule_ tunes the _bodie's_ instrument;
      These harmonies she makes with _life_ and _sense_;
      The organs fit are by the body lent,
      But th' actions flow from the _Soule's_ influence.


THE INTELLECTUALL POWERS OF THE SOULE.

    _But now_ I haue a _will_, yet want a _wit_,
     To expresse the working of the _wit_ and _will_;
      Which, though their root be to the body knit,
      Vse not the body, when they vse their skill.

    These powers the nature of the _Soule declare_,
      For to man's _soule_ these onely proper bee;
      For on the Earth no other wights there are
      That haue these heauenly powers, but only we.


THE WIT OR UNDERSTANDING.

    The WIT, the pupill of the _Soule's_ cleare eye,
      And in man's world, the onely shining _starre_;
      Lookes in the mirror of the Fantasie,
      Where all the gatherings of the _Senses_ are.

    From thence this power the shapes of things abstracts,
      And them within her _passiue part_ receiues;
      Which are enlightned by that part which _acts_,
      And so the formes of single things perceiues.

    But after, by discoursing to and fro,
      Anticipating, and comparing things;
      She doth all vniversall natures know,
      And all _effects_ into their _causes_ brings.[137]

[Footnote 136: Misprinted 'them' in 1622 edition, corrected as above
from 1599 and 1608 editions. G.]


REASON, VNDERSTANDING.

    When she _rates_ things and moues from ground to ground,
      The name of _Reason_ she obtaines by this;
      But when by Reason she the truth hath found,
      And _standeth fixt_, she VNDERSTANDING is.


OPINION, JUDGEMENT.

    When her assent she _lightly_ doth encline
      To either part, she is OPINION[138] light:
      But when she doth by principles define
      A certaine truth, she hath _true Judgement's_ sight.

    And as from _Senses_, _Reason's_ worke doth spring,
      So many _reasons understanding_ gaine;
      And many _understandings_, _knowledge_ bring;
      And by much _knowledge_, _wisdome_ we obtaine.

    So, many stayres we must ascend vpright
      Ere we attaine to _Wisdome's_ high degree;[139]
      So doth this Earth eclipse our Reason's light.
      Which else (in instants) would like angels see.

    Yet hath the _Soule_ a dowrie naturall,
      And _sparkes of light_, some common things to see;
      Not being a _blancke_ where nought is writ at all,
      But what the writer will, may written be

    For Nature in man's heart her lawes doth pen;
      Prescribing _truth_ to _wit_, and _good_ to _will_;
      Which doe _accuse_, or else _excuse_ all men,
      For euery thought or practise, good or ill:

    And yet these sparkes grow almost infinite,
      Making the World, and all therein their food;
      As fire so spreads as no place holdeth it,
      Being nourisht still, with new supplies of wood.

    And though these sparkes were almost quencht with sin,
      Yet they whom that _Iust One_ hath iustifide;
      Haue them encreasd with heauenly light within,
      And like the _widowe's oyle_ still multiplide.

[Footnote 137: Thomas Davies, as before, mis-prints 'bring.' G.]

[Footnote 138: Thomas Davies and Southey, as before, read 'opinion's
light:' but in all the Author's editions it is as above = light
opinion: or query is 'hight' = named, meant? G.]

[Footnote 139: Davies, as before, 'decree.' G.]


THE POWER OF WILL.

    And as this _wit_ should goodnesse truely know,
      We haue a _Will_, which that true good should chuse;
      Though _Wil_ do oft (when _wit_ false formes doth show)
      Take _ill_ for _good_, and _good_ for _ill_ refuse.


THE RELATIONS BETWIXT WIT AND WILL.

    _Will_ puts in practice what the _Wit_ deuiseth:
      _Will_ euer acts, and _Wit_ contemplates still;
      And as from _Wit_, the power of _wisedome_ riseth,
      _All other vertues_ daughters are of _Will_.

    _Will_ is the _prince_, and _Wit_ the counseller,
      Which doth for common good in Counsell sit;
      And when _Wit_ is resolu'd, _Will_ lends her power
      To execute what is aduis'd by _Wit_.

    _Wit_ is the mind's chief iudge, which doth controule
      Of _Fancie's_ Court the iudgements, false and vaine;
      _Will_ holds the royall septer in the _soule_
      And on[140] the passions of the heart doth raigne.

    _Will_ is as free as any emperour,
      Naught can restraine her _gentle_ libertie;
      No tyrant, nor no torment, hath the power,
      To make vs _will_, when we vnwilling bee.


THE INTELLECTUALL MEMORIE.

    To these high powers, a store-house doth pertaine,
      Where they all arts and generall reasons lay;
      Which in the _Soule_, euen after death, remaine
      And no _Lethaean_[141] flood can wash away.

    This is the _Soule_, and these her vertues bee;
      Which, though they haue their sundry proper ends,
      And one exceeds another in degree,
      Yet each on other mutually depends.

    _Our Wit_ is giuen, _Almighty God_ to _know_;
      Our _Will_ is giuen to _loue_ Him, being _knowne_;
      But God could not be _known_ to vs below,
      But by His _workes_ which through the sense are shown.

    And as the _Wit_ doth reape the fruits of _Sense_,
      So doth the _quickning_ power the _senses feed_;
      Thus while they doe their sundry gifts dispence,
      "The best, the seruice of the least doth need.

    Euen so the King his Magistrates do serue,
      Yet Commons feed both magistrate and king;
      The Commons' peace the magistrates preserue
      By borrowed power, which from the Prince doth spring.

    The _quickning power_ would _be_, and so would rest;
      The _Sense_ would not _be_ onely, but _be well_;
      But _Wit's_ ambition longeth to the _best_,
      For it desires in endlesse blisse to dwell.

    And these three powers, three[142] sorts of men doe make:
      For some, like plants, their veines doe onely fill;
      And some, like beasts, their senses' pleasure take;
      And some, like angels, doe contemplate still.

    Therefore the fables turnd some men to flowres,
      And others, did with bruitish formes inuest;
     And did of others, make celestiall powers,
      Like angels, which still trauell, yet still rest.

    Yet these three powers are not three _soules_, but one;
      As one and two are both containd in _three_;
      _Three_ being one number by it selfe alone:
      A shadow of the blessed Trinitie.

[Footnote 140: Here = o'er as on page 61 _ante_. G.]

[Footnote 141: = forgetfulness: from Lethe. G.]

[Footnote 142: A numeral '3' here, and in the next stanza but one. G.]


AN ACCLAMATION.

    O! what is Man (great Maker of mankind!)
      That Thou to him so great respect dost beare!
      That Thou adornst him with so bright a mind,
      Mak'st him a king, and euen an angel's peere!

    O! what a liuely life, what heauenly power,
      What spreading vertue, what a sparkling fire!
      How great, how plentifull, how rich a dower
      Dost Thou within this dying flesh inspire!

    Thou leau'st Thy print in other works of Thine,
      But Thy whole image Thou in Man hast writ;
      There cannot be a creature more diuine,
      Except (like Thee) it should be infinit.

    But it exceeds man's thought, to thinke how hie
      _God_ hath raisd _Man_, since _God a man_ became;
      The angels doe admire this _Misterie_,
      And are astonisht when they view the same.


THAT THE SOULE IS IMMORTAL, AND CANNOT DIE.

    Nor hath He giuen these blessings for a day,
      Nor made them on the bodie's life depend;
      The _Soule_ though made in time, _suruives for aye_,
      And though it hath beginning, sees no end.

    Her onely _end_, is _neuer-ending_ blisse;
      Which is, _th' eternall face of God to see_;
      Who _Last of Ends_, and _First of Causes_, is:
      And to doe this, she must _eternall_ bee.

    How senselesse then, and dead a soule hath hee,
      Which _thinks_ his _soule_ doth with his body die!
      Or _thinkes_ not so, but so would haue it bee,
      That he might sinne with more securitie.

    For though these light and vicious persons say,
      Our _Soule_ is but a smoake, or ayrie blast;
      Which, during life, doth in our nostrils play,
      And when we die, doth turne to wind at last:

    Although they say, '_Come let us eat and drinke_';
      Our life is but a sparke, which quickly dies;
      Though thus they _say_, they know not what to think,
      But in their minds ten thousand doubts arise.

    Therefore no heretikes desire to spread
      Their light opinions, like these _Epicures_:[143]
      For so the staggering thoughts are comforted,
      And other men's assent their doubt assures.

    Yet though these men against their conscience striue,
      There are some sparkles in their flintie breasts
      Which cannot be extinct, but still reuiue;
      That though they would, they cannot quite bee _beasts_;

    But who so makes a mirror of his mind,
      And doth with patience view himselfe therein,
      His _Soule's_ eternitie shall clearely find,
      Though th' other beauties be defac't with sin.


REASON I.

DRAWNE FROM THE DESIRE OF KNOWLEDGE.

    First _in Man's mind_ we find an appetite
      To _learne_ and _know the truth_ of euery thing;
      Which is co-naturall, and borne with it,
      And from the _essence_ of the _soule_ doth spring.

    With this _desire_, shee hath a natiue _might_
      To find out euery truth, if she had time;
      Th' innumerable effects to sort aright,
      And by degrees, from cause to cause to clime.

    But sith our life so fast away doth slide,
      As doth a hungry eagle through the wind,
      Or as a ship transported with the tide;
      Which in their passage leaue no print behind;

    Of which swift little time so much we spend,
      While some few things we through the sense doe straine;
      That our short race of life is at an end,
      Ere we the principles of skill attaine.

    Or God (which to vaine ends hath nothing done)
      In vaine this _appetite_ and _power_ hath giuen;
      Or else our knowledge, which is here begun,
      Hereafter must bee perfected in heauen.

    God neuer gaue a _power_ to one whole kind,
      But most part of that kind did vse the same;
      Most eies haue perfect sight, though some be blind;
      Most legs can nimbly run, though some be lame:

    But in this life no _soule_ the truth can know
      So perfectly, as it hath power to doe;
      If then perfection be not found below,
      An higher place must make her mount thereto.

[Footnote 143: = disciples of Epicurus's Philosophy. G.]


REASON II.

DRAWN FROM THE MOTION OF THE SOULE.

    _Againe_ how can shee but immortall bee?
      When with the motions of both _Will_ and _Wit_,
      She still aspireth to eternitie,
      And neuer rests, till she attaine to it?

    Water in conduit pipes, can rise no higher
      Then the wel-head, from whence it first doth spring:
      Then sith to eternall GOD shee doth aspire,
      Shee cannot be but an eternall thing.

    "All mouing things to other things doe moue,
      "Of the same kind, which shews their nature such;
      So _earth_ falls downe and _fire_ doth mount aboue,
      Till both their proper elements doe touch.


THE SOUL COMPARED TO A RIUER.

    _And as_ the moysture, which the thirstie earth
      Suckes from the sea, to fill her emptie veines,
      From out her wombe at last doth take a birth,
      And runs a _Nymph_[144] along the grassie plaines:

[Footnote 144: Davies and Southey, as before, have the extraordinary
misprint here of 'lymph.' Cf. 'Orchestra,' stanza 63, which explains
the personification. G.]

    Long doth shee stay, as loth to leaue the land,
      From whose soft side she first did issue make;
      Shee tastes all places, turnes to euery hand,
      Her flowry bankes vnwilling to forsake:

    Yet _Nature_ so her streames doth lead and carry,
      As that her course doth make no finall stay,
      Till she her selfe vnto the _Ocean_ marry,
      Within whose watry bosome first she lay:

    Euen so the _Soule_ which in this earthly mold
      The Spirit of God doth secretly infuse;
      Because at first she doth the earth behold,
      And onely this materiall world she viewes:

    At first her _mother-earth_ she holdeth deare,
      And doth embrace the world and worldly things:
      She flies close by the ground, and houers here,
      And mounts not vp with her celestiall wings.

    Yet vnder heauen she cannot light on ought
      That with her heauenly _nature_ doth agree;
      She cannot rest, she cannot fix her thought,
      She cannot in this world contented bee:

    For who did euer yet, in _honour_, _wealth_,
      Or _pleasure of the sense_, contentment find?
      Who euer ceasd to wish, when he had _health_?
      Or hauing _wisedome_ was not vext in mind?

    Then as a _bee_ which among weeds doth fall,
      Which seeme sweet flowers, with lustre fresh and gay;
      She lights on that, and this, and tasteth all,
      But pleasd with none, doth rise, and soare away;

    So, when the _Soule_ finds here no true content,
      And, like _Noah's_ doue, can no sure footing take;
      She doth returne from whence she first was sent,
      And flies to _Him_ that first her wings did make.

    _Wit_, seeking _Truth_, from cause to cause ascends,
      And neuer rests, till it the _first_ attaine:
      _Will_, seeking _Good_, finds many middle ends,
      But neuer stayes, till it the _last_ doe gaine.

    Now God, the _Truth_, and _First of Causes_ is:
      God is the _Last Good End_, which lasteth still;
      Being _Alpha_ and _Omega_ nam'd for this;
      _Alpha_ to _Wit_, _Omega_ to the _Will_.

    Sith[145] then her heauenly kind shee doth bewray,
      In that to God she doth directly moue;
      And on no mortall thing can make her stay,
      She cannot be from hence, but from _aboue_.

[Footnote 145: In 1599 and 1608 editions, 'since,' as before. G.]

    And yet this _First True Cause_, and _Last Good End_,
      Shee cannot heere so _well_, and _truely_ see;
      For this perfection shee must yet attend,
      Till to her _Maker_ shee espoused bee.

    As a _king's_ daughter, being in person sought
      Of diuers princes, who doe neighbour neere;
      On none of them can fixe a constant thought,
      Though shee to all doe lend a gentle eare:

    Yet she can loue a forraine _emperour_,
      Whom of great worth and power she heares to be;
      If she be woo'd but by _embassadour_,
      Or but his _letters_, or his pictures see:

    For well she knowes, that when she shalbe brought
      Into the _kingdome_ where her _Spouse_ doth raigne;
      Her eyes shall see what she conceiu'd in thought,
      Himselfe, his state, his glory, and his traine.

    So while the _virgin Soule_ on _Earth_ doth stay,
      She woo'd and tempted is ten thousand wayes,
      By these great powers, which on the _Earth_ beare sway;
      The _wisdom of the World_, _wealth_, _pleasure_, _praise_:

    With these sometime she doth her time beguile,
      These doe by fits her Fantasie possesse;
      But she distastes them all within a while,
      And in the sweetest finds a tediousnesse.

    But if upon the World's Almighty King
      She once doe fixe her humble louing thought;
      Who by His _picture_, drawne in euery thing,
      And _sacred messages_, her _loue_ hath sought;

    Of Him she thinks, she cannot thinke too much;
      This hony tasted still, is euer sweet;
      The pleasure of her rauisht thought is such,
      As almost here, she with her blisse doth meet:

    But when in Heauen she shall His _Essence_ see,
      This is her _soueraigne good, and perfect blisse_:
      Her longings, wishings, hopes all finisht be,
      Her ioyes are full, her motions rest in this:

    There is she crownd with garlands of _content_,
      There doth she manna eat, and nectar drinke;
      That Presence doth such high delights present,
      As neuer tongue could speake, nor heart could thinke.


REASON III.

FROM CONTEMPT OF DEATH IN THE BETTER SORT OF SPIRITS.

    _For this_ the better _Soules_ doe oft despise
      The bodie's death, and doe it oft desire;
      For when on ground, the burdened ballance lies
      The emptie part is lifted vp the higher:

    But if the bodie's death the _soule_ should kill,
      Then death must needs _against her nature_ bee;
      And were it so, all _soules_ would flie it still,
      "For Nature hates and shunnes her contrary.

    For all things else, which Nature makes to bee,
      Their _being_ to preserue, are chiefly taught;
      And though some things desire a change to see,
      Yet neuer thing did long to turne to naught.

    If then by death the _soule_ were quenched quite,
      She could not thus against her nature runne;
      Since euery senselesse thing, by Nature's light,
      Doth preservation seeke, destruction shunne.

    Nor could the World's best spirits so much erre,
      If death tooke all--that they should all agree,
      Before this life, their _honour_ to preferre;
      For what is praise to things that nothing bee?

    Againe, if by the bodie's prop she stand;
      If on the bodie's life, her life depend;
      As _Meleager's_ on the fatall brand[146],--
      The bodie's good shee onely would intend:

    We should not find her half so braue and bold,
      To leade it to the Warres and to the seas;
      To make it suffer watchings, hunger, cold,
      When it might feed with plenty, rest with ease.

    Doubtlesse all _Soules_ have a suruiuing thought;
      Therefore of death we thinke with quiet mind;
      But if we thinke of _being turn'd to nought_,
      A trembling horror in our _soules_ we find.

[Footnote 146: Apollod I., 8, Sec. 2, _et alibi_: Ovid, _Met._
viii., 450; _et seq_: 531: Diod. IV., 34. G.]


REASON IV.

FROM THE FEARE OF DEATH IN THE WICKED SOULES.

    _And as_ the better spirit, when shee doth beare
      A scorne of death, doth shew she cannot die;
      So when the wicked _Soule_ Death's face doth feare,
      Euen then she proues her owne eternitie.

    For when Death's forme appeares, she feareth not
      An vtter quenching or extinguishment;
      She would be glad to meet with such a lot,
      That so she might all future ill preuent:

    But shee doth doubt what after may befall;
      For Nature's law accuseth her within;
      And saith, 'Tis true that is affirm'd by all,
      _That after death there is a paine for sin_.

    Then she which hath bin hud-winkt from her birth,
      Doth first her selfe within Death's mirror see;
      And when her body doth returne to earth,
      She first takes care, how she alone shall bee.

    Who euer sees these irreligious men,
      With burthen of a sicknesse weake and faint;
      But heares them talking of Religion then,
      And vowing of their _soules_ to euery saint?

    When was there euer cursed _atheist_ brought
      Vnto the _gibbet_,[147] but he did adore
      That blessed Power, which he had set at nought,
      Scorn'd and blasphemed all his life before?

    These light vaine persons still are drunke and mad,
      With surfettings and pleasures of their youth;
      But at their deaths they are fresh,[148] sober, sad
      Then they discerne, and then they speake the truth.

    If then all _Soules_, both good and bad, doe teach,
      With generall voice, that _soules_ can neuer die;
      'Tis not man's flattering glosse, but _Nature's speech_,
      Which, like _God's_ Oracle, can neuer lie.


REASON V.

FROM THE BENERALL DESIRE OF IMMORTALITIE.

    _Hence springs_ that vniuersall strong desire,
      Which all men haue of Immortalitie:
      Not some few spirits vnto this thought aspire,
      But all mens' minds in this vnited be.

    Then this desire of Nature is not vaine,
      "She couets not impossibilities;
      "Fond thoughts may fall into some idle braine,
      "But one _assent_ of all, is euer wise.

    From hence that generall care and study springs,
      That _launching_ and _progression of the mind_;
      Which all men haue so much, of future things,
      That they no ioy doe in the present find.

    From this desire, that maine desire proceeds,
      Which all men haue suruiuing Fame to gaine;
      By _tombes_, by _bookes_, by memorable _deeds_:
      For she that this desires, doth still remaine.

    Hence lastly, springs care of posterities,
      For things their kind would euerlasting make;
      Hence is it that old men do plant young trees,
      The fruit whereof another age shall take.

    If we these rules vnto our selues apply,
      And view them by reflection of the mind;
      All these true notes of immortalitie
      In our _heart's tables_ we shall written find.

[Footnote 147: Spelled in 1622 edition 'Iiebbet,' but in 1599 and 1608
as above. G.]

[Footnote 148: = active, vigorous: an uncommon use of the word. G.]


REASON VI.

FROM THE VERY DOUBT AND DISPUTATION OF IMMORTALITIE.

    _And though_ some impious wits do questions moue,
      And doubt if _Soules_ immortall be, or no;
      That _doubt_ their immortalitie doth proue,
      Because they seeme immortall things to know.

    For he which reasons on both parts doth bring,
      Doth some things mortall, some immortall call;
      Now, if himselfe were but a mortall thing,
      He could not iudge immortall things at all.

    For when we iudge, our minds we mirrors make:
      And as those glasses which materiall bee,
      Formes of materiall things doe onely take,
      For _thoughts_ or _minds_ in them we cannot see;

    So, when we God and angels do conceiue,
      And thinke of _truth_, which is eternall too;
      Then doe our minds immortall formes receiue,
      Which if they mortall were, they could not doo:

    And as, if beasts conceiu'd what Reason were,
      And that conception should distinctly show,
      They should the name of _reasonable_ beare;
      For without _Reason_, none could _Reason_ know:

    So, when the _Soule_ mounts with so high a wing,
      As of eternall things she _doubts_ can moue;
      Shee proofes of her eternitie doth bring,
      Euen when she striues the contrary to proue.

    For euen the _thought_ of immortalitie,
      Being an act done without the bodie's ayde;
      Shewes, that her selfe alone could moue and bee,
      Although the body in the graue were layde.


THAT THE SOULE CANNOT BE DESTROYED.

    And if her selfe she can so liuely moue,
      And neuer need a forraine helpe to take;
      Then must her motion euerlasting proue,
      "Because her selfe she neuer can forsake.


HER CAUSE CEASETH NOT.

    _But though_ corruption cannot touch the minde,
      By any cause that from it selfe may spring;
      Some outward cause Fate hath perhaps designd,
      Which to the _Soule_ may vtter quenching bring.


SHE HATH NO CONTRARY.

    _Perhaps_ her cause may cease, and she may die;
      God is her _cause_, His _Word_ her Maker was;
      Which shall stand fixt for all eternitie
      When Heauen and Earth shall like a shadow passe.

    _Perhaps_ some thing repugnant to her kind,
      By strong _antipathy_, the _Soule_ may kill;
      But what can be _contrary_ to the minde,
     Which holds all _contraries_ in concord still?

    She lodgeth heat, and cold, and moist, and dry,
      And life, and death, and peace, and war together;
      Ten thousand fighting things in her doe lye,
      Yet neither troubleth, or disturbeth either.


SHEE CANNOT DIE FOR WANT OF FOOD.

    _Perhaps_ for want of food the _soule_ may pine;
      But that were strange, sith all things _bad_ and _good_,
      Sith all God's creature's _mortall_ and _diuine_,
      Sith _God Himselfe_, is her eternall food.

    Bodies are fed with things of mortall kind,
      And so are subiect to mortalitie;
      But _Truth_ which is eternall, feeds the mind;
      The _Tree of life_, which will not let her die.


VIOLENCE CANNOT DESTROY HER.

    _Yet violence_, perhaps the _Soule_ destroyes:
      As lightning, or the _sun-beames_ dim the sight;
      Or as a thunder-clap, or cannons' noyse,
      The power of hearing doth astonish quite.

    But high perfection to the _Soule_ it brings,
      T' encounter things most excellent and high;
      For, when she views the best and greatest things
      They do not hurt, but rather cleare her[149] eye,

    Besides,--as _Homer's gods_ 'gainst armies stand,--
      Her subtill forme can through all dangers slide;
      _Bodies are captiue_, _minds_ endure no band,
      "And Will is free, and can no force abide.


TIME CANNOT DESTROY HER.

    _But lastly_, _Time_ perhaps at last hath power
      To spend her liuely powers, and quench her light;
      But old god _Saturne_ which doth all deuoure,
      Doth cherish her, and still augment her might.

    Heauen waxeth old, and all the _spheres_ aboue
      Shall one day faint, and their swift motion stay;
      And _Time_ it selfe in time shall cease to moue;
      _Onely the Soule suruives_, and liues for aye.

    "Our Bodies, euery footstep that they make,
      "March towards death, vntill at last they die;
      "Whether we worke, or play, or sleepe, or wake,
      "Our life doth passe, and with _Time's_ wings doth flie:

    But to the _Soule_ Time doth perfection giue,
      And ads fresh lustre to her beauty still;
      And makes her in eternall youth to liue,
      Like her which nectar to the gods doth fill.[150]

    The more she liues, the more she feeds on _Truth_;
      The more she feeds, her _strength_ doth more increase:
      And what is _strength_, but an effect of _youth_?
      Which if _Time_ nurse, how can it euer cease?

[Footnote 149: Thomas Davies and Southey, as before, misread 'the.' G.]


OBJECTIONS AGAINST THE IMMORTALITIE OF THE SOULE.

    _But now_ these _Epicures_ begin to smile,
      And say, my doctrine is more false then true;
      And that I fondly doe my selfe beguile,
      While these receiu'd opinions I ensue.

[Footnote 150: Hebe. G.]


OBJECTION I.

    For what, say they, doth not the _Soule_ waxe old?
      How comes it then that aged men doe dote;
      And that their braines grow sottish, dull and cold,
      Which were in youth the onely spirits of note?

    What? are not _Soules_ within themselues corrupted?
      How can there idiots then by nature bee?
      How is it that some wits are interrupted,
      That now they dazeled are, now clearely see?


ANSWERE.

    _These questions_ make a subtill argument,
      To such as thinke both _sense_ and _reason_ one;
      To whom nor agent, from the instrument,
      Nor power of working, from the work is known.

    But they that know that wit can shew no skill,
      But when she things in _Sense's glasse_ doth view;
      Doe know, if accident this glasse doe spill,
      It _nothing sees_, or _sees the false for true_.

    For, if that region of the tender braine,
      Where th' inward sense of Fantasie should sit,
      And the outward senses gatherings should retain,
      By Nature, or by chance, become vnfit;

    Either at first vncapable it is,
      And so few things, or none at all receiues;
      Or mard by accident, which haps amisse
      And so amisse it euery thing perceiues.

    Then, as a cunning prince that vseth _spyes_,
      If they returne no newes doth nothing know;
      But if they make aduertisement of lies,
      The Prince's Counsel all awry doe goe.

    Euen so the _Soule_ to such a body knit,
      Whose inward senses vndisposed be,
      And to receiue the formes of things vnfit;
      Where nothing is brought in, can nothing see.

    This makes the idiot, which hath yet a mind,
      Able to _know_ the truth, and _chuse_ the good;
      If she such figures in the braine did find,
      As might be found, if it in temper stood.

    But if a _phrensie_ doe possesse the braine,
      It so disturbs and blots the formes of things;
      As Fantasie prooues altogether vaine,
      And to the Wit no true relation brings.

    Then doth the Wit, admitting all for true,
      Build fond[151] conclusions on those idle grounds;
      Then doth it flie the good, and ill pursue,
      Beleeuing all that this false _spie_ propounds.

    But purge the humors, and the rage appease,
      Which this distemper in the fansie wrought;
      Then shall the _Wit_, which never had disease,
      Discourse, and iudge discreetly, as it ought.

    So, though the clouds eclipse the _sunne's_ faire light,
      Yet from his face they doe not take one beame;
      So haue our eyes their perfect power of sight,
      Euen when they looke into a troubled streame.

    Then these defects in _Senses'_ organs bee,
      Not in the _soule_ or in her working might;
      She cannot lose her perfect power to see,
      Thogh mists and clouds do choke her window light.

    These imperfections then we must impute,
      Not to the agent but the instrument;
      We must not blame _Apollo_, but his lute,
      If false accords from her false strings be sent.

    The _Soule_ in all hath one intelligence;
      Though too much moisture in an infant's braine,
      And too much drinesse in an old man's sense,
      Cannot the prints of outward things retaine:

    Then doth the _Soule_ want worke, and idle sit,
      And this we _childishnesse_ and _dotage_ call;
      Yet hath she then a quicke and actiue Wit,
      If she had stuffe and tooles to worke withall:

    For, giue her organs fit, and obiects faire;
      Giue but the aged man, the young man's sense;
      Let but _Medea_, _AEson's_ youth repaire,[152]
      And straight she shewes her wonted excellence.

    As a good harper stricken farre in yeares,
      Into whose cunning hand the gowt is fall;[153]
      All his old crotchets in his braine he beares,
      But on his harpe playes ill, or not at all.

    But if _Apollo_ takes his gowt away,
      That hee his nimble fingers may apply;
      _Apollo's_ selfe will enuy at his play,
      And all the world applaud his minstralsie.

    Then _dotage_ is no weaknesse of the mind,
      But of the _Sense_; for if the mind did waste,
      In all old men we should this wasting find,
      When they some certaine terme of yeres had past:

    But most of them, euen to their dying howre,
      Retaine a mind more liuely, quicke, and strong;
      And better vse their vnderstanding power,
      Then when their braines were warm, and lims were yong.

    For, though the body wasted be and weake,
      And though the leaden forme of earth it beares;
      Yet when we heare that halfe-dead body speake,
      We oft are rauisht to the heauenly _spheares_.

[Footnote 151: Foolish. G.]

[Footnote 152: Ovid, _Met._ vii. 163, 250 _et alibi_. G.]

[Footnote 153: _Sic_: and also onward. G.]


OBJECTION II.

    Yet say these men, If all her organs die,
      Then hath the _soule_ no power her powers to vse;
      So, in a sort, her powers extinct doe lie,
      When vnto _act_ shee cannot them reduce.

    And if her powers be dead, then what is shee?
      For sith from euery thing some powers do spring,
      And from those powers, some _acts_ proceeding bee,
      Then kill both _power_ and _act_, and kill the _thing_.


ANSWERE.

    _Doubtlesse_ the bodie's death when once it dies,
      The instruments of sense and life doth kill;
      So that she cannot vse those faculties,
      Although their root rest in her substance still.

    But (as the body liuing) _Wit_ and _Will_
      Can _iudge_ and _chuse_, without the bodie's ayde;
      Though on such obiects they are working still,
      As through the bodie's organs are conuayde:

    So, when the body serues her turne no more,
      And all her _Senses_ are extinct and gone,
      She can discourse of what she learn'd before,
      In heauenly contemplations, all alone.

    So, if one man well on a lute doth play,
      And haue good horsemanship, and Learning's skill;
      Though both his lute and horse we take away,
      Doth he not keep his former learning still?

    He keepes it doubtlesse, and can vse it to[o];
      And doth both th' other _skils_ in power retaine;
      And can of both the proper actions doe,
      If with his lute or horse he meet againe.

    So (though the instruments by which we liue,
      And view the world, the bodie's death doe kill;)[154]
      Yet with the body they shall all reuiue,
      And all their wonted offices fulfill.


OBJECTION III.

    _But how_, till then, shall she herselfe imploy?
      Her spies are dead which brought home newes before;
      What she hath got and keepes, she may enioy,
      But she hath meanes to vnderstand no more.

    Then what do those poore _soules_, which nothing get?
      Or what doe those which get, and cannot keepe?
      Like buckets[155] bottomlesse, which all out-let
      Those _Soules_, for want of exercise, must sleepe.


ANSWERE.

    _See how_ man's _Soule_ against it selfe doth striue:
      Why should we not haue other meanes to know?
      As children while within the wombe they liue,
      Feed by the nauill: here they feed not so.

    These children, if they had some vse of sense,
      And should by chance their mothers' talking heare;
      That in short time they shall come forth from thence,
      Would feare their birth more then our death we feare.

    They would cry out, 'If we this place shall leaue,
      Then shall we breake our tender nauill strings;
      How shall we then our nourishment receiue,
      Sith our sweet food no other conduit brings?'

    And if a man should to these babes reply,
      That into this faire world they shall be brought;
      Where they shall see the Earth, the Sea, the Skie,
      The glorious Sun, and all that God hath wrought:

    That there ten thousand dainties they shall meet,
      Which by their mouthes they shall with pleasure take;
      Which shall be cordiall too, as wel as sweet,
      And of their little limbes, tall bodies make:

    This would[156] they thinke a fable, euen as we
      Doe thinke the _story_ of the _Golden Age_;
      Or as some sensuall spirits amongst vs bee,
      Which hold the _world to come, a fained stage_:

    Yet shall these infants after find all true,
      Though then thereof they nothing could conceiue;
      As soone as they are borne, the world they view,
      And with their mouthes, the nurses'-milke receiue.

    So, when the _Soule_ is borne (for Death is nought
      But the _Soule's_ birth, and so we should it call)
      Ten thousand things she sees beyond her thought,
      And in an vnknowne manner knowes them all.

    Then doth she see by spectacles no more,
      She heares not by report of double spies;
      Her selfe in instants doth all things explore,
      For each thing present, and before her, lies.

[Footnote 154: The parenthetic marks are as _supra_: but perhaps they
ought to begin at 'by' and end with 'world.' G.]

[Footnote 155: Davies and Southey, as before, oddly misprint
'bucklers.' G.]

[Footnote 156: Misprinted 'world,' but corrected in the errata of
1622 edition. Davies and Southey, as before, repeat the misprint, and
accommodate 'they' to it by reading 'they'd:' so rare is it to recur to
an author's own text. G.]


OBJECTION IV.

    _But still_ this crue with questions me pursues:
      If _soules_ deceas'd (say they) still liuing bee;
      Why do they not return, to bring vs newes
      Of that strange world, where they such wonders see?[157]

[Footnote 157:

    'Tell us, ye dead, will none of you in pity,
    To those you left behind, disclose the secret?

    Oh! that some courteous ghost would blab it out;
    What 'tis you are, and we must shortly be.'

    ROBERT BLAIR: 'The Grave.' G.]


ANSWERE.

    _Fond[158] men!_ If we beleeue that men doe liue
      Vnder the _Zenith_ of both frozen _Poles_,
      Though none come thence aduertisement to giue;
      Why beare we not the like faith of our _soules_?

    The _soule_ hath here on Earth no more to doe,
      Then we haue businesse in our mother's wombe;
      What child doth couet to returne thereto?
      Although all children first from thence do come?

    But as _Noah's_ pidgeon, which return'd no more,
      Did shew, she footing found, for all the Flood;
      So when good soules, departed through Death's dore,
      Come not againe, it shewes their dwelling good.

    And doubtlesse, such a _soule_ as vp doth mount,
      And doth appeare before her Maker's Face;
      Holds this vile world in such a base account,
      As she looks down, and scorns this wretched place.

    But such as are detruded downe to Hell,
      Either for shame, they still themselues retire;
      Or tyed in chaines, they in close prison dwell,
      And cannot come, although they much desire.

[Footnote 158: Foolish. G.]


OBJECTION V.

    _Well, well_, say these vaine spirits, though vaine it is
      To thinke our _Soules_ to Heauen or Hell to[159] goe,
      _Politike_ men haue thought it not amisse,
      To spread this _lye_, to make men vertuous so.


ANSWERE.

    _Doe you_ then thinke this _morall vertue_ good?
      I thinke you doe, euen for your priuate gaine;
      For Common-wealths by _vertue_ euer stood,
      And common good the priuate doth containe.

    If then this _vertue_ you doe loue so well,
      Haue you no meanes, her practise to maintaine;
      But you this lye must to the people tell,
      That good _Soules_ liue in ioy, and ill in paine?

    Must _vertue_ be preserued by a _lye_?
      _Vertue_ and _Truth_ do euer best agree;
      By this it seemes to be a veritie,
      Sith the effects so good and vertuous bee.

    For, as the deuill father is of lies,
      So vice and mischiefe doe his lyes ensue;
      Then this good doctrine did not he deuise,
      But made this _lye_, which saith it is not true.

[Footnote 159: In 1599 and 1608 editions, 'do.' G.]


THE GENERALL CONSENT OF ALL.

    _For how_ can that be false, which euery tongue
      Of euery mortall man affirmes for true?
      Which truth hath in all ages been so strong,
      As lodestone-like, all hearts it euer drew.

    For, not the _Christian_, or the _Iew_ alone,
      The _Persian_, or the _Turke_, acknowledge this;
      This mysterie to the wild _Indian_ knowne,
      And to the _Canniball_ and _Tartar_ is.

    This rich _Assyrian_ drugge growes euery where;
      As common in the _North_, as in the _East_;
      This doctrine does not enter by the _eare_,
      But of it selfe is natiue in the breast.

    None that acknowledge God, or prouidence,
      Their _Soule's_ eternitie did euer doubt;
      For all _Religion_ takes her root from hence,
      Which no poore naked nation liues without.

    For sith the World for Man created was,
      (For onely Man the vse thereof doth know)
      If man doe perish like a withered grasse,
      How doth God's Wisedom order things below?

    And if that Wisedom still wise ends propound,
      Why made He man, of other creatures King?
      When (if he perish here) there is not found
      In all the world so poor and vile a thing?

    If death do quench vs quite, we haue great wrong,
      Sith for our seruice all things else were wrought;
      That _dawes_, and _trees_, and _rocks_, should last so long,
      When we must in an instant passe to nought.

    But blest be that _Great Power_, that hath vs blest
      With longer life then Heauen or Earth can haue;
      Which hath infus'd into our mortall breast
      Immortall powers, not subiect to the graue.

    For though the Soule doe seeme her graue to beare,
      And in this world is almost buried quick;
      We haue no cause the bodie's death to feare,
      For when the shell is broke, out comes a chick.


THREE KINDS OF LIFE ANSWERABLE TO THE THREE POWERS OF THE
SOULE.

    _For_ as the _soule's essentiall_ powers are three,
      The _quickning power_, the _power of sense_ and _reason_;
      Three kinds of life to her designed bee,
      Which perfect these three[160] powers in their due season.

    The first life, in the mother's wombe is spent,
      Where she her _nursing power_ doth onely vse;
      Where, when she finds defect of nourishment,
      Sh' expels her body, and this world she viewes.

    This we call _Birth_; but if the child could speake,
      He _Death_ would call it; and of Nature plaine,[161]
      That she would thrust him out naked and weake,
      And in his passage pinch him with such paine.

    Yet, out he comes, and in this world is plac't,
      Where all his _Senses_ in perfection bee;
      Where he finds flowers to smell, and fruits to taste;
      And sounds to heare, and sundry formes to see.

    When he hath past some time vpon this stage,
      His _Reason_ then a litle seemes to wake;
      Which, thogh she spring, when sense doth fade with age,
      Yet can she here no perfect practise make.

    Then doth th' aspiring _Soule_ the body leaue,
      Which we call _Death_; but were it knowne to all,
      What _life_ our _soules_ do by this _death_ receiue,
      Men would it _birth_ or _gaole[162] deliuery_ call.

    In this third life, Reason will be so bright,
      As that her sparke will like the _sun-beames_ shine;
      And shall of God enioy the reall sight.
      Being still increast by influence diuine.

[Footnote 160: Numeral '3,' as before, in 1622 edition. G.]

[Footnote 161: _Id est_ 'complain.' G.]


AN ACCLAMATION.

    O Ignorant poor man! what dost thou beare
      Lockt vp within the casket of thy brest?
      What iewels, and what riches hast thou there!
      What heauenly treasure in so weake a chest!

    Looke in thy _soule_, and thou shalt _beauties_ find,
      Like those which drownd _Narcissus_ in the flood:[163]
      _Honour_ and _Pleasure_ both are in thy mind,
      And all that in the world is counted _Good_.

    Thinke of her worth, and think that God did meane,
      This worthy mind should worthy things imbrace;
      Blot not her beauties with thy thoughts vnclean,
      Nor her dishonour with thy passions base;

    Kill not her _quickning power_ with surfettings,
      Mar not her _Sense_ with sensualitie;
      Cast not her serious[164] wit on idle things:
      Make not her free-_will_, slaue to vanitie.

    And when thou think'st of her _eternitie_,
      Thinke not that _Death_ against her nature is,
      Thinke it a _birth_; and when thou goest to die,
      Sing like a swan, as if thou went'st to blisse.[165]

    And if thou, like a child, didst feare before,
      Being in the darke, where thou didst nothing see;
      Now I haue broght thee _torch-light_, feare no more;
      Now when thou diest, thou canst not hud-winkt be.

    And thou my _Soule_, which turn'st thy curious eye,
      To view the beames of thine owne forme diuine;
      Know, that thou canst know nothing perfectly,
      While thou art clouded with this flesh of mine.

    Take heed of _ouer-weening_, and compare
      Thy peacock's feet with thy gay peacock's traine;[166]
      Study the best, and highest things that are,
      But of thy selfe an humble thought retaine.

    Cast downe thy selfe, and onely striue to raise
      The glory of thy Maker's sacred Name;
      Vse all thy powers, that Blessed Power to praise,
      Which giues thee power to _bee_, and _vse the same_.

[Footnote 162: 'Goale' in 1608 edition. G.]

[Footnote 163: See Ovid, _Met._ III., 341 _et alibi_, and
Eustathius (ad Hom. p. 266). G.]

[Footnote 164: 'Serious' dropped by Davies and Southey, as before. G.]

[Footnote 165: Cf. Sir Thomas Browne: 'Vulgar Errors,' _s.v._ G.]

[Footnote 166: More usually applied to the swan: as ancient
WORSHIP puts it 'The whitest swanne hath a blacke foot:'
'Christian's Mourning Garment.' G.]

 $Finis.$




$Appendix.$

REMARKS PREFIXED TO NAHUM TATE'S EDITION (1697) OF 'NOSCE TEIPSUM.'[167]


There is a natural love and fondness in Englishmen for whatever was
done in the reign of Queen Elizabeth. We look upon her time as our
golden age; and the great men who lived in it, as our chiefest heroes
of virtue, and greatest examples of wisdom, courage, integrity and
learning.

[Footnote 167: The Original, Nature, and Immortality of the Soul. A
Poem. With an Introduction concerning Humane Knowledge. Written by Sir
John Davies, Attorney-General to Q. Elizabeth. With a Prefatory Account
concerning the Author and Poem. London, Printed by W. Rogers at the
Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet street. 1697'--TATE
informs us that the 'Remarks' were 'written by an ingenious and learned
Divine'--It will be noticed that they finish somewhat abruptly: and
while there is 'account' of the Poem, none of the Author.'--Dr.
BLISS, in his edition of Anthony-a-Wood's ATHENAE,
describes above as containing only the second portion: but he is
mistaken: the Poem is given completely.]

Among many others, the author of this poem merits a lasting honour;
for, as he was a most eloquent lawyer, so, in the composition of this
piece, we admire him for a good poet and exact philosopher. 'Tis not
rhyming that makes a poet, but the true and impartial representing
of virtue and vice, so as to instruct mankind in matters of greatest
importance. And this observation has been made of our countrymen, That
Sir John Suckling wrote in the most courtly and gentleman-like style;
Waller in the most sweet and flowing numbers; Denham with the most
accurate judgment and correctness; Cowley with pleasing softness and
plenty of imagination: none ever uttered more divine thought than Mr.
Herbert; none more philosophical than Sir John Davies. His thoughts are
moulded into easy and significant words; his rhymes never mislead the
sense, but are led and governed by it: so that in reading such useful
performances, the wit of mankind may be refined from its dross, their
memories furnished with the best notions, their judgments strengthened,
and their conceptions enlarged: by which means the mind will be raised
to the most perfect ideas it is capable of in this degenerate state.

But as others have laboured to carry out our thoughts, and to
entertain them with all manner of delights abroad; 'tis the peculiar
character of this author, that he has taught us (with Antoninus) to
meditate upon ourselves; that he has disclosed to us greater secrets
at home; self-reflection being the only way to valuable and true
knowledge, which consists in that rare science of a man's self, which
the moral philosopher loses in a crowd of definitions, divisions and
distinctions: the historian cannot find it among all his musty records,
being far better acquainted with the transactions of a thousand years
past, than with the present age, or with himself: the writer of fables
and romances wanders from it, in following the delusions of a wild
fancy, chimeras and fictions that do not only exceed the works, but
also the possibility of Nature. Whereas the resemblance of truth is
the utmost limits of poetical liberty, which our author has very
religiously observed; for he has not only placed and connected together
the most amiable images of all those powers that are in our souls, but
he has furnished and squared his matter like a true philosopher; that
is, he has made both body and soul, colour and shadow of his poem, out
of the storehouse of his own mind, which gives the whole work a real
and natural beauty; when that which is borrowed out of books, (the
boxes of counterfeit complexion) shews well or ill, as it has more or
less likeness to the natural. But our author is beholding to none but
himself; and by knowing himself thoroughly, he has arrived to know
much; which appears in his admirable variety of well-chosen metaphors
and similitudes that cannot be found within the compass of a narrow
knowledge. For this reason the poem, on account of its intrinsic worth,
would be as lasting as the Iliad or the AEneid, if the language 'tis
wrote in were as immutable as that of the Greeks and Romans.

Now it would be of great benefit to the beaus of our age to carry this
glass in their pocket, whereby they might learn to think rather than
dress well. It would be of use also to the wits and virtuosoes to carry
this antidote against the poison they have sucked in from Lucretius
or Hobbes. This would acquaint them with some principles of religion;
for in old times the poets were the divines, and exercised a kind of
spiritual authority amongst the people. Verse in those days was the
sacred style, the style of Oracles and Lawes. The vows and thanks of
the people were recommended to their gods in songs and hymns. Why may
they not retain this priviledge? for if prose should contend with
verse, it would be upon unequal terms, and (as it were) on foot against
the wings of Pegasus. With what delight are we touched in hearing the
stories of Hercules, Achilles, Cyrus, and AEneas? Because in their
characters we have wisdom, honour, fortitude and justice, set before
our eyes. It was Plato's opinion, that if a man could see virtue, he
would be strangely enamoured on her person. Which is the reason why
Horace and Virgil have continued so long in reputation, because they
have drawn her in all the charms of poetry. No man is so senseless
of rational impressions, as not to be wonderfully affected with the
pastorals of the ancients, when under the stories of wolves and sheep,
they describe the misery of people under hard masters, and their
happiness under good. So the bitter and wholesome Iambick was wont to
make villainy blush; the Satire invited men to laugh at folly; the
Comedian chastised the common errors of life; and the Tragedian made
kings afraid to be tyrants, and tyrants to be their own tormentors.

Wherefore, as Sir Philip Sidney said of Chaucer, that he knew not which
he should most wonder at, either that he in his dark time should see
so distinctly, or that we in this clear age should go so stumblingly
after him; so may we marvel at and bewail the low condition of poetry
now, when in our Plays scarce any one rule of decorum is observed, but
in the space of two hours and a half we pass through all the fits of
Bedlam; in one scene we are all in mirth, in the next we are all in
sadness; whilst even the most laboured parts are starved for want of
thought; a confused heap of words, and empty sound of rhyme.

This very consideration should advance the esteem of the following
poem, wherein are represented the various movements of the mind; at
which we are as much transported as with the most excellent scenes of
passion in Shakespear, or Fletcher: for in this, as in a mirror (that
will not flatter) we see how the soul arbitrates in the understanding
upon the various reports of sense, and all the changes of imagination:
how compliant the will is to her dictates, and obeys her as a queen
does her king: at the same time acknowledging a subjection, and yet
retaining a majesty: how the passions move at her command, like a
well-disciplined army; from which regular composure of the faculties,
all operating in their proper time and place, there arises a
complacency upon the whole soul, that infinitely transcends all other
pleasures.

What deep philosophy is this! to discover the process of God's art
in fashioning the soul of man after His own image; by remarking how
one part moves another, and how those motions are varied by several
positions of each part, from the first springs and plummets, to the
very hand that points out the visible and last effects. What eloquence
and force of wit to convey these profound speculations in the easiest
language, expressed in words so vulgarly received, that they are
understood by the meanest capacities.

For the poet takes care in every line to satisfy the understandings of
mankind: he follows step by step the workings of the mind, from the
first strokes of sense, then of fancy, afterwards of judgment, into
the principles both of natural and supernatural motives: hereby the
soul is made intelligible, which comprehends all things besides; the
boundless tracks of sea and land, and the vaster spaces of heaven; that
vital principle of action, which has always been busied in enquiries
abroad, is now made known to itself; insomuch that we may find out what
we ourselves are, from whence we came, and whither we must go; we may
perceive what noble guests those are, which we lodge in our bosoms,
which are nearer to us than all other things, and yet nothing further
from our acquaintance.

But here all the labyrinths and windings of the human frame are laid
open: 'tis seen by what pullies and wheels the work is carried on, as
plainly as if a window were opened in the breast: for it is the work
of God alone to create a mind. The next to this is to shew how its
operations are performed.




II. HYMNES OF ASTRAEA.




NOTE.


The following is the original title-page of 'Astr[oe]a':

  HYMNES OF
  ASTR[OE]A, IN
  Acrosticke verse

  London
  Printed for J. S.
  1599

  [4^{o} pp. 27: register A. B. C. D. of 4 leaves each.]

Throughout, the Poet spells 'Astr[oe]a': probably Asteria ([Greek:
'Asteria]) were more accurate. Our text for these 'Hymnes' is, as in
Nosce Teipsum, the edition of 1622: but throughout, compared with the
first, as _supra_. Title-page in 1622 edition is as follows:

  HYMNES
  of
  ASTREA

  _In Acrosticke Verse._

  London
  Printed by A. M. for _Richard Hawkins_.
  1622. [8vo.]

With reference to Elizabeth who is so glorified in these 'Hymnes' as
'Astraea,' cf. the 'Conference between a Gentleman-Usher and a Post' in
our Memorial-Introduction. I have since found that another copy of
this interesting MS. is preserved among the Harleian MSS.: No. cclxxxvi
fol. 248. I would here call attention to the correspondence between the
metaphor of the Senses serving the Intellect in 'Nosce Teipsum' and in
the 'Conference' as flatteringly descriptive of the position held by
her 'ministers' to the Queen. In Davison's 'Rhapsody' _the_ name for
Elizabeth is Astraea. G.




_Hymnes to Astr[oe]a._

HYMNE I.

OF ASTR[OE]A.[168]


    $E$ arly before the day doth spring,
    $L$ et us awake my Muse, and sing;
    $I$ t is no time to slumber,
    $S$ o many ioyes this time doth bring,
    $A$ s Time will faile to number.

    $B$ ut whereto shall we bend our layes?
    $E$ uen vp to Heauen, againe to raise[169]
    $T$ he Mayd, which thence descended;
    $H$ ath brought againe the golden dayes,
    $A$ nd all the world amended.

    $R$ udenesse it selfe she doth refine,
    $E$ uen like an Alchymist diuine;
    $G$ rosse times of yron turning
    $I$ nto the purest forme of gold;
    $N$ ot to corrupt, till heauen waxe old,
    $A$ nd be refined with burning.

[Footnote 168: Here spelled 'Astrea.' G.]

[Footnote 169: = to praise or exalt. G.]


HYMNE II.

TO ASTRAEA.

    $E$ ternall Virgin, _Goddesse_ true,
    $L$ et me presume to sing to you.
    $I$ oue, euen great _Ioue_ hath leasure
    $S$ ometimes to heare the vulgar crue,
    $A$ nd heares them oft with pleasure.

    $B$ lessed _Astraea_, I in part
    $E$ nioy the blessings you impart;
    $T$ he Peace, the milke and hony,
    $H$ umanitie, and civil _Art_,
    $A$ richer dower then money.

    $R$ ight glad am I that now I liue,
    $E$ uen in these dayes whereto you giue
    $G$ reat happinesse and glory;
    $I$ f after you I should be borne,
    $N$ o doubt I should my birth-day scorne,
    $A$ dmiring your sweet storie.


HYMNE III.

TO THE SPRING.

    $E$ arth now is greene, and heauen is blew,
    $L$ iuely Spring which makes all new,
    $I$ olly Spring, doth enter;
    $S$ weete yong sun-beames doe subdue
    $A$ ngry, aged Winter.

    $B$ lasts are milde, and seas are calme,
    $E$ uery meadow flowes with balme,
    $T$ he Earth weares all her riches;
    $H$ armonious birdes sing such a psalme,
    $A$ s eare and heart bewitches.

    $R$ eserue (sweet Spring) this Nymph of ours,
    $E$ ternall garlands of thy flowers,
    $G$ reene garlands neuer wasting;
    $I$ n her shall last our _State's_ faire Spring,
    $N$ ow and for euer flourishing,
    $A$ s long as Heauen is lasting.


HYMNE IV.

TO THE MONETH OF MAY.

    $E$ ach day of thine, sweet moneth of May,
    $L$ oue makes a solemne holy-day.
    $I$ will performe like duty,
    $S$ ith thou resemblest euery way
    $A$ straea, Queen of beauty,

    $B$ oth you fresh beauties do pertake,
    $E$ ither's aspect doth Summer make,
    $T$ houghts of young Loue awaking;
    $H$ earts you both doe cause to ake,
    $A$ nd yet be pleas'd with akeing.

    $R$ ight deare art thou, and so is shee,
    $E$ uen like attractiue sympathy,
    $G$ aines vnto both like dearenesse;
    $I$ weene this made Antiquitie
    $N$ ame thee, sweet _May of Maiestie_,
    $A$ s being both like in _clearnesse_.


HYMNE V.

TO THE LARKE.

    $E$ arley, cheerfull, mounting Larke,
    $L$ ight's gentle vsher, Morning's clark,
    $I$ n merry notes delighting;
    $S$ tint awhile thy song, and harke,
    $A$ nd learne my new inditing.

    $B$ eare vp this hymne, to heau'n it beare,
    $E$ uen vp to heau'n, and sing it there,
    $T$ o heau'n each morning beare it;
    $H$ aue it set to some sweet sphere,
    $A$ nd let the Angels heare it.

    $R$ enownd Astraea, that great name,
    $E$ xceeding great in worth and fame,
    $G$ reat worth hath so renownd it;
    $I$ t is Astraea's name I praise,
    $N$ ow then, sweet Larke, do thou it raise,
    $A$ nd in high Heauen resound it.


HYMNE VI.

TO THE NIGHTINGALE.

    $E$ uery night from euen till morne,
    $L$ oue's Quirister amidde the thorne
    $I$ s now so sweet a singer;
    $S$ o sweet, as for her song I scorne
    $A$ pollo's voice, and finger.

    $B$ ut Nightingale, sith you delight
    $E$ uer to watch the starry night;
    $T$ ell all the starres of heauen,
    $H$ eauen neuer had a starre so bright,
    $A$ s now to Earth is giuen.

    $R$ oyall Astraea makes our day
    $E$ ternall with her beames, nor may
    $G$ rosse darknesse ouercome her;
    $I$ now perceiue why some doe write,
    $N$ o countrey hath so short a night,
    $A$ s England hath in Summer.


HYMNE VII.

TO THE ROSE.

    $E$ ye of the Garden, Queene of flowres,
    $L$ ove's cup wherein he nectar powres,
    $I$ ngendered first of nectar;
    $S$ weet nurse-child of the Spring's young howres,
    $A$ nd Beautie's faire character.

    $B$ est iewell that the Earth doth weare,
    $E$ uen when the braue young sunne draws neare,
    $T$ o her hot Loue pretending;[170]
    $H$ imselfe likewise like forme doth beare,
    $A$ t rising and descending.

    $R$ ose of the Queene of Loue belou'd;
    $E$ ngland's great Kings diuinely mou'd,
    $G$ ave Roses in their banner;
    $I$ t shewed that Beautie's Rose indeed,
    $N$ ow in this age should them succeed,
    $A$ nd raigne in more sweet manner.

[Footnote 170: = reaching forward. G.]


HYMNE VIII.

TO ALL THE PRINCES OF EUROPE.

    $E$ urope, the earth's sweet Paradise,
    $L$ et all thy kings that would be wise,
    $I$ n _politique deuotion_;
    $S$ ayle hither to obserue her eyes,
    $A$ nd marke her heaunly motion.

    $B$ raue Princes of this ciuill age,
    $E$ nter into this pilgrimage;
    $T$ his saint's tongue is an oracle,
    $H$ er eye hath made a Prince a page,
    $A$ nd works each day a miracle.

    $R$ aise but your lookes to her, and see
    $E$ uen the true beames of maiestie,
    $G$ reat Princes, marke her duly;
    $I$ f all the world you doe suruey,
    $N$ o forehead spreades so bright a ray,
    $A$ nd notes a Prince so truly.


HYMNE IX.

TO FLORA.

    $E$ mpresse of flowers, tell where away
    $L$ ies your sweet Court this merry[171] May,
    $I$ n _Greenewich_ Garden allies?[172]
    $S$ ince there the heauenly powers do play
    $A$ nd haunt no other vallies.

    $B$ _eautie_, _vertue_, _maiestie_,
    $E$ loquent Muses, three times three,
    $T$ he new fresh _Houres_ and Graces,
    $H$ aue pleasure in this place to be,
    $A$ boue all other places.

    $R$ oses and lillies did them draw,
    $E$ re they diuine _Astraea_ saw;
    $G$ ay flowers they sought for pleasure:
    $I$ nstead of gathering crownes of flowers,
    $N$ ow gather they Astraea's dowers,
    $A$ nd beare to heauen that treasure,

[Footnote 171: Thomas Davies, as before, drops 'merry.']

[Footnote 172: = alleys. G.]


HYMNE X.

TO THE MONETH OF SEPTEMBER.

    $E$ ach moneth hath praise in some degree;
    $L$ et May to others seeme to be
    $I$ n sense the sweetest Season;
    $S$ eptember thou art best to me,
    $A$ nd best dost please my reason.

    $B$ ut neither for thy corne nor wine
    $E$ xtoll I those mild dayes of thine,
    $T$ hough corne and wine might praise thee;
    $H$ eauen giues thee honour more diuine,
    $A$ nd higher fortunes raise thee.

    $R$ enown'd art thou (sweet moneth) for this,
    $E$ mong thy dayes her birth-day is;[173]
    $G$ race, plenty, peace and honour
    $I$ n one faire hour with her were borne;
    $N$ ow since they still her crowne adorne,
    $A$ nd still attend vpon her.

[Footnote 173: Queen Elizabeth was born on 7th September, 1533. G.]


HYMNE XI.

TO THE SUNNE.

    $E$ ye of the world, fountaine of light,
    $L$ ife of Day, and death of Night;
    $I$ humbly seek thy kindnesse:
    $S$ weet, dazle not my feeble sight,
    $A$ nd strike me not with blindnesse.

    $B$ ehold me mildly from that face,
    $E$ uen where thou now dost run thy race,
    $T$ he spheare where now thou turnest;
    $H$ auing like _Phaeton_ chang'd thy place,
    $A$ nd yet hearts onely burnest.

    $R$ ed in her right cheeke thou dost rise,
    $E$ xalted after in her eyes,
    $G$ reat glory there thou shewest;
    $I$ n th' other cheeke when thou descendest,
    $N$ ew rednesse vnto it thou lendest,
    $A$ nd so thy round thou goest.


HYMNE XII.

TO HER PICTURE.

    $E$ xtreame was his audacitie,
    $L$ ittle his skill, that finisht thee;
    $I$ am asham'd and sorry,
    $S$ o dull her counterfeit should bee,
    $A$ nd she so full of glory.

    $B$ ut here are colours red and white,
    $E$ ach line, and each proportion right;
    $T$ hese lines, this red and whitenesse,
    $H$ aue wanting yet a life and light,
    $A$ maiestie, and brightnesse.

    $R$ ude counterfeit, I then did erre,
    $E$ uen now when I would needs inferre
    $G$ reat boldnesse in thy maker;
    $I$ did mistake, he was not bold,
    $N$ or durst his eyes her eyes behold:
    $A$ nd this made him mistake her.


HYMNE XIII.

OF HER MINDE.

    $E$ arth, now adiew, my rauisht thought
    $L$ ifted to Heau'n sets thee at nought;
    $I$ nfinite is my longing,
    $S$ ecrets of angels to be taught,
    $A$ nd things to Heau'n belonging.

    $B$ rought downe from heau'n of angels kind,
    $E$ uen now doe I admire her _mind_;
    $T$ his is my contemplation,
    $H$ er cleare sweet spirit, which is refin'd
    $A$ boue humane _creation_.

    $R$ ich sun-beame of th' AEternall light,
    $E$ xcellent _Soule_, how shall I wright?[174]
    $G$ ood angels make me able;
    $I$ cannot see but by your eye,
    $N$ or, but by your tongue, signifie
    $A$ thing so admirable.

[Footnote 174: = write. G.]


HYMNE XIIII.

OF THE SUN-BEAMES OF HER MIND.

    $E$ xceeding glorious is the starre,
    $L$ et vs behold her beames afarre
    $I$ n a side line reflected;
    $S$ ight bears them not, when neere they are,
    $A$ nd in right lines directed.

    $B$ ehold her in her vertues' beames,
    $E$ xtending sun-like to all realmes;
    $T$ he sunne none viewes too neerly:
    $H$ er well of goodnes in these streames,
    $A$ ppeares right well and clearely.

    $R$ adiant vertues, if your light
    $E$ nfeeble the best iudgement's sight,
    $G$ reat splendor aboue measure
    $I$ s in the _mind_ from whence you flow;
    $N$ o wit may haue accesse to know,
    $A$ nd view so bright a treasure.


HYMNE XV.

OF HER WIT.

    $E$ ye of that mind most quicke and cleere,--
    $L$ ike Heauen's eye, which from his spheare
    $I$ nto all things prieth;
    $S$ ees through all things euery where,
    $A$ nd all their natures trieth.

    $B$ right image of an angel's wit,
    $E$ xceeding sharpe and swift like it,
    $T$ hings instantly discerning;
    $H$ auing a nature infinit,
    $A$ nd yet increas'd by learning.

    $R$ ebound vpon thy selfe thy light,
    $E$ nioy thine own sweet precious sight
    $G$ iue us but some reflection;
    $I$ t is enough for vs if we
    $N$ ow in her speech, now policie,
    $A$ dmire thine high perfection.


HYMNE XVI.

OF HER WILL.

    $E$ uer well affected _will_,
    $L$ ouing _goodnesse_, loathing _ill_,
    $I$ nestimable treasure!
    $S$ ince such a power hath power to spill,[175]
    $A$ nd save vs at her pleasure.

    $B$ e thou our law, sweet _will_, and say
    $E$ uen what thou wilt, we will obay
    $T$ his law, if I could reade it;
    $H$ erein would I spend night and day,
    $A$ nd study still to plead it.

    $R$ oyall _free-will_, and onely _free_,
    $E$ ach other _will_ is slaue to thee;
    $G$ lad is each will to serue thee:
    $I$ n thee such princely power is seene,
    $N$ o spirit but takes thee for her Queene,
    $A$ nd thinkes she must obserue thee.

[Footnote 175: = spoil. G.]


HYMNE XVII.

OF HER MEMORIE.

    $E$ xcellent iewels would you see,
    $L$ ouely ladies? come with me,
    $I$ will (for loue I owe you).
    $S$ hew you as rich a treasurie,
    $A$ s East or West can shew you.

    $B$ ehold, if you can iudge of it,
    $E$ uen that great store-house of her wit:
    $T$ hat beautiful large Table,
    $H$ er Memory; wherein is writ
    $A$ ll knowledge admirable.

    $R$ eade this faire book, and you shall learne
    $E$ xquisite skill; if you discerne,
    $G$ aine heau'n by this discerning;
    $I$ n such a memory diuine,
    $N$ ature did forme the _Muses_ nine,
    $A$ nd _Pallas_ Queene of Learning.


HYMNE XVIII.

OF HER PHANTASIE.

    $E$ xquisite curiositie,
    $L$ ooke on thy selfe with iudging eye,
    $I$ f ought be faultie, leaue it;
    $S$ o delicate a phantasie
    $A$ s this, will straight perceiue it.

    $B$ ecause her temper is so fine,
    $E$ ndewed with harmonies diuine;
    $T$ herefore if discord strike it,
    $H$ er true proportions doe repine,
    $A$ nd sadly do[176] mislike it.

    $R$ ight otherwise a pleasure sweet
    $E$ uer she takes in actions meet,
    $G$ racing with smiles such meetnesse;
    $I$ n her faire forehead, beames appeare,
    $N$ o Summer's day is halfe so cleare,
    $A$ dorn'd with halfe that sweetnesse.

[Footnote 176: Misprinted 'to.' G.]


HYMNE XIX.

OF THE ORGANS OF HER MINDE.

    $E$ clipsed she is, and her bright rayes.
    $L$ ie under vailes, yet many wayes
    $I$ s her faire forme reuealed;
    $S$ he diuersly her selfe conueyes,
    $A$ nd cannot be concealed.

    $B$ y instruments her powers appeare
    $E$ xceedingly well tun'd and cleare:
    $T$ his lute is still in measure,
    $H$ olds still in tune, euen like a spheare,
    $A$ nd yeelds the world sweet pleasure.

    $R$ esolue me, Muse, how this thing is,
    $E$ uer a body like to this
    $G$ aue Heau'n to earthly creature?
    $I$ am but fond[177] this doubt to make
    $N$ o doubt the angels bodies take,
    $A$ bove our common nature.

[Footnote 177: = Foolish. G.]


HYMNE XX.

OF THE PASSIONS OF HER HEART.

    $E$ xamine not _th' inscrutable heart_,
    $L$ ight _Muse_ of her, though she in part
    $I$ mpart it to the subiect;
    $S$ earch not, although from Heau'n thou art,
    $A$ nd this an heauenly obiect.

    $B$ ut since she hath a heart, we know,
    $E$ uer some passions thence doe flow,
    $T$ hough euer rul'd with Honor;
    $H$ er judgment raignes, they waite below,
    $A$ nd fixe their eyes vpon her.

    $R$ ectified so, they in their kind
    $E$ ncrease each vertue of her mind,
    $G$ ouern'd with mild tranquilitie;
    $I$ n all the regions vnder heau'n,
    $N$ o State doth beare it selfe so euen,
    $A$ nd with so sweet facilitie.


HYMNE XXI.

OF THE INNUMERABLE VERTUES OF HER MINDE.

    $E$ re thou proceed in this sweet paines,
    $L$ earne _Muse_ how many drops it raines
    $I$ n cold and moist _December_;
    $S$ um up _May_ flowres, and _August_ graines,
    $A$ nd grapes of mild _September_.

    $B$ eare the Sea's sand in memory,
    $E$ arth's grasses, and the starres in skie;
    $T$ he little moates which mounted,
    $H$ ang, in the beames of _Ph[oe]bus'_ eye,
    $A$ nd neuer can be counted.

    $R$ ecount these numbers numberlesse,[178]
    $E$ re thou her vertue canst expresse,
    $G$ reat wits this count will, cumber.
    $I$ nstruct thy selfe in numbring Schooles;
    $N$ ow courtiers vse to begge for fooles,
    $A$ ll such as cannot number.

[Footnote 178: Cf. Paradise Regained, iii. 310. G.]


HYMNE XXII.

OF HER WISDOME.

    $E$ [a]gle-eyed Wisdome, life's loadstarre,
    $L$ ooking neere on things afarre;
    $I$ oue's best beloued daughter,
    $S$ howes to her spirit all[179] that are,
    $A$ s Ioue himselfe hath taught her.

    $B$ y this straight rule she rectifies
    $E$ ach thought that in [her] heart doth rise:
    $T$ his is her cleane true mirror,
    $H$ er _looking-glasse_, wherein she spies
    $A$ [ll] forms of Truth and Error.

    $R$ ight princely vertue fit to raigne,
    $E$ nthroniz'd in her spirit remaine,
    $G$ uiding our fortunes euer;
    $I$ f we this starre once cease to see,
    $N$ o doubt our State will shipwrackt bee,
    $A$ nd torne and sunke for euer.

[Footnote 179: In first edition 'things.' G.]


HYMNE XXIII.

OF HER JUSTICE.

    $E$ xil'd _Astraea_ is come againe,
    $L$ o here she doth all things maintaine
    $I$ n _number_, _weight_, and _measure_:
    $S$ he rules vs with delightfull paine,
    $A$ nd we obey with pleasure.

    $B$ y _Loue_ she rules more then by _Law_,
    $E$ uen her great mercy breedeth awe;
    $T$ his is her sword and scepter:
    $H$ erewith she hearts did euer draw,
    $A$ nd this guard euer kept her.

    $R$ eward doth sit in her right-hand,
    $E$ ach vertue thence taks her garland
    $G$ ather'd in Honor's garden;
    $I$ n her left hand (wherein should be
    $N$ ought but the sword) sits Clemency
    $A$ nd conquers Vice with pardon.


HYMNE XXIV.

OF HER MAGNANIMITIE.

    $E$ uen as her State, so is her mind,
    $L$ ifted aboue the vulgar kind;
    $I$ t treades proud Fortune vnder:
    $S$ un-like it sits aboue the wind,
    $A$ boue the stormes, and thunder.

    $B$ raue spirit, large heart, admiring _nought_,
    $E$ steeming each thing as it ought,
    $T$ hat swelleth not, nor shrinketh;
    $H$ onour is alwayes in her thought,
    $A$ nd of great things she thinketh.

    $R$ ocks, pillars, and heauen's axeltree,
    $E$ xemplifie her constancy;
    $G$ reat changes neuer change her:
    $I$ n her sexe, feares are wont to rise,
    $N$ _ature_ permits, _Vertue_ denies,
    $A$ nd scornes the face of _Danger_.


HYMNE XXV.

OF HER MODERATION.

    $E$ mpresse of kingdomes though she be,
    $L$ arger is her soueraigntie
    $I$ f she her selfe doe gouerne;
    $S$ ubiect vnto her self is she,
    $A$ nd of her selfe true soueraigne.

    $B$ eautie's crowne though she do weare,
    $E$ xalted into Fortune's chaire,
    $T$ hron'd like the Queene of Pleasure;
    $H$ er vertues still possesse her eare,
    $A$ nd counsell her to measure.

    $R$ eason, if shee incarnate were,
    $E$ uen Reason's selfe could neuer beare
    $G$ reatnesse with moderation;
    $I$ n her one temper still is seene,
    $N$ o libertee claimes she as Queene,
    $A$ nd showes no alteration.


HYMNE XXVI.

TO ENUY.

    $E$ nuy, goe weepe; my Muse and I
    $L$ augh thee to scorne: thy feeble eye
    $I$ s dazeled with the glory
    $S$ hining in this gay poesie,
    $A$ nd little golden story.

    $B$ ehold how my proud quill doth shed
    $E$ ternall _nectar_ on her head;
    $T$ he pompe of coronation
    $H$ ath not such power her fame to spread,
    $A$ s this my admiration.

    $R$ espect my pen as free and franke
    $E$ xpecting not reward nor thanke,
    $G$ reat wonder onely moues it;
    $I$ never made it mercenary,
    $N$ or should my Muse this burthen carrie
    $A$ s hyr'd, but that she loues it.

  $Finis.$




III. ORCHESTRA.




NOTE.


In the Registers of the Stationer's Company, under date 25th June,
1594, a Mr. Harrison entered for copy-right of 'Orchestra' (Notes
and Queries 3 S. II., p. 461: Dec. 13, '62): but it was not
published till 1596. The following is the original title-page:

  ORCHESTRA

  OR

  A POEME ON DAUN-
  CING

  Iudicially prooving the
  true observation of time and
  measure, in the Authenticall
  and laudable use of Daun-
  cing.

  Ouid. Art. Aman. lib I.
  Si vox est, canta: si mollia
  brachia, salta
  Et quacunque potes dote
  placere, place.

  AT LONDON:

  Printed by J. Robarts
  for N. Ling.

  1596.

  [18mo: pp 46: register A B C of 8 leaves each.]

In the Bodleian copy there is this inscription at top of title-page "Ex
dono Wilti. Burdett, amici sui primo die Decembr. 1596 36. E. R."

Instead of the after-dedication 'To the Prince' there was the 'Sonnet'
to Martin which we have placed before it. The title-page from the
edition of 1622 may be added here:--

  ORCHESTRA.

  OR

  A Poeme expressing the An-
  _tiquitie and Excellencie_
  OF DAVNCING.

  In a Dialogue betweene _Penelope_
  and one of her Wooers.

  _Not Finished._

  LONDON.

  Printed by A. M. for Richard Hawkins.

  1622. [8vo.]

With reference to 'Not finished' placed on the later title-page (1622),
it is explained by the stanzas restored from the first edition. These
shew that the Poet had intended to pursue his subject further; even the
hitherto omitted stanzas reading more like a fresh 'invocation' than a
'conclusion.'

Our text, as with 'Nosce Teipsum,' is from the edition of 1622: but
compared throughout with above very rare, if not unique, first edition
from the Bodleian. At close, by recurrence to the original edition
we are able to supply the blanks of all the subsequent editions and
reprints. See our Memorial-Introduction, for explanation of the
omission: and for Sir John Harington's 'Epigram' on 'Orchestra.' G.




[$Dedications.$]


I. TO HIS VERY FRIEND, MA. RICH. MARTIN.[180]

    To whom shall I this dauncing Poem send,
    This suddaine, rash, half-capreol[181] of my wit?
    To you, first mouer and sole cause of it,
    Mine-owne-selues better halfe, my deerest frend.
    O, would you yet my Muse some Honny lend
    From your mellifluous tongue, whereon doth sit
    Suada in Maiestie, that I may fit
    These harsh beginnings with a sweeter end.
    You know the modest Sunne full fifteene times
    Blushing did rise, and blushing did descend,
    While I in making of these ill made rimes,
    My golden howers unthriftily did spend:
      Yet, if in friendship you these numbers prayse,
      I will mispend another fifteene dayes.

[Footnote 180: See Memorial-Introduction concerning Martin. G.]

[Footnote 181: Cf. st. 68. l. 6. G.]


II. TO THE PRINCE.[182]

    Sir, whatsoeuer YOV are pleas'd to doo
      It is your special praise, that you are bent,
      And sadly[183] set your princely mind thereto:
      Which makes YOV in each thing so excellent.

    Hence is it that YOV came so soon to bee
      A man-at-armes in euery point aright;
      The fairest flowre of noble chiualrie;
      And of Saint _George_ his band, the brauest knight.

    And hence it is, that all your youthfull traine
      In actiueness and grace, YOV doe excell;
      When YOV doe courtly dauncings entertaine
      Then Dauncing's praise may be presented well

    To YOV, whose action adds more praise thereto,
      Then all the _Muses_ with their penns can doo.

[Footnote 182: Query--Henry, son of James I.? He died in 1612. Or
Prince Charles, afterwards Charles I.? Most probably the former. G.]

[Footnote 183: = seriously. Cf. Milton: P. L. vi. 541 and Comus, 509.
So in Shakespeare frequently. G.]




_Orchestra_,

OR

A POEME OF DAUNCING.


1.

    Where liues the man that neuer yet did heare
    Of chaste _Penelope_, _Ulisses'_ Queene?
    Who kept her faith vnspotted twentie yeare,
    Till he return'd that farre away had beene,
    _And many men, and many townes had seen_:
      Ten yeare at siege of Troy he lingring lay,
      And ten yeare in the Mid-land-Sea did stray.


2.

    _Homer_, to whom the Muses did carouse
    A great deepe cup with heauenly nectar filld:
    The greatest, deepest cup in _Ioue's_ great house,
    (For _Ioue_ himselfe had so expresly willd)
    He dranke off all, ne let one drop be spilld;
      Since when, his braine that had before been drie,
      Became the well-spring of all Poetrie.


3.

    _Homer_ doth tell in his aboundant verse,
    The long laborious trauailes of the _Man_;
    And of his lady too he doth reherse,
    How shee illudes with all the art she can,
    Th' vngratefull loue which other lords began;
      For of her lord, false Fame long since had sworn,
      That _Neptune's_ monsters had his carkase torne.


4.

    All this he tells, but one thing he forgot,
    One thing most worthy his eternall song;
    But he was old, and blind, and saw it not,
    Or else he thought he should _Ulisses_ wrong,
    To mingle it his tragike acts among;
      Yet was there not in all the world of things,
      A sweeter burden for his Muse's wings.


5.

    The courtly loue _Antinous_ did make:
    _Antinous_ that fresh and iolly knight,
    Which of the gallants that did vndertake
    To win the widdow, had most wealth and might,
    Wit to perswade, and beautie to delight:
      The courtly loue he made vnto the Queene,
      _Homer_ forgot, as if it had not beene.


6.

    Sing then _Terpischore_, my light Muse sing
    His gentle art, and _cunning curtesie_;
    You lady can remember euery thing,
    For you are daughter of Queene Memorie;
    But sing a plaine and easy melodie:
      For the soft meane that warbleth but the ground,
      To my rude eare doth yeeld the sweetest sound.


7.

    One onely night's discourse I can report,
    When the great Torch-bearer of Heauen was gone
    Downe in a maske vnto the Ocean's Court,
    To reuell it with Thetis[184] all alone;
    Antinous disguised and vnknowne,
      Like to the Spring in gaudie ornament,
      Vnto the Castle of the Princesse went.


8.

    The soueraine Castle of the rockie Ile,
    Wherein _Penelope_ the Princesse lay;
    Shone with a thousand lamps, which did exile
    The shadowes darke,[185] and turn'd the night to day;
    Not _Ioue's_ blew tent, what time the sunny ray
      Behind the Bulwarke of the Earth retires,
      Is seene to sparkle with more twinckling fires.

[Footnote 184: Misprinted 'Tethis.' G.]

[Footnote 185: In 1st edition 'dim darke shades.' G.]


9.

    That night the Queen came forth from far within,
    And in the presence of her Court was seene;
    For the sweet singer _Ph[oe]mius_[186] did begin
    To praise the worthies that at _Troy_ had beene;
    Somewhat of her _Ulisses_ she did weene.
      In his graue hymne the heau'nly man would sing,
      Or of his warres, or of his wandering.


10.

    _Pallas_ that houre with her sweet breath diuine
    Inspir'd immortall beautie in her eyes;
    That with caelestiall glory shee did shine,
    Brighter[187] then _Venus_ when shee doth arise
    Out of the waters to adorne the skies;
      The Wooers all amazed doe admire
      And checke their owne presumptuous desire.

[Footnote 186: Phemius, a great singer at the court of Ulysses: Odys.
i. 154, 337: the latter contains the allusion _supra_, where Penelope
stands at the door of the hall and listens to the song. G.]

[Footnote 187: Misprinted 'brigher.' G.]


11.

    Onely _Antinous_ when at first he view'd
    Her starbright eyes, that with new honour shind;
    Was not dismayd, but there-with-all renew'd
    The noblesse and the splendour of his mind;
    And as he did fit circumstances find,
      Vnto the throne he boldly gan aduance,
      And with faire maners wooed the Queene to dance.


12.

    'Goddesse of women, sith your heau'nlinesse
    'Hath now vouchsaft it selfe to represent
    'To our dim eyes, which though they see the lesse
    'Yet are they blest in their astonishment;
    'Imitate heau'n, whose beauties excellent
      'Are in continuall motion day and night,
      'And moue thereby more wonder and delight.


13.

    'Let me the moouer be, to turne about
    'Those glorious ornaments, that Youth and Loue
    'Haue fixed in you, euery part throughout;
    'Which if you will in timely measure moue,
    'Not all those precious iemms in heau'n aboue,
      'Shall yeeld a sight more pleasing to behold,
      'With all their turnes and tracings manifold.'


14.

    With this the modest Princesse blusht and smil'd,
    Like to a cleare and rosie euentide,
    And softly did returne this answer mild:
    'Faire Sir, you needs must fairely be denide
    'Where your demaund cannot be satisfide;
      'My feet, which onely Nature taught to goe,
      'Did neuer yet the art of footing know.


15.

    'But why perswade you me to this new rage?
    '(For all disorder and misrule is new)
    'For such misgouernment in former age,
    'Our old diuine Forefathers neuer knew;
    'Who if they liu'd, and did the follies view,
      'Which their fond nephews make their chiefe affaires,
      'Would hate themselues that had begot such heires.'


16.

    'Sole heire of Vertue and of Beautie both,
    'Whence cometh it (_Antinous_ replies)
    'That your imper[i]ous vertue is so loth
    'To graunt your beauty her chiefe exercise?
    'Or from what spring doth your opinion rise
      'That dauncing[188] is a frenzy and a rage,
      'First knowne and vs'd in this new-fangled age?

[Footnote 188: Misprinted in 1612 edition 'danching.' G.]


17.

    '_Dauncing_[189] (bright Lady) then began to bee,
    'When the first seeds whereof the World did spring,
    'The fire, ayre, earth, and water--did agree,
    'By Loue's perswasion,--Nature's mighty King,--
    'To leaue their first disordred combating;
      'And in a daunce such measure to obserue,
      'As all the world their motion should preserue.

[Footnote 189: Margin-Note here 'The antiquitie of dancing.' G.]


18.

    'Since when, they still are carried in a round,
    'And changing, come one in another's place;
    'Yet doe they neither mingle nor confound,
    'But euery one doth keepe the bounded space
    'Wherein the Daunce doth bid it turne or trace;
      'This wondrous myracle did Loue deuise,
      'For Dauncing is Love's proper exercise.


19.

    'Like this, he fram'd the gods' eternall Bower,
    'And of a shapelesse and confused masse,
    'By his through-piercing and digesting power,
    'The turning vault of heauen formed was;
    'Whose starry wheeles he hath so made to passe,
      'As that their moouings do a musicke frame,
      'And they themselues still daunce vnto the same.


20.

    'Or if this All which round about we see,
    '(As idle _Morpheus_ some sicke braines hath taught)
    'Of vndeuided _motes_ compacted bee:
    'How was this goodly Architecture wrought?
    'Or by what meanes were they together brought?
      'They erre that say they did concurre by chance:
      'Loue made them meet in a well-ordered daunce.


21.

    'As when _Amphion_ with his charming lire
    'Begot so sweet a syren of the ayre;
    'That with her Rethorike made the stones conspire
    'The ruines of a citie to repaire:
    '(A worke of wit and reason's wise affaire)
      'So Loue's smooth tongue, the _motes_ such measure taught
      'That they ioyn'd hands; and so the world was wrought.


22.

    'How iustly then is Dauncing tearmed new,
    'Which with the World in point of time begun?
    'Yea Time it selfe, (whose birth _Ioue_ neuer knew,
    'And which indeed is elder then the sun)[190]
    'Had not one moment of his age outrunne,
      'When out leapt Dauncing from the heap of things,
      'And lightly rode vpon his nimble wings.


23.

    'Reason hath both their pictures in her treasure,
    'Where _Time the measure of all mouing is_,
    'And Dauncing is a moouing all in measure;
    'Now if you doe resemble that to this,
    'And thinke both one, I thinke you thinke amis:
      'But if you iudge them twins, together got,
      'And Time first borne, your iudgement erreth not.


24.

    'Thus doth it equall age with age inioy,
    'And yet in lustie youth for euer flowers;
    'Like loue his sire, whom Paynters make a boy,
    'Yet is the eldest of the heau'nly powers;
    'Or like his brother Time, whose winged howers
      'Going and comming will not let him dye,
      'But still preserve him in his infancie.'

[Footnote 190: In first edition reads: 'And which is far more ancient
then the sun.' G.]


25.

    This said; the Queene with her sweet lips diuine,
    Gently began to moue the subtile ayre,
    Which gladly yeelding, did itselfe incline
    To take a shape betweene those rubies fayre;
    And being formed, softly did repayre
      With twenty doublings in the emptie way,
      Vnto _Antinous_ eares, and thus did say:


26.

    'What eye doth see the heau'n, but doth admire
    'When it the moouings of the heau'ns doth see?
    'My selfe, if I to heau'n may once aspire,
    'If that be dauncing, will a Dauncer be;
    'But as for this your frantick iollitie
      'How it began, or whence you did it learne,
      'I neuer could with Reason's eye discerne.


27.

    Antinous answered: 'Iewell of the Earth,
    'Worthy you are that heau'nly daunce to leade;
    'But for you thinke our dauncing base of birth,
    'And newly-borne but of a braine-sicke head,
    'I will foorthwith his antique gentry read;
      'And for I loue him, will his herault[191] be,
      'And blaze his Armes, and draw his petigree.[192]


28.

    'When Loue had shapt this World,--_this great faire wight_,
    'That all wights else in this wide womb containes;
    'And had instructed it to daunce aright,[193]
    'A thousand measures with a thousand straines,
    'Which it should practise with delightfull paines,[194]
      'Vntill that fatall instant should reuolue,
      'When all to nothing should againe resolue:


29.

    'The comely order and proportion faire
    'On euery side, did please his wandring eye:
    'Till glauncing through the thin transparent ayre,
    'A rude disordered rout he did espie
    'Of men and women, that most spightfully
      'Did one another throng, and crowd so sore,
      'That his kind eye in pitty wept therefore.

[Footnote 191: Herald. G.]

[Footnote 192: Pedigree. G.]

[Footnote 193: Margin-Note here 'The original of dancing.' G.]

[Footnote 194: 'Painstaking.' G.]


30.

    'And swifter then the lightning downe he came,
    'Another shapelesse Chaos to digest;
    'He will begin another world to frame,
    '(For Loue till all be well will neuer rest)
    'Then with such words as cannot be exprest,
      'He cutts the troups, that all asunder fling,
      'And ere they wist, he casts them in a ring.


31.

    'Then did he rarifie the element,
    'And in the center of the ring appeare;
    'The beams that from his forehead spreading[195] went,
    'Begot an horrour, and religious feare
    'In all the soules that round about him weare;
      'Which in their eares attentiueness procures,
      'While he, with such like sounds, their minds allures.


32.

    'How doth Confusion's mother, headlong Chance,[196]
    'Put Reason's noble squadron to the rout?
    'Or how should you that haue the gouernance
    'Of Nature's children, Heauen and Earth throughout,
    'Prescribe them rules, and liue your selues without?
      'Why should your fellowship a trouble be,
      'Since man's chiefe pleasure is societie?

[Footnote 195: In 1st edition 'shining.' G.]

[Footnote 196: Margin-Note here 'The speech of Love, perswading men to
learn Dancing.' G.]


33.

    'If sence hath not yet taught you, learne of me
    'A comely moderation and discreet;
    'That your assemblies may well ordered bee
    'When my vniting power shall make you meet,
    'With heau'nly tunes it shall be tempered sweet:
      'And be the modell of the World's great frame,
      'And you Earth's children, _Dauncing_ shall it name.


34.

    'Behold the _World_, how it is _whirled round_,
    'And for it is so _whirl'd_, is named so;
    'In whose large volume many rules are found
    'Of this new Art, which it doth fairely show;
    'For your quicke eyes in wandring too and fro
      'From East to West, on no one thing can glaunce,
      'But if you marke it well, it seemes to daunce.


35.

    'First[197] you see fixt in this huge mirrour blew,
    'Of trembling lights, a number numberlesse:[198]
    '_Fixt they are_ nam'd, but with a name vntrue,
    'For they all mooue[199] and in a Daunce expresse
    'That _great long yeare_, that doth containe no lesse
      'Then threescore hundreds of those yeares in all,
      'Which the sunne makes with his course naturall.

[Footnote 197: Margin-Note here 'By the orderly motion of the fixed
stars.' G.]

[Footnote 198: Cf. 'Paradise Regained' iii. 310, as in Astr[oe]a, Hymne
xxi. G.]


36.

    'What if to you these sparks disordered seeme
    'As if by chaunce they had beene scattered there?
    'The gods a solemne measure doe it deeme,
    'And see a iust proportion euery where,
    'And know the points whence first their mouings were;
      'To which first points when all returne againe,
      'The axel-tree of Heau'n shall breake in twaine.


37.

    'Vnder that spangled skye, fiue wandring flames[200]
    'Besides the King of Day, and Queene of Night,
    'Are wheel'd around, all in their sundry frames,
    'And all in sundry measures doe delight,
    'Yet altogether keepe no measure right;
      'For by it selfe each doth it selfe aduance,
      'And by it selfe each doth a galliard[201] daunce.

[Footnote 199: In 1st edition 'are mov'd.' G.]

[Footnote 200: Margin-Note here 'Of the planets.' G.]


38.

    '_Venus_, the mother of that bastard Loue,
    'Which doth vsurpe the World's great Marshal's name,
    'Iust with the sunne her dainty feete doth moue,
    'And vnto him doth all the iestures frame;
    'Now after, now afore, the flattering Dame,
      'With diuers cunning passages doth erre,
      'Still him respecting that respects not her.


39.

    'For that braue Sunne the Father of the Day,
    'Doth loue this Earth, the Mother of the Night;
    'And like a reuellour in rich aray,
    'Doth daunce his galliard in his lemman's sight,
    'Both back, and forth, and sidewaies, passing light;
      'His princely[202] grace doth so the gods amaze,
      'That all stand still and at his beauty gaze.

[Footnote 201: A French 'dance': the name meaning gay or brisk, and
so a quick liuely dance, introduced into England about 1541. Thomas
Wright's 'Dictionary' _s.v._ G.]

[Footnote 202: In 1st edition 'gallant.' G.]


40.

    'But see the Earth, when he approcheth neere,
    'How she for ioy doth spring and sweetly smile;
    'But see againe her sad and heauy cheere
    'When changing places he retires a while;
    'But those blake[203] cloudes he shortly will exile,
      'And make them all before his presence flye,
      'As mists consum'd before his cheerefull eye.

[Footnote 203: Black. G.]


41.

    'Who doth not see the measures of the Moone,
    'Which thirteene times she daunceth euery yeare?
    'And ends her pauine[204] thirteene times as soone
    'As doth her brother, of whose golden haire[205]
    'She borroweth part, and proudly doth it weare;
      'Then doth she coyly turne her face aside,
      'Then halfe her cheeke is scarse sometimes discride.

[Footnote 204: Spanish _pavana_: a solemn Spanish dance. G.]

[Footnote 205: Spelled in first edition, 'heire.' G.]


42.

    'Next her, the pure, subtile, and clensing Fire[206]
    'Is swiftly carried in a circle euen;
    'Though Vulcan be pronounst by many a lyer,
    'The only halting god that dwels in heauen:
    'But that foule name may be more fitly giuen
      'To your false Fire, that farre from heauen is fall:[207]
      'And doth consume, waste, spoile, disorder all.

[Footnote 206: Margin-Note here 'Of the Fire.' G.]

[Footnote 207: Cf. 'Nosce Teipsum' page 103, _ante_: st. fourth, line
second. G.]


43.

    'And now behold your tender nurse the _Ayre_[208]
    'And common neighbour that ay runns around;
    'How many pictures and impressions faire
    'Within her empty regions are there found;
    'Which to your sences Dauncing doe propound.
      'For what are _Breath_, _Speech_, _Ecchos_, _Musicke_, _Winds_,
      'But Dauncings of the Ayre in sundry kinds?

[Footnote 208: Margin-Note here, 'Of the Ayre.' G.]


44.

    'For when you breath, the _ayre_ in order moues,
    'Now in, now out, in time and measure trew;
    'And when you speake, so well she dauncing loues,
    'That doubling oft, and oft redoubling new,
    'With thousand formes she doth her selfe endew
      'For all the words that from our lips repaire
      'Are nought but tricks and turnings of the ayre.


45.

    'Hence is her pratling daughter _Eccho_ borne,
    'That daunces to all voyces she can heare;
    'There is no sound so harsh that shee doth scorne,
    'Nor any time wherein shee will forbeare
    'The ayrie pauement with her feet to weare;
      'And yet her hearing sence is nothing quick,
      'For after time she endeth euery trick.


46.

    'And thou sweet _Musicke_, Dauncing's onely life,
    'The eare's sole happinesse, the ayre's best speach;
    'Loadstone of fellowship, charming-rod of strife,
    'The soft mind's Paradice, the sicke mind's leach;
    'With thine own tong, thou[209] trees and stons canst teach,
      'That when the Aire doth dance her finest measure,
      'Then art thou borne, the gods and mens sweet pleasure.

[Footnote 209: In first edition 'y^{e}' = the, and so elsewhere. G.]


47.

    'Lastly, where keepe the _Winds_ their reuelry,
    'Their violent turnings, and wild whirling hayes,[210]
    'But in the Ayre's tralucent[211] gallery?
    'Where shee herselfe is turnd a hundreth wayes,
    'While with those Maskers wantonly she playes;
      'Yet in this misrule, they such rule embrace,
      'As two at once encomber not the place.

[Footnote 210: A round country dance. G.]

[Footnote 211: Translucent. Cf. Milton, Samson Agonistes 548, and
Comus, 861. G.]


48.

    'If then fire,[212] ayre, wandring and fixed lights
    'In euery prouince of the imperiall skie,
    'Yeeld perfect formes of dauncing to your sights,
    'In vaine I teach the eare, that which the eye
    'With certaine view already doth descrie.
      'But for your eyes perceiue not all they see,
      'In this I will your Senses master bee.

[Footnote 212: In first edition spelled 'fier.' G.]


49.

    'For loe the _Sea_[213] that fleets about the Land,
    'And like a girdle clips her solide waist,
    'Musicke and measure both doth vnderstand;
    'For his great chrystall eye is alwayes cast
    'Vp to the Moone, and on her fixed fast;
      'And as she daunceth in her pallid spheere,
      'So daunceth he about his Center heere.

[Footnote 213: Margin-Note here 'Of the sea.' G.]


50.

    'Sometimes his proud greene waues in order set,
    'One after other flow vnto the shore;
    'Which, when they haue with many kisses wet,
    'They ebbe away in order as before;
    'And to make knowne his courtly loue the more,
      'He oft doth lay aside his three-forkt mace,
      'And with his armes the timorous Earth embrace.


51.

    'Onely the Earth doth stand for euer still:
    'Her rocks remoue not, nor her mountaines meet:
    '(Although some wits enricht with Learning's skill
    'Say heau'n stands firme, and that the Earth doth fleet,
    'And swiftly turneth vnderneath their feet)
      'Yet though the Earth is euer stedfast seene,
      'On her broad breast hath Dauncing euer beene.


52.

    'For those blew vaines that through her body spred,
    'Those saphire streames which from great hils do spring.[214]
    '(The Earth's great duggs; for euery wight is fed
    'With sweet fresh moisture from them issuing):
    'Obserue a daunce in their wilde wandering;
      'And still their daunce begets a murmur sweet,
      'And still the murmur with the daunce doth meet.

[Footnote 214: Margin-Note here 'Of the riuers.' G.]


53.

    'Of all their wayes I love _Maeander's_ path,
    'Which to the tunes of dying swans doth daunce;[215]
    'Such winding sleights, such turns and tricks he hath,
    'Such creeks, such wrenches, and such daliaunce;
    'That whether it be hap or heedlesse chaunce,
      'In this indented course and wriggling play
      'He seemes to daunce a perfect cunning _hay_.[216]

[Footnote 215: Ovid (Heroides VII. 1, 2)

    'Sic ubi fata vocant, udis abjectus in herbis,
      Ad vada Maeandri concinit albus olor.'

Cf. Sir Thomas Browne 'Enquiries into Vulgar and Common Errors' Book
III.c.xxvii: Works by Wilkin, Vol. II. pp. 517, 518
(edition Pickering 1835.) G.]

[Footnote 216: A round country dance, as before.]


54.

    'But wherefore doe these streames for euer runne?
    'To keepe themselues for euer sweet and cleere:
    'For let their euerlasting course be donne,
    'They straight corrupt and foule with mud appeare.
    'O yee sweet Nymphs that beautie's losse do feare,
      'Contemne the drugs that Physicke doth deuise,
      'And learne of Loue this dainty exercise.


55.

    'See how those flowres that have sweet beauty too,
    '(The onely iewels that the Earth doth weare,[217]
    'When the young Sunne in brauery her doth woo):
    'As oft as they the whistling wind doe heare,
    'Doe waue their tender bodies here and there;
      'And though their daunce no perfect measure is,
      'Yet oftentimes their musicke makes them kis.

[Footnote 217: Margin-Note here 'Of other things upon the earth.' G.]


56.

    'What makes the vine about the elme to daunce,
    'With turnings, windings, and embracements round?
    'What makes the loadstone to the North aduance
    'His subtile point, as if from thence he found
    'His chiefe attractiue vertue to redound?
      'Kind Nature first doth cause all things to loue,
      'Loue makes them daunce and in iust order moue.


57.

    'Harke how the birds doe sing, and marke then how
    'Iumpe[218] with the modulation of their layes,
    'They lightly leape, and skip from bow to bow:
    'Yet doe the cranes deserue a greater prayse
    'Which keepe such measure in their ayrie wayes,
      'As when they all in order ranked are,
      'They make a perfect forme triangular.

[Footnote 218: 'Exact': this illustrates Hamlet i., I, and Othello ii.,
3. G.]


58.

    'In the chiefe angle flyes the watchfull guid,
    'And all the followers their heads doe lay
    'On their foregoers backs, on eyther side;
    'But for the captaine hath no rest to stay,
    'His head forewearied with the windy way,
      'He back retires, and then the next behind,
      'As his lieuetenaunt leads them through the wind.


59.

    'But why relate I euery singular?
    'Since all the World's great fortunes and affaires
    'Forward and backward rapt and whirled are,
    'According to the musicke of the spheares:
    'And Chaunge[219] herselfe her nimble feete vpbeares
      'On a round slippery wheele that rowleth ay,
      'And turnes all States with her imperuous[220] sway.

[Footnote 219: In first edition a probable misprint is, 'Chaunce.' G.]

[Footnote 220: In first edition 'impetuous.' G.]


60.

    'Learne then to daunce, you that are Princes borne,
    'And lawfull lords of earthly creatures all;
    'Imitate them, and thereof take no scorne,
    'For this new art to them is naturall--
    'And imitate the starres caelestiall:
      'For when pale Death your vital twist shall seuer,
      'Your better parts must daunce, with them for euer.


61.

    'Thus Loue perswades, and all the crowd[221] of men
    'That stands around, doth make a murmuring;
    'As when the wind loosd from his hollow den,
    'Among the trees a gentle base[222] doth sing,
    'Or as a brooke through peebles wandering;
      'But in their looks they vttered this plain speach,
      'That they would learn to daunce, if Loue would teach.[223]

[Footnote 221: In first and 1622 editions there is a probable misprint
of 'crowne' here. G.]

[Footnote 222: Bass. G.]

[Footnote 223: Margin-Note here: 'How Loue taught men to dance.' G.]


62.

    'Then first of all he doth demonstrate plaine
    'The motions seauen that ar in Nature found,
    '_Upward_ and _downeward_, _forth_ and _backe againe_,
    '_To this side_ and _to that_, and _turning round_;[224]
    'Whereof a thousand brawles he doth compound,
      'Which he doth teach vnto the multitude,
      'And euer with a turne they must conclude.

[Footnote 224: Margin-Note here 'Rounds or Country Dances.' G.]


63.

    'As when a Nimph[225] arysing from the land,
    'Leadeth a daunce with her long watery traine
    'Down to the Sea; she wries to euery hand,
    'And euery way doth crosse the fertile plaine;
    'But when at last shee falls into the maine,
      'Then all her trauerses concluded are,
      'And with the Sea her course is circulare.

[Footnote 225: This interprets 'Nosce Teipsum,' Reason II, st. 1, page
86 _ante_.]


64.

    'Thus when at first Loue had them marshalled,
    'As earst he did the shapeless masse of things,
    'He taught them _rounds_ and _winding heyes_ to tread,
    'And about trees to cast themselues in rings:
    'As the two Beares, whom the First Mouer flings
      'With a short turn about heauen's axeltree,
      'In a round daunce for ever wheeling bee.


65.

    'But after these, as men more ciuell grew,
    'He did more graue and solemn measures frame,[226]
    'With such faire order and proportion true,[227]
    'And correspondence euery way the same,
    'That no fault-finding eye did euer blame;
      'For euery eye was moued at the sight
      'With sober wondring, and with sweet delight.

[Footnote 226: Margin-Note here 'Measures.' G.]

[Footnote 227: In 1st edition spelled 'trew,' G.]


66.

    'Not those yong[228] students of the heauenly booke,
    '_Atlas_ the great, _Promethius_ the wise,
    'Which on the starres did all their life-time looke,
    'Could euer finde such measures in the skies,
    'So full of change and rare varieties;
      'Yet all the feete whereon these measures goe,
      'Are only spondeis, solemne, graue and sloe.

[Footnote 228: In 1st edition 'old': 'young' in 1622 must be a
misprint, unless used in the grand meaning of SIR THOMAS
BROWNE. In 1622 it is mis-spelled 'youg.' G.]


67.

    'But for more diuers and more pleasing show,
    'A swift and wandring daunce she did inuent,
    'With passages vncertaine to and fro,
    'Yet with a certaine answer and consent
    'To the quicke musicke of the instrument.[229]
      'Fiue was the number of the Musick's feet,
      'Which still the daunce did with fiue paces meet.

[Footnote 229: Margin-Note here 'Galliards.' G.]


68.

    'A gallant daunce, that lively doth bewray
    'A spirit and a vertue masculine;
    'Impatient that her house on earth should stay
    'Since she her selfe is fiery and diuine;
    'Oft doth she make her body vpward fline[230],
      'With lofty turnes and capriols[231] in the ayre,
      'Which with the lusty tunes accordeth faire.

[Footnote 230: In 1st edition spelled 'flyne': A.S. 'to fly.' G.]

[Footnote 231: A 'capriole' is a 'lady's head-dress' (Wright): but here
seems to mean 'springings and turnings': degenerated into 'capers' at
this later day. G.]


69.

    'What shall I name those currant trauases,[232]
    'That on a triple _dactile_ foot doe runne
    'Close by the ground with sliding passages,
    'Wherein that Dauncer greatest praise hath wonne
    'Which with best order can all orders shunne;
      'For euery where he wantonly must range,
      'And turne, and wind, with vnexpected change.

[Footnote 232: Margin-Note here, 'Courantoes.' G.]


70.

    'Yet is there one, the most delightfull kind,
    'A loftie iumping, or a leaping round;[233]
    'Where arme in arme two dauncers are entwind
    'And whirle themselues with strict embracements bound,
    'And still their feet an _anapest_ do sound;
      'An _anapest_ is all their musick's song,
      'Whose first two feet are short, and third is long.

[Footnote 233: Margin-Note here, 'Lavoltaes.' G.]


71.

    'As the victorious _twinnes_ of _Laeda_ and _Ioue_
    'That taught the Spartans dauncing on the sands
    'Of swift _Eurotas_, daunce in heaun aboue,
    'Knit and vnited with eternall hands;
    'Among the starres their double image stands,
      'Where both are carried with an equall pace,
      'Together iumping in their turning race.


72.

    'This is the net wherein the Sunn's bright eye
    '_Venus_ and _Mars_ entangled did behold;
    'For in this daunce, their armes they so imply[234]
    'As each doth seeme the other to enfold;
    'What if lewd wits another tale haue told
      'Of iealous _Vulcan_, and of yron chaynes?
      'Yet this true sence that forged lye containes.

[Footnote 234: There is a misprint of 'employ' in Thomas Davies'
edition, as before. G.]


73.

    'These various formes of dauncing, Loue did frame
    'And beside these, a hundred millions moe;
    'And as he did inuent, he taught the same,
    'With goodly iesture, and with comly show,
    'Now keeping state, now humbly honoring low:
      'And euer for the persons and the place
      'He taught most fit and best according grace.[235]

[Footnote 235: Margin-Note here 'Grace in dauncing.' G.]


74.

    'For Loue, within his fertile working braine
    'Did[236] then conceiue those gracious Virgins three;
    'Whose ciuell moderation does maintaine
    'All decent order and conueniencie,
    'And faire respect, and seemlie modestie;
      'And then he thought it fit they should be borne,
      'That their sweet presence dauncing might adorne.

[Footnote 236: In the errata of 1622 edition 'doo' is substituted for
'did,' itself a misprint, perhaps, for 'does.' G.]


75.

    'Hence is it that these _Graces_ painted are
    'With hand in hand dauncing an endlesse round;
    'And with regarding eyes, that still beware
    'That there be no disgrace amongst them found;
    'With equall foote they beate the flowry ground,
      'Laughing, or singing, as their passions will:
      'Yet nothing that they doe becomes them ill.


76.

    'Thus Loue taught men, and men thus learnd of Loue
    'Sweet Musick's sound with feet to counterfaite;
    'Which was long time before high thundering _Ioue_
    'Was lifted vp to Heauen's imperiall seat;
    'For though by birth he were the Prince of _Creete_,
      'Nor _Creet_, nor Heau'n should the yong Prince haue seen,
      'If dancers with their timbrels had not been.


77.

    'Since when all ceremonious misteries,
    'All sacred orgies and religious rights,[237]
    'All pomps, and triumphs, and solemnities,
    'All funerals, nuptials, and like publike sights,
    'All Parliaments of peace, and warlike fights,
      'All learned arts, and euery great affaire
      'A liuely shape of dauncing seemes to beare.[238]

[Footnote 237: 'Rites.' G.]

[Footnote 238: Margin-Note here, 'The use and formes of dauncing in
sundry affaires of man's life.' G.]


78.

    'For what did he who with his ten-tong'd lute
    'Gaue beasts and blocks an vnderstanding eare?
    'Or rather into bestiall minds and brute
    'Shed and infus'd the beames of reason cleare?
    'Doubtlesse for men that rude and sauage were
      'A ciuill forme of dauncing he deuis'd,
      'Wherewith vnto their gods they sacrifiz'd.


79.

    'So did _Musaeus_, so _Amphion_ did,
    'And _Linus_ with his sweet enchanting song;
    'And he whose hand the Earth of monsters rid,
    'And had men's eares fast chayned to his tongue
    'And _Theseus_ to his wood-borne slaues among,
      'Vs'd dauncing as the finest policie
      'To plant religion and societie.


80.

    'And therefore now the Thracian _Orpheus_ lire
    'And _Hercules_ him selfe are stellified;[239]
    'And in high heau'n amidst the starry quire,
    'Dauncing their parts continually doe slide;
    'So on the Zodiake _Ganimed_ doth ride,
      'And so is _Hebe_ with the Muses nine
      'For pleasing _Ioue_ with dauncing, made diuine.

[Footnote 239: Made stellae=stars or constellations. G.]


81.

    'Wherefore was _Proteus_ sayd himselfe to change
    'Into a streame, a lyon, and a tree;
    'And many other formes fantastique, strange,
    'As in his fickle thought he wisht to be?
    'But that he daunc'd with such facilitie,
      'As like a lyon he could pace with pride,
      'Ply like a plant, and like a riuer slide.


82.

    'And how was _Caeneus_[240] made at first a man,
    'And then a woman, then a man againe,
    'But in a daunce? which when he first began
    'Hee the man's part in measure did sustaine:
    'But when he chang'd into a second straine,
      'He daunc'd the woman's part another space,
      'And then return'd into his former place.

[Footnote 240: Virgil, AEneid VI., 448, calls him Caenis:

    .... 'et juvenis quondam, nunc femina, Caenis,
    Rursus et in veterem fato revoluta figuram.'

He is mentioned again in Homer, Iliad I. 264. G.]


83.

    'Hence sprang the fable of _Tiresias_,
    'That he the pleasure of both sexes tryde;
    'For in a daunce he man and woman was
    'By often chaunge of place from side to side;
    'But for the woman easily did slide
      'And smoothly swim with cunning hidden art,
      'He tooke more pleasure in a woman's part.


84.

    'So to a fish _Venus_ herselfe did change,[241]
    'And swimming through the soft and yeelding waue,
    'With gentle motions did so smoothly range,
    'As none might see where she the water draue;
    'But this plaine truth that falsed fable gaue,
      'That she did daunce with slyding easines,
      'Plyant and quick in wandring passages.

[Footnote 241: _Met._ III., 320, &c., &c. G.]


85.

    'And merry _Bacchus_ practis'd dauncing to[o],
    'And to the Lydian numbers,[242] rounds did make:
    'The like he did in th' Easterne India doo,
    'And taught them all when _Ph[oe]bus_ did awake,
    'And when at night he did his coach[243] forsake:
      'To honor heaun, and heau'ns great roling eye
      'With turning daunces, and with melodie.

[Footnote 242: Cf. L'Allegro 'Lap me in soft Lydian airs.' (l 136.) G.]

[Footnote 243: Qu: couch? G.]


86.

    'Thus they who first did found a Common-weale,
    'And they who first Religion did ordaine,
    'By dauncing, first the peoples hearts did steale:
    'Of whom we now a thousand tales doe faine;
    'Yet doe we now their perfect rules retaine
      'And vse them stil in such deuises new,
      'As in the World, long since their withering, grew.


87.

    'For after townes and kingdomes founded were,
    'Betweene greate States arose well-ordered War;
    'Wherein most perfect measure doth appeare,
    'Whether their well-set rankes respected are
    'In quadrant forme or semicircular:
      'Or else the march, when all the troups aduance,
      'And to the drum, in gallant order daunce.


88.

    'And after Warrs, when white-wing'd Victory
    'Is with a glorious tryumph beautified,
    'And euery one doth _Io Io_ cry,
    'Whiles all in gold the conquerour doth ride;
    'The solemne pompe that fils the Citty wide
      'Obserues such ranke and measure euerywhere,
      'As if they altogether dauncing were.


89.

    'The like iust order mourners doe obserue,
    '(But with vnlike affection and atire)
    'When some great man that nobly did deserue,
    'And whom his friends impatiently desire,
    'Is brought with honour to his latest fire:[244]
      'The dead corps too in that sad daunce is mou'd
      'As if both dead and liuing, dauncing lou'd.

[Footnote 244: Incremation. G.]


90.

    'A diuers cause, but like solemnitie
    'Vnto the Temple leads the bashfull bride:
    'Which blusheth like the Indian iuory
    'Which is with dip of Tyrian purple died;
    'A golden troope doth passe on euery side,
      'Of flourishing young men and virgins gay,
      'Which keepe faire measure all the flowry way.


91.

    'And not alone the generall multitude,
    'But those choise _Nestors_ which in councell graue
    'Of citties, and of kingdomes doe conclude,
    'Most comly order in their sessions haue;
    'Wherefore the wise Thessalians euer gaue
      'The name of leader of their Countrie's daunce
      'To him that had their Countrie's gouernance.


92.

    'And those great masters of their liberall arts,
    'In all their seurall Schooles doe Dauncing teach:
    'For humble Grammer first doth set the parts
    'Of congruent and well-according speach;
    'Which Rethorike, whose state the clouds doth reach,
      'And heau'nly Poetry, doe forward lead,
      'And diuers measures diuersly doe tread.


93.

    'For Rhetorick, clothing speech in rich aray
    'In looser numbers teacheth her to range,
    'With twenty tropes, and turnings euery way,
    'And various figures and licencious change;
    'But Poetry with rule and order strange,
      'So curiously doth moue each single pace,
      'As all is mard if she one foot misplace.


94.

    'These Arts of speach, the guids and marshals are;
    'But Logick leadeth Reason in a daunce:
    '(Reason the cynosure and bright load-star,
    'In this World's sea t' auoid the rock of Chaunce.)
    'For with close following and continuance
      'One reason doth another so ensue,[245]
      'As in conclusion still the daunce is true.

[Footnote 245: Pursue or succeed. G.]


95.

    'So Musicke to her owne sweet tunes doth trip
    'With tricks of 3, 5, 8, 15, and more;
    'So doth the Art of Numbering seeme to skip
    'From eu'n to odd in her proportion'd score;
    'So doe those skils, whose quick eyes doe explore
      'The iust dimension both of Earth and Heau'n,
      'In all their rules obserue a measure eu'n.


96.

    'Loe this is Dauncing's true nobilitie,
    'Dauncing, the child of Musicke and of Loue;
    'Dauncing it selfe, both loue and harmony,
    'Where all agree, and all in order moue;
    'Dauncing, the Art that all Arts doe approue;
      'The faire caracter of the World's consent,
      'The Heau'ns true figure and th' Earth's ornament.


97.

    The Queene, whose dainty eares had borne too long,
    The tedious praise of that she did despise;
    Adding once more the musicke of the tongue
    To the sweet speech of her alluring eyes,
    Began to answer in such winning wise,
      As that forthwith _Antinous'_ tongu[e] was tyde,
      His eyes fast fixt, his eares were open wide.


98.

    'Forsooth (quoth she) great glory you haue won,
    'To your trim minion, Dauncing, all this while,
    'By blazing him Loue's first begotten sonne;
    'Of euery ill the hateful father vile
    'That doth the world with sorceries beguile;
      'Cunningly mad, religiously prophane,
      'Wit's monster, Reason's canker, Sence's bane.


99.

    'Loue taught the mother that vnkinde desire
    'To wash her hands in her owne infant's blood;
    'Loue taught the daughter to betray her sire
    'Into most base vnworthy seruitude;
    'Loue taught the brother to prepare such foode
      'To feast his brothers that the all-seeing sun
      'Wrapt in a clowd, that wicked sight did shun.[246]

[Footnote 246: The Cenci of Shelley has 'married' this tragical crime
to 'immortal verse.' G.]


100.

    'And euen this self same Loue hath dauncing taught,
    'An Art that showes th' Idea of his minde
    'With vainesse, frenzie, and misorder fraught;
    'Sometimes with blood and cruelties vnkinde:
    'For in a daunce, _Tereus'_ mad wife did finde
      'Fit time and place by murther[247] of her sonne,
      'T' auenge the wrong his trayterous sire had done.

[Footnote 247: In first edition, 'murthering.' G.]


101.

    'What meane the mermayds when they daunce and sing
    'But certaine death vnto the marriner?
    'What tydings doe the dauncing dilphins[248] bring,
    'But that some dangerous storme approcheth nere?
    'Then sith both Loue and Dauncing lyueries beare
      'Of such ill hap, vnhappy may I[249] proue,
      'If sitting free I either daunce or loue.'

[Footnote 248: In first edition also spelled 'dilphins' = dolphins. G.]

[Footnote 249: In first edition, 'they.' G.]


102.

    Yet once again _Antinous_ did reply;
    'Great Queen, condemne not Loue[250] the innocent,
    'For this mischeuous lust, which traterously
    'Vsurps his name, and steales his ornament:
    'For that true Loue which Dauncing did inuent,
      'Is he that tun'd the World's whole harmony,
      'And linkt all men in sweet societie.

[Footnote 250: Note here, 'True Loue inventor of dauncing.' G]


103.

    'He first extracted from th' earth-mingled mind
    'That heau'nly fire, or quintessence diuine,
    'Which doth such simpathy in beauty find,
    'As is betweene the elme and fruitful vine,
    'And so to beauty euer doth encline;
      'Life's[251] life it is, and cordiall to the heart,
      'And of our better part, the better part.

[Footnote 251: Spelled 'Liues.' G.]


104.

    'This _is true Loue_, by that true _Cupid_ got,
    'Which daunceth galliards in your amorous eyes,
    'But to your frozen hart approcheth not--
    'Onely your hart he dares not enterprise;
    'And yet through euery other part he flyes,
      'And euery where he nimbly daunceth now,
      'Though[252] in your selfe, your selfe perceiue not how.

[Footnote 252: Thomas Davies and Southey, as before, misprint
egregiously 'that.' G.]


105.

    'For your sweet beauty daintily transfus'd
    'With due proportion throughout euery part;
    'What is it but a daunce where Loue hath vs'd
    'His finer cunning, and more curious art?
    'Where all the elements themselues impart,
      'And turne, and wind, and mingle with such measure,
      'That th' eye that sees it surfeits with the pleasure?


106.

    'Loue in the twinckling of your eylids daunceth,
    'Loue daunceth in your pulses and your vaines,
    'Loue when you sow, your needle's point aduanceth
    'And makes it daunce a thousand curious straines
    'Of winding rounds, whereof the forme remaines;
      'To shew, that your faire hands can daunce the hey,
      'Which your fine feet would learne as well as they.


107.

    'And when your iuory fingers touch the strings
    'Of any siluer-sounding instrument;
    'Loue makes them daunce to those sweete murmerings,
    'With busie skill, and cunning excellent;
    'O that your feet those tunes would represent
      'With artificiall motions to and fro,
      'That Loue this art in ev'ry part might sho[w]e!


108.

    'Yet your faire soule, which came from heau'n aboue
    'To rule thys house,--another heau'n below,--
    'With diuers powers in harmony doth moue,
    'And all the vertues that from her doe flow,
    'In a round measure hand in hand doe goe:
      'Could I now see, as I conceiue thys Daunce,
      'Wonder and Loue would cast me in a traunce.


109.

    'The richest iewell in all the heau'nly treasure
    'That euer yet vnto the Earth was showne,
    'Is perfect Concord, th' onely perfect pleasure[253]
    'That wretched earth-borne men haue euer knowne,
    'For many harts it doth compound in one;
      'That when so one doth will, or speake, or doe,
      'With one consent they all agree thereto.

[Footnote 253: Margin-Note here, 'Concord.' G.]


110.

    'Concord's true picture shineth in this art,
    'Where diuers men and women ranked be,
    'And euery one doth daunce a seuerall part,
    'Yet all as one, in measure doe agree,
    'Obseruing perfect vniformitie;
      'All turne together, all together trace,
      'And all together honour and embrace.


111.

    'If they whom sacred Loue hath link't in one,
    'Doe as they daunce, in all their course of life,
    'Neuer shall burning griefe nor bitter mone,
    'Nor factious difference, nor vnkind strife,
    'Arise betwixt the husband and the wife;
      'For whether forth or bake[254] or round he goe
      As the man doth, so must the woman doe.

[Footnote 254: 'Back,' same as 'blake,' page 176, _ante_, for 'black.'
G.]


112.

    'What if by often enterchange of place
    'Sometime the woman gets the vpper hand?
    'That is but done for more delightfull grace,
    'For one[255] that part shee doth not euer stand;
    'But, as the measure's law doth her command,
      'Shee wheeles about, and ere the daunce doth end,
      'Into her former place shee doth transcend.

[Footnote 255: = on. G.]


113.

    'But not alone this correspondence meet
    'And vniform consent doth dauncing praise;
    'For _Comlines_ the child of order sweet,[2]
    'Enamels it with her eye-pleasing raies;
    'Fair Comlines, ten hundred thousand waies,
      'Through dauncing shedds it selfe, and makes shine
      'With glorious beauty, and with grace diuine.


114.

    'For _Comliness_ is a disposing faire
    'Of things and actions in fit time and place;
    'Which doth in dauncing shew it selfe most cleere,
    'When troopes confus'd, which here and there doe trace
    'Without distinguishment or bounded space:
      'By dauncing's rule, into such ranks are brought,
      'As glads the eye, as rauisheth the thought.


115.

    'Then why should Reason iudge that reasonles
    'Which is wit's ofspring, and the worke of art,
    'Image of concord and of comlines?
    'Who sees a clock mouing in euery part,
    'A sayling pinnesse,[256] or a wheeling cart;
      'But thinks that Reason, ere it came to passe
      'The first impulsiue cause and mouer was?

[Footnote 256: In first edition, spelled 'pinnesse' also, = pinnace. G.]


116.

    'Who sees an Armie all in ranke aduance,
    'But deemes a wise Commaunder is in place,
    'Which leadeth on that braue victorious daunce?
    'Much more in Dauncing's Art, in Dauncing's grace,
    'Blindnes it selfe may Reason's footstep trace;
      '_For of Loue's maze it is the curious plot,
      'And of Man's fellowship the true-love knot_.


117.

    'But if these eyes of yours, (load-starrs of Loue,
    'Shewing the World's great daunce to your mind's eye!)
    'Cannot with all their demonstrations moue
    'Kinde apprehension in your fantasie,
    'Of Dauncing's vertue, and nobilitie;
      'How can my barbarous tongue win you there to,
      'Which Heau'n and Earth's faire speech could neuer do?


118.

    'O Loue my king: if all my wit and power
    'Haue done you all the seruice that they can,
    'O be you present in this present hower,
    'And help your seruant and your true Leige-man
    'End that perswasion which I earst began;
      'For who in praise of Dauncing can perswade
      'With such sweet force as Loue, which Dancing made?


119.

    Loue heard his prayer, and swifter then the wind,
    Like to a page, in habit, face, and speech,
    He came, and stood _Antinous_ behind,
    And many secrets to his thoughts did teach;[257]
    At last a christall mirrour he did reach
      Vnto his hands, that he with one rash view,
      All formes therein by Loue's reuealing knew.

[Footnote 257: Margin-Note here, 'A passage to the description of
dauncing in this age.' G.]


120.

    And humbly honouring, gaue it to the Queene
    With this faire speech: 'See fairest Queene (quoth he)
    'The fairest sight that euer shall be seene,
    'And th' onely wonder of posteritie,
    'The richest worke in Nature's treasury;
      'Which she disdaines to shew on this World's stage,
      'And thinkes it far too good for our rude age.


121.

    'But in another World diuided far:
    'In the great, fortunate, triangled Ile,
    'Thrise twelue degrees remou'd from the North star,
    'She will this glorious workemanship compile;
    'Which she hath beene conceiuing all this while
      'Since the World's birth, and will bring forth at last,
      'When sixe and twenty hundred yeares are past.'


122.

    _Penelope_, the Queene, when she had view'd
    The strang eye-dazeling, admirable sight,
    Faine would have praisd the state and pulchritude,
    But she was stricken dumbe with wonder quite,
    Yet her sweet minde retain'd her thinking might;
      Her rauisht minde in heaunly thoughts did dwel,
      But what she thought, no mortall tongue can tel.


123.

    You lady Muse, whom _Ioue_ the Counsellour
    Begot of Memorie, Wisdom's treasuresse;
    To your diuining tongue is giuen a power
    Of vttering secrets large and limitlesse:
    You can _Penelope's_ strange thoughts expresse
      Which she conceiu'd, and then would faine haue told,
      When shee the wond'rous christall did behold.


124.

    Her winged thoughts bore vp her minde so hie,
    As that she weend shee saw the glorious throne
    Where the bright moone doth sit in maiesty:
    A thousand sparkling starres about her shone,
    But she herselfe did sparkle more alone
      Then all those thousand beauties would haue done
      If they had been confounded all in one.


125.

    And yet she thought those stars mou'd in such measure.
    To do their soueraigne honor and delight,
    As sooth'd her minde, with sweet enchanting plesure,
    Although the various change amaz'd her sight,
    And her weake iudgement did entangle quite;
      Beside, their mouing made them shine more cleare,
      As diamonds mou'd more sparkling do appeare.


126.

    This was the picture of her wondrous thought;
    But who can wonder that her thought was so,
    Sith _Vulcan_ king of fire that mirror wrought,
    (Who things to come, present, and past, doth know)
    And there did represent in liuely show
      Our glorious English Courts diuine image,
      As it should be in this our Golden Age.

       *       *       *       *       *

 _Here are wanting some Stanzaes describing Queene Elizabeth. Then
 follow these._


127.

    Her brighter dazeling beames of maiestie
    Were laid aside, for she vouchsaft awhile
    With gracious, cheerefull, and familiar eye
    Vpon the reuels of her Court to smile;
    For so Time's Iourneis she doth oft beguile:
      Like sight no mortall eye might elsewhere see,
      So full of State, Art, and varietie.


128.

    For of her barons braue, and ladies faire,--
    Who had they been elsewhere, most faire had been;
    Many an incomparable louely payre,
    With hand in hand were interlinked seene,
    Making faire honour to their soueraigne Queene;
      Forward they pac'd, and did their pace apply
      To a most sweet and solemne melody.


129.

    So subtile and curious was the measure,
    With such[258] vnlookt for chaunge in euery straine;
    As that _Penelope_ rapt with sweet pleasure,
    Weend[259] shee beheld the true proportion plaine
    Of her owne webb, weaud and unweaud againe;
      But that her art was somewhat lesse she thought,
      And on a meere ignoble subiect wrought.

[Footnote 258: Thomas Davies, as before, drops 'such.' G.]

[Footnote 259: Thomas Davies and Southey misread 'when.' G.]


130.

    For here like to the silkeworme's industry,
    Beauty it selfe out of it selfe did weaue
    So rare a worke, and of such subtilty,
    As did all eyes entangle and deceiue,
    And in all mindes a strange impression leaue;
      In this sweet laborinth did _Cupid_ stray,
      And neuer had the power to passe away.


131.

    As when the Indians, neighbours of the morning,
    In honour of the cheerefull rising sunne;
    With pearle and painted plumes themselues adorning,
    A solemne stately measure haue begun;
    The god well pleasd with that faire honour done,
      Sheds foorth his beames, and doth their faces kis
      With that immortal glorious face of his.

132.

    So, &c., &c. * * *


 _Such is 'Orchestra' as given by the Author in 1622: but in the first
 edition (1596) no fewer than five omitted stanzas are found. They here
 follow._


127.

    Away, Terpsechore, light Muse away!
    And come Vranie, prophetese diuine;
    Come, Muse of heau'n, my burning thirst allay:
    Euen now for want of sacred drinke I tine:
    In heau'nly moysture dip thys pen of mine,
      And let my mouth with nectar ouerflow,
      For I must more then mortall glory show.


128.

    O, that I had Homer's aboundant vaine,
    I would hierof another Ilias make:
    Or els the man of Mantua's[260] charmed braine,
    In whose large throat great Joue the thunder spake.
    O that I could old Gefferie's[261] Muse awake,
      Or borrow Colin's[262] fayre heroike stile,
      Or smooth my rimes with Delia's servants file.[263]

[Footnote 260: Virgil. G.]

[Footnote 261: Chaucer. G.]

[Footnote 262: Spenser. G.]

[Footnote 263: Daniel: The allusion being to his 'Sonnets to Delia.' G.]


129.

    O, could I, sweet Companion, sing like you,
    Which, of a shadow, under a shadow sing;[264]
    Or, like _Salue's_ sad lover true,
    Or like the Bay, the Marigold's darling,[265]
    Whose suddaine verse Loue covers with his wing:
      O that your braines were mingled all with mine,
      T' inlarge my wit for this great worke diuine!

[Footnote 264: Edward Guilpin calls his volume 'Skialetheia, or a
_Shadowe_ of Truth in certain Epigrams and Satyres,' 1598. G.]

[Footnote 265: I hazard a guess, that this may refer to _Charles
Best_, an associate of DAVIES in the 'Rhapsody,' and author
of certain vivid lines called 'A Sonnet of the Sun: a jewell, being
a sun shining upon the _Marigold_ closed in a heart of gold, sent to
his mistress, named Mary, among others. See _Nicolas's_ edition of the
'Rhapsody,' Vol. I., pp. 183, 184. G.]


130.

    Yet, Astrophell might one for all suffize,
    Whose supple Muse Camelion-like doth change
    Into all formes of excellent deuise:
    So might the Swallow,[266] whose swift Muse doth range
    Through rare Idaeas, and inuentions strange,
      And euer doth enioy her ioyfull Spring,
      And sweeter then the Nightingale doth sing.

[Footnote 266: Perhaps a play on his 'then' friend's name of Martin. G.]


131.

    O that I might that singing Swallow heare,
    To whom I owe my seruice and my loue!
    His sugred tunes would so enchant mine eare,
    And in my mind such sacred fury moue,
    As I should knock at Heau'ns gate aboue,
      With my proude rimes, while of this heau'nly state
      I doe aspire the shadow to relate.[267]

[Footnote 267: Collier gives _supra_ in his 'Bibliographical Account of
Early English Literature,' _s.n._]

  $Finis.$


  _Uniform with the present volume._

  EARLY ENGLISH POETS

  Edited, with Introductions and copious Notes, by the REV
  A. B. GROSART. Elegantly printed on fine paper, Crown
  8vo., Cloth, 6s. per volume.

  [asterism] LARGE PAPER COPIES, ONLY 50 PRINTED.

  "Mr. Grosart has spent the most laborious and the most enthusiastic
  care on the perfect restoration and preservation of the
  text; and it is very unlikely that any other edition of the poet
  can ever be called for.... From Mr. Grosart we always
  expect and always receive the final results of most patient and
  competent scholarship."--_Examiner._

  I. FLETCHER'S (GILES B. D.) COMPLETE POEMS,
  Christ's Victorie in Heaven, Christ's Victorie on Earth,
  Christ's Triumph over Death, and Minor Poems, with
  Memorial-Introduction and Notes.

  II. DAVIES' (SIR JOHN) COMPLETE POETICAL
  WORKS, including Psalms I. to L. in Verse, and other
  hitherto unpublished MSS., for the first time collected
  and edited, with Memorial-Introduction and Notes, 2
  volumes.

  III. HERRICK'S (ROBERT) HESPERIDES, NOBLE
  NUMBERS, and complete Collected Poems, with
  Notes, Introductory Memoir, and facsimile Portrait,
  Index of First Lines and Glossary, 3 volumes. [_In the
  press._

  IV. SIDNEY'S (SIR PHILIP) COMPLETE POETICAL
  WORKS, including the Songs and Sonnets,
  Astrophel and Stella, the May Lady, &c., &c., with
  Memorial-Introduction and copious notes. [_In preparation._

  V. DONNE'S (JOHN) COMPLETE POETICAL
  WORKS, including the Poems on Several Occasions,
  the Satyrs, Polydoran, &c., &c., with Introductory Memoir
  and copious Explanatory Notes. [_In preparation._


  Other volumes are in active preparation.

  _CHATTO AND WINDUS, Piccadilly, W._





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Complete Poems of Sir John Davies.
Volume 1 of 2., by John Davies

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS OF SIR JOHN DAVIES (1/2) ***

***** This file should be named 44977.txt or 44977.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/4/9/7/44977/

Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
