The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Logs of the Serapis-Allance-Ariel under
the Command of John Paul Jones 1779-1780, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Logs of the Serapis-Allance-Ariel under the Command of John Paul Jones 1779-1780

Author: Anonymous

Editor: John S. Barnes

Release Date: February 25, 2014 [EBook #45011]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOGS OF THE SERAPIS-ALLANCE-ARIEL ***




Produced by David Edwards, Christine P. Travers and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from scans of public domain material
produced by Microsoft for their Live Search Books site.)









  THE SECRETARY OF THE NAVAL HISTORY
  SOCIETY CERTIFIES THAT THIS COPY OF THE
  LOGS OF THE SERAPIS, ALLIANCE, AND ARIEL IS

  No. 175

  OF THREE HUNDRED COPIES, PRINTED FOR
  THE SOCIETY ONLY




  OFFICERS
  OF THE
  NAVAL HISTORY SOCIETY
  1910-11




  PRESIDENT
  CAPTAIN JOHN S. BARNES


  VICE-PRESIDENT
  REAR-ADMIRAL F. E. CHADWICK, U. S. N., RET.


  SECRETARY AND TREASURER
  ROBERT WILDEN NEESER
  1076 Chapel St., New Haven, Conn.


  BOARD OF MANAGERS

  CAPTAIN JOHN S. BARNES
  REAR-ADMIRAL F. E. CHADWICK, U. S. N., RET.
  COLONEL W. C. CHURCH
  LOYALL FARRAGUT
  REAR-ADMIRAL C. F. GOODRICH, U. S. N., RET.
  CHARLES T. HARBECK
  GRENVILLE KANE
  JOHN FORSYTH MEIGS
  ROBERT W. NEESER
  HERBERT L. SATTERLEE
  REAR-ADMIRAL C. H. STOCKTON, U. S. N., RET.


  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

  REAR-ADMIRAL C. F. GOODRICH, U. S. N., RET.
  CAPTAIN JOHN S. BARNES
  REAR-ADMIRAL F. E. CHADWICK, U. S. N., RET.
  JOHN FORSYTH MEIGS
  ROBERT W. NEESER




  PUBLICATIONS
  OF THE
  NAVAL HISTORY SOCIETY

  VOLUME I


[Illustration: John Paul Jones

  Tels hommes rarement se peuvent presenter,
  Et quand le Ciel les donne, il faut en profiter.]




  THE LOGS
  OF THE
  SERAPIS--ALLIANCE--ARIEL
  UNDER THE COMMAND OF
  JOHN PAUL JONES
  1779-1780

  WITH EXTRACTS FROM PUBLIC DOCUMENTS,
  UNPUBLISHED LETTERS, AND NARRATIVES, AND ILLUSTRATED
  WITH REPRODUCTIONS OF SCARCE PRINTS

  EDITED BY
  JOHN S. BARNES
  LATE LIEUTENANT COMMANDER, U. S. N.

  NEW YORK
  PRINTED FOR THE NAVAL HISTORY SOCIETY
  BY THE DE VINNE PRESS
  MDCCCCXI




  Copyright, 1911, by
  THE NAVAL HISTORY SOCIETY




CONTENTS


                                                                  PAGE

  Foreword                                                        xiii

  List of Officers and Men of the Continental Ship, Bon Homme
    Richard, July the 26th, 1779                                     3

  A List of The Men Names that has Desarted from The Bone Homme
    Richard, Lorient July. 19th. 1779                               18

  A List of Officers, & Men, belonging to the American Continental
    Ship of War, Ariel, Commanded, by the Honble, John Paul Jones   20

  Some Remarkable Occurrences that happened on the 23d day of
    September 1779--relative to the Bon Homme Richard, and the
    Serapis.--Commanded by Richard Pearson Esqr                     24

  A Journall Kept on Board the Serapis, an English Ship of War,
    of 44 Guns taken the 23rd. of September, (by the Bon Homme
    Richd.,) now Commanded by the Honble. John Paul Jones           25

  A Journall Kept on Board the American Continentall Frigate
    of War, Alliance of 36 Guns, under, the Command of the
    Honble, John Paul Jones                                         42

  An Account of Occurrences in L'Orient respecting the Bon Homme
    Richards Officers & Crew                                        90

  A Journall Kept on Board the American Continental Ship of War,
    Ariel, of 26.... Nine Pounders, Commanded by the Honble. John
    Paul Jones Esqr.                                                91

  Appendix A.--Copies of the remarks in the log of the Bon Homme
    Richard for the 22d, 23d and 24th September. The log is now
    in the possession of the Selkirk family, at St. Mary's Isle.
    A typewritten copy, with facsimiles of several pages, is in
    the Library of the Navy Department                             123

  Appendix B.--A letter of Captain James Nicholson to Captain
    John Barry, dated June 24th, 1781--relative to Jones' efforts
    before Congress to obtain higher rank in the reorganized navy  125

  Appendix C.--A letter of Jones to the Honble. E. Hopkins,
    Esquire, Admiral of the American Fleet, dated on board the
    Providence, at sea, Lat. 37 deg. 40' N., and Long. 54 deg. W. per the
    Brig Sea Nymph, Capt. W. Hopkins                               128

  Appendix D.--A letter of Jones to John Wendell, Esqr., Portsmouth,
    N. H., dated on board the Ranger, Nantes, 11th Decr., 1777     130

  Appendix E.--Extract from Nathaniel Fanning's Narrative,
    describing the entertainment given by Jones about the 10th
    day of December, 1780                                          132

  Appendix F.--A relation of the voyage of the Ariel to the
    United States, and her encounter with a ship called Triumph    134

  Appendix G.--The storm which wrecked the Ariel. An account
    given by Fanning in his Narrative                              135

  Appendix H.--Fanning's account of the taking possession of the
    Alliance by Landais                                            137




ILLUSTRATIONS


  Portrait of Jones                                     _Frontispiece_

  Facsimile--first page log Serapis                              xxxvi

      "      letter of Groube                                   xxxvii

      "      first page muster-roll Bon Homme Richard            xxxix

  Picture--Engagement of Bon Homme Richard and Serapis             xlv




FOREWORD


The executive committee of the Naval History Society having decided
to publish for its initial volume the logs of the three ships
commanded by John Paul Jones during the years 1779 and 1780, the
owner has consented to edit this publication, with a description
of the book itself, together with its history, so far as it can be
ascertained, believing that it will add something of interest to
the voluminous records and the literature relating to the life and
services of the distinguished hero of our Revolutionary navy.

Besides these logs of the _Serapis_, _Alliance_, and _Ariel_, there
are, in the Library of the Navy Department, copies of the log of the
_Ranger_, beginning November 26, 1777, and ending May 18, 1778; also
of the log of the _Bon Homme Richard_, beginning at L'Orient May 18,
1779, and ending September 24, 1779.

The original log-books, as shown by notes and a copy of a letter
accompanying and attached to them, are stated to have been purchased
by Captain Boyd, of Greenock, from a person of the name of Harding,
a baker, in New York, in 1824; and to have been presented to Lady
Isabella Helen Douglas, daughter of the fifth Earl of Selkirk, by
William John, ninth Lord Napier, on March 17, 1830; they are now
supposed to rest among the manuscripts of the Selkirk family.

Had the editor known of the existence of this log of the _Bon Homme
Richard_, covering the period of her commissioning and cruise prior
to the engagement with the _Serapis_, he would have deemed it proper
to have included it in this publication. The information came to him
too late to have it fully transcribed and prepared for the printer. A
few excerpts from it are placed in the Appendix.[1]

[Footnote 1: See Appendix A.]

The log-book now published is one of the few relics known to exist
of the engagement between the _Bon Homme Richard_ and the _Serapis_,
as most of the records and official papers of both ships were lost
when the _Bon Homme Richard_ sank, or following the confusion on the
_Serapis_ after her capture.

The book is fourteen inches tall, nine and one quarter inches wide,
bound in old vellum, stained, warped, worn with age and hard usage on
land and sea. The paper is rough, greenish in color, the hand-made
linen paper of the period, with a watermark showing it to be of
English manufacture.

Upon the exterior of both covers are numerous scribblings:
"R. D. June 2d, 1779"--"R. D. June 26, 1779"--"Richard Dales
book"--"September the 3d--1780--This book belongs to Mr. Henry Lunt,
Lieutenant of the Ship of War, the (_Ariel_)." Richard Dale's name is
also found in several places on the pages of the book.

It was first used to enter the names of the officers and crew
of the _Bon Homme Richard_, giving their rank, rating, and the
dates and places of their enlistment.[2] It evidently constituted
the muster-roll of that ship when Robert Robinson was the first
lieutenant, and, after the dismissal of that officer by sentence of
court martial for "negligence of duty," it passed into the keeping of
Richard Dale, who succeeded Robinson as first lieutenant, he entering
therein, on the pages immediately following the muster-roll: "A List
of The Men Names that has Desarted from _The Bone Homme Richard_,
Lorient July, 19th. 1779"[3]

[Footnote 2: See p. 3.]

[Footnote 3: See p. 18.]

When the _Richard_ sank off Flamborough Head, the muster-roll was
saved and taken on board the _Serapis_, as constituting the official
list of those entitled to prize money--then as now the great
incentive to naval enlistment and activity.

As may well be imagined, a blank-book suitable for a log was
not available at that moment of supreme confusion, so that the
muster-roll book of the _Richard_, with only a few of its pages
in use, was seized upon and used to enter the daily transactions
on board the _Serapis_, from the time of her capture until, as a
result of the political situation between Holland and England, she
was turned over to the French, and, under the command of Captain
Cottineau, hoisted the French colors in the Texel Roads.

The book was reversed, and the log of the _Serapis_ begun at
the other end, preceded by a brief memorandum--"Some Remarkable
Occurrences that happened on the 23d day of September, 1779,"--which
briefly records the capture of the _Serapis_.

No other or more circumstantial account of the fight existed in
the book when it came into the possession of its later owners, but
a close examination showed that, besides minor mutilations, two
leaves, immediately preceding that containing the statement of "Some
Remarkable Occurrences," had, at some time, been torn out. In order
to incorporate into the book a clearer and more circumstantial
account of the fight, a former owner caused to be copied on several
blank leaves the narrative found amongst the Peter Force Collection
of Manuscripts, "John Paul Jones Papers," Volume VI, number 29.

The authorship and penmanship of this document have been ascribed by
various biographers of Jones to Richard Dale.[4]

[Footnote 4: Memoirs of Rear-Admiral Paul Jones, Edinburgh, 1830;
Professor Marion, John Paul Jones' Last Cruise and Final Resting
Place, Washington, 1906.]

The present owner's attention was specially called to it by seeing
a small photographic reproduction, published in a book by Professor
Marion entitled, "John Paul Jones' Last Cruise and Final Resting
Place," Washington, 1906. The author describes this valuable and
historical document as a "manuscript written on two pages of rough,
greenish paper, evidently torn out of a log book," and attributes it
to Richard Dale, the first lieutenant of the _Bon Homme Richard_.
The compiler of the "John Paul Jones Manuscripts" in the Library of
Congress attributes it possibly to Jones' secretary.[5] The author
of the "Memoirs of Rear-Admiral Paul Jones," published in Edinburgh
and London, 1830, Volume I, page 192, states "that the fact of
Landais' firing into the _Bon Homme Richard_ is also confirmed by
the log-book, which was preserved when the ship sunk, and by a very
interesting and seaman-like narrative of the engagement, drawn up by
Mr. Dale." He adds in a footnote in reference to the log-book: "This
battered volume, after many adventures by land and water, is now
(1830) in the possession of Mr. Richard Napier, Advocate."

[Footnote 5: Calendar of John Paul Jones Manuscripts, pp. 104, 105.]

As this author bases his book upon documents then in the possession
of Mrs. Jeanette Taylor, the sister of Paul Jones, which she came
into possession of when he died in Paris, the "battered volume"
referred to must have been amongst Jones' papers, and is undoubtedly
the same log-book now under review. As will be shown later, it was
surely in the possession of Richard Dale as late as 1782, and at some
time after the war he probably restored it to Jones, who certainly
had a good claim to it, as the muster-roll of the _Bon Homme
Richard_, contained in it, was necessary in the prosecution of his
prize-money claims in France.

However this may be, the present owner procured a photograph of the
narrative of the engagement, of the exact dimensions of the sheets
upon which it was written, and on comparison of these sheets with the
leaves of the log-book it was found that in dimensions, in the color
and quality of the paper, even in the indenture of the torn edges,
there could be no possible doubt that the document was torn from this
log-book, and found its way into the Peter Force Collection, and
thence to the possession of the Congressional Library. The facsimile
is now where the original was, and the narrative is included in this
publication of the _Serapis'_ log.[6] Still there was doubt as to
its authorship. A comparison of the handwriting with that of Richard
Dale, to whom it was attributed, showed conclusively that he was not
the writer. Amongst the various scribblings upon the covers of the
log-book is found:

     September the 3d, 1780. This book belongs to Mr. Henry
     Lunt, Lieutenant of the Ship of War, the (Ariel)

a memorandum undoubtedly written by Lunt himself, who was, on the
date named, the second lieutenant of the _Ariel_, commanded by Jones,
Dale being her first lieutenant.[7]

[Footnote 6: See p. 22 of log of _Serapis_.]

[Footnote 7: See List of Officers of _Ariel_, p. 20.]

Comparisons of letters of Henry Lunt, also in the Peter Force
Collection, with the narrative establish beyond any doubt that it is
the penmanship of Lieutenant Henry Lunt. Mr. Gaillard Hunt, chief of
the Manuscripts Division of the Library of Congress, in a letter to
the editor, in reply to his suggestion that Lunt may have been the
writer, states as follows:

     That the two pages of the _Serapis_ log are in the
     hand of Lieutenant Henry Lunt. They have been compared
     with a letter of Lunt to Jones, October 7, 1779, and
     there can be no question of the identity of the hand.

A few words as to Lieutenant Henry Lunt. As is well known, he was not
on board the _Bon Homme Richard_ during the engagement, having been
sent, with fifteen of the crew, to take possession of a brigantine
which had been chased inshore, and, although recalled by signal, he
did not return until after the action. His conduct in this respect
has been properly criticized. He states himself:

     Having, on the 23d of September, 1779, been ordered
     in a pilot boat with a party of men after a brig, but
     some time after I set out from alongside, a signal was
     made for me to return back to the _Bon homme Richard_,
     she being then in chase of two British ships-of-war,
     the _Serapis_ and _Countess of Scarborough_, and
     before I could get on board the _Bon homme Richard_
     she commenced the engagement with the _Serapis_. It
     being night, I thought it not prudent to go alongside
     in time of action....

This is signed, "On board the _Serapis_, at the Texel, 25th of
October, 1779. Henry Lunt."

Jones indorses this as follows:

     This certificate of Lieut. Lunt, who was a mere
     spectator, is of great weight and importance, it being
     only in the power of this gentleman to give a true
     account of the respective positions and manoeuvres of
     the ships engaged.

                                                       J. P. JONES.[8]

[Footnote 8: Sherburne's Life of Jones, New York, 1851, p. 164.]

The question naturally arises, Who dictated the narrative of the
fight which Lunt wrote in the _Serapis'_ log? It is an authentic and
truthful narration of the principal occurrences, and corresponds with
Jones' own accounts of the battle. It is written in the first person,
and must have been written by some one who was on board the _Bon
Homme Richard_, and copied by Lunt into the _Serapis'_ log at some
time subsequent to the engagement, in order to have a circumstantial
account recorded in the log. Lunt's statement that the log-book
belonged to him on September 3, 1780, when second lieutenant of the
_Ariel_, nearly a year after the fight, would lead us to suppose
that, as he was surrounded by the officers who were on the _Bon Homme
Richard_, he simply copied a description dictated by one of them,
probably by Jones himself, as the latter's well-known proclivity
for self-adulation would naturally show itself in a desire to have
his personal efforts spread upon the official record. It is further
worthy of note that almost the only tributes to the officers of the
_Bon Homme Richard_, or recognition of their services, are to be
found in Jones' charges and proofs against Landais, where his object
was to give force to their testimony.[9] His apparent unwillingness
to commend others, or award to each of his officers a just meed of
praise, has been noted by some of his biographers as his great fault.

[Footnote 9: Sherburne's Life of Jones, New York, 1851, pp. 156-171.]

It is a matter of interest to a collector to be able to identify the
author or writer of this narrative of the engagement, and to place
it, after a long separation, where it originally was written.

The first regular entry in the _Serapis'_ log is on the 26th of
September, when, dismasted, crowded with prisoners, and encumbered
with wounded, her people, assisted by men from the other ships of
the squadron, were employed in erecting jury masts and repairing
the damages sustained in the action. The wind was for several days
light, from the southwest, and the sea fairly smooth, the speed
recorded being from two to four knots. Jones decided to make the port
of Dunkirk, but his colleagues overruled him, and upon making the
land, owing to bad weather and contrary winds, the squadron, after
being tossed to and fro by contrary winds for seven days, anchored in
the Texel Roads on the 3d of October. That the ship should have been
safely taken to a harbor under such circumstances is not the least
of Jones' exploits as a seaman; while the failure of the English
cruisers to intercept and recapture her brought much obloquy upon the
British admiralty.

Safely anchored in the Texel, Sir Joseph Yorke, the British
ambassador at The Hague, who persistently referred to Jones as
"that pirate, Paul Jones: a rebel subject and criminal of State,"
immediately demanded the surrender of the prizes and the release of
the prisoners.[10] The demand was refused by the High Commissioners,
and after much correspondence Jones obtained permission, under
certain restrictions, to land his prisoners and wounded, and to mount
guard over them on an island in the Texel. Jones may fairly be said
to have added to his fame by being mainly instrumental in bringing
about an open rupture between England and Holland by the stand taken
by him during this trying period.

[Footnote 10: Sherburne's Life of Jones, New York, 1851, p. 129.]

As will be seen by the entries in the log, the crew, with assistance
from the other ships, were for many days busily employed in cleaning
up her decks and in repairing and refitting the ship. She was in a
dreadful condition of filth and disorder. Jones desired to refit her,
and again to cruise in English waters, as she was a fine, stanch
ship, recently built, and would have been a valuable substitute for
the lost _Richard_. Jones states that she was the best ship he ever
saw of her kind.

Complications between the Dutch and English governments, however,
became acute. Jones was ordered to sail from the Texel, then
blockaded by an English fleet, and the Dutch Admiral was ordered
to use forcible measures, if found necessary, to compel him to do
so. With Dr. Franklin's approval it was decided to turn over to
the French the prizes, and all the ships except the _Alliance_,
which, having been built in America, was accepted as a properly
commissioned Continental ship-of-war. In pursuance of this decision
Jones turned over to Captain Cottineau the command of the _Serapis_,
who hoisted the French flag over her on November 21, 1779. Landais
was deposed from the command of the _Alliance_, to which ship
Jones transferred his flag, having first stripped the _Serapis_
of everything movable and useful and sent the same on board the
_Alliance_.[11]

[Footnote 11: See log of _Serapis_ for November 21, 1779.]

The log-book now continues with "A Journall Kept on Board the
American Continental Frigate of War, _Alliance_, of 36 guns, under
the Command of the Honble. John Paul Jones, Commencing in the Road of
Texel in Holland."

Commencing on the 22d of November, the log states the daily
occurrences until June 12, 1780. According to Jones' account the ship
was in a deplorable condition, which he attributed to the incapacity
of Landais, whom he had supplanted, and with whom he was on bad
terms, having charged him with being responsible, in part, for the
collision with the _Richard_ on her first cruise; with cowardice
during the action with the _Serapis_; with intentionally firing
upon the _Richard_; with disobedience of orders, disrespect, and
insolence. Jones states that the _Alliance_ had not a good cable
or sail; the officers and men were intemperate and idle; filth,
insubordination, and epidemic diseases prevailed among the crew; she
was badly supplied with arms; and her powder was of bad quality. Some
of these deficiences Jones supplied from the _Serapis_.

The remaining officers and crew of the _Richard_ were transferred
to the _Alliance_, except the French volunteers; and the French
volunteers and marines on the _Alliance_ were sent to the _Serapis_,
as it had been arranged that no French subject was to remain on
the _Alliance_. Until the 27th of December the ship's company and
mechanics from shore were busily employed in making necessary
repairs, refitting the rigging, making new yards, and altering the
old ones. Every effort was apparently made to get the ship ready for
sea. Gales of wind and rotten cables placed her often in peril. Her
bottom being foul, the ship was careened and the bottom scrubbed.

The English kept a squadron cruising off the port, but Jones
determined to get to sea as soon as the weather would permit. He
thought he had recovered the trim of the ship which had been lost
under Landais. He states that the ship was well manned, and would not
be given away; that the Holland squadron had been drawn up ready for
battle for more than a month to drive him out if he should attempt to
remain after the wind became fair, while the English fleet was almost
constantly in sight of the harbor.

He was requested by the Dutch Admiral to declare whether the
_Alliance_ was a French or an American vessel, and if French to
display the French flag, and to omit no occasion of departing. To
this Jones replied, declining to display French colors, and saying
that he would get to sea whenever a pilot would take the ship out of
the harbor.

On the 27th of December, the wind serving, he set sail from the
Texel, fell foul of a Dutch merchant ship, lost the best bower-anchor
and cable, and had other mishaps, owing to the ignorance or
drunkenness of the old pilot.

The _Alliance_ passed along the Flemish banks, got to windward of
the enemy's fleet in the North Sea, and passed through the Strait of
Dover in full view of the enemy's fleet in the Downs. He then ran the
_Alliance_ past the Isle of Wight, in view of the enemy's fleet at
Spithead, got safe through the Channel, and cruised about the Bay of
Biscay and Cape Finisterre, overhauling many neutral ships and making
a few unimportant prizes. On the 17th of January he came to anchor
in the harbor of Corunna, Spain. Here he remained until the 28th of
January. He received and entertained visitors; again careened the
ship and scrubbed her bottom; made changes in her spars; obtained a
new anchor; and gave his men liberty. The men were complaining that
their wages and prize money had not been paid, and were in a mutinous
condition. On the 19th of January they all refused doing duty, but
Jones succeeded in satisfying them, and they returned to duty the
following day.[12]

[Footnote 12: See log of _Alliance_ for January 19, 1780.]

On the 28th of January, after entertaining the governor, the
_Alliance_ again put to sea, and cruised in the neighboring waters,
overhauling several ships, capturing a few unimportant prizes. She
met the American letter-of-marque ship _Livingston_, and in company
with her anchored within the Isle of Groix on the 11th of February,
and on the 19th moved up to the harbor of L'Orient, and moored the
_Alliance_ to the King's Moorings.

Jones' first object now appears to have been to repair and refit
the ship and make extensive alterations, the extent and cost of
which were the subject of remonstrance on the part of Benjamin
Franklin, who positively forbids his sheathing the ship's bottom
with copper, buying new canvas and cordage, thus adding to the
extraordinary expenses already incurred in Holland, especially as
Jones seemed to impute the damages the _Alliance_ had sustained more
to Landais' negligence than to accidents of the cruise; Franklin
concludes his admonitions with an appeal to Jones--"For God's sake be
sparing unless you mean to make me a bankrupt, or have your drafts
dishonoured for want of money in my hands to pay them."[13]

[Footnote 13: Richard C. Sands, Life and Correspondence of John Paul
Jones, New York, 1830, p. 248.]

Notwithstanding this appeal for economy, from the 19th of February
to the 12th of June the _Alliance_ remained at anchor at L'Orient,
and the repairs, renewals, and refitting were prosecuted with energy
by the crew of the ship, assisted by carpenters and mechanics from
shore. The log relates the work done day by day with some precision.
The essential repairs were completed in April, and Jones states that,
when finished, judges allowed that everything about the frigate was
perfect, and that he knew not what was the amount of disbursements.
In his journal for the King he says: "She was thought one of the
completest frigates in France."

Meantime, it was Mr. Franklin's intention to send the _Alliance_
back to America with large supplies of arms and clothing. Mr. Arthur
Lee, one of our commissioners, also desired to return in her. Landais
was annoying Franklin with importunities to such an extent that the
latter wrote Jones that he was determined to have nothing further to
do with him.

On the 4th of March Franklin wrote the President of Congress that
Jones would carry the _Alliance_ home, and that Landais had not
applied to be replaced in her, but on the 17th of March he asked
Franklin to be replaced in command of the _Alliance_. To this request
Franklin replied that he considered him so imprudent, so litigious
and quarrelsome a man, that if he had twenty ships-of-war in his
disposition, he would not give him command of one of them. Franklin,
on the 18th of March, states that he knew of nothing to prevent Jones
from proceeding immediately to such part of North America as he could
reach in safety.

The prize-money question was in abeyance; Franklin in his letters
to Jones referred to it, and stated that the ships-of-war he had
taken were to be valued, the King intending to purchase them, but
that the muster-roll of the _Bon Homme Richard_ was wanting in order
to regulate the proportions to each ship. At the same time Franklin
authorized Jones to draw on him for 24,000 livres in advance to
the people of the _Bon Homme Richard_, and stated that M. LeRay de
Chaumont had authorized his correspondent in L'Orient to advance
100,000 livres for the Americans of the _Alliance_ and _Bon Homme
Richard_, on account.

This prize-money question, as shown by the voluminous correspondence
of the time, was a troublesome matter, the cause of dissension,
controversy, and insubordination amounting to mutiny in the ship's
company.

The subject is fully treated in the various biographies of Jones, and
it is unnecessary to do more than allude to it here. It was, however,
the cause which induced Jones to go frequently to Paris, ostensibly
to hasten proceedings for the adjustment of the claims for prize
money. In his absence on shore at L'Orient Captain Landais, acting
under the advice of Arthur Lee and Commodore Gillon, of the South
Carolina navy, took possession of the _Alliance_ on the 12th of June.
The log entry on that day is the last of the _Alliance's_ journal. It
forms a terse but accurate account of this extraordinary transaction.
A more detailed account, by a participant in this event, will be
found in the Appendix.[14]

[Footnote 14: Richard C. Sands, Life and Correspondence of John Paul
Jones, New York, 1830, pp. 265-267. See Appendix H for Nathaniel
Fanning's narrative of this transaction. Landais and his first
lieutenant, Degge, were both tried by a court martial held on the
_Alliance_, November, 1780, Captain John Barry, president; both were
sentenced "to be broke, cashiered, and rendered incapable of serving
in the American navy thereafter." The Board of Admiralty reported
to Congress, March 28, 1781, that the plans of Jones for bringing
clothing and stores to America were overset by Landais' misconduct,
and Jones was exonerated from all charges for the delay. Naval
Records of the Revolution, 1775-1788, Washington, 1906, pp. 170, 171,
173.]

It appears from the correspondence of Mr. Franklin that Landais had
been furnished with money to enable him to return to America for
trial upon the charges preferred by Jones, and Franklin had, in May,
expressed his astonishment that he continued to remain at L'Orient.
To this Landais, on the 29th of May, coolly replied that he had been
waiting for orders to retake command of the _Alliance_! Franklin
replied to this, "I charge you not to meddle with the command, or
create any disturbance on board her, as you will answer the contrary
at your peril."

Arthur Lee, as well as Commodore Gillon, had previously quarreled
with Jones, and detested him. Lee, in a written opinion discussing
constitutional questions as to the authority of Congress, and that
of Mr. Franklin, advised Landais that he might lawfully treat our
minister's orders with contempt. As Jones was constantly absent from
his ship, spending much time in Paris, where he was the recipient of
marked attentions, it was not difficult for Landais to work upon the
mutinous spirit of the crew by charging Jones with neglect of their
interests regarding prize money due them, to such effect that they
addressed a letter to Franklin, signed by one hundred and fifteen
of the crew, declaring that they would not raise the anchor, nor
depart from L'Orient, until their wages and the utmost farthing of
their prize money had been paid them, and until _their legal captain,
P. Landais, was restored to them_. This mutinous document was
undoubtedly instigated by Landais; it bore unmistakable evidence of
being penned, and was forwarded to Franklin, by Landais himself.

On the morning of the 12th of June Jones, at L'Orient, assembled
his crew, before going on shore, and asked them if they could say a
word to his disadvantage. They answered that they could not, and,
according to Jones' account, showed every appearance of contentment
and subordination. Jones then went on shore, and Landais, taking
advantage of his absence, seized the command during the afternoon of
that day. Jones heard of the transaction from Dale, who informed him
that he and some others had just been turned ashore.

Jones immediately despatched by express to Franklin a statement of
the occurrence. Upon its receipt Franklin procured an order from
Versailles for the arrest and imprisonment of Landais, as a Frenchman
and subject to French laws. Lee, under whose legal advice Landais
had acted, wrote a long letter to Jones, in which he claimed that it
was clear that Landais commanded the _Alliance_ under the full and
express order of Congress, and no other authority existed which could
dismiss him from the command.

Some attempt was made by the commandant of the port to arrest Landais
and prevent the departure of the _Alliance_. Jones declined to employ
means to prevent her departure, interposing, he says, "to prevent
bloodshed between the subjects of allied powers." The _Alliance_
was hurried out of port with a mutinous crew--many of them in
irons--taking Arthur Lee and a number of civilians as passengers. On
the voyage homeward the officers and crew became dissatisfied with
Landais' conduct, and compelled him to relinquish the command. Mr.
Arthur Lee was particularly incensed against him, and principally
upon his testimony, on his trial by court martial, Landais was
dismissed from the service on the score that he was insane.

The conduct of Jones in thus abandoning his command has been
commented upon at length by his biographers, and variously accounted
for, the consensus of opinion being that, had he really wished to
recover the command, he could have gone on board the _Alliance_ with
his officers as soon as he heard that Landais had taken possession of
her, and would have met with no opposition from Landais, or, if he
had ventured upon personal violence, Jones, being in the right, would
not have been blamable for the consequences. The conduct of Jones
during this extraordinary transaction seems inconsistent with his
general character as a bold and determined fighter, and does not add
to his reputation.

Following the entry in the _Alliance's_ journal, recording the taking
possession of her by Landais, the log continues with "An account of
occurrences in L'Orient, respecting the _Bon Homme Richards_ Officers
& Crew" during the three days they were on shore waiting for orders.
On the 16th of June they were ordered to, and removed on board the
_Ariel_ frigate, that ship having been loaned by the French to assist
in transporting to America clothing and munitions of war, for which
room could not be found on the _Alliance_ and of which our army was
sorely in need. The _Ariel_ was a small frigate, formerly captured
from the English by the squadron under d'Estaing.

The log-book now contains

     A Journall Kept on Board the American Continental Ship
     of War, _Ariel_, of 26--Nine Pounders, Commanded by
     the Honble. John Paul Jones Esqr. commencing in the
     Port of L'Orient June the 16th: 1780.

Although under the date of the 16th, in the account of the
occurrences on shore, is written "Commencement of the _Ariels_
Journall," the first entry following the complete heading is on June
18th.

The remarks on the following days are full of interest. The ship
could hardly have been more than a hulk, in no way prepared for
sea, for until the 8th of October--nearly three months--they show
that she was remasted, sparred, altered, repaired, and refitted
with sails and new rigging, besides receiving on board quantities
of stores, clothing, and munitions of war, destined for America,
that the _Alliance_ had been unable to take. The movements of the
_Alliance_ under Landais are also recorded prior to her departure.
On the 2d of September a grand entertainment was given by Jones,
during which he endeavored to represent the battle with the _Serapis_
to a large and distinguished company. An amusing description of
another entertainment, about December 10th, appears in Fanning's
narrative,[15] who figures in the log entry on the 2d of September as
having been kicked by Jones and ordered below.

[Footnote 15: See Appendix E for Fanning's account of Jones'
entertainment. Although he states it to have occurred about December
10th, it probably is that recorded September 2d in the _Ariel's_ log.]

Although apparently ready for sea early in September, the ship was
moved only to the Roads of Groix, where she lay until the 8th of
October, apparently detained by contrary winds or foul weather. On
that day she got to sea, and on the very night of her departure
encountered a heavy gale which increased to a hurricane the following
day, in which the ship was nearly lost.

The remarks of the 9th and 10th of October describe the distress of
the ship, with some particularity for a formal log entry, but a more
detailed account of this great storm is found in a report signed by
the officers of the _Ariel_ which Jones procured, possibly to confirm
his own report of the gale and its effects, which he gives in his
journal for the King.

He sailed from the Roads of Groix with such a quantity of arms and
powder as filled the ship even between decks; the wind was fair
and weather pleasant, but the next night the _Ariel_ was driven by
the violent tempest close to the rocks of Penmarque, a terrible
ledge between L'Orient and Brest. The ship could show no sail, but
was almost buried under water, not having room to run before the
wind, and having several feet of water in the hold. Finding the
depth of water diminishing fast, Jones in the last extremity cast
anchor, but could not bring the ship's head to the wind. Sometimes
the lower yard-arms touched the water, and Jones had no remedy left
but to cut away the foremast. This had the desired effect, and the
ship immediately came head to the wind. The mainmast had got out of
the step, and now reeled about like a drunken man. Foreseeing the
danger of its either breaking off below the gun-deck or going through
the ship's bottom, Jones ordered it to be cut away, but, before
this could be done, the chain plates gave way, and the mainmast
breaking off by the gun-deck carried with it the mizzenmast, and the
mizzenmast carried away the quarter-gallery; two additional cables
were spliced and veered out. In that situation the _Ariel_ rode in
the open ocean to windward of perhaps the most dangerous ledge of
rocks in the world, for two days and two nights, in a tempest that
covered the shore with wrecks and dead bodies, and that drove ships
ashore from their anchors, even in the port of L'Orient.[16]

[Footnote 16: See Appendix G for Fanning's account of the storm which
wrecked the _Ariel_.]

This terrible gale was felt nearly all over Europe. In the
_Gentleman's Magazine_ for November, 1780, it is stated that "this
dreadful hurricane was one of those tremendous tempests of which two
or three occur in an age." In England it occurred on the night of
Sunday, October 8th, and did immense damage by sea and land. It is a
singular coincidence that, while Jones was experiencing this dreadful
hurricane on the French coast, his opponent of a twelvemonth before
equally felt its effects on the English coast.

In a letter to the Admiralty, dated on board the _Alarm_, at
Plymouth, October 10, 1780, Sir Richard Pearson states as follows:

     I arrived here on the evening of the 8th, it blowing
     very hard at S. E.; the next morning the wind shifted
     suddenly to W. N. W. and blew a gale all yesterday
     from that to W. S. W. and S. W. and continued until
     one or two o'clock this morning; in which I had the
     misfortune to part my two Bowers and Sheet Cable,
     and was reduced to my spare anchor, which I had
     providentially got two cables on, which brought me
     up at eleven o'clock last night, when I found myself
     under the necessity of cutting away all my masts
     for the preservation of his Majesty's ship and the
     lives of my people. I am now in the same distressing
     situation as I was last night.[17]

[Footnote 17: This letter is taken from the papers deposited in the
British Museum, known as the Filkin Manuscripts, in ten note-books.
They contain an extensive collection of memoranda--extracts from
magazines, newspapers, contemporaneous publications, and Admiralty
documents--collected by Mr. Filkin with the intention of writing
another Life of Paul Jones. Mr. Filkin dying, his note-books were
presented to the British Museum. Full copies of them are in the
editor's collection.]

The storm continuing until the morning of the 10th, notwithstanding
the heavy sea Jones succeeded on that and the following day in
getting up jury, fore, and mizzen masts, and on the 11th, at noon,
cut the cable, got under way, and anchored the _Ariel_ on the 13th of
October in the harbor of L'Orient.

The journal of the _Ariel_ ends on the 14th of October. She remained
at L'Orient until the 18th of December, when she again sailed, and
arrived safely in the United States, having encountered an enemy's
ship, supposed by Jones to be named the _Triumph_, which, after a
short resistance, struck her colors, and a few minutes afterward
(according to Jones) her captain had the baseness to fill his sails
and run away. This voyage in the _Ariel_ was the last service at sea
performed by John Paul Jones under the American flag. He arrived in
Philadelphia on February 18, 1781, having been absent from the United
States three years, three months, and eighteen days.

Following the last entry of the _Ariel's_ log, several leaves
have been torn out. The book was reversed again, and immediately
following "A List of The Men Names that has Desarted from The _Bone
Homme Richard_, Lorient July, 19th. 1779" we find, in the identical
handwriting of the logs of the _Serapis_, _Alliance_, and _Ariel_,
"A List of Officers, & Men, belonging to the American Continental
Ship of War, _Ariel_, Commanded, by the Honble, John Paul Jones."
A comparison of this list with the muster-roll of the _Bon Homme
Richard_ shows that most of the officers and many of the crew of the
former still followed the fortunes of Jones.

Upon several pages are also inscribed the following receipts:[18]

[Footnote 18: From these receipts it would appear that the _Queen of
France_ was formerly the _Count d'Artois_. The James Dick who signs
one of the receipts had served on the _Lexington_ as midshipman, had
been a prisoner of war in Mill Prison, was exchanged, and served
on the _Alliance_ with Dale. See Calendar of Jones Manuscripts, p.
182. There were seven privateers or letters-of-marque named _Queen
of France_, of which the bonds are listed in the papers of the
Continental Congress in the Congressional Library.]

     Recd. from Capt. Richard Deal the sum of Twenty one
     pounds seventeen and sixpence for thirty five days
     work on Board the Ship _Count De Artois_. July 27.
     1782.

                                                     Theobald Jennings

and

     Reserved, August the 11--1782 of Mr. Richard Dale
     twenty Eight pounds as an Advance to gow in the Ship
     _Queen of France_----

     L28.00.00.

                                                            James Dick

Another log is also contained in the book. It immediately follows the
"List of the Officers and Crew of the _Ariel_," and is headed, "A
Journal Kept on Board the Ship _Queen of France_, from Cape Henlopen
towards Lorient." Beginning on August 20, 1782, it records the
courses, distances run, the latitudes and longitudes of each day, up
to and including September 10th, when the ship was in latitude 47 deg.
19' N. and longitude 19 deg. 15' W. There are no entries in the column
under "Remarks."

Importance is attached to this log because it shows conclusively that
the book was in the possession of Dale until the end of the cruise of
the _Queen of France_, in February, 1783, about the time of the end
of the Revolution.

From Cooper's "Life of Richard Dale" we learn that after his return
to the United States in the _Ariel_ Jones was anxious to take him
with him to the ship _America_, to which Jones had been appointed,
but Dale declined the service and was employed on the _Trumbull_,
which was captured by an English fleet, and for the fourth time
Dale was made prisoner, but was exchanged in November, 1781. No
new service in the regular navy offering, Dale obtained a furlough
and joined a large letter-of-marque called the _Queen of France_,
that carried twelve guns, as her first officer. Soon after he was
appointed to the command of her and, in company with several other
letters-of-marque, sailed for France, making many captures by the
way. Dale's ship, however, parted from the fleet, and, falling in
with an English privateer of fourteen guns, a severe engagement
followed, in which both parties were much cut up, and they parted by
mutual consent.[19]

[Footnote 19: See Life of Richard Dale, by J. Fenimore Cooper,
Philadelphia, 1846, Vol. II, p. 257.]

Upon the termination of hostilities, in common with most of the
officers of the navy, Dale was "disbanded," and engaged in the East
India trade until 1792, when he was restored to the navy as captain
in the reorganized marine.

It was probably during this period that our log-book passed into the
possession of Jones, who was urging his claims for rank and prize
money before Congress.[20] Failing to obtain what he termed "proper
consideration," after a cruise with the French fleet Jones was
commissioned as agent to look after the prizes made on his cruises
in European waters and sailed for France November 10, 1783, in the
_Washington_, late _General Monk_, the ship captured by Barney in the
_Hyder-Ally_ and then commanded by Barney. Jones left in the care
of a Mr. Hyslop of New York a portion of his papers, being the same
which later turned up in the keeping of the baker in New York, and
upon which Sherburne based his life of Jones, and from him the logs
of the _Ranger_ and _Bon Homme Richard_ appear to have been purchased
in 1824 by Captain Boyd, before alluded to. But Jones took with him
those papers which he deemed most important to the discharge of his
mission to France, not the least of which was the book containing
the muster-roll of the _Bon Homme Richard_, which probably was the
only authentic and official list then in existence, and indispensable
to the proceedings in the French prize courts.

[Footnote 20: For an account of Jones' efforts before Congress to
obtain higher rank on the navy list, see letter from Captain James
Nicholson to Captain John Barry, Appendix B.]

The papers and property of Jones, upon his death in Paris in 1792,
passed to his sister Mrs. Taylor, and upon them as a base followed
the Edinburgh "Life of Jones," also that by Sands--by all conceded to
be the best of the numerous biographies of Jones--while Sherburne's
book, published in 1825, is properly criticized as a chaotic
compilation, creating inextricable confusion in the mind of a reader.

There has always been some difficulty in finding a correct
muster-roll of the _Bon Homme Richard_.[21] The list published by
Sherburne he states is made from "official sources," and is shown
by the correspondence on the subject to have been made from "a
certified copy of a copy." This is undoubtedly the document now in
the Congressional Library, being a copy, written by a Frenchman,
of the muster-roll filed by Jones in the French prize courts and
certified to by him as correct. As this list corresponds with great
exactness to the muster-roll of the officers and crew of the _Bon
Homme Richard_, making due allowances for desertions, men sent away
in prizes, and possibly new enlistments, it seems evident that the
original basis of the lists was that contained in the log-book. The
names of the French volunteers and marines were not entered in the
muster-roll, but were probably ascertained by Jones in France, and
added to the copy filed by him.

[Footnote 21: See correspondence on the subject of the muster-roll
and prize money, Sherburne's Life of Jones, New York, 1851, pp. 266,
364, 365, 366.]

The editor has alluded to the fact that the logs of the _Serapis_,
_Alliance_, and _Ariel_, as well as the list of the officers and crew
of the _Ariel_, are all written by the same hand. The penmanship
is remarkably good, the orthography correct, showing the writer to
have had some pretensions to scholarship and clerical ability, much
more than that shown by either Dale or Lunt. It had been conjectured
that the writer was Midshipman Nathaniel Fanning, who served under
an appointment by Jones on the _Richard_, _Serapis_, _Alliance_,
and _Ariel_. He it was who, stationed in the maintop, threw, or
caused to be thrown, the bomb which, exploding on the gun-deck of the
_Serapis_, created such havoc as to have been largely instrumental in
bringing the action to a close.

Fanning has left a narrative of his life, in which he claims to have
been Jones' private secretary, and to have had close and intimate
relations with him. He also refers to the journal kept by him, and
the dates of the occurrences, as stated at length in his narrative,
correspond with some accuracy with the same events as recorded in the
several logs.[22] The journal of the _Ariel_ ceases when Fanning left
the _Ariel_, probably because of the slight misunderstanding recorded
in the _Ariel's_ log on the 2d of September, an occurrence which
sufficiently accounts for Fanning's severe criticisms of Jones, given
in his narrative, with frequent allusions to his ungovernable temper.

[Footnote 22: Narrative of the Adventures of an American Navy Officer
who served during part of the American Revolution under the Command
of Com. John Paul Jones, New York, Printed for the author, 1806.]

Another reason for the conjecture arose from the fact that the name
of Nathaniel Fanning, as well as that of Beaumont Groube, both in the
muster-roll of the _Richard_ and the _Ariel_, are in the unmistakable
handwriting of the penman of the logs. As opposed to the conjecture,
however, the name of Nathaniel Fanning is spelled Fenning in the
_Richard's_ list, while in that of the _Ariel_ it is correctly
spelled.

This caused the editor to make further investigations, as it was
apparent that if Fanning was not, possibly Midshipman Groube was, the
writer of the logs, particularly as he had been considered competent
to act as judge-advocate of a number of courts martial, and,
inferentially, was a better scholar than other officers under Jones'
command.

Availing himself of the cordial assistance of Mr. Putnam, the
Librarian of Congress, and Mr. Hunt, chief of the Manuscripts
Division, the editor procured a facsimile of a long letter written
by Beaumont Groube to Captain Bell, commanding the privateer
_Luzerne_, then at L'Orient, dated May 3, 1780, when both Groube and
Fanning were attached to the _Alliance_, asking his good offices in
accommodating a quarrel with Lieutenant Degge, one of the officers
then on the _Alliance_.

Upon comparison of the penmanship of this letter with that of the
logs, it was established, beyond any possible doubt, that Midshipman
Groube was the scribe of all three logs, the handwriting being
identical.[23]

[Footnote 23: For facsimiles of a page in the _Serapis'_ journal, and
letter of Midshipman Beaumont Groube, see pp. xxxvi-xxxviii.]

There is a certain amount of interest attached to Midshipman Groube,
growing out of the fact that there are a great many contemporaneous
prints which represent Jones in the act of shooting a Lieutenant
Grubb for attempting to haul down the colors of the _Richard_. As
there was no Lieutenant Grubb in the ship, Groube has been made, by
writers of numerous chap-books, the victim of this act of Jones.
These chap-books are mainly fabrications of their authors and
engravers, and may properly be called the "dime novels" of the period.

Groube probably returned to the United States with Jones in the
_Ariel_, although he discontinued keeping the log on the 14th of
October, 1780. He seems to have disappeared, as no further trace
of him can be found, nor is there any account of his previous
life. It is evident, however, that he was a young man of good
education, as shown by his handwriting and correct spelling--unusual
accomplishments of the sailors of that period--as well as from his
selection as judge-advocate of the many courts martial held on the
officers and men of the _Richard_[24] when that ship was fitting for
sea at L'Orient.

[Footnote 24: Calendar of Jones Manuscripts, in Library of Congress,
pp. 98, 99.]

The editor would call attention to the fact that, although the
greater part of Jones' voluminous correspondence is now deposited
in the Library of Congress, Mrs. Taylor, or her daughter Jeanette
Taylor, parted with many interesting documents, and there are also
to be found in the hands of individuals many others which have never
been published. Besides the log-books here printed--as well
as the log-books of the _Ranger_ and _Bon Homme Richard_ heretofore
referred to--Miss Taylor informed Mr. Cooper that she had given
Jones' original commission as lieutenant, dated August 8, 1776,
to some one in Scotland as an autograph of President Hancock. The
original certificate of Hancock, appointing him to the command of the
_Providence_, is in the editor's collection, while his commission,
dated October 10, 1776, of which Sherburne in his edition of 1851
prints a facsimile, is now in private hands.

     On the following four pages are reproduced for the
     purpose of a comparison of the handwriting facsimiles
     of the first page of the _Serapis'_ log, and opposite
     it a page from a letter by Beaumont Groube. On the two
     subsequent pages are the continuation of the letter
     and a page from the ship's muster-roll. Almost at a
     glance it can be seen that the two signatures were
     written by the same hand and that the writing in
     the log and that in the letter are identical as to
     penmanship.

[Illustration: Facsimiles of the first page.]

Miss Taylor also presented to a relative the original certificate
of Jones' membership in the Society of the Cincinnati, signed by
Washington, dated October 31, 1785, which is now owned by Colonel
N. Arnott of Edinburgh, a descendant of the Paul family.[25]
The original commission of Jones authorizing him to arrange the
difficulties with the Barbary powers is in the remarkable collection
of Mr. Grenville Kane, of New York. Eighteen autograph letters from
and to Jones are now offered for sale by a London dealer for the
modest sum of $5,000; these evidently escaped from the Taylor family.

[Footnote 25: See Notes on a Wax Medallion, and Relative Letter, of
Paul Jones, by Francis Caird Inglis, F.S.A. Scot., 1906, p. 18.]

The editor has deemed it not uninteresting, although not immediately
connected with the principal object of this publication, to refer to
the dispersion of Jones' letters and public documents, and to print
in the Appendix an interesting letter to Commodore Esek Hopkins,[26]
also a letter from Captain James Nicholson to Commodore John Barry
relating to Jones' efforts before Congress to be placed at the
head of the navy, both of which are in the editor's collection of
manuscripts. In the Appendix will also be found a copy of a letter
of Jones, addressed to John Wendell--which as a composition may
be considered as one of the most remarkable of all his epistolary
effusions. The original letter is now in the possession of the
Wendell family. None of these letters have ever been published.[27]

[Footnote 26: See Appendix C.]

[Footnote 27: See Appendix D.]

In concluding this preamble to the logs, it will be noted that the
editor has supplemented the ship's stories by drawing largely upon
the accounts of the events, barely touched upon in the remarks to
be found in the numerous biographies of John Paul Jones, and upon
the papers relating to his career now deposited in the Congressional
Library. This has been done because it was possible that, as the
biographies are out of print and rather scarce, they might not be
readily available to many of the readers.

The first authentic "Life of Jones," throwing aside the numerous
so-called chap-books, was that of Andre, published in French in
Paris, 1798, translated and republished in "Niles' Register" for
the year 1812. Following the discovery of Jones' letters, Sherburne
produced his first edition in 1825. The manuscript of this first
edition he sent also to John Murray in London, who caused it to be
edited by Disraeli, later the Earl of Beaconsfield, and published the
book in the same year, 1825.[28] The preface of this book, according
to the editor of the "Life of Disraeli," was the earliest appearance
of Disraeli as an author. Sherburne was aware of the existence of
the papers in the possession of the Taylor family, and endeavored to
obtain them; but his request was refused, as they were already in the
hands of the author of the Edinburgh "Life of Jones," published in
1830.

[Footnote 28: The Life of Paul Jones, from original documents in the
possession of John Henry Sherburne esq., Register of the Navy of
the United States. London: John Murray, Albemarle Street, MDCCCXXV.
Also, The Life of Benjamin Disraeli, Earl of Beaconsfield, by William
Flavelle Monypenny, New York, 1910, pp. 60-61.]

Then followed the "Life of Jones" by Robert C. Sands, from the
original letters and manuscripts in the possession of Miss Jeanette
Taylor--New York, 1830. Mackenzie's "Life," in 1845, and Cooper's
"Life," in 1846--both based upon Sands and Sherburne--contain but
few additional matters of interest. Sherburne's "Life," published in
1825, was so freely criticized that a second edition, corrected and
enlarged, was published in 1851.

Several other lives of Paul Jones, simply reproductions of the
foregoing, with illustrations, and in cheaper popular form, have also
appeared, worthy of place only in a bibliography. Later we have the
"Life" by Buell, which, although he calls it a history, is simply a
pleasing, popular romance.

The history of the logs here reproduced may be thought somewhat
obscure, being founded upon some conjectures, deductions, and
probabilities, as well as absolute facts. The editor purchased the
log-book at the sale of the library of Mr. S. L. M. Barlow, of New
York, in 1889, it being item No. 2760 in the catalogue prepared by
Mr. J. O. Wright. Mr. Wright states that Mr. Barlow acquired the book
through Mr. Harrisse or Mr. Stevens, of London, some time previous to
1869.

The portrait facing the title-page has been selected from the
numerous engraved portraits of Jones as not only the best authentic
likeness taken from life, excepting perhaps the bust by Houdon, but
the earliest in point of execution, having been drawn by a celebrated
artist, Moreau le Jeune, in May, 1780, when Jones was in command of
the _Alliance_, at L'Orient.

The portrait by Charles W. Peale, now in Independence Hall,
Philadelphia, was executed seven years later, and has been
reproduced many times. A comparison of the two with the Houdon
bust demonstrates at once that the Moreau le Jeune portrait is by
far the more faithful likeness, and of a greater personality than
Peale's painting, with which we are more familiar. The great number
of engraved contemporaneous so-called portraits of Jones attest the
interest attached to his career in Europe. Many of them are purely
imaginative, and exist in all forms of engraving from the grand folio
mezzotint to the absurd caricature, and have formed the special
object of pursuit by many collectors of Americana, with the result
of extraordinary values for the rare ones, including the one here
reproduced.

The most remarkable collection of Jones' portraits, and pictures
relating to Jones' career, is that of Mr. Grenville Kane, of New York.

The picture of the engagement is a rare print, and has been selected
instead of the more familiar one taken from the painting by Richard
Paton.

The original painting by Paton is owned by the heirs of Lord Amherst,
whose ancestral estate included Flamborough Head, off which the
famous battle was fought. It has recently been offered for sale for
the sum of L3000.

In concluding this introduction to the logs, it has been the editor's
purpose to avoid repeating the incidents of Jones' life related in
his numerous biographies or quoting literally from his voluminous
correspondence, but he has referred to them only in so far as they
seemed to be connected in some measure with the log stories. The
letters given in the Appendix have been copied from the originals and
have never before been printed, while the extracts from Fanning's
narrative are taken from a book of which very few copies are in
existence.

A reprint of this narrative has been contemplated by the executive
committee as one of the future publications of the Society, it being
the only known autobiography of a man and officer who served under
Jones in European waters.

It remains for the editor to express his acknowledgments to Mr.
Robert W. Neeser, the secretary of the Society, for his very able
assistance in the preparation of this volume for the press, in
correcting and revising the proof-sheets, and in verifying the
references.

To Mr. Herbert Putnam, Librarian of the Congressional Library, and
his able assistants Mr. Gaillard Hunt and Mr. J. C. Fitzpatrick, the
editor's thanks are due for their interest and assistance, as well as
to Mr. Charles W. Stewart, the Librarian of the Navy Department.

The absence of Rear-admiral Goodrich, at whose instance the Naval
History Society was organized, this publication undertaken, and
whose cooeperation was expected, has contributed to the delay in the
publication, for which the editor begs the indulgence of the members
of the Society.

[Illustration: _Print Published in London, First of December, 1781_

_By John Harris, Sweetings Alley, Cornhill._

"_To the Merchants trading to Russia, this Print representing the
gallant Defence of Capt.n Pearson in his Majesty's Ship Serapis,
and the Countess of Scarborough Arm'd Ship Capt.n Piercy, against
Paul Jones's Squadron, whereby a valuable Fleet from the Baltic were
prevented from falling into the hands of the Enemy, is with the
greatest respect Inscribed by their Humble Servant._

                                                      _John Harris._"]

[Illustration: Ship.]




THE LOGS OF THE SERAPIS--ALLIANCE--ARIEL




(List of Officers and Men of the Continental Ship, Bon Homme Richard)

(July the 26th, 1779)

  ========================+=====+==================+==============
  _Place & Time of Entry_ |_No._|   _Mens Names_   | _Qualities_
  ------------------------+-----+------------------+--------------
                          |     |                  |
                          |     | Robert Robison[1]| Lieutenant
                          |     |                  |
  Nantes March 4th        |     | Richad Dale      |
                          |     |                  |
  Pimbauf April 5th       |     | Henry Lunt       |
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | Cutting Lunt     | Master
                          |     |                  |
                          |     | Matthews         | Purser
                          |     |                  |
                          |     | Lawrence Brooks  | Surgeon
                          |     |                  |
                          |     | William Smith    | Masters Mate
                          |     |                  |
                          |     | Samuel Stacey    |   Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Dinan March 16th        |     | John White       |   Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Pimbauf April 5th       |     | Joshua Carswell  |   Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere March 19th       |     | Reuben Chase     | Midshipman
                          |     |                  |
  Pimbauf April 5th       |     | Benjamin Stubbs  |   Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Havar Degrace April 11th|     | Thomas Potter    |   Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  L'Orient June 5th       |     | Beaumont Groube  |   Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Lorient June 15         |     | John Meyrant     |   Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto 15          |     | John Linthweith  |   Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto 15          |     | William Daniel   |   Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto 15          |     | Richard Corum    |   Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Nantz                   |     | Nathl. Fenning   |
                          |     |                  |
  Antreum March 19        |     | Stepen Lee       | Captains Clark
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere May 21           |     | John Peacock     | Surgeons Mate
                          |     |                  |
  Pimbauf April 5th       |     | John Burbank     | Master a Arms
                          |     |                  |
  Nates February 22th     |     | John Conner      | Gunner
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere March 19th       |     | John Robinson    | Coxswain
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto             |     | Andrew Lendsey   | Boatswain
                          |     |                  |
  Pimbauf April 5         |     | John Gunnison    | Carpenter
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | Joshua Brewster  | Cooper
                          |     |                  |
  Brest March 2d.         |     | William Sturges  | Armourer
                          |     |                  |
  Nantes  April 5th       |     | Daniel Russell   | Steward
                          |     |                  |
  Havar Degrace April 1st |     | William Clarke   | Sailmaker
                          |     |                  |
  Pimbauf April 5         |     | Jacob True       | Yoeman powder roome.
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere March 19th       |     |John Thomas =Cook=| Cook--- ---
                          |     |                  |
                          |     |                  | Gunners Mate
                          |     |                  |
                          |     |                  |   Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  =Brest March 2=         |     |=Richard Williams=| =Boatswain Mate=
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere May 21           |     | Richard Williams | Boatswain, Mate
                          |     |                  |
  Brest March 2           |     | Edward Garrett   |   Ditto
                          |     |                  |
                          |     |                  |   Ditto
                          |     |                  |
                          |     |                  |   Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Nantes March 15th       |     | Thomas Miller    | Carpenter Mate
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto 15          |     | William Physick  |   Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Pimbauf April 5th       |     | John Madden      | yoeman at Armes
                          |     |                  |
                          |     |                  |   Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere March 19th       |     | John Haynes      | Boatswain Ditto
                          |     |                  |
                          |     |                  | Gunners Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Nanys April 5th         |     | Icabad Lord      | Carpenters yeoman
                          |     |                  |
  Brest March 2th         |     | William Roberts  | Coopers Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere March 19th       |     | Thomas Davis     | Armourers Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Haver Degrace April 1th |     | Hugh Woulton     | Sailmakers Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Brest March 2d.         |     | George Campbell  | Cooks--Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto-Ditto do.         |     | Joseph Holland   | Ditto--Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | John Williams    | Quarters Masters
                          |     |                  |
  Nants April 15th        |     | James Conner     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto. Ditto do.        |     | Robert Steel     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto April 5th         |     | George Tufathan  | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Lorient ditto 20th      |     | Robert Towers    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Haver Degrace ditto 23th|     | William Thompson | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere March 19th       |     | John Woulton     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Brest Ditto 2th         |     | Robert Stevens   | Quarter Gunner
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto. Ditto 2th        |     | Arthur Randall   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  =Ditto Ditto 2th=       |     |                  |
                          |     |                  |
  Nants ditto .. 15       |     | James Whelton    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto 15th        |     | Thomas Mc.Carthy | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Lorient April 20th      |     | Jonathan Wells   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Haver Degrace April 1th |     | Robert Mc.Cormick| Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Denant May 23th         |     | William Barry    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto-Ditto 23th        |     | Thomas Cooks     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Pimbauf April 5th       |     | John Down        | Quarter Gunner
                          |     |                  |
  Lorient July 19the      |     | Francis Campbell | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere. March 19the     |     | William Lee      | .. Yeoman Forecastle
                          |     |                  |
  ditto. ditto 19the      |     | John Robinson    | ... Yeoman Main top
                          |     |                  |
  ditto. ditto 19the      |     | John Murphy      |         ditto
                          |     |                  |
  ditto. ditto 19the      |     | Thomas Jones     | ... Do. Mizen top
                          |     |                  |
  Nants. ditto 15the      |     | William Johnston | ditto Fore top
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere March 19the      |     | John Brown       | ditto--ditto
                          |     |                  |
  ditto May 21th,         |     | James Nicholson  | ditto after guard
                          |     |                  |
  Dinan March 16th        |     | John Balch       | ditto--ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Brest March 2th         |     | Michael Woolf    | Seaman
                          |     |                  |
  ditto, Ditto 2          |     | Thomas Turner    | ditto
                          |     |                  |
  ditto ditto. 2th        |     | Jacob Andrews    | ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto 2th         |     | John Sheas       | ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Denaunt March 16th      |     | James Waggarell  | ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto 16         |     | Hugh Gorman      | ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto 16         |     | Gilbert Crumb    | ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto 16         |     | Thomas Bartlet   | ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto 16         |     | James Smith      | ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere March 19th       |     | Barnaby Kirk     | ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto 19th        |     | George Hayes     | ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto 19th       |     | Thomas White     | ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto 19th       |     | Henry Martin     | ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Denant March 16th       |     |Robert Weatherhead| ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere March. 19th      |     | Isaac Lane       | Seaman
                          |     |                  |
  Lorient, April 20th     |     | Arthur Young     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto.-Ditto do.        |     | Richard Fell     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto..Ditto do.        |     | Robert Hill      | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | William Fox      | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto..Ditto do.        |     | James Yuney      | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto..Ditto do.        |     | Duncan Taylor    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto..Ditto do.        |     | John Mc.Kinlay   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Nants, March 15th       |     | George Walker    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto.-Ditto do.        |     | William Adamson  |Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | Michael Thompson |Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | William Wilson   |Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | James Kirby      |Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | David Kirk       |Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto-do.        |     | Lewis Brown      |Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | John Harriment   |Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | James Evans      |Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | John Hart        |Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Haver Degrace April 1th |     | William Hamilton | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Brest March the IId.    |     | John West        | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere May 21th         |     | John Whright     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Fuger March 19th        |     | John Pierce      | Seaman
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere May 21th         |     | Robert Dougherty | Seaman
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | Richard Hughes   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto..Ditto do.        |     | John Brown       | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto..Ditto do.        |     | Adam Mc.Creight  | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto..Ditto do.        |     | William Clidodale| Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto..Ditto do.        |     |John Williams, the 2.| Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto..Ditto do.        |     | Michael Slater   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto..Ditto do.        |     | Joseph Landcraft | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | Ezra Abbot       | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Denant May 23th         |     | John Conner      | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto..do.        |     | Lawrence Driskell| Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto-Ditto do.         |     | Henry Phillips   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Lorient May 27th        |     |=John= Jonathan Stell| Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto April 20th        |     | Jacques Morean   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto June 14th         |     | James Johnston   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto 14          |     | George Kelson    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto 14          |     | Joseph Walker    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Nants March 13th        |     | Andrew Thompson  | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Pimbauf April 5th       |     | John Mc.Caffrey  | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere, May 21th        |     | Thomas Cane      | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto March 19the       |     | Benjamin Morris  | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere May 21th         |     | John Hall        | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
         1779.            |     |                  |
                          |     |                  |
  Dinant March 16th       |     | Edward Conner    | Ordinary Seaman
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere March 19the      |     | James Mc.Kinzee  | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Lorient April 20the     |     | Robert Mc.Colloch| Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Brest March 2the        |     | Robert Rowen     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto 2          |     | David Prichard   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto 2           |     | Nicholass Lawless| Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto..Ditto 2          |     | Andrew Ryan      | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto-Ditto 2           |     | Samuel Mathews   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Dinant March 16th       |     | John Hayney      | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto 16          |     |Thomas Cane, the first| Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto 16          |     | Lawrence Furlong | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere March 19the      |     | W. Thomas Forrest| Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto 19         |     | Stephen Ously    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto 19          |     | Thomas Harris    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Lorient April 20th      |     | Robert Jones     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Paimbauf April 5th      |     | Robert Mahany    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Lorient April 20th      |     | John Colbreath   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere May 21th,        |     | Edward Loyd      | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto, Ditto do.        |     | James Crauford   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | John Hammond     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do          |     | Daniel McCarty   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  =Ditto Ditto d=         |     |                  |
                          |     |                  |
  Lorient June 12th,      |     | Lawrence Vernus  | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Lorient June 14th       |     | James Kindrick   | Ordinary Seaman
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto-Ditto 14          |     | Joseph Love      | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto. Ditto 14         |     | John Lighton     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto-Ditto 14          |     |Joseph Louen. french man,| Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Dinant March 19th       |     | George Johnston  | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  =Lorient June 12th=     |     | =Joseph Love=    | =Ditto=
                          |     |                  |
  Lorient July 19         |     | Francis Campblle | Seaman
                          |     |                  |
  Brest March 2th         |     | Anthony Jeremy   | Landsman
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto-Ditto 2th         |     | William Mallet   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto 2th         |     | John Ridway      | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto 2th         |     | George Munnical  | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto-Ditto 2th         |     | Richard Williams | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto-Ditto 2th         |     | Robert Marshall  | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto-Ditto 2th         |     | James Power      | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto 2th        |     | John Jordan      | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere March 19th       |     | James Parry      | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere March 19         |     | George Williams  | Landsman
                          |     |                  |
  Do. Do.                 |     | James Martin     | Do.
                          |     |                  |
  Do Do.                  |     | Henry Couzen's   | Do.
                          |     |                  |
  Do. Do.                 |     | Alexr Cooper     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | John Mc.Donnald  | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Lorient April do.       |     | Stephens Graves  | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | Meacum McDonal   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | Thomas Davis     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  ditto ditto do.         |     | William Thomson, | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | William Morgan   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | Robert Mastres   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto--do.       |     | John Gray        | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | Peter Richardson | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | John Damster     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | Joseph Stewart   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | Samuel Fergurson | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Pimbauf April 5th       |     | Samuel Fletcher  | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto. Ditto do.        |     | Ichabod Shaw     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | Thomas Hammet    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | Stephen Loley    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | Abisha Rogers    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | Aron Goodwin     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto. Ditto do.        |     | Nathl. Kennard   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Dinant March 16th       |     | William Smith    | Landsman
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto 16         |     | Simon Searle     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto. Ditto 16         |     | Simon Williams   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto. Ditto 16         |     | Joseph Crooks    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere May 21the        |     | Peter Corster    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto. Ditto do.        |     | Andrew Maison    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto. Ditto do         |     | William Woodhead | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Lorient April 20th,     |     |William Cullingwood.| Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  =Ditto Ditto do.=       |     | John Smart       | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Dinant, March 16th      |     |                  |
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto..Ditto. do.       |     | Stephen McCoy    | Ditto, Taylor
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere March 19th       |     | Charles Ryley    | Ditto, Taylor
                          |     |                  |
  Pimbauf April 5the      |     | Thomas Knight    | Carpenter
                          |     |                  |
  Nants March 15the       |     | James Linn       | Barber
                          |     |                  |
  Lorient April 20th      |     | Joseph Collison  | Carpenter
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto..Ditto 20th       |     | John Handerhan   | Joyner
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto..Ditto 20th       |     | John Rice        | Cooper
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto..Ditto 18the      |     | Jacques Connou   | Carpenter
                          |     |                  |
  =Ditto Ditto do.=       |     |                  |
                          |     |                  |
  Dinant March 19         |     | Thomas Cole      | Landsman
                          |     |                  |
  Brest March 2the        |     | Peter Nuddle     | Boy
                          |     |                  |
  Dinant March 16the      |     | Chales Finch     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere March 19th       |     | Patrick Condon   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Brest March 2th         |     | Daniel Swain     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | Joseph Brussen   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | William Totten   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | Richard Jeffers  | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Fugere March 19th       |     |John Jones the 1d.| Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | Joseph Burns     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto-Ditto 20th        |     | John Flood       | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | Samuel Higgens   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | John Duffy       | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto-Ditto do.         |     | John Jones the 2d| Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto-Ditto do.         |     | John Stephens    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | Jeremiah Loney   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | Alexander Mc.Donnald| Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | Chals Donnelly   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | Daniel Murphy    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do         |     | John Panherman   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto-Ditto do.         |     | John Cox         | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto-Ditto do.         |     | William Knox     | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | Aron Smith       | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | Abram Martell    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     |William Shewsberry| Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Pimbauf April 5th       |     | Nathaniel Bayly  | Boy
                          |     |                  |
  Nants March 15th        |     | Henry Humphreys  | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | William Langum   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | John Moore       | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Lorient April 20the     |     | James Mehanny    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | James Mane       | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | John Crowly      | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | Hugh Mc.Intire   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | William Wilkinson| Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | Robert Mc.Cullock| Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | Daniel Cammeron  | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | Angus Campbil    | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto--Ditto do.        |     | David Stockton   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | Elijah Middleton | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do.         |     | Christy Yeatly   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do          |     | George Harraway  | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do          |     | Robert Seaford   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do          |     | John Jordan      | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Havre Degrace May 1th   |     | Francis Perkins  | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Lorient April 30th      |     | Lewis Role Johnno| Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto Ditto do          |     | Jacques Blorgu   | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Ditto April 20          |     |William Carmichael| Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Nantes March 15th       |     | Nathaniel Bonnon | Ditto
                          |     |                  |
  Brest March 2th         |     | James Williams   | Boy
                          |     |                  |
  Lorient July 19the      |     | John Hackit      | Ditto
                          |     |                  |



A List of Officers and Men, belonging to the American Continental
Ship of War (Ariel) Commanded by the Honble John Paul Jones Esqr[29]

[Footnote 29: This inscription in Beaumont Groube's handwriting
occurs on this page. It is repeated again on p. 20. Groube evidently
saw that there was not room here for the list, the following pages
being already filled in.]


A List of The Men Names that has Desarted from
The Bone Homme Richard, Lorient July. 19th. 1779

  =====================================================================================================================
  Place & Time of Entry    |No.|     Mens Names     |     Qualities      |  Place & Time Desarted     | Time Returned
  -------------------------+---+--------------------+--------------------+----------------------------+----------------
  Pimbauf April 5th        |  1| Richard Soward     | Midshipman         |  Lorient July 9th          |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Fugere March 19th        |  2| Andrew Lindsay     | Boatswain          |  Lorient July 9            |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Nantes                   |  3| Ebenezer Hoog      | Stewart            |  Lorient July 10th         |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Lorient                  |  4|                    | Surgeons, Mate     |  Lorient July 7            |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Ditto                    |  5|                    | Ditto              |  Ditto Ditto do.           |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Pimbauf March 15th       |  6| James Ennion       | Seaman             |  Ditto Ditto 3th           |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Ditto Ditto do.          |  7| Thomas Powel       | Ditto              |  Ditto Ditto do.           |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Ditto Ditto do.          |  8| William Campbell   | Landsman           |  Ditto Ditto do.           |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Dinaunt March 16th       |  9| Cooper McConnell   | Seaman             |  Ditto Ditto 4th,          |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Nantes Ditto 15th        | 10| Joseph Curtis      | Ditto              |  Ditto Ditto do.           |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Lorient April 20th       | 11| Alexander Mcnarren | Ditto              |  Ditto Ditto do.           |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Ditto Ditto do.          | 12| William Hudgson    | Ditto              |  Ditto Ditto do.           |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Nantes March 15th        | 13| John Lumbley       | Ditto              |  Ditto Ditto 6do.          |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Brest March 2th          | 14| William Hannover   | Ditto              |  Ditto Ditto do.           |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Ditto Ditto 2the         | 15| John Timlen        | Ordinary Seaman    |  Ditto Ditto do.           |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Fugere Ditto 19the       | 16| John Campbell      | Seaman             |  Ditto Ditto do.           |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Haver Degrace April 1th  | 17| Archibald Mc.Kinlay| Ditto              |  Ditto Ditto 11th          |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Lorient April 20the      | 18| William Gibson     | Ditto              |  Ditto Ditto 9the          |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Ditto Ditto do.          | 19| William Lister     | Landsman           |  Ditto Ditto do.           | July the 19
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Brest March 2th          | 20| James Sommers      | Ordinary Seaman    |  Ditto Ditto 11the         |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Lorient April 20th       | 21| Vaughan Bell       | Landsman           |  Ditto Ditto do.           | July the 19
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Fugere March 19the       | 22| Emanuel Miles      | Ordinary Seaman    |  Ditto Ditto do.           |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Nantes March 15th        | 23| William Hall       | Quarter gunner     |  Ditto Ditto do.           |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Lorient April 20th       |   | John McIntire      | Seaman             |  Ditto Ditto do.           |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Nants April 5the         |   | Elischa Johnston   | Quarter gunner     |  Ditto Ditto do.           |
                           |   |                    |                    |                            |
  Pimbauf April 5th        |   | John Atwood        | Landsman           |  Lorient July 6the         |



A List of Officers, & Men, belonging to the American Continental Ship
of War, Ariel, Commanded, by the Honble, John Paul Jones

  =========================================================================================================================
    _No._ |    _Mens Names_     | _Qualy._  |_No._|    _Mens Names_     | _Qualy._     |_No._|  _Mens Names_     | _Seamen_
  --------+---------------------+-----------+-----+---------------------+--------------+-----+-------------------+------------
          | Richd. Dale         | Lieut.    | 0   | Jno Bourbank        | Masr Arms    | 0'  | Willm. Lee        | do
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
          | Henry Lunt          | do.       |     | Edwd. Garrett       | Bon Mate     | '0  | Danl. Willott     | do
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
          | Saml. Stacey        | Mastr.    | 0   | Martin Shaw         | do.          | '0  | Jno Wilson        | do
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
          | Mattw. Maize        | Purser    | 0   | Wm. Roberts         | Coopr.       | '0  | Jno Mosey         | do
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
          | Amos Windship       | Surgn.    | 0   | Jno Gates           | Gunrs Mate   | 0'  | Gerlano Bairdo    | do
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
          | John Frankford      | Mrs Mte.  |     | Preservd Syssell    | Gunr Mate    | 0'  | Antonio Sponza    | do
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
          |                     |           | Dd. | Josh. Walker        | Gunrs. Yeon. | --  | Pier Locby        | do run Augt. 5
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
          | Thos. Potter        | Mid       |     |                     |              | 1   | Andw. Markhouse   | do Hoste.
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
          | Beaut Groube        | Mid       | 0   | Jno Woulton         | Qr Masr.     | '0  | Pedro Ambregue    | do
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
          | Natl. Fanning       | Mid       | 0   | Valente. Strong     | do           | 0'  | Antonio Mazzingay | do.
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
          | Joseph Hitchborn    | Mid       | 0'  | Elizh. Johnston     | Qr Gunr.     | 0'  | Augustino Martino | do
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
          | Artr. Robinson      | Mid       | 0   | Jno Down            | do           | '0  | Bernardo Jo Vera  | do
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
  run     | Jonathn. Lander     | Mid       | 0'  | Wm. Clarke[1]       | do           | 1   | Thos. Golligan    |
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
          | Khervillon          | Dischd.   | 0'  | Thos. Austin        | do           | 1   | Richd Stephens    |
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
          | John Peacock        | Surge Mat | 1   | Thos. Knight        | Carpr        | --  | Jno Duboy         | run August 10
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
  run     | John Daily          | do        | 1   | Jno Handerham       | do           | --' | Harry Tommy       | run Sep 14
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
          | Abisha Perkins[1]   | do        | 1   | Wm. Priest          | do.          | 0'  | Louis Groa        |
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
  run     | John Chester        | Carpr.    | 1   | Edwd. Cooney        | Sean.        | 0'  | Jno Obrey         |
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
          | Jno. Wheeler        | Gunr      | 1   | Wm. Pool.           | Sean.        | 0   | Josh. Antoine     |
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
  run     | Danl. Russell       | Stewd     | '0  | Banj: Stubbs        | do.          |     |                   |
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
  0       | Jno Gunnison        | Carprs.   | 1   | Lawe. Furlong       | do.          |     |                   |
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
          |                     | Mate      | '0  | Jno Browne          | do.          |     |                   |
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
          |                     |           | '0  | Andrew Ryan         | do.          |     |                   |
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |                   |
  ================================================================================================================
    _No._ |  _Mens Names_       | _Quality_ |_No._|    _Mens Names_     | _Qualy._     |_No._|  _Boys_
  --------+---------------------+-----------+-----+---------------------+--------------+-----+--------------------
   '0     | Aaron Goodwin       | Ory. Sean.| '0  | John Thompson       | Landn.       | '0  | Saml. Getchell
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
   1      | Geo. Johnston       |  do.      |  1  | Wm. Mc.Cullock      |  do.         | '0  | Jno. Wier
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
   1      | Saml. Matthews      |  do.      |  1  | Chas. Riley         |  do          | '0  | Jno Dupee
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
   '0     | Danl. Swain         |  do.      | '0  | Jno Warren          |  do          | '0  | Saml. Gray
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
   1      | Jno Rudderford      |  do       | '0  | Isaih Jordan        |  do.         |  1  | James Chester Run
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
   '0     | Peter Nuddle        |  do       |     | Nichs. Caldwell     |  do          |  1  | James Mahany Run
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
   0'     | Richd. Wilson       |  do.      | '0  | Lewis Pastillo      |  do          | '0  | John Duffy
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
   0      | Jno Hatton          |  do       |  0' | Alexr. Mayson       |  do.         |  0' | John Hackett
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
   '0     | Jno Ungey           |  do       |  1  | Vinun Marc          |  do          |  0  | Elizh. Middleton
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
   0-1/2' | Lewis Lennard.      | do.       | '0  | Pier Villerett      |  do.         |  0  | Wm. Ears
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
   '0     | Dominique Portuguese| do        |  0  | --Gulliam Langlois  |              |     | Chas. Glover--Capt Clerk
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
   '0     | Joseph Morea.       | do        |  0  | --Noehauless        |  do.         |     | Jno Gilbin
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
   '0     | Lewis Marlin        | do.       |     |                     |              |1/2 0| Tusan Lucas
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
   0'     | Jacob Henry         | do        |     |                     |              |1/2 0| Jno Mai
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
          | Francoi Bullon      | do        |     |                     |              |     | =Josh. Cushon=
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
   1+     | Jno Thomas          | do        |  0  | Jas. Makenzy        | Cripples     | 1/2 | { Sam: Hammon
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |    0| {
   0      | Amos Wait           | do.       |  0  | Jno Jordan          |  do          | 1/2 | { Aaron Burges
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
   1/2'0  | John Marlin+        | do Run    |  0  | Joseph Brussen      |  do          |     | =Louis Cushon=
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
   '0     | Joanna Cushero      | do.       |     |                     |              |1/2 0| Jacque Blorga
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
   0      | Jean Romaine        | do.       |     |                     |              |     | Joseph Courdavieta
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
          | Andrew              |           |     |                     |              |     | =Tixtheren=
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
   Oct. 7 | =Edward= Roach      |           |     |                     |              |1/2 0| Titzerre
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
          | Michal Mc. Graw     |           |  0  | Abrm. Martell.      | Servt.       |  0  | Robert Cudriaux
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
   Oct. 18| Robert Tommas       |           |     | Antoine Jeremy      |  do          |  0  | Claud Le Maitre
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
          |                     |           |     | Chas. Priley        |  do.         |     |
          |                     |           |     |                     |              |     |
          |                     |           |     | Chas. Steward.      |  do          |     |


Remarks on Friday 24th, Sepr. 1779

The first part of this 24 Hours light Breese of Wind and clear
Weather At 2 P.M. sent away the Pilot Boat with the 2d. Lieutenant
and a number of Marines Arm'd; after a Brigg to the Windward lying
too under her Fore Topsail At 3 P.M. saw a Fleet to the leeward among
them appear'd to be two Ship's of War made a Signal for the Alliance
to give Chase at 1/2 past 3 P.M. fir'd a Gun at the Boat for =the
Boat= her to return to us; she Bore away for us & at Do. we made
Sail gave Chase to the two Ships that were to the leeward of us that
appeard to be =Arm'd= Ships of War; The Pallas and Brigg Vengeance
gave Chase likewise at 5 P.M. The Fleet stood in for the Land & the
two =Arm'd= Ships of War hove too ready for engaging of us we Bore
away for to meet them & got the Ship ready for engaging (all Hands
being at their Quarters) at 6 P.M. spoke the Pallas and Ordered her
to Keep astern of us; at 1/2 past 6 P.M. hoisted a Signal for the
rest of the Squadron to form a line at Do. =hailed the largest Ship=
One of the Ships hailed us; Answers of no great Consequence return'd.
=The= The Capt. of the Ship; that appeard to be the largest said tell
me Instantly from whence You came and who You be or i'll fire a Broad
side into You; finding her to be an Enemy discharg'd a Broadside into
her which She return'd after exchanging three or four Broadsides
came to Yard Arm, & Yard Arm, in which posture both ships lay the
rest of the engagement; lash'd the Enemies Ship to Ours; after we
had engag'd about an Hour the Alliance came up and rak'd us twice;
kill'd and wounded a Number of our Men; The engagement was so hot
that both Ships got on fire several times; which was put out with as
much expedition as possible by the Men belonging to each Ship; all
this time the engagement was exceeding warm. Both ships keeping up
a heavy fire with Cannon and small Arms; just before the engagement
ended saw the Alliance coming down upon us hailed her and Orderd
her to Board the Enemy immediately but she return'd no answer; shot
ahead of us and raked Both Ships; the Enemy then crying for Quarters
Capt. Jones said, haul your Colours down then; which was granted
immediately & our People took possession of her; She afterwards fir'd
three Guns & wounded several of Our Men while they were Boarding of
her; She struck to us at 1/2 past 10 P.M. at Do. cast the Ship off
from us, and as soon as we got Clear of her; her Main Mast fell over
her Side; She prov'd to be the Serapis of 46 Guns the latter part of
the Night all employed in putting out the fire in different parts of
the Ship and in Pomping she having not less than =two= three foot of
Water in her Hold; The Carpenters employed in stoping the leeks with
the assistance of the Carpenters from the Other Ships; The leek still
gaining on us; we were supply'd with Men from the other Ships; who
assisted in heaving the Lower Deck Guns overboard & the Dead Men &c---

25th. The first part of this 24 Hours Moderate Breeses & Clear
Weather. The leak still increasing got assistance from the other
Ships of Officers & Men some of whom assisted in Pomping The leak
still gaining on us Notwithstanding all the Pomps were at work. The
Carpenters crying out that it was impossible to stop the leak At 2
P.M. Capt. Jones with the Capt. & Lieutenant of the Prize; quitted
the Ship & left Orders to keep the Pomps agoing & the Carpenters at
Work; at 7 He return'd and found the leak increasing in Consequence
of which He Order'd the wounded to be Carried on Board the different
Vessels & things that was most Necessary to be taken out of the Ship;
Boats from the rest of the Squadron were employed for that purpose.
At 1/2 past 7 P.M. the Capt. left the Ship with several more of the
Officers =&= repar'd on Board of the Prize; At 10 P.M. the Capt. sent
for the Master of the Ship; & Orders for the Officers then on Board
that did not belong to her, to repair on Board their respective Ships
with their Men, they immediately quitted the Pomps and Obeyed Orders;
Boats were employed the latter part of the Night in Carrying the Men
& things that were most Necessary from the Ship to the different
Vessels in the Squadron; At 4 A.M. quitted the Pomps the Water then
being almost up to the lower Deck; At 10 Do. every Man left the Ship
At 1/2 Past 10 A.M. there was a Boat sent from the Commodore The
Serapis to go on Board the Bon homme Richard But before the Boat got
along side She Sunk which was about 11 A.M. latter Part Fresh Breeses
and a large Sea----

     NOTE:--This account, in the handwriting of Lieutenant
     Henry Lunt, was originally written in the Serapis'
     log, from which it was torn, and now is in the John
     Paul Jones Papers, Peter Force Collection, Vol. VI.,
     No. 29. These pages, in facsimile, have now been
     inserted in their proper place in the original logs.

Some Remarkable Occurrences that happened on the 23d day of September
1779--relative to the Bon Homme Richard, and the Serapis.--Commanded
by Richard Pearson Esqr

At 1/2 Past 1 being off Scarborough, discovered the Serapis, and a
Number of Vessels under her Convoy--

The Bon Homme Richard at 1/2 Past 7. P M. came up with and Engaged
her, at 8 P M. Laid the Serapis along side and lashed the Bon Homme
Richard to her,

At 1/2 Past 12 at Night the Serapis' Colours, were Halled down and
some of the Bon Homme Richards Officers & Men boarded her,

A Journall Kept on Board the Serapis, an English Ship of War, of 44
Guns taken the 23rd. of September, (by the Bon Homme Richd.,) now
Commanded by the Honble. John Paul Jones

  ===+===+======+===+=========+=======+======================================
  _H_|_K_|_[HK]_|_F_|_Courses_|_Winds_| _Remarks on Sunday 26th Septr. 1779_
  ---+---+------+---+---------+-------+--------------------------------------
   1 | 2 |      |   |   ESE   |   SSW |These 24 Hours Cloudy Weather, Fresh
   2 | 2 |      |   |         |       |Breezes Wind, in Company with the
   3 | 2 |      |   |         |       |Frigate Alliance and Pallas, the Brig
   4 | 2 |      |   |         |       |Vengeance, and Countess of Scarbro' of
     |   |      |   |         |       |20 guns, one of the Prizes
   5 | 2 |      |   |         |       |
   6 | 2 |      |   |         |       |
   7 | 2 |      |   |         |       |
   8 | 3 |      |   |         |       |People Employed refitting the Rigging
   9 | 2 |      |   |         |       |&c. of the Serapis, which Ship Capt.
  10 | 3 |      |   |         |       |Jones, as Commodore, had Hoisted his
  11 | 2 |      |   |         |       |Flag. the Bon Homme Richard sinking
  12 | 2 |   1  |   |         |       |from the damage she received the Night
     |   |      |   |         |       |of the Action
   1 | 2 |      |   |         |       |
   2 | 3 |      |   |         |       |
   3 | 2 |      |   |         |       |The Master at Arms was put in Irons
   4 | 2 |      |   |         |       |for letting the Prisoners, loose on
   5 | 2 |      |   |         |       |the Night of the Engagement
   6 | 2 |      |   |         |       |
   7 | 2 |      |   |         |       |
   8 | 2 |      |   |         |       |Carpenters Employed repairing the
   9 | 2 |      |   |         |       |damages the Serapis had sustained
  10 | 2 |      |   |         |       |during the late Action.
  11 | 2 |      |   |         |       |
  12 | 2 |      |   |         |       |
  ---+---+------+---+---------+-------+--------------------------------------
                               _Remarks on Monday 27th Septr. 1779_
  ---+---+------+---+---------+-------+--------------------------------------
    1| 2 |      |   |   SEBE  | SWBS  | These 24 Hours begins with Moderate
    2| 2 |      |   |         |       | Breezes of Wind, Dark Cloudy Weather.
    3| 2 |      |   |         |       |
    4| 2 |      |   |         |       | All Hands Employed, fitting the Ship
    5| 2 |      |   |         |       |
    6| 2 |      |   |         |       |
    7| 2 |      |   |         |  SSW  |
    8| 2 |      |   |    ESE  |       | At 6 P.M. got the Mizen Top Mast on
    9| 2 |      |   |         |       | End, the Rigging over head and set
     |   |      |   |         |       | it up
   10| 2 |      |   |         |       |
   11| 2 |      |   |         |       |
   12| 2 |      |   |         |       |
    1| 2 |      |   |         |       |
    2| 2 |   1  |   |         |       | At 3 A.M. Saw a Large Sail fired 3
    3| 2 |      |   |         |       | Guns found her to be a Dutch
     |   |      |   |         |       | Merchantman
    4| 2 |      |   |         |       |
    5| 2 |      |   |         |       |
    6| 2 |      |   |         |       |
    7| 2 |      |   |         |       |
    8| 2 |      |   |         |       |
    9| 2 |      |   |         |       |
   10| 2 |      |   |         |       |
   11| 2 |      |   |         |       |
   12| 2 |      |   |         |       |
  ---+---+------+---+---------+-------+--------------------------------------
                                      | _Remarks on Teusday 28th. Septr. 1779_
  ---+---+------+---+---------+-------+--------------------------------------
    1| 1 |   1  |   |    SBE  |   SW  | The first Part of these 24 Hours,
    2| 2 |      |   |         |       | Clear and Pleasant Moderate Gales and
     |   |      |   |         |       | fair Weather,
    3| 2 |      |   |         |       |
    4| 2 |   1  |   |         |       |
    5| 2 |      |   |         |       |
    6| 2 |   1  |   |    SSE  | SWBW  |
    7| 2 |      |   |         |       |
    8| 2 |   1  |   |         |       | Peope still Employed refitting the
    9| 2 |      |   |         |       | Ship, with the Assistance of the
     |   |      |   |         |       | Alliances People
   10| 2 |      |   |         |       |
   11| 2 |   1  |   |         |       |
   12| 2 |      |   |         |       | One Boat Employed, passing and
    1| 2 |   1  |   |         |       | repassing from Ship to Ship in
    2| 2 |      |   |         |       | bringing Necessarys for the repair
     |   |      |   |         |       | of the Ship
    3| 2 |      |   |         |       |
    4| 2 |      |   |         |       |
    5| 2 |   1  |   |    ESE  |   SW  |
    6| 2 |      |   |         |       |
    7| 2 |      |   |         |       | A M. at 1 Gott up a Jury Main Mast
    8| 2 |      |   |         |       |
    9| 2 |   1  |   |         |       |
   10| 2 |      |   |         |       |
   11| 2 |      |   |         |       |
   12| 2 |   1  |   |         |       |
  ---+---+------+---+---------+-------+--------------------------------------
                              | _Remarks on Wednesday September 29th: 1779_
  ---+---+------+---+---------+-------+--------------------------------------
   1 | 2 |      |   |  SEBS   |   SW  | These 24 Hours begins with Moderate
   2 | 2 |      |   |         |       | Breezes and Hazy Weather,
   3 | 2 |      |   |         |       |
   4 | 2 |      |   |         |       |
   5 | 2 |      |   |         |       |
   6 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       | People employed cleaning the Ships
   7 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       | Decks, and repairing the Ship &c.
   8 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       |
   9 | 2 |  1   |   |   WBN   |       | At 9 A M. Hoisted 5 Lanthorns. at
  10 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       | the Mizen Peak and fired a gun as a
  11 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       | Signal for the Squadron to Heave in
     |   |      |   |         |       | Stays, and stand to the Westward
  12 | 2 |  1   |   |   ESE   |  SBW  |
   1 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       |
   2 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       |
   3 | 3 |      |   |         |       |
   4 | 3 |      |   |         |       | At 1 A M made the same Signal, Wore
   5 | 3 |      |   |         |       | Ship and stood to the Eastward again.
   6 | 3 |      |   |         |       |
   7 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       |
   8 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       | Latter Part People Employed. bending
   9 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       | a Jury Main Sail
  10 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       |
  11 | 2 |      |   |         |       |
  12 | 2 |      |   |         |       |
  ---+---+------+---+---------+-------+--------------------------------------
                                      | _Remarks on Thursday Septr. 30th. 1779_
  ---+---+------+---+---------+-------+--------------------------------------
   1 | 2 |  1   |   |   ESE   |  SSW  | These 24 Hours Pleasant Weather, and
     |   |      |   |         |       | a smooth Sea
   2 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       |
   3 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       |
   4 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       | At 2 P. M got the Main Sail, and bent
     |   |      |   |         |       | it, and sett it
   5 | 2 |  1   |   |  SEBS   | SWBW  |
   6 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       |
   7 | 2 |      |   |         |       |
   8 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       | At 12 P M made the Signal for Heaving
     |   |      |   |         |       | in Stays
   9 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       |
  10 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       |
  11 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       |
  12 | 2 |  1   |   |   NNW   |       | At 4 P M made the Signal for the
   1 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       | Squadron to Tack and stand to
     |   |      |   |         |       | the Eastward
   2 | 2 |  1   |   |         |       |
   3 | 3 |      |   |         |       |
   4 | 3 |      |   |  SEBE   | SWBS  | At 8 A M swayed up the Main Top
   5 | 3 |      |   |         |       | Mast and got the Main Top Sail
     |   |      |   |         |       | Yard athwart
   6 | 3 |      |   |         |       |
   7 | 3 |      |   |         |       | At 10 A M set the Main Top Sail--
   8 | 4 |      |   |         |       |
   9 | 4 |      |   |         |       |
  10 | 4 |      |   |         |       | At Meridian made the Signal for
  11 | 4 |      |   |         |       | the Squadron to Tack,
  12 | 4 |      |   |   WBS   |South  |
  ---+---+------+---+---------+-------+--------------------------------------
                              | _Remarks on Friday October 1st. 1779_
  ---+---+------+---+---------+-------+--------------------------------------
   1 | 3 |      |   |   WSW   |  SSE  | The First part of these 24 Hours
   2 | 3 |      |   |         |       | Cloudy Weather, Moderate Gales.
     |   |      |   |         |       | and a smooth Sea,
   3 | 3 |   1  |   |         |       |
   4 | 3 |   1  |   |         |       |
   5 | 4 |      |   |         |       | At 1 PM. saw 2 Strange Sail, did
   6 | 4 |      |   |         |       | not alter our Course for them.
   7 | 3 |   1  |   |         |       |
   8 | 3 |   1  |   |         |       |
   9 | 4 |      |   |  SWBW   | SEBE  | Still Employed repairing the Ship
  10 | 4 |      |   |         |       |
  11 | 4 |      |   |         |       |
  12 | 4 |      |   | South   |  WBS  |
   1 | 3 |      |   |         |       |
   2 | 3 |   1  |   |         |       |
   3 | 4 |      |   |         |       | At 5 AM a Number of Vessels
   4 | 3 |   1  |   |         |       | appeared in Sight they proved to
     |   |      |   |         |       | be a fleet of Dutch Merchantmen
   5 | 4 |      |   |         |       |
   6 | 4 |      |   |         |       |
   7 | 4 |      |   |         |       |
   8 | 4 |      |   |         |       |
   9 | 4 |      |   |         |       |
  10 | 4 |      |   |         |       |
  11 | 4 |      |   |         |       |
  12 | 4 |      |   |         |       |
  ---+---+------+---+---------+-------+--------------------------------------
                                      | _Remarks on Satarday October 2nd. 1779_
  ---+---+------+---+---------+-------+--------------------------------------
   1 | 4 |   1  |   |  SWBS   |  WNW  | The First part of these 24 Hours
     |   |      |   |         |       | Moderate Weather
   2 | 5 |      |   |         |       |
   3 | 5 |   1  |   |         |       | At 3. PM. The Pilot, which we had
   4 | 3 |   1  |23 |         |       | taken off Scarbro' and had Towed from
   5 | 4 |      |   |         |       | thence, was employed in going from us
   6 | 4 |      |   |         |       | to the Pallas, till 6 P.M. and then
     |   |      |   |         |       | Veered a Stern again
   7 | 4 |      |   |         |       |
   8 | 3 |  --  |21 |         |       |
   9 | 3 |      |   |         |       |
  10 | 3 |   1  |   |         |       | At 10 AM. Handed the Mizen Top Sail,
  11 | 3 |  --  |16 |   EBN   |       | which Sail was a Top Gallt.
     |   |      |   |         |       | Sail
  12 | 3 |  --  |17 |         |       |
   1 | 3 |      |   |         |       | Sounded every Quarter of an Hour,
     |   |      |   |         |       | untill Day Light
   2 | 3 |   1  |   |         |       |
   3 | 3 |   1  |   |         |       | At 6AM. saw severall Ships and
     |   |      |   |         |       | other Vessells
   4 | 3 |      |   |         |       |
   5 | 3 |      |   |         |       | At 1/2 Past 10 spoke with a Large Dutch
     |   |      |   |         |       | Ship
   6 | 3 |   1  |   |         |       |
   7 | 3 |      |   |         |       | At 7 AM. spoke the Pallas,
   8 | 3 |   1  |   |  NEBE   |       |
   9 | 3 |      |   |         |       |
  10 | 3 |      |   |         |       |
  11 | 3 |      |   |         |       |
  12 | 3 |      |   |         |       |

  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Sunday October 3rd. 1779_--
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | First part of these 24 Hours. Clear and Pleasant Weather, Fresh
         | Gales and a Large Tumbling Swell from the Westward, at 2 P.M. made
         | the Land of Holland, near the Texel bearing EBS distant 5 Leagues,
   NW    | at 4 P.M. a Pilot came on Board. Stood from the Land, Untill
         | Midnight and then made the Signal for the Squadron to Tack, and
         | stand in Shore at 6 AM. Found ourselves. close in with the Land,
         | at Meridian came to an Anchor in the Texel Road, with the rest of
         | the Squadron.
         +======================================================================
         |  _Remarks on Monday October 4th. 1779_--
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | These 24 Hours begins with Pleasant Weather, at 1 P.M. the Captain
  ENE    | of the Pallas came on Board, and Tarryd till 10 P.M.
         |
         | People employed on various Occasions
         +======================================================================
         |  _Remarks on Teusday October 5th. 1779_--
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | These 24 Hours begins with Moderate Gales and Clear Weather,
         | People employed on Sundry Necessary Occasions
         |
         | At 10 PM. Two Men attempted to Swim on Shore, but they had not got
  EBS.   | far before they were taken up and brought back again
         |
         | At 10 AM. Hove up our Anchor, and stood up towards the Texel with
         | the Tide
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday October 6th. 1779_--
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | The First part of these 24 Hours. Clear Weather, and Moderate
  ESE    | Gales at 3PM. came too an Anchor, and moored Ship, found a Number
         | of Dutch Men of War, riding here. People employed unbending the
         | Sails and cleaning the Decks.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday October 7th. 1779_--
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | These 24 Hours People employed, unrigging, and preparing to get
         | the Jury Main Mast out, Received from the Pallas. 12 Bolts. of
  EBS    | Canvas No. 2, and 3 Bundles of Twine, the Commodore set out for
         | Amsterdam, a Sergeant of Marines put in Irons, for Embezzling
         | several Articles of Cloathing out of the Pursers Store Room,
         | Squally Weather, with Rain
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|                   _Remarks on Friday October 8th. 1779_--
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day fine Pleasant Weather, got out our Jury Main Mast. and
         | the Stump of the Old Main Mast, several Boats came alongside, and
         | brought us a great Plenty of Vegetables
         |
         | Received on Board from the Pallas the following Rigging
         |       1  Coil of 78 thread Cordage
  NEBE-- |       1  Coil of 45 ditto
         |       3  Coil of 27 ditto
         |       3  Coil of 33 do
         |       3  Coil of 24 do
         |       5  Coil of 30 do.
         |       4  Coil of 36 do
         |       3  Coil of 18 do
         |       2  Coil of 12 do
         +======================================================================
         |      _Remarks on Satarday October 9th. 1779_--
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day Begins with fine Weather, and Light Breezes of Wind the
         | People Employed in Cleaning the upper, and Lower Gun Decks. and
         | in refitting the Fore Shrouds,
         |
  SBE.   | Received on Board 2 Cask of Brandy
         |
         | Edward Garrett put in Irons for refusing to do his Duty after
         | being requested several times by Mr. Lunt
         +======================================================================
         |                  _Remarks on Sunday October 10th. 1779_--
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Fine Pleasant Weather, this Day People mostly employed in
  SSW    | refitting the Rigging Sails &c. In the Night about 11 OClock, the
         | Stoppers of the Cables were cast off (by persons unknown,) in
         | Order to Let the Ship drive on Shore Received on Board as follows.
         | 8 Bbls. of Beef 4 Firks. of Butter 1 Cask of Bread
         +======================================================================
         |                   _Remarks on Monday October 11th. 1779_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day Moderate Gales. and fine Weather, &c.
         | &c. People Employed in Sundry Jobbs, 2 Carpenters came on Board
         | to help repair the Ship
         |
         | Received on Board the following Articles        | Vizt.
  SSW    | 1 Plank 16 Feet Long & 3. In, thick 9 In. Broad | 2 Teirces of Beef
         | 1   do.  9 Feet do.  9 In  do. 4     do.        | 2 Barrels of Bread
         | 100 lb. Beef                                    | 2 Hhds. of Bread
         | 300 Bread                                       | 146 Head of Cabbage
         | 11 Teirces of Beer,                             |
  =======+=====================================================================
  _Winds_|    _Remarks on Teusday October 12th.. 1779_--
  -------+---------------------------------------------------------------------
   SWBS. | Dark Rainy Weather, followed by High Winds, People Employed
         | making Foxes Sinnett &c. Carpenters at work under the Half Deck.
         |
         |            Edward Garrett released from Irons
         +=====================================================================
         |    _Remarks on Wednesday October 13th.. 1779--_
         +---------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day fine Moderate Weather, People employed fitting the Ship
         | for Sea Received on Board from the Pallas,
         |         426 lb. Beef
         |         483 lb. Bread & 12 Pine Plank.
         |
         | Received from a Lighter which came from Amsterdam as follows--
         |     16 Skanes of Hamber Line
         |     12 Bundles of Marline
         |     12 Skanes of Hausing
         |      4 Coils of 9 Thread Cordage
         |      2 Coils of 12 Thread Cordage
         |      2 Top Sail Sheet Blocks. & 2 Quarter do.
         |     10 Single Blocks
         |      3  Cask. of 33 Cordage
         |      2 Cask of 30 Cordage
         |      1 Cask of 72 thread do.
         |      1 Cask of 42 thread do.
         |      1 Cask of 54 do
         |      Part of a Coil of Hauser laid Rope 90 thread
         |      1 Large Coil of 5-1/4 In .... Do
         |      1 Coil of 39 thread Cordage
         |      1 Coil of 36 do
         |        part of a Coil of Hauser laid Rope
         |      2 Coils for Tacks. 2 Coils for Top Mast stays
         |      9 Pieces of Shroud Hauser & a Main Stay
         |      4 Tanned Hydes
         |      1 small Cask of Nails
         |      1 Coil of 5 Inch Rope
         |     12 Oak Plank
         |    100 lb. Oakham
         |      3  Teirces of Beef
         |     12 Teirces of Beer
         |      1 Box",
  =============================================================================
  _Winds_|      _Remarks on Thursday October 14th. 1779._
  -------+---------------------------------------------------------------------
  SWBS   | This Day Moderate Weather, got in the Stump of the Old Main Mast
         | and got up a Jury Main Mast again, at 2. OClock in the Afternoon
         | while the Officers and Men were at Dinner, 22 of the People, and 3
         | that belonged to the Alliance, Frigate got into a Dutch Boat then
         | along side and made off----several Small Arms were fired at
         | them. without Effect, The Commanding Officer,
         | Mr. Deal Orderd some Hands into a Boat a Long side, with Lieut.
         | Stack, and M. Groube Midshipn. to go on Board the Pallas Frigate
         | (which lay not far off) in Order to procure a Boat.
         | to pursue the Deserters, as the Boat they being in
         | was too small, they Procured. the Pallas. Long
         | Boat. with some Marines and pursued them, and in a
         | short time came within Musquet Shott of them,--the Deserters Left
         | their Boat. and were up to their Middles in Water,
         | as the Boat in which were Messrs. Stack and Groube. came near, and
         | they with their People went in the Water after them, the
         | Deserters formed themselves with knives drawn to receive them--but
         | after a Discharge of Musquets over their Heads. they petitioned.
         | for Quarters, but some of them made towards the Shore, and were
         | closely pursued but there being a Channel betwixt the Main, and a
         | small Neck of Land, they Landed on.--some that could Swim ventured
         | themselves a Cross. the others that could not surrendered. 9
         | ventured a Cross. 5 of which were drowned, at 1/2 Past 5. the Boat
         | returned with 16 of the Deserters
         |
         | their Names as follows.
         |
         | James Perry      }
         | John Brown       }  Alliances       Among these Deserters were 2
         | Francis Campbell }   ---------      Portuguese who had no hand in
         | Wm. Fox          }  Wm. Packer      the Scheme but only got into
         | James Quin       }  Wm. Pritchard   the Boat for to Buy Apples
         | Lawrence Vernurs }   Jas. Ferran    they were all put in Irons
         | Saml. Matthews   }                  except the Portuguese
         | Hugh Roney       }
         | Willm. Clidsdale }                                { Robt. Stevens
         | Lewis Brown      }                                { Robt. Weatherhead
         | Arthur Young     }                                { Robt. McCullen
         |                                                   { Wm. Smith
         |                                     Still Missing { Peter Richardson
         |                                                   { John Stevens
         |                                                   { Aaron Smith
         |                                                   { Jno. McIntyre
         |                                                   { Arthr. Randall
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|                   _Remarks on Friday October 15th. 1779_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Fine Pleasant Weather, this day bent the Fore Sail. Fore Top
         |  Sail Fore Stay Sail & Jibb, and then got the Main Top Gallt. Mast up
         |  instead of a Main Top Mast.
         |
  Vble.  |  Received a Lighter from Amsterdam the folowg. Articles
         |     2  Trebble Blocks
         |   522 lb. Cheese
         |     1 Barrel. 1 Firkin of Butter
         +======================================================================
         |                _Remarks on Satarday October 16th. 1779_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  First Part of this Day. Dark Cloudy Weather
         |
         |  Received from Amsterdam as follows Vizt.
         |     3 Teirces of Bread
         |     2 Teirces of Beef
  WBS.   |    50 Casks of Beer
         |
         |  At Noon 2 French Cutters came into the Road, and Anchord a Stern of
         |  us, Latter part of the day Blows a Gale, at 4 PM. Struck the Fore Top
         |  Mast and got the Sheet Anchor, ready to let go
         +======================================================================
         |                _Remarks on Sunday October 17th, 1779_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Morning the Lieut. of the Pallas, came on board, with
  West   |  Orders from Capt. Cottineau, to get the Jury Main Mast out again which
         |  was done by 4 PM.
         |
         |  Fresh Gales and Clear Weather, Cleaned the Upper, & lower Gun Decks
         +======================================================================
         |                _Remarks on Monday October 18th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Fine Moderate Weather, got the Stump of the Main Mast out again
         |  Commodore Jones returned from Amsterdam
         |
         |  Received from Amsterdam the following Articles vizt.
         |  40 Quarter Cask of Beer                      16 Pine Plank
         |   1 Barrel of Tar                              9 Oak Plank
         |   3 Barrels of Pitch                          16 Oak Boards
         |  20 Single & double Blocks of difft Sizes     10 Pine Boards
         |   1 small Cask of Bread                       11 Slips of do
         |   1 small Cask of Nails                        5 Tice
  ==============================================================================
  _Winds_|      _Remarks on Teusday October 19th. 1779--_
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day Moderate and Fair Weather, People employed Cleaning the
         | Ships Decks, Hoisting in Water &c. &c. 7 Dutch Carpenters at work on
         | Board Received on Board from Amsterdam as follows Vizt.
         |
         |      30 Barrels of Pork  | 1 Barrel of Butter    | 2 Bags of Cuff Irons
         |      10 Barrels of Flour | 3 Kegs of Barly       | 1 Large Chest marked D N
         |       1 Barrel of Rice   | 1 Keg of Sugar        | 2 Canvas Bales
         |     218 Cheeses          |12 Oars                |24 Handspikes
   EBS   |       8 Bags of Potatoes | 6 small Spars         |Main Truss & Cross Trees
         |       7 Bags of Pease    | 8 Oak Plank           |Main Top
         |       1 Firkin of Butter |24 Bundles of Spun Yarn| 1 Bundle of Cork
         |                          | 2 Bags of Hand Irons  | a Turning Machine
         |
         | 59 English Prisoners taken on Board the Serapis sent on Board the Scarborough
         |
         |======================================================================
         |    _Remarks on Wednesday October 20th. 1779--_
         |----------------------------------------------------------------------
   SE    | This Day fine Pleasant Weather, People variously employed, Received on
         | Board the following Articles from Amsterdam
         | 1  Iron Hoop--  } The Main Mast, and 2 Large Spars were Towed off and
         | 4 Bolts of Iron }                                       veered a Stern
         |======================================================================
         |    _Remarks on Thursday October 21st. 1779--_
         |----------------------------------------------------------------------
   WBS.  | This Day begins with Moderate Weather, and small Winds, at 10 A M
         | unmoored, and moved up the Road farther, as did the rest of the
         | Squadron, at 1 PM. came too an Anchor, and moord Ship
         |======================================================================
         |    _Remarks on Friday October 22nd. 1779_
         |----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Fine Weather. People Employed, Cleaning the Upper, & Lower Gun
         | Decks sent on Board the Pallas the following Articles Vizt.
         |
         |      2 Coils of 9 Thread Ratling  } 4 Skanes of White Line
         |      2 Coils of 6 do              } 1 Barrel of Oyl for Lamps
         |      8 Skanes of Marline          } 1 Box of Candles
         |      4 Skanes of Hamber Line      } 4 Barrels of Flour
         |      30 Yds. of Old Canvas        }
         |      12 Yds. of New do.           }
         |======================================================================
         |    _Remarks on Satarday October 23rd. 1779--_
         |----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day Fine Weather, 1 Officer, a Boatswain & 19 Men, belonging to
   WBS.  | the Alliance came on Board to assist in fitting the Ship for Sea
  ========+=====================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Sunday October 24th. 1779--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Dark Foggy Weather. this Day. People employed, Hoisting Water Casks
  WSW    | out of the Hold, that were filled with Salt Water, and Clearing out the
         | Hold Received on Board 663 lb. Fresh Beef
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday October 25th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day Foggy Weather, People Employed fixing Rigging for the Main
         | Mast, some shipping the Fore Top Mast, others Cleaning the Main Hold
         +======================================================================
         |                   Received from Amsterdam as follows
         |
         | 37 Bags of Bread     |  24 Iron Scrapers       | Sent 10 Cask of Rum on
 SW      |  6 Marlin Spikes     |   6 Locks               |     Board
         |  6 Serving Malletts  |   1 Canvas Bale         | the Vengeance,
         |  1 Box of Tin        |   a Cap for ye Mainmast | 7 Dutch Carpenters at
         |  1 small Packet of   |   a Cap for ye Topmast  |     work on
         |      Nails           |  2 Pair of Cross Trees  | Board this. day
         |
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday October 26th. 1779_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day Cloudy Weather, fresh Breezes of Wind, People employed
         | fitting the Ship for Sea, Received from Amsterdam as follows
         |
         |  29 Teirces of Beef  |   1 Cable               | 7 Dutch Carpenters & 2
         |  18 Teirces of Rum   |   1 Armourers Bellows   | Glaziers at Work this
         |   2 Pipes of Wine    |   a Parcell of Wood     | Day. The Alliances
         |   9 Bags of Pease    | 520 lb. fresh Beef      | People as before
         | 138 Head of Cabbages |                         | Deserted Stephn. Graves
         |                      |                         | Butcher
         |
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday October 27th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day Foggy Weather with Rain, People Employed on Sundry Jobbs.
         | Dutch Carpenters still at work, 2 Americans came on Board, one of which
  SWBS   | named Wm. Greenill, Acted in the Station of a Lieutenant having made
         | his Escape from Fortune Prison in England, the other Joseph Wilson
         | did the duty of an Acting Midshipman Recd. 550 lb. Beef 23 lb. fr Veal
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday October 28th. 1779_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day Fresh Gales of Wind and Rainy Weather, People employd, fixing
  WNW    | the Rigging for the Main Mast, and Main Top Mast, at 1P.M. Blew
         | very Heavy the Boat went on Shore this Morning for Beef. But Not returned
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday October 29th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  NNE    | This Day Blows a Gale of Wind People variously employed People
         | variously Recd. 797 lb. Beef 156 lb. Mutton
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Satarday October 30th. 1779_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day begins with Dark Foggy Weather, People Employed Hoisting
         | in the Sheers, and getting them lashed, together to step the Main
  NBE    | Mast,--Deserted William Hamilton Quarter Master
         | Left the Ship the following Officers, belonging to the State of South Carolia
         | Messrs. Linthwaite, Coram. & Morant, Midshipmen, Dutch
         | Carpenters and the Alliances as people as usual
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday October 31st. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Vble   | Dark Cloudy Weather, People variously employed, Dutch Carpenters at
         | Work sent Water Casks on Shore to be filled Recd. 523 lb. Fresh Beef
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday November 1st. 1779._
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day Cloudy Weather, People employd, Hoisting in several Spars
  NNE.   | getting the Fore Top Mast on End, and the Fore Top Sail Yard athwart
         | Dutch Carpenters as before, Recd. 620 lb. Beef
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday November 2nd. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  NNW    | People Employed Rigging the Ship, the Alliances. People, & Dutch Carpenters
         | as before
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday November 3rd. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day begins with Cloudy Weather, Dutch Carpenters as usual Recd
  NW.    | 450 lb Beef--Received from Amsterdam 2 Long Deal Planks. 56 Long
         | Boards 646 lb. Beef
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday November 4th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day Fresh Gales of Wind, People Employed. setting up the Fore
         | Shrouds and Cleaning the Lower Gun Deck, Got the Main mast slung and
  NNW    | partly Hoisted on Board, Dutch Carpenters not to work this day
         |
         | Towards Night struck the Fore Top Mast. Rec--595 . lb. Beef
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday November 5th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day thick Cloudy Weather, & Hard Rain Got the Main mast
  NE.    | a Cross the Ship the Alliances People as before, Dutch Carpenters
         | not at Work, Recd. 589 lb. Beef
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Satarday November 6th: 1779--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | First part of this day Cloudy Weather, Fresh Gales of Wind, and a Considerable
         | Swell, which Prevents our Stepping the Main Mast, People
         | employed variously. got the Sprit Sail Yard, athwart. the Bowspritt.
   NNW.  | The Dutch Carpenters not at work this day
         | Received on Board 425 lb. Beef 80 lb. Pork,
         | sent 30 Casks on Shore to be filled with Water
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday November 7th.. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day Thick Weather, and Rain, People Employed getting in the Main
         | Mast and stepping it, sent away for Amsterdam 78 Casks, and the Main
   Vble  | Top Got the Main Yard in Fore and Aft, on Deck, and Sundry other
         | Jobbs. Received 466 lb. Beef & 149 lb. Veal,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday November 8th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day thick Weather, and some Rain, People Employed getting the
         | Main Rigging overhead, and sundry other Jobbs. the Dutch Carpenters,
         | at work, One Officer, and a Number of Men from the Alliance, at work,
         | the Alliances Cutter was sent on Shore, with 4 Hands, to carry the Carpenters
         | on Shore, which after they had done, 3 of them deserted from the
         | Boat. A Lighter came from Amsterdam, with water. and sundry other
         | Articles Vizt.
         | 18 small Dead Eyes, for the Topmast Shrouds
         |  2 Sheaves. with Iron Pins & Bras Coggs
         |  1 Spare Pin and Cogg
         |  Took the Boom Irons off the Main Yard, and put some others on it
         |  Recd. 481 lb. Beef
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Teusday November 9th. 1779_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day begins with a Fresh Breeze of Wind and some Rain, People
         | Employed, some in Stripping the Main Shrouds, and the rest about
  WNW    | sundry other Jobbs, No Dutch Carpenters on board this day to
         | Work, One Officer, from the Alliance, with a Number of Men came
         | to Work, this day. 2 of the Alliances Men Deserted, Recd. 482 lb. Beef
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday Novr. 10th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day begins with a Fresh Breeze of Wind and some Rain
         | People employed in Turning the Dead Eyes in the Main Shrouds
         | and Sundry other Jobbs got the Sheers over head, the Boat went on
  NNE    | Shore and could not get off again, in the Evening Cleared the Hause
         | No Dutch carpenters at work this Day
         | Received from the Shore 569 lb. Beef
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday 11th November 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day begins with fresh Breeze of Wind, and Squally Weather
         | People Employed, in setting up the Main Shrouds. and other Jobbs
  NBW.   | sent the Sheers on Shore, One Officer from the Alliance, and a Number
         | of Men came to work, Recd. 626 lb. Beef
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday 12th. November 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day begins with Rainy Weather, and a Fresh Breeze of Wind
         | sent a Boat a shore for the Main Top, Brought it off and got it
  SW     | over Head, a Lighter came with Water, and we Hoisted it in
         | Deserted Richard Williams. Brought the Main Top Mast stay
         | from the Pallas, got the Main Top Mast in. Dutch Carpenters
         | at work,
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Satarday November 13th. 1779_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day Fresh Breeze of Wind, and Squally Weather, People employed
         | about the Main Rigging, and sundry other Jobbs. the Lighter came along
         | side this Afternoon, and Hoisted in 22 Casks of Water, the Dutch Carpenters
         | at Work, Received from Amsterdam. 16 Large Dead Eyes
         | Recd. 1054 lb. Beef
         |
         | sent on Board the Countess of Scarbro' 15 pr. of Hand Irons & 15 Pair of
         | Leg Irons
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday November 14th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day Squally Weather with Rain. People employed fixing the Rigging
         | on the Main Yard, Ratling the Shrouds &c. Lent the Pallas a Ball of
  SSW    | Marling Received from Amsterdam 6 Boxes marked--No. 1 a 6 D N.
         | Received 547 lb. of Beef
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday November 15th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day Cloudy Weather, but Moderate, People employd getting the
  SSW    | Main Top Mast and End, Main and Main Top Sail Yard athwart,
         | The Boat sent on Shore with the Corpse of one Williams in Order to
         | Bury him, The Commodore set out for Amsterdam,
         |
         | Recd. 450 lb. Beef & 25 Brooms.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday November. 16th..1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Fine Weather, People Employed variously some in getting on the Rigging
  SSE.   | on the Main Top Mast, some in getting the Fore Top Gallt. Mast up &c.
         | &c. Received 18 Casks of Fresh Water, & 548 lb. Beef
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday November 17th.. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day Pleasant Weather, People employed on various Jobbs. some getting
         | the Main Top Gallt. up, some Hoisting in Water, &c. Recd. 249 lb.
  EBS.   | Beef 40 lb. Mutton 66 lb. Salt 94 Brooms, Broachd a Barrel of Flour,
         | Recd. 45 Butts of Water Mustered the People, found 6 Missing, Wm.
         | Hamilton, Richd. Williams Edwd. Conner, William Woodhead, Hugh
         | Roney & Robert Jones--
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Thursday November 18th. 1779--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day the Weather, Squally with Hail, People employd on Sundry
         | Occasions, Towards Night the Commodore returned from Amsterdam
         | and gave Orders, that this Ships Barge, & her Masts Oars. Sails &c. &c.
         | Likewise a Quantity of Provisions. Liquors, Fire Wood, &c. &c.
         | must be sent on Board the Alliance Immediately, all Hands
         | employed, untill 12 O Clock. at Night Executing these Orders
         | Recd. 748 lb. Beef. Recd. from Amsterdam as follows Vizt.
         |
         |            10 Bales of Blankets
         |            13 do. of Hammocks
         |             1 do. of Stockings
         |             1 do. of No. 8
         |             1  do. of Jackets
         |           180 Beds
  EBS    |             1 Cag marked D N
         |             2  Bundles of Hair Breeches
         |            13 Bags of Bread
         |            23 Bundles of Spunyarn
         |             3  Cags of Lambblack
         |             1 Cag of White Paint
         |             1 Cag of Red Paint
         |             1 Hamper No. 70
         |             1 Hamper no mark nor number
         |             2  Cases marked D N
         |             1  Cag marked D N
         |             2  Peices of Cordage
         |             1 small Bale. with a Pair of Scales
         |               and several Weights,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday November 19th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day Thick Cloudy Weather, with Rain, People employd in
  WBS    | Hoisting out Sundry Articles on board of Dutch Boats. to send
         | on Board the Alliance,
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Satarday November 20th..1779--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
  WSW.   | Fine Moderate Weather, People Employd as Yesterday
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday November 21st. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day People Employd as Yesterday. most of the Ships Company removed
         | to the Alliance, as was Likewise the Sick and Wounded, Capt.
  WBS.   | Cottineau came on board the Serapis. and took Possession of her, all
         | the Officers. Left her and went on Board the Alliance, with. all the
         | Americans. that belonged to the Late Bon Homme Richard
         +======================================================================
         | Account of Sundry Articles sent from on Board the Serapis.. to the
         | Alliance the 20th.. 21st, & 22nd of November, as follows.
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |
         |12 Casks of Rum            |  6 Serving Mallets    | 2 Boxes            | 1 French Province Hall
         | 1 Ullage Cask do          |  5 Marling Spikes     |72 Musqt. Cartge do.|   Ensign
         | 1 Pipe of Gin             |  3 Bunds. of Marline  |30 Belts            | 1 Broad American
         | a Large Quanty of Wood    |   2 White Lines       |  Scabbards & Bayts.|   Pendant
         | 20 Bags of Coal           |  Main & Mizn. Top     | 1 Bundle Fogs      | 1 American Ensign
         |  1 Chest of Medicines     |    Gallt. Mast        | 2 Drums            | 1 French Pendant
         |  2 Coils of 2-1/2 In Rope |  80 Musquetts wth     | Time Glasses
         |  2 Bolts of Canvas        |    Bayonetts          | 2 English Ensigns
         |  1 Hamper of Medicines    | 16 Pair of Pistols    | 2 Signal Pendants
         |  1 Box of Bottled Wine    | 60 Cutlasses          | 3 Red & White Flags
         |  1 Jar, with Spirrits of  |  4 Hen Coops          | 1 do. do. Pendant
         |    Campr.                 |  1 Engine             | 4 English Jacks
         |  5 Jars of Oyl            |  1 Bundle Brushes     | 2 Blue&White Flags
         |  1 Jar part full          |  1 do. Brushes &      | 1 Checkd Flag
         |  2 Snatch Blocks          |    Mops               | 1 Blue Signal do.
         |  2 Sheat Cleats           | 63 New Brooms         | 1 Checkd Pendt.
         |  2.3 Square Light Houses  |  1 New Cable          | 1 Blue&White Flag
         |      Lanthorns            |  1 Pair of Cross      | 3 Red Pendants
         | 1 pr. Bellows pr. Armour. |    Trees              | 1 Red & White do.
         | 1 Cag of Oyl              |  1 Cap Per Main       | 1 Yellow--do.
         | 1/2 Cag Yellow Paint      |    Mast               | 1 Blue---do.
         | 1/2 Cag Vermillion        |  2 Large Arm Chests   | 2 White--do.
         | 1 Cag White Lead          |  2 small do. for Tops | 3 Blue & Yellow do.
         | 1 Cag Lambblack           |  1 Large Oak Plank    | 1 Blue--do.
         | a small QuantY. of Red    |  2 small Oak Plank    | 1 Yellow--do.
         |   Oker                    | 22 Pole Axes          | 1 Broad Dutch.
         | a Coil of 5-1/2 In Rope   | 36 Boardg. Pikes      |  Pendt.
         |10 Large Signal Lanthorns  |  1 Keg of Flints      | 3 Dutch Ensigns
         |23 small Do.               |  3 Boxes Musqt.       | 1 Red White Blue
         | a Laithe                  |    Cartridgs.         |   & Yellow Flag
         | a Stove                   |  2 do. Per Pistols    | 1 French Ensign
         | a Quantity of Wood        |  a Pair of Handscrews | 4 Dutch Jacks
         | a Barge with Oars &c.     |  1 Jack Box           | 2 Dutch Pendts.
         |                           |100 pr. Leg Irons      | 1 Spanish do
         |                           |  2 Bags of do. with   | 1 Spanish Jack
         |                           |    Irons              | 1 Do Ensign
         |                           |  3 Large Iron Bolts   |
         |                           |    with Shackles      |
         |                           |  1 Small Binnacle &   |
         |                           |    Lamp & Compass     |
         |                           |  4 Compasses          |


A Journall Kept on Board the American Continental Frigate of War,
Alliance of 36 Guns, under, the Command of the Honble, John Paul
Jones. Commencing in the Road of Texel, in Holland,--

  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Monday November 22nd. 1779--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Dark Rainy Weather, this Day Cottl, Wybert. came on Board, with a
         | Number of Prisoners. that had been a shore ever since we came into the
         | Road, Likewise a Number of Marines. that had been sent on Shore
         | to Guard them, People employd on sundry Occasions,
  WBN.   | The Remaining Part of the Late Bon Hommes Richard Crew. came on
         | Board. Except the French Volunteers: which stayed on Board the Serapis
         | with Capt. Cottineau
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday November 23rd. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day thick Foggy Weather, People employd on Sundry Jobbs. The
  WSW.   | French Maines. that were on board, sent on board the Serapis as were also
         | a Number of Prisoners. Latter Part Fresh Gales. & thick Weather
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday November 24th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Cloudy Weather. People employd Hoisting in Provisions, and stowing
         | them away
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday November 25th. 1779_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Dark Cloudy Weather People Employd in stowing away sundry Articles
         | in Order to make Room for the Officers of the Late Bon Homme Richard
  SSW.   | the After part of the day settled down the Fore and Main Yards
         | as the Wind blowd very Flesh and the Weather lookg. very bad
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Friday November 26th. 1779--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day Heavy Gales of Wind, with Showers of Hail & Rain
  SSW.   | People Employd on Sundry Necessary Jobbs. at 5 A M. Struck Yards
         | and Top Masts. Continues to Blow hard all Night
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Satarday November 27th. 1779_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | The Weather this Day Moderate, Got the Main Yard down Fore and Aft
         | The Carpenters employd to reduce it. People Employd in sundry Jobbs
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday November 28th: 1779_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Fair Weather People Employd on Sundry Jobbs. the Carpenters as before.
         | Mr. Blorgett paid the People. 1 Ducat each. as part of Wages,
         | at 3 P.M. the Carpenters finished the Main Yard, got it Rigged and
         | athwart, Broachd a Cask of Rum, & 1 Box of Candles
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday November 29th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  SEBE.  | AM. Rainy Dirty Weather, bent the Main Sail, Swayed up Yards and
         | Top Masts. Cleared Hause, and got all ready to get under Sail. PM
  NNW.   | the Wind Shifted, and Blows a Hard Gale, Struck Yards & Top Masts
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday November 30th. 1779_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | AM. Plenty of Rain, Moderate Breeze of Wind, Swayed up Yards &
         | Topmts. Cut 12 Fathom off. of a Condemnd Cable for Junk. P.M.
         | Fine Weather Loosed the Sails to Dry. the Barge went on Shore, with an
         | Officer, in search of the Cutter, Received 853 lb. Beef. Broachd 1 Cask
         | of Rum. 2 Boxes of Candles, 1 Sack of Barley the Barge returned, but no
         | News of the Cutter
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday December 1st. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | AM Fresh Gales and Squally struck Lower Yards. & Top Gallt. Masts,
         | the Armourer, and a Seaman Died P.M. Clear Weather, People employd
         | variously Recd. a New Mizen Top Mast and a Rough Spar. for a Top
         | Sail Yard.
         |
         | Broachd 1 Firkin of Butter
         |         1 Sack of Barley
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|     _Remarks on Thursday December 2nd. 1779--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Fresh Winds and Plenty of Rain. People employd getting down the Mizen
         | Top Mast, and getting up a spare Main Top Gallt. Mast. in its Place
  West   | at 4 P.M. Struck Top Masts
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday December 3rd. 1779._
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Fresh Gales and Squally People employd variously. Carpenters reducing
         | the Cross Tack Yard, & Mizen Top Sail Yard, Broachd 2 Bbls. of Beef
         | 1 Sack of Pease, 1 Pipe of Brandy. 111 Gallons.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Satarday December 4th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | First Part Moderate Breezes, and Plenty of Rain, swayed up Yards and
  NBE    | Top Masts, Parted our Fore Tears At 9 AM. the Wind Hauled Westward
         | a Fresh Gale, Struck Yards & Top Masts again, Carpenters employed
  WNW    | repairing the Barge, and reducing the Cross Tack Yard. at 10 P.M.
         | Veered 50 Fathom out of our small Bower Cable, Housed the Guns. Fore
         | & Aft Broach 2 Barrels of Pork, 1 Tierce of Rum. 1 Firkin of Butter
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday December 5th. 1779._
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  NW.    | Fresh Gales and Squally. Hove in the Cable that was veered out last Night
         | got down Top Gallt. Masts Recd 2181 lb. Beef & 50 Cabbages.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday December 6th: 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | AM. Squally. Fresh Breeze of Wind, People Employed rigging the Mizen
         | Top Mast, and Cross Tack Yard, a Dutch Boat took all the Prisoners
         | taken in the Serapis, and carried them on Board the said Ship
         | PM. Pleasant Weather, Bent the Mizen Top Sail the Boat that
         | carried away the Prisoners. returned with 100 more taken in the
         | Merchant Ships. Broachd 1 Pipe of Gin 3 Bbls. of Beef 1 Box of Candles.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday December 7th. 1779_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | AM Moderate Breezes and Dirty Weather, People employd variously
         | sent some Casks on Shore for Water, Recd. 1207 lb. Beef 77 lb. Mutton
         | 400 Loaves of Bread 1218 lb. of Salt--Expended 1 Bbl. of Flour
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Wednesday December 8th: 1779._
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Fine Weather Swayed up Yards & Top Masts, unmoord Ship and got
         | all Clear for going to Sea, PM do. Weather Received Recd. 10 Gang Cask
  NNE    | of Water, &c. 307 Loaves of Bread, in the Evening Moored Ship again
         | with Starboard Tacks to the Westward,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks, on Thursday December 9th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  NW     | Dirty Rainy Weather, People Employd in Arranging the Sparrs, on
  to     | the Booms and other Necessary Duty, Carpenters repairing the
  SW.    | Barge. in the Evening Cleared Hause,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday December 10th. 1779_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | AM. Pleasant Weather, and small Breeze of Wind, unmoord Ship
  SEBE   | and Hove short on the other Cable, expecting to go to Sea, but the
  ----   | Wind Hauled to the Southward, & the Pilot refused to carry us out
  SBE    | in the Afternoon, Hove up our Anchor, went a little farther to the
         | Northward, and Moored Ship, Two of our People Died, Recd 1370 lb
         | of Beef & Mutton 312 lb. Candles Broachd 1/2 Pipe of Brandy
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Satarday December 11th.. 1779_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | A M. Hazy Weather, People Employd variously. Recd. on Board
  NNW.   | several Planks, sent the 2 Dead Men on Shore, P. M. Fair
         | Weather Exercised the Cannon
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday December 12th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Small Breezes of Wind attended with Rain, unbent the Main Top
  SSW    | Sail, and Bent another, Recd. 3 Hhds. of Gin 2 Cask of Sand
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday December 13th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Small Breezes & Rain, Hands Employd, Sundry Jobbs. Sail Makers
  SW     | Enlarging the Fore Top Sail, 4 Men Deserted, Broachd 2 Bbls. of Beef
         | 1 Bbl. of Flour 1 Box of Candles
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Teusday December 14th: 1779--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | AM. Fresh Gales, and Squally. Lowerd down the Lower Yards P.M
         | Hard Gales Veered out. 10 Fathom of our best Bower Cable, soon after
         | Perceived the Cable to be stranded, Just forward of the Bitts, Ten or
  WNW    | Twelve Fathom from the End, hove it in Cut it off and spliced another
         | Cable too it. and veered out about 18 fathom of said Cable, and the whole
         | of the small Bower, both Anchors a Head.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday December 15th.. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | AM. Fresh Breezes and thick Weather, at 7 Got to Work Heaving in
         | our Cables, a Boat came off with Beef and Bread, sent in her Part
         | of our Prisoners, to the Serapis P.M. Pleasant Weather, sent the
  NNW    | Remainder of our Prisoners, to the Serapis except some Sick and
         | Wounded, in the Evening Hove up the small Bower Anchor, and
         | Moored Ship again
         |
         | Recd. 1828 lb. Beef 350 Loaves of Bread Broachd 1 Firkin of Butter
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday December 16th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  SSW    | AM Moderate Breezes of Wind, and fair Weather, People variously
  NNW    | employed, Carpenters repairing the Barge, PM Clear Weather
         | Swayed up Yards & Top Masts, Recd. 12 Gang Cask of Water
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday December 17th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Westy  | AM Pleasant Weather, People variously employd, Recd. 1700 lb. Beef
         | 950 lb Bread. Broachd 1 Teirce of Rum 1 Pipe of Gin
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Satarday December 18th.. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Moderate Breezes and Rainy Weather, all Hands Employd as
         | most Necessary.
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Sunday December 19th: 1779--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Moderate Breezes and thick Weather, AM. Careened Ship, and
         | Scrubbed her Bottom, the Larboard Side People employd Cleaning Decks
  WSW    | Broachd 1 Box of Candles. Carpenters shutting up the After Hatchway
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday, December 20th. 1779_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | First Part Fresh Gales, and Dirty Weather, at 5 AM. Lowerd Down the
         | Fore & Main Yards, at 8 Cleared Hause, the Middle of the Day Clear
         | Weather Loosed Courses to Dry. People Employd as most necessary
         | Carpenters as Yesterday in the Evening Squally Roove one New Fire
         | Geers
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday December 21st. 1779_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  WSW    | First Part small Breezes. Swayed up the Lower Yards; and began to
         | unmoor Ship, but before we could accomplish it the Wind Changed to
         | the Westward, Moored Ship again Loosed, the Sails. P.M. Creened Ship
  NEBN   | and scrubbed her Bottom on the Starboard Side, a Dutch Boat Brought
         | 13 Cask Gang Water, Handed Sails and Righted Ship, Carpenters employd
         | Caulking up the After Hatchway, Broachd 1 Teirce of Rum
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday December 22nd. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  ENE    | Begins with thick Weather, and Rain--at 4 AM. Got up the Larboard
  North  | Anchor At 8 the Wind came North, fresh Breezes. Lowerd down. the
  NEBN   | Fore and Main Yards. P.M. Fresh Gales from N. to NWBW struck the
  NWBW   | Top Masts Veered out 100 Fathom. of the Starboard Cable, and let go the
         | Larboard Anchor at 10 Hove a Head, with the Starboard Cable to the
         | Moorings. Recd. 2108 lb. Beef & 1375 lb. Bread
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday December 23rd. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Fair Weather, all Hands variously Employed Broachd one Barrell of
  WNW.   | Beef
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Friday December 24th. 1779--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
  WNW    | Fine Pleasant Weather got up Yards & Top Masts at 7 AM. a Dutch
         | Lighter came along Side with 11 Gang Casks of Water, Hoisted them in
         | and started them, at 8 Recd, from Amsterdam the following
  Easty. | Articles Vizt. 7710 lb. Bread
         |                  60 Barrels of Beef  | 11 Boxes of Candles
         |                  22 do. of Pork      | 10 Casks of Liquor
         |                   8 do. of Flour     |  5 Casks of Water
         |                   2 Teirces of Salt  | 16 Sacks of Pease
         |                   1 do. Vinegar      | 45 lb. Coffee
         |                                      | 50 lb. Sugar
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Satarday December 25th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Pleasant Weather, unmoored Ship expecting to go to Sea, at 4 P.M. a
  Easty. | Lighter from Amsterdam, came along side with Water and Wood People
         | Employd discharging her, Broachd 1 Cask of Brandy
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday December 26th. 1779--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Pleasant Weather, all Hands Employd Clearing the Lighter, and starting
         | the Water into Casks in the Hold, still Riding by a Single Anchor,
         | at 5 PM. Finished Discharging the Lighter, sent away in her 26 Bbls.
         | of Pork that was received from Amsterdam, it being much damaged,
  "_"    | owing to it not being propperly Salted, Just as the Lighter put off
         | from a Long Side, the Ship struck a Drift. Let go another Anchor,
         | but could not stop her, before she got fowl of a Dutch Merchant Ship,
         | that lay to the Eastward of us, Carryd, away her Jibb Boom and Sprit
         | Sail Yards and damaged us in our Starboard Quarter, at 10 got Clear
         | of her, and Hove in the Starboard Cable, found that was it cut off
         | about 8 or 10 Fathom, from the Anchor, Let go the Sheet Anchor, and
         | brought her up with her two Anchors a Head, close in with the Helder,
         | Received 1014 lb. Bread
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday December 27th. 1779_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Fresh Breeze of Wind at 4 AM. Hove up our small Bower Anchor at 9
  "_"    | Got a Spring on the Sheet Cable, from our Starboard Quarter to Cant
         | the Ship, at 10 Cut the Cable, and got under Way. with several Dutch
         | Men of War, and a Number of Merchantmen, at 11 Got Clear of the Bay
         | and Hove too for a Boat to take out the Pilot
         | Recd. 1665 lb. Beef

  ===+===+======+=========+=======+========================================================
  _H_|_K_|_[HK]_|_Courses_|_Winds_| _Remarks on Teusday 28th. Decemr. 1779_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+--------------------------------------------------------
   1 |10 |      | SW      | East  | These 24 Hours fresh Breezes of Wind & Cloudy
   2 | 9 |      |         |       | Weather the Pilot left us. and we Bore away under 2d.
   3 | 9 |      |         |       | Reef Top Sails & Fore Sail, At 1 PM. Camper Down
   4 | 9 |      |         |       | Bore ENE at 2-1/2 Leag. at 4 P.M. Handd. Miz. Top
   5 |   |      |         |       | Sail. & Close Reefd, Fore & Main Top Sails, in doing
   6 | 8 | 1    | West    | EBS   | it Split the Fore Top Sail, and got it down to mend, at
   7 | 5 | 1    |         |       | 5 Handd. Main Top Sail, at 6 the Maze Lights Bore,
   8 | 5 | 1    |         |       | South. Distt. 2 Leage. got a New Cable, bent to the
   9 | 6 |      |         |       | Remaining Anchor, Broachd 1 Box of Candles At 3
  10 | 5 | 1    |         |       | A.M. Sett Main and Mizen Top Sails got the Fore
  11 | 6 | --   | W1/2S   |       | Top Sail up to Bend, and Let the Reefs out of the
  12 | 6 |      |         |       | Main & Mizen Top Sail, Set Stay Sails, and Fore Top
   1 | 9 | --   | WSW     | East  | Mast Steerg Sails. at 9 saw Land on Both Sides of us,
   2 | 9 |      |         |       | several Vessels in Sight At 10 Past by Calais in Fore
   3 |10 |      |         |       | Top Mast Steerg Sail Bent a Cable to the Stream
   4 | 9 | --   | West    |       | Anchor, At Meridian Calais Clifts bore, SEBS. Distance
   5 | 6 | 1    | WSW     | ESE   | 2 Leagues
   6 | 6 |      |         |       |
   7 | 7 | 1    | SWBW    |       |
   8 | 7 |      |         |       |
   9 | 7 |      |         |       |
  10 | 6 |      | SSW     |       |
  11 | 6 |      |         |       |
  12 | 6 |      | WSW     |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+========================================================
                                  | _Remarks on Wednesday 29th. December 1779_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+--------------------------------------------------------
   1 | 7 |      | SWBW    | EBS   | Begins Moderate Breezes & thick Weather, Set Steerg.
   2 | 7 |      | WSW     |       | Sails & Driver, at 4 PM. a High Point of Land to the
   3 | 5 |  1   |         |       | Eastward of Bolougne, bore East about 9 Leags
   4 | 5 |      |         | EBN   | Diste.---took in the Driver,
   5 | 6 |  1   |         |       |
   6 | 5 |      | West    |       |
   7 | 3 |  1   |         |       |
   8 | 3 |      |         |       |
   9 | 4 |      |         |       |
  10 | 5 |      |         |       |
  11 | 5 |      | WBS     |       | Saw several Sail of Vessels in the Run of the Night
  12 | 5 |      |         |       | At 9 A.M. Saw the Isle of Wight Bearg. NBW
   1 | 5 | 1    |         |       | At 10 do. all Hands to Quarters up all Hammocks
   2 | 5 |      |         |       | Exercised the Cannon--
   3 | 5 |      | West    |       |
   4 | 3 | 1    |         |       |
   5 | 3 | 1    |         |       |
   6 | 4 |      |         |       |
   7 | 4 |      |         |       |
   8 | 5 | 1    | WSW     |       |
   9 | 7 | 1    |         |       |
  10 | 7 |      |         |       |
  11 | 7 |      |         |       |
  12 | 7 |      |         |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+=======================================================
                          | _Remarks on Thursday December 30th: 1779--_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+-------------------------------------------------------
   1 | 6 |      | WSW     | SEBE  | First part of these 24 Hours, Modte. Breezes and
   2 | 6 |      |         |       | Hazy Weather, at 1/2 PM. Cape La Hogue Bore,
   3 | 5 |  1   |         |       | WSW Distt. 5 Leagues At 2 A.M. Squally, took in
   4 | 4 |      |         |       | Steering Sails. Set Stays Sails Hauld up as p Log.
   5 | 4 |      |         |       | Took in Top Gallt. Sails
   6 | 4 |      | NWBW    | SE    |
   7 | 6 |      |         |       |
   8 | 7 |  1   |         |       | Latter Part Fresh Breezes & Clear, Weather, at 5
   9 | 8 |      |         |       | Reefd Top Sails
  10 | 8 |      |         |       |
  11 | 9 |      |         |       |
  12 | 9 |      |         |       | At Meridian give Chace, to a Ship & a Brig
   1 | 9 |      |         |       |
   2 | 9 |      | WNW     | EBS   | People Employd Scrubbing their Hammocks,
   3 | 9 |      |         |       | Expended 1 Barrell of Pork
   4 | 7 |      |         |       |
   5 | 9 |      |         |       |
   6 | 9 |      |         |       |
   7 | 9 |      |         |       |
   8 | 9 |      |         |       |
   9 |10 |      | WSW     | East  | Lattd. Obsd. 49 deg.. 14" North.
  10 |10 |      | West    | SE    |
  11 | 9 |      |         |       |
  12 | 9 |      | WBN     | SEBE  |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+=======================================================
                                  | _Remarks on Friday December 31st: 1779--_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+-------------------------------------------------------
   1 | 7 |      | WSW     | SEBS  | Fresh Breezes and Cloudy at 2 P.M. Spoke with the
   2 | 7 |      |         |       | Ship She was a Sweede from Stockholm, at the same time
   3 | 7 | --   | WBN     |       | spoke a Brig from Dantzick, at 1 Spoke a Dutch Galliot
   4 | 5 |      |         |       | at 4 Handed Main Sail, at 8 Handed Mizen Top
   5 | 9 |      | West    |       | Sail and Hauled up Fore Sail, a Large Sea, Housed all
   6 | 9 |      | WNW     |       | Guns
   7 | 9 |      |         |       |
   8 | 9 |      |         |       |
   9 | 9 |      |         |       |
  10 | 8 |      |         |       |
  11 | 7 |  1   |         |       | Expended 1 But. 1 Puncheon 12 Gang Casks of Water
  12 | 8 |      |         |       | and 1 Barrel of Salt Beef
   1 | 7 |  1   |         |       |
   2 | 8 |      |         |       | At 1/2 Past 7 AM. Layed the Main Top Sail Aback
   3 | 8 |      |         |       | Sounded 80 Fathom, Gray Sand, and small Shells
   4 | 7 |  1   |         |       | At Meridian Close Reefd Top Sails
   5 | 8 |  1   |         |       |
   6 | 8 |      |         |       |
   7 | 8 |  1   |         |       |
   8 | 1 |  1   |         |       | Lattd. Obsd. 49 deg.. 18" North
   9 | 1 |      |         |       |
  10 | 1 |  1   |         |       |
  11 | 1 |      |         |       |
  12 | 1 |  1   |         |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+=====================================================
                          | _Remarks on Satarday Janry. 1st. 1780--_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+-----------------------------------------------------
   1 | 4 |      | SWBW    | SSE   | First Part Fresh Breezes and Cloudy Weather set the
   2 | 6 |      |         |       | Courses. Large Sea Got down Top Gallt. Yards.
   3 | 4 |  1   |         |       |
   4 | 5 |      |         |       |
   5 | 5 |      |         |       |
   6 | 5 |      |         |       |
   7 | 4 |  1   |         |       |
   8 | 5 |      |         |       |
   9 | 4 |  1   | SW      |       |
  10 | 4 |      |         |       | Latter Part moderate
  11 | 4 |      |         |       |
  12 | 4 |      |         |       |
   1 | 4 |      | SWBW    | SBE   |
   2 | 3 |      |         |       | Coopers employed Repairing some Provisions, Received
   3 | 2 |  1   |         |       | at the Texel
   4 | 2 |      |         |       |
   5 | 2 |      | WSW     | South |
   6 | 2 |  1   |         |       |
   7 | 2 |  1   | West    | SSW   |
   8 | 2 |      |         |       |
   9 | 1 |  1   | WSW     | South | No Observation
  10 | 2 |      |         |       |
  11 | 2 |      |         |       |
  12 | 2 |      |         |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+=====================================================
                                  | _Remarks on Sunday January 2nd. 1780_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+-----------------------------------------------------
   1 | 1 |  1   | SSW     | SE    | Small Breezes of Wind & thick Weather, at 3 PM
   2 | 1 |  1   | WSW     | SSE   | saw a Sail Bearing NWBW. Set all Sail in Chace of
   3 | 2 |      |         |       | her, got the Main Top Gallt. Yard athwart, at 5 Past
   4 | 4 |  1   |         |       | Just to Windward of her, she standing Eastward
   5 | 3 |      | NW      |       | Tackd after her, but it being very dark, could see
   6 | 3 |      | East    | SSE   | Nothing of her afterwards,
   7 | 4 |      |         |       | Expended 1 Barrell of Beef 2 Butts of Water
   8 | 5 |      |         |       |
   9 | 4 |  1   | EBN     |SEBS   |
  10 | 4 |  1   |         |       |
  11 | 3 |  1   |         |       |
  12 | 4 |      |         |       |
   1 | 5 |      |         |       | At 10 PM. 2 Reefs. Top Sails, Broachd, 1 Butt of
   2 | 5 |      | East    | SSE   | Brandy. 1 Pipe of Gin
   3 | 5 |      |         |       |
   4 | 4 |      |         |       |
   5 | 3 |  1   |         |       |
   6 | 1 |  1   |         |       |
   7 | 1 |  1   | EBN     |       | At 10 A M up Hammocks, Sail Maker,
   8 | 2 |  1   | Tackd   |       | mending the Main & Fore Sails
   9 | 3 |      | Ship    |       |
  10 | 3 |  1   | WSW     |       | No Observation
  11 | 5 |      |         |       |
  12 | 5 |      |         |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+=======================================================
                          | _Remarks on Monday Janry. 3rd. 1780--_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+-------------------------------------------------------
   1 | 2 |  1   | WSW     | South | Small Breezes and thick Weather, People variously
   2 | 2 |  1   | SWBW    | SBE   | employd, Expended 2 Butts of Water, 1 Bbl. of Pork,
   3 | 2 |  1   |         |       |
   4 | 2 |  1   |         |       |
   5 | 2 |  1   |         |       |
   6 | 2 |  1   |         |       |
   7 | 2 |      | SW      | SE    |
   8 | 2 |      |         |       |
   9 | 2 |      |         |       |
  10 | 2 |  1   |         |       |
  11 | 2 |      |         |       |
  12 | 2 |      |         |       |
   1 | 3 |  1   |         |       |
   2 | 3 |      |         |       |
   3 | 3 |      |         |       |
   4 | 4 |  1   |         |       |
   5 | 2 |      |         |       |
   6 | 4 |  1   | SBW     | SEBE  | At 6 A M. Saw a Sail, gave Chace
   7 | 4 |      | SSW     |       | At 10 came up with her, sent the Yawl on Board her,
   8 | 5 |      | WBN     | SE    | she proved to be a Prussian Galliot bound to Bourdeaux
   9 | 7 |      |         |       |
  10 | 6 |      | North   |       |
  11 | 5 |      |         |       | No Observation,
  12 | 5 |      | ENE     |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+=======================================================
                                  | _Remarks on Teusday Janry. 4th. 1780_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+-------------------------------------------------------
   1 | 2 |  1   | EBN     | SEBE  | Moderate Breezes and thick Weather, Expended
   2 | 5 |      | NE      | ESE   | 2 Butts of Water, 1 Barrel Beef 1 Barrel Pork,
   3 | 5 |      |         |       | Broachd 1 Keg of Butter 1 Box of Candles
   4 | 5 |      |         |       |
   5 | 2 |  1   |         |       |
   6 | 3 |  1   |         |       |
   7 | 3 |  1   |         |       |
   8 | 3 |  1   |         |       | At 8 P.M. Pleasant Weather, Tackd Ship
   9 | 1 |  1   | South   |       |
  10 | 2 |  1   |         |       | At 12 Thick and Cloudy
  11 | 2 |      |         |       |
  12 | 3 |      |         |       | At 7 A.M. saw a Galliot to Windward, People
   1 | 3 |      |         |       | employed variously, Coopers repairing Provisions
   2 | 1 |      |         |       | filled. some of the Empty Water Casks with}
   3 | 2 |      |         |       |                                 Salt Water}
   4 | 2 |  1   |         |       |
   5 | 2 |      | SWBS    | SEBS  |
   6 | 2 |      | SSW     | SE    |
   7 | 2 |      |         |       | Lattd. Obsd. 48 deg.. 10" No.
   8 | 3 |      | SBW     | SEBE  |
   9 | 3 |      | South   | ESE   |
  10 | 3 |      | SSE     | East  |
  11 | 5 |      |         |       |
  12 | 6 |      |         |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+=========================================================
                          | _Remarks on Wednesday Janry. 5th. 1780._
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+---------------------------------------------------------
   1 | 5 |      | SBW     | SEBE  | First part Moderate Breezes & thick Weather, Expended
   2 | 3 |  4   | SSW     |       | 2 Butts of Water, 1 Barrel of Beef Broachd 1
   3 | 3 |  4   | ENE     | SE    | Box Candles At 3 P M Tackd Ship, at 4 saw two Sails
   4 | 3 |      |         |       | to Windward At. 8 Tackd again at 10 fresh Gales at
   5 | 4 |      |         |       | 12 Close reeft Top Sails at 2 A M. in Mizen Top Sail
   6 | 3 |      |         |       | at 6 Saw a Sail a head Let 2 Reefs out of the Top Sails,
   7 | 2 |      |         |       | at 9 Saw two Sails to Windward, at 11 came up and
   8 | 4 |      |         |       | spoke with the first Sail, she is from Amsterdam
   9 | 4 |      | SSW     |       | Bound to Surinam
  10 | 6 |      |         |       |
  11 | 6 |      |         |       |
  12 | 6 |      |         |       |
   1 | 4 |      |         |       |
   2 | 3 |  4   |         |       |
   3 | 3 |      | SBW     |       |
   4 | 4 |  4   |         |       |
   5 | 3 |  4   | SSW     | SEBE  |
   6 | 3 |      | SWBS    |       | At Meridian left her and made Sail after the other
   7 | 4 |      |         |       | two
   8 | 5 |      |         | SE    |
   9 | 7 |      | SW      |       |
  10 | 8 | 4    | WSW     |       | No Observation--
  11 | 8 | 4    |         |       |
  12 | 1 |      |         |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+=========================================================
                                  | _Remarks on Thursday Janry. 6th. 1780_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+---------------------------------------------------------
   1 | 9 |      | SW      | SE    | Fresh Breezes and Cloudy Weather, at 1/2 Past 3 P M
   2 | 9 |      |         |       | were a Breast of the 2 Ships some Distance to
   3 | 9 |      |         |       | Windward, Hoisted English Colours & fired a Gun to
   4 | 4 |      |         |       | Leeward, they Hoisted Dutch Colours & fired a Gun to
   5 | 5 |      | North   |       | Windward, at 4 Wore Ship. Run as p Logg, at 5 Wore
   6 | 6 |      | SW      |       | Ship, again & handed Mizen Top Sail & Main Sail
   7 | 5 |      | SWBW    |       | Close Reefd Fore & Main Top Sail, Broachd 2 Bbls. of
   8 | 6 |      |         |       | Beef 1 do. of Pork, 1 Box of Candles 3 Butts of Water
   9 | 5 |      |         |       | At 7 A M. Saw a Sail a Head, made Sail after her
  10 | 7 |      |         |       | at 10 Spoke her, she proved, she proved to be a Ship
  11 | 6 |  4   |         |       | from Amsterdam Bound to Cadiz, at the same time saw
  12 | 8 |      |         |       | Ships to Leward, which we took to be the same we saw
   1 | 7 |      |         |       | last Night
   2 | 6 |      |         |       | At Meridian saw a Cutter to Windward bearing down
   3 | 7 |      |         |       | upon us hauled Close to meet her
   4 | 6 |      |         |       |
   5 | 6 |      |         |       | Lattd. Obsd. 45 deg.. 20" No.
   6 | 6 |      |         |       |
   7 | 4 |  4   |         |       |
   8 | 7 |  4   | SWBS    |       |
   9 | 6 |  4   |         |       |
  10 | 6 |  4   | WSW.    |       |
  11 | 6 |  4   |         |       |
  12 | 7 |  4   |         |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+===========================================================
                          | _Remarks on Friday Janry. 7th. 1780_--
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+-----------------------------------------------------------
   1 | 8 |  4   | SWBW    | SE    | First Part Fresh Breezes & thick Weather, at 1 P.M.
   2 | 7 |  4   |         |       | the above Cutter Hauled her Wind, being right a head
   3 | 8 |  4   | SWBS    |       | of us we gaining fast on her, At 3 she Put away before
   4 | 8 |      |         |       | the Wind, we set all Sail before the Wind after
   5 | 8 |      | NW      |       | her, gain Nothing on her, at 1/2 Past 5 Lost Sight of her,
   6 | 8 |      |         |       | Took in Steering Sails Reefd the Top Sails, and
   7 | 1 |      | SWBS    |       | Hauled by the Wind the 2 Ships mentioned above, Just
   8 | 3 |      |         |       | to Windward of us. at 10 Pleasant Weather, and
   9 | 3 |      |         |       | Moderate Breezes, Expended 2-1/2 Butts of Water, at 9
  10 | 6 |      |         |       | A M. Saw 3 Sails to Leward. Two of them we Judge,
  11 | 6 |      |         |       | to be the two Ships beforementioned the other a Brig,
  12 | 7 |      |         |       | at 10 Wore Ship, and stood towards them At Meridian
   1 | 7 |      |         |       | Hoisted English Colours, they Hoisted Dutch Colours.
   2 | 7 |      |         |       | Hauled our Wind to the Southward
   3 | 7 |      |         |       |
   4 | 7 |      |         |       |
   5 | 5 |  4   |         |       |
   6 | 5 |  4   |         |       | Lattd. Obsd. 43 deg.. 33" No
   7 | 5 |      |         |       |
   8 | 5 |      |         |       |
   9 | 3 |      |         |       |
  10 | 3 |      | NNE     | EBS.  |
  11 | 3 |      |         |       |
  12 | 3 |      |         |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+===========================================================
                                  | _Remarks on Satarday Janry. 8th. 1780_--
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+-----------------------------------------------------------
   1 | 1 |  4   | SSW     | SE    | Begins small Winds and Pleast. Weather, at 3 P.M.
   2 | 1 |  4   |         |       | Calm Lowerd downs Top Sails, all Hands employd
   3 | 1 |      |         |       | setting up Rigging, and fixing Broad Pendants, Expended
   4 |   |      |         |       | 2-1/2 Butts of Water, Continued Calm till 3
   5 |   |      |         |       | A M. then Sprung up a small Breeze, at 6 saw four
   6 |   |      | Calm    |       | Sails to Leward, 3 of them we Judge to be the same 3
   7 |   |      |         |       | we saw Yesterday, the other a Large Ship standing to
   8 |   |      |         |       | the Southward, we made Sail after the Brig, at 10
   9 |   |      |         |       | Came up with her, Hoisted out the Yawl, and sent on
  10 |   |      |         |       | Board of her, and brought the Master of her on Board,
  11 |   |      |         |       | he says he is from Liverpool Bound to Leghorn
  12 |   |      |         |       |
   1 |   |      |         |       | Lattd: Obsd: 43. 04 No.
   2 |   |      |         |       |
   3 |   |      |         |       |
   4 |   |      |         |       |
   5 | 3 |      | SSW     |       |
   6 | 1 |      |         |       |
   7 | 4 |      |         |       |
   8 | 3 |      |         |       |
   9 | 4 |      |         |       |
  10 | 5 |      | WBS     |       |
  11 | 1 |      |         |       |
  12 | 1 |      |         |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+=====================================================
                          | _Remarks on Sunday Janry. 9th. 1780_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+-----------------------------------------------------
   1 |   |      | Lying   | SE    | Moderate Breezes and Pleasant Weather, find the Brig
   2 |   |      |      too|       | to be English Property, at 7 sent a Prize Master
   3 |   |      | Drift   |       | and 4 Men on Board, took 4 Men and a Boy out of her,
   4 |   |      |    WNW  |       | made Sail and Steerd as p. Log. The Brig in Company.
   5 |   |      | 1 Mile  |       |
   6 |   |      | pr. Hour|       |
   7 |   |      |         |       |
   8 | 3 |      |         |       |
   9 | 3 |  4   |         |       |
  10 | 3 |  4   |         |       | At 7 A M sent the Boat on Board with the Master of
  11 | 3 |  4   |         |       | the Brig, and one of our People more to go in her,
  12 | 3 |  5   |         |       | One Barrel of Beef and some Candles and Bread. sent
   1 | 3 |  5   |         |       | them for America,
   2 | 4 |      |         |       |
   3 | 4 |      |         |       |
   4 | 4 |      |         |       |
   5 | 3 |  4   |         |       |
   6 | 3 |  4   |         |       |
   7 | 3 |  4   |         |       | Expended 2-1/2 Butts of Water, and 1 Barrel of Beef
   8 | 4 |      |         |       | Wt. 250 lb
   9 | 4 |      |         |       | Pleasant Weather
  10 | 3 |      |         |       |
  11 | 3 |  4   |         |       | Lattd. Obsd. 42. 15 No.
  12 | 3 |      |         |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+=====================================================
                                  | _Remarks on Monday, Janry. 10. 1780_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+-----------------------------------------------------
   1 | 3 |      | SEBE   | EBN    | Fine Pleasant Weather Moderate Breezes of Wind, at
   2 | 4 |      |        |        | 3 P M saw a Ship standing to the Northward, at 4
   3 | 5 |      |        |        | she Passed us to the Westward, about 1 Leage, and
   4 | 4 |      |        |        | Hoisted American Colours, we Hoisted Dutch Colours.
   5 | 5 |      | SE     | ENE    | at 5 we Tackd Ship after her, in hopes of coming up
   6 | 6 |      |        |        | with her in the Night Expended 2 Butts of Water. 1
   7 | 5 |      |        |        | Bbl. of Flour, W. 200 lb. at 6 A M wore Ship saw
   8 | 6 |      | NBE    | EBN    | Nothing of the Chace, spoke a Dutch Snow. Bound
   9 | 4 |      |        |        | to Amsterdam filled some Empty Casks with Salt
  10 | 3 |  4   | North  |        | Water in the Fore Hold
  11 | 4 |      |        |        |
  12 | 4 |      |        |        |
   1 | 5 |      | NBW    | NEBE   |
   2 | 5 |      |        |        |
   3 | 5 |      |        |        |
   4 | 5 |      | SE     |        |
   5 | 4 |      | NNW    | NE     |
   6 | 4 |      |        |        |
   7 | 4 |      |        |        |
   8 | 3 |      | EBN    | NEBN   | Lattd. Obsd. 42 deg.. "33 No.
   9 | 3 |  4   |        |        |
  10 |-- |      |        |        |
  11 | 4 |      |        |        |
  12 | 3 |      |        |        |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+==========================================================
                          | _Remarks on Teusday Janry. 11th. 1780_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+----------------------------------------------------------
   1 | 3 |      | ENE     | North | Pleasant Weather, and Moderate Breezes of Wind,
   2 | 3 |      |         |       | Expended 2-1/2 Butts of Water, 1 Barrel of Pork, 1 Barrel
   3 | 3 |      |         |       | of Beef
   4 | 3 |      |         |       |
   5 | 3 |  4   | EBN     |       |
   6 | 4 |      |         |       | At 10 P M. in all Stay Sails
   7 | 4 |      |         |       |
   8 | 5 |  4   |         | NBW   |
   9 | 7 |      |         |       |
  10 | 7 |  4   |         |       | At 12 Fresh Breeze and Squally
  11 | 7 |      |         |       |
  12 | 7 |  4   |         |       | At 8 A.M. Saw a Sail a Head, and two on our Lee Bow
   1 | 7 |      | East    |       |
   2 | 7 |      |         | NBE   | Sett Top Gallt Sails & Staysails
   3 | 6 |  4   |         |       |
   4 | 6 |      |         |       |
   5 | 6 |      |         |       |
   6 | 5 |      |         |       |
   7 | 5 |      |         |       |
   8 | 5 |      |         |       |
   9 | 5 |      |         |       |
  10 | 4 |      |         | North | Lattd: Obsd.. 43. 00 No
  11 | 4 |  4   | ENE     |       |
  12 | 4 |  4   |         |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+==========================================================
                                  | _Remarks on Wednesday Janry. 12th. 1780_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+----------------------------------------------------------
   1 | 1 |  4   | East    | NNE   | Pleasant Weather, at 3 came up with the Ship that
   2 | 1 |  4   | SEBS    |       | was a head of us sent the Boat on Board of her,
   3 | 2 |      |         |       |
   4 |   |      |         |       |
   5 |   |      |         |       | At 4 the Boat returned. informed us she is a Dutch
   6 |   |      |         |       | Ship, from Marseilles Bound to Bourdeaux, Hoisted in
   7 |   |      |         | Calm  | the Boat Expended 3 Butts of Water,
   8 |   |      |         |       |
   9 |   |      |         |       |
  10 |   |      |         |       | At 12 small Breezes of Wind, at 1 in Top Gallt. Sails
  11 |   |      |         |       | at 4 in Stay Sails, at 8 Thick Weather, and Moderate
  12 | 2 |  4   | EBN     | SBE   | Breezes of Wind, Saw 3 Sail on the Weather
   1 | 5 |      |         |       | Bow. and. 2 to Leward steering Northward, we Kept
   2 | 4 |  5   |         |       | close to the Wind in Order to speak to a Ship to the
   3 | 5 |      |         |       | Windward, at Meridian we Hoisted English Colours.
   4 | 5 |      |         |       | and fired a Gun, they showd Portuguese, and backd
   5 | 5 |      | BS      |       | thier Top Sails. got a Boat out and sent an officer on
   6 | 5 |      |         |       | board of her, Returned soon after with an officer of
   7 | 6 |      |         |       | the Ship
   8 | 6 |      |         |       | No Observation
   9 | 7 |      |         |       |
  10 | 7 |      |         |       |
  11 | 8 |      |         |       |
  12 | 8 |      |         |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+========================================================
                          | _Remarks on Thursday Janry. 13th. 1780_
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   1 |   |      | Lay wth |       | Begins fresh Breezes of Wind and Cloudy Weather,
   2 |   |      | Main    |       | find the abovementioned Ship is from Portugal bound to
   3 |   |      | Top Sail|       | Cork. at 5 P M took the People out of her, who were
   4 |   |      | aback   |       | all Portuguese, and put 3 officers and 8 Men on
   5 |   |      | Drift   |       | board of her, at 8 the Master and Mate put on Board
   6 |   |      | ENE 1   | SBW   | of her, Hoisted in Our Boat and Wore Ship
   7 |   |      | Mile pr.|       | the other Ship likewise Wore, and stood to the Westward
   8 |   |      | Hour    |       | in Company with us Expended 2-1/2 Butts of Water
   9 | 2 |      | WBS     |       | 1. Barrel of Beef. 1 Firkin of Butter, Close Reefd
  10 | 2 |      |         |       | Top Sails Handd the Main Sail Fresh Gales attended
  11 | 2 |      |         |       | wth. Rain at 11 handd the Main Top Sail a large
  12 | 2 |      | WNW     |       | Sea, lost Sight of the Ship. at 12 handd. Mizen
   1 | 2 |      |         |       | Top Sail at 4 A M Moderate Breezes Set the Main
   2 | 3 |      |         |       | Top Sail at 1/2 Past 7. saw the Ship to Leward, bore
   3 | 4 |      |         |       | away. and ran down to her, they Informed us they
   4 | 3 |      |         |       | had Carried away thier Fore Yard, and that the Ship
   5 | 2 |  4   |         |       | was Leaky, got out a Boat and sent a Sail Maker on
   6 | 2 |  4   |         |       | Board. to mend her Fore Sail
   7 | 2 |      |         |       |
   8 | 4 |      | NEBN    |       |
   9 | 3 |      | WBN     |       |
  10 | 1 |      |         |       | Lattd: Obsd. 43. 50 North
  11 | 1 |      |         |       |
  12 | 1 |      |         |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+========================================================
                                  | _Remarks on Friday Janry. 14th. 1780_
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   1 |   |      |         |       | Begins Calm and Pleasant Weather, sent 4 Barrels of
   2 |   |      | Calm    |       | Provisions on Board the Portuguese Ship, and got
   3 |   |      |         |       | ready 400 Gallons of Water, at 2 PM. the Portuguese
   4 |   |      |         |       | sent on Board. of thier Ship. and our People come out
   5 |   |      |         |       | of her, Brought the Provisions aboard again, gave
   6 |   |      |         |       | them a Fore Yard, and left them.
   7 |   |      |         |       |
   8 |   |      |         |       |
   9 |   |      |         |       |
  10 |   |      |         |       |
  11 |   |      |         |       | At 6 PM. some Squalls of Rain at 9 Pleast. Weather
  12 |   |      |         |       | Expended 3 Butts of Water. 1 Barrel of Pork, 1 Bbl.
   1 |   |      |         |       | of Flour
   2 | 1 |  4   | SEBE    | West  |
   3 | 1 |  4   |         | SW    | At 1 A M. Light Airs of Wind. Let the Reefs out of
   4 | 2 |      |         |       | the Top Sails and sett Top Gallt. Sails at 8 a
   5 | 3 |      |         |       | fine Breeze of Wind, Sett Top Mast Steering Sails
   6 | 4 |      |         |       |
   7 | 5 |  4   |         |       |
   8 | 5 |  4   |         |       | People Employed Cleaning between Decks at Meridian
   9 | 5 |  4   |         |       | =in= Fresh Breezes in Steering Sails
  10 | 5 |      |         |       |
  11 | 6 |      |         |       |
  12 | 6 |  4   |         |       | Lattd. Obsd. 43 deg.. 49" No.
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+=============================================================
                          | _Remarks on Satarday Janry. 15: 1780_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+-------------------------------------------------------------
   1 | 8 |      | SE      | SW    | Fresh Breezes and thick Weather, at 5 P M. Spoke a
   2 | 8 |      | SEBS    |       | Dutch Ship from Amsterdam. bound to Lisbon Handed
   3 | 8 |      |         |       | the Main Sail at 1/2 Past 9 Saw the Land bearing SBE.
   4 | 7 |      |         |       | Distance 1 Leage. Wore Ship and stood off. Took in
   5 | 6 |      |         |       | 2 Reefs of our Top Sails Expended 3 Butts of Water.
   6 | 3 |      |         |       | 1 Butt of Brandy. 1 Bbl. of Beef
   7 | 3 |      |         |       |
   8 | 6 |      |         |       |
   9 | 7 |      |         |       |
  10 | 7 |      | NWBW    |       | At 4 AM. Wore Ship Handd. Fore & Mizen Top
  11 | 4 |      |         |       | Sails, Fresh Gales and small Rain at 9 A M Wore
  12 | 5 |      |         |       | Ship to the Northward
   1 | 5 |      |         |       | Saw the Land Bearing SEBS. Distt. about 5 Mile
   2 | 5 |      |         |       | Wore Ship again and stood in for the Land. for a little
   3 | 3 |      |         |       | but the Weather, setting in Thick, lost Sight of it.
   4 | 4 |      |         |       | Wore Ship again Bent the Main Stay Sail. Fresh Gales
   5 | 3 |  4   | SBE     | SWBW  | and Dirty Weather,
   6 | 3 |  4   |         |       |
   7 | 3 |  4   |         |       |
   8 | 3 |  4   |         |       |
   9 | 3 |      |         |       |
  10 | 3 |      | NWBW    |       |
  11 | 3 |      | SE      |       |
  12 | 3 |      | NWBW    |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+=============================================================
                                  | _Remarks on Sunday Janry. 16th. 1780_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+-------------------------------------------------------------
   1 | 2 |      | NWBW    | SW    | Begins Fresh Gales and Dirty Weather, we under Fore
   2 | 2 |      |         |       | Sail and Close Reefd Top Sails & Mizen Stay Sail. at 4
   3 | 2 |      |         |       | PM. Reefd the Fore Sail, and sett the Main Sail, and
   4 | 2 |      |         |       | Handed the Main Top Sail, Launch Top Gallt Masts.
   5 | 2 |      |         |       | at 10 more Moderate a Large Sea, at 4 A M. Wore
   6 | 2 |      |  NWBN   | SWBW  | Ship, sett the Top Sails, at 6 AM Saw a Ship to Leward,
   7 | 1 |  4   |         |       | Run down to her, and shewd English Colours. she
   8 | 1 |  4   |         |       | shewd Dutch. Hauled our Wind and sett Stay Sails,
   9 | 1 |  4   |         |       | and let one Reef out of the Top Sails Swayed up the
  10 | 1 |  5   |         |       | Top Gallt. Masts
  11 | 1 |  4   |         |       |
  12 | 1 |  5   |         |       |
   1 | 1 |  4   |         |       |
   2 | 1 |  4   |  NBW    | WBN   |
   3 | 1 |  4   |         |       |
   4 | 1 |  4   |         |       |
   5 | 1 |  4   |  SBW    |       | West Expended 2 Bbls. of Beef 1 Bbl. of Flour, 1 Box of
   6 | 1 |  4   |         |       | Candles. 1 Firkin of Butter
   7 | 2 |      |         |       |
   8 | 3 |      |  South  | WBN   |
   9 | 3 |  4   |         |       | Lattd: Obsd. 43. 32 No
  10 | 6 |      |         |       |
  11 | 7 |      |         |       |
  12 | 7 |      |         |       |

  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Monday January 17th: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Begins fresh Breezes and Squally, at 1 P.M saw the Land near Ferrol
         | at 4 came to an Anchor in the Harbour of Corrunna, At 7 let go our
         | Stream Anchors, at 8 A M a Spanish Boat with a Number of Gentlemen
         | came on Board, Hoisted out the Barge, and the Captain went on
  West   | Shore, People Employed getting the Fore Yard, Fore and Aft in Order
         | to reduce it, the Sail Maker Employd, Repairing the Sails, Ends
         | Fresh Breeze of Wind, Expended 1 Barrel of Pork. 2 Bbls. of Flour,
         | 1 Barrel of Beef
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday January 18th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  WBS    | Fresh Breezes of Wind attended with Rain in Squalls P M. People
         | variously employed, A M. ditto Weather, spread the steering Sails,
  WSW    | and other Light Sails to Dry. broke up the Upper Tier of Water Casks,
         | and sent 20 a shore in a Spanish Boat. unbent Fore and Main Top
         | Sails, Carpenters reducing the Main Yard, an Inch in the Slings, and
         | 6 Feet from the Length, Received 606 lb. Beef
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday January 19th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fresh Breezes of Wind and Clear Weather, People variously employd
  WNW    | AM. Ditto Winds attended with Plenty of Rain, all the People
         | refused doing Duty, untill they got some Part of the Money due them
         | Recd 597 lb. Beef and some Vegetables
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday January 20th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Small Breezes of Wind, and Plenty of Rain. the People were
         | satisfyd by the Captain, so as to appear chearfully to Duty AM
         | Pleasant Weather, Careened Ship in Order to scrub her Bottom
         | At Meridian a Boat came off with an Anchor,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday January 21st. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  WNW    | PM. Pleasant Weather, People Employd scrubbing the Ships Bottom &
         | Blacking the Bends AM. Fresh Breezes and Plenty of Rain. Careened
         | the other Side and Scrubbed it. got down the Fore Top Sail Yard, and
  North  | hove up the small Bower Anchor in Order to lay it farther to the
         | Southward
         |
         | Recd. 578 lb. Beef    Broachd 1 Box of Candles
         |       300 Bread
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Satarday January 22nd. 1780_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM small Breezes of Wind attended with Rain, Moored Ship a Boat came
         | a long side, with 20 Water Casks, A M. Pleasant Weather Hoisted in
  West.  | the Water came off last Night got the Fore Top Sail Yard athwart,
         | and did other Necessary Duty Recd. 441 lb. Beef 300 lb Bread.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday January 23rd. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Pleasant Weather, People variously employed AM. Ditto Weather,
  WNW    | Nothing Done, a Number of People on Shore on Liberty Recd. 322 lb.
         | Beef 600 lb. Bread.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday January 24th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Pleasant Weather, Received 13 Cask of Fresh Water, A. M. Ditto
         | Weather. People variously employed, Recd. 593 lb. Beef
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday January 25th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fresh Breezes of Wind and some Rain, Employed setting up the
  EBS    | Rigging, Staying the Masts. got the Fore Yard athwart
         | AM. Employed the Rigging Received 600 lb. Bread.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday January 26th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | P.M. Light Airs Clear Weather, People Employed setting up the Rigging
  SW     | Paying the Bends, and other Necessary Jobbs. Recd. 950 lb.
         | Beef
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday January 27th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Light Airs of Wind, Pleasant Weather, Received an Anchor, sent
         | another on shore being too light A M. Bent the Fore Sail, and
         | unmoored Ship, and sundry other Jobbs. Recd. 600 lb. Bread & Vegetables
         | Broachd 1 Pipe of Gin 1 Keg of Butter, the Boatswain Confined
         | to his Cabbin

  ===+===+======+=========+=======+=======================================================
  _H_|_K_|_[HK]_|_Courses_|_Winds_| _Remarks on Friday Janry. 28th. 1780_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+-------------------------------------------------------
   1 |   |      |         |       | Begins Moderate Breezes and Clear Weather, from the
   2 |   |      |         |       | Southward, the Governor, came on board with a Number
   3 |   |      |         |       | of Gentlemen to view the Ship Fired a Salute of 13
   4 |   |      |         |       | Guns at 6 A M. sent the Boat on Shore, for the People,
   5 |   |      |         |       | People employd Heaving Short. and Clearing Decks, at
   6 |   |      | steered |       | 10 P.M. Fired a Gun, and Hoisted a Signal for the
   7 |   |      |     out |       | Boats to come off at 12 PM got under way went out
   8 |   |      |   North | SSE   | with the French Frigate. La Sensible Bound to Brest
   9 |   |      |         |       | we Bound on a Cruize,
  10 |   |      |         |       |
  11 |   |      |         |       |
  12 |   |      |         |       |
   1 |   |      |         |       |
   2 |   |      |         |       |
   3 |   |      | At 4 PM |       | At 2 PM Saw a Sail to Leward, gave Chace came up
   4 |   |      | Hauld   |       | with her, At 4 Boarded her, she proved to be a Dutch
   5 |   |      | ENE     |       | Snow. from Amsterdam to Lisbon, Latter Part Clear
   6 |   |      |         |       | Weather, and Fresh Breezes.
   7 |   |      |         |       |
   8 |   |      |         |       |
   9 |   |      |         |       | Lost Sight of the French Frigate
  10 |   |      |         |       |
  11 |   |      |         |       |
  12 |   |      |         |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+=======================================================
                                  | _Remarks on Satarday Janry. 29th: 1780_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+-------------------------------------------------------
   1 |   |      |         |       | Begins Moderate Breezes and Clear Weather
   2 |   |      |         |       |
   3 |   |      |         |       |
   4 | 4 |  4   | ENE     | South |
   5 | 4 |  4   |         |       |
   6 | 4 |  4   |         |       |
   7 | 4 |  4   | NEBE    |       |
   8 | 5 |      | NE      |       |
   9 | 6 |      |         |       |
  10 | 2 |      | NEBE    |       |
  11 | 2 |      |         |       | At 4 AM Wore Ship to the Westward. at 1/2 Past 6
  12 | 2 |      |         |       | saw the Land Bearing SBW. about 7 Leags. Distt.
   1 | 2 |      | EBN     |       |
   2 | 2 |      |         | SSE   |
   3 | 2 |      | ENE     |       |
   4 | 2 |      | WBS     |       |
   5 | 2 |      | WNW     |       |
   6 | 2 |      | WBN     | SWBS  |
   7 | 2 |      |         |       | No Observation this day
   8 | 2 |      |         |       |
   9 | 1 |  4   |         |       |
  10 | 1 |  4   |         |       |
  11 | 1 |  4   |         |       |
  12 | 1 |  4   |         |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+======================================================
                                  |  _Remarks on Sunday Janry 30th. 1780--_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+------------------------------------------------------
   1 | 3 |      | SSW     | NEBE  | Begins fresh Gales and Squally, Employd Clearing the
   2 | 3 |      |         |       | Lumber from between Decks. & stowing it away in the
   3 | 3 |      |         |       | Hold Sundry other Jobbs, at 5 PM. Hauled up Main
   4 | 3 |      |         |       | Sail, and Wore Ship to the Northward, took in 2 Reefs
   5 | 5 |      |         |       | of the Top Sails Fresh Gales and Squally with Rain
   6 | 6 |      |         |       |
   7 | 5 |      | NWBN    | NNE   |
   8 | 4 |      |         |       |
   9 | 4 |      |         |       | At 6 Close Reefd Fore & Main Top Sails, & Handd.
  10 | 4 |      |         |       | the Mizen Top Sail, Struck Top Gallt. Yards. &
  11 | 3 |      |         |       | Handd. the Main Sail
  12 | 3 |      |         |       |
   1 | 3 |      | WNW     | NBE   |
   2 | 3 |      |         |       | Expended 2 Barrels of Beef 1 Barrel of Pork
   3 | 3 |      |         |       | At 12 P.M. Fresh Gales and thick Weather,
   4 | 3 |      |         |       |
   5 | 2 |      | NWBW    |       | At 4 AM. Ditto Weather,
   6 | 2 |      |         |       |
   7 | 2 |      |         |       | At 8 AM Moderate Breezes & Hazy with Rain
   8 | 2 |  4   | WNW     |       |
   9 | 2 |  4   |         |       | At 9 Saw a Sail Let the Reefs out of the Top Sails
  10 | 2 |  4   |         |       | a large Swell from the Eastward
  11 | 2 |  4   |         |       |
  12 | 2 |  4   |         |       | Lattd. Obsd. 44 deg.. 19" North.
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+======================================================
                                  | _Remarks on Monday Janry 31st. 1780--_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+------------------------------------------------------
   1 | 2 |      | SBE     | SWBW  | Begins Fresh Gales and Squally. with Rain from the
   2 | 2 |  4   |         |       | Eastd.
   3 | 6 |      |         |       | At 7 PM. Splitt the Fore Top Sail
   4 | 7 |  4   |         |       |
   5 | 7 |  4   |         |       | At 8 Handed it; Handed Main & Mizen Top Sail
   6 | 7 |  4   | NBW     | WBS   |
   7 | 6 |      |         |       |
   8 | 6 |      |         |       | At 10 Do. Weather Blows very Hard,
   9 | 4 |      |         |       |
  10 | 4 |      |         |       |
  11 | 5 |      |         |       | At 12 Do. Weather.--
  12 | 5 |      |         |       | Expended 2 Bbls. of Beef 1 Bbl. of Pork, 1 Bbl. Flour
   1 | 6 |      | NWBN    |       | 1 Box of Candles,
   2 | 5 |  4   |         |       |
   3 | 6 |      |         |       | At 4 AM Moderate Breezes & a Large Sea unbent the
   4 | 4 |  4   |         |       | Fore Top Sail
   5 | 4 |      |         |       |
   6 | 4 |      |         |       |
   7 | 2 |  4   |         |       | At 8 made Sail Moderate Breezes and Clear Weather
   8 | 2 |  4   |         |       |
   9 | 2 |  4   | SWBW    | SBE   |
  10 | 2 |  4   |         |       | Lattd. Obsd. 44 deg. .. 31" North
  11 | 2 |  4   | SW      | SSE   |
  12 | 2 |  4   |         |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+====================================================
                                  |  _Remarks on Teusday Febry. 1st. 1780_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+----------------------------------------------------
   1 | 1 |  4   | NWBW    | BEBE  | Begins Light Winds & Clear Weather, People Employd
   2 | 1 |  4   |         |       | cleaning the between Decks, and Scrubbing
   3 | 1 |  4   |         |       | Hammocks & other Necessary Jobbs
   4 | 2 |  4   |         |       |
   5 | 2 |      |         |       |
   6 | 3 |  4   |         |       |
   7 | 3 |      | NNW     | EBS   |
   8 | 4 |  4   |         |       | Expended 1 Barrel of Beef
   9 | 4 |  4   |         |       |
  10 | 3 |  4   |         |       |
  11 | 3 |  4   |         |       | At 8 Light Winds & Clear Weather,
  12 | 3 |  4   |         |       |
   1 | 4 |      | North   |       |
   2 | 4 |      |         |       |
   3 | 4 |  4   |         |       | At 9 Squally with Rain, at 10 Handd. Mizn. Top Sail
   4 | 4 |  4   |         |       |
   5 | 4 |      |         |       | At 11 Set the Mizen Top Sail again
   6 | 3 |  4   |         |       |
   7 | 4 |      |         |       |
   8 | 4 |      | NWBW    | NEBE  |
   9 | 4 |      | 1/2W    | 1/2E  |
  10 | 3 |      | NW      |  NNE  |
  11 | 2 |      |         |       | No Observation
  12 | 2 |      | NWBW    | NEBN  |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+====================================================
                                  | _Remarks on Wednesday Febry. 2 nd. 1780--_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+----------------------------------------------------
   1 | 2 |      | NWBW    | NEBN  | Begins Moderate Breezes. and Squally with Rain.
   2 | 1 |  4   |         |       | People variously employed about the Ship
   3 | 4 |  4   |         |       |
   4 | 3 |      |         |       |
   5 | 2 |      |         |       | At 4 PM Ditto Winds, with Showers of Rain
   6 | 4 |  4   |         |       | At 6 do. Weather
   7 | 3 |      |         |       |
   8 | 4 |  4   | North   | ENE   | At 8 Sprung up a Breeze from the Eastwd.
   9 | 4 |      | NBE     | EBN   |
  10 | 4 |      |         |       | At 10 Fresh Gales and Cloudy
  11 | 4 |      |         |       | Expended 1 Bbl. of Flour, Broachd 1 Pipe of Gin &
  12 | 4 |  4   |         |       | 1 Cask of Beans
   1 | 4 |      |         |       | At 6 A M. Saw a Sail on the Quarter Wore Ship and
   2 | 4 |      |         |       | gave Chace, Sett the Main Sail Mizzen Top Sail &
   3 | 4 |      |         |       | Jibb
   4 | 4 |      |         |       |
   5 | 4 |      |         |       | At 9 AM. came up and spoke her, she proved to be a
   6 | 4 |      | SSE     |       | Letter of Marque, Ship from Virginia. Bound to
   7 | 6 |      |         |       | Bourdeaux, out 33 Days. John Gale Commander,
   8 | 7 |      |         |       |
   9 | 8 |      |         |       |
  10 | 8 |      | NBE     |       | Lattd: Obsd. 45 deg.. 46" North
  11 | 3 |      |         |       |
  12 | 3 |      |         |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+=======================================================
                                  | _Remarks on Thursday Febry. 3rd. 1780_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+-------------------------------------------------------
   1 | 2 |      |  NNW    | NE    | Begins Fresh Breezes and Squally, at 1 P.M made a
   2 | 1 |  4   |         |       | Sail on our Larboard Quarter, Wore Ship gave Chace,
   3 | 4 |  4   | West    |       | Out all Reefs, Set Steering Sails got Top Gallt.
   4 | 3 |      |  NW     |       | Yards athwart set Top Gallt. Sails, at 5 P M gave
   5 | 2 |      | SSE     |       | over Chace, Wore Ship to the Eastward, Reefd the
   6 | 4 |  4   |         |       | Top Sails Light Winds & Squally
   7 | 2 |  4   |         |       |
   8 | 3 |  4   |         |       |
   9 | 3 |      |         |       |
  10 | 3 |      |  SBE    | EBN   |
  11 | 3 |  4   |         |       |
  12 | 3 |      |         |       | Expended 1 Barrel of Beef
   1 | 3 |      |         |       |
   2 | 2 |      |         |       | Departed this Life Benjn. Powers Master at Arms
   3 | 1 |  4   |         |       | At 4 A M. Light Winds & Clear Weather, the Ship in
   4 | 1 |  4   |         |       | Sight
   5 | 4 |      |         |       |
   6 | 3 |      | ENE     | EBS   | At 6 A M. Tacked Ship to the Southward
   7 | 3 |      |         |       | At 8 Small Winds & Pleasant Weather,
   8 | 3 |      | East    | SE    |
   9 | 2 |      | SSE     |       | At 10 Backd. Main & Miz Top Sail Hauled down
  10 | 1 |  4   | EBN     | SEBS  | Jibb & Main Top Mast Stay Sail, Hoisted out the
  11 | 1 |  4   |         |       | Yawl went on Board the Ship in Company
  12 | 2 |  4   |         |       | Lattd: Obsd. 45 deg.. 15" North
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+=======================================================
                                  | _Remarks on Friday Febry. 4th. 1780_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+-------------------------------------------------------
   1 | 3 |      | East    | EBS   | Begins Fresh Gales & thick Weather, from the Southward
   2 | 3 |  4   | SSE     |       |
   3 | 4 |      | SBE     |       | At 4 PM. Fresh Gales & Squally with Rain, at 5 PM
   4 | 4 |      |         |       | sent the Yawl on Board the Ship in Company, with her
   5 | 4 |      |         |       | Captain and a Passenger,
   6 | 4 |      |         |       |
   7 | 6 |      |         |       |
   8 | 6 |      |         |       | At 6 Fresh Gales & thick Weather,
   9 | 8 |      |         |       |
  10 | 8 |      |         |       | At 8 Fresh Gales and Squally
  11 | 8 |      |         |       | At 9 Handed down the Main Top Sail Struck Top
  12 | 8 |      |         |       | Gallt Yards, Hauled up the Mizen down Stay Sails
   1 | 7 |  4   |         |       | Fore and Aft,
   2 | 6 |  4   |         |       |
   3 | 6 |  4   | ENE     | SE    |
   4 | 6 |  4   |         |       |
   5 | 5 |  4   |         |       | Expended 2 Bbls. of Pork, Broachd 1 Box of Candles
   6 | 5 |  4   |         |       |
   7 | 5 |      |         |       | At 4 A M. Fresh Gales and a Large Sea
   8 | 5 |      |         |       | Broachd 2 Barrels of Beef
   9 | 4 |      | EBN.    |SEBS   |
  10 | 4 |      | ESE     |       |
  11 | 4 |      |         |       | No Observation
  12 | 4 |      |         |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+==========================================================
                          |       | _Remarks on Satarday Febry. 5th. 1780_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+----------------------------------------------------------
   1 | 2 |      | East    |SSW    | Begins Moderate Breezes & a Large Sea, wth Rain,
   2 | 1 |      |         |       | saw a Ship to the Westward, Tackd Ship and gave
   3 | 5 |      |         |       | Chace at 4 PM Spoke to her she was from Stockholm
   4 | 5 |      | SE      |NW     | Bound to Lisbon. at 4 P M Wore Ship and stood to
   5 | 5 |      |         |       | the ENE.. Expended 2 Barrels of Beef
   6 | 3 |      | ENE     |SW     |
   7 | 3 |      |         |       |
   8 | 5 |      |         |       |
   9 | 5 |      |         |       |
  10 | 7 |      |         |       | At 10 Reeft Top Sails and Sett Main Stay Sail
  11 | 8 |      |         |       | Retook a small French Bark, that had been taken by
  12 | 8 |      |         |       | a Geurnsey Privateer, Laden with Wine from Bourdeaux,
   1 | 8 |      |         |       | sent a Midshipman, and 3 Hands on Board,
   2 | 9 |      |         |       | her, and took her in Tow.
   3 | 8 |      |         |       |
   4 | 7 |      |         |       |
   5 | 6 |      |         |       | At Meridian found her to be very Weak & Leaky to
   6 | 6 |      |         |       | Bear Towing, we Halled by the Wind, and Layd our
   7 | 6 |      |         |       | Top Sails a back, in Order to take the Men out of the
   8 | 6 |      |         |       | Prize--
   9 | 6 |      |         |       |
  10 | 4 |      |         |       |
  11 | 4 |      |         |       |
  12 | 4 |      |         |       | Lattd. Obsd. 47 deg...16" North
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+==========================================================
                                  | _Remarks on Sunday Febry. 6th. 1780--_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+----------------------------------------------------------
   1 |   |      |         |       | Begins with thick Weather, & fresh Breezes, Cut away
   2 |   |      |Laying   |       | the Masts of the Prize, and got her a long Side,
   3 |   |      |too      |       | took out of her, her Main & Fore Sail, & Fore Top
   4 |   |      |         |       | Sail a small Hauser, & 11 Casks of Wine, before we
   5 | 4 |      |SEBE     | WNW   | could get anything more, she Sunk, served the Ships
   6 | 4 |      |         |       | Company, 1 Cask, of Wine, at 12 PM. Do. Weather
   7 | 4 |   4  |         |       | at 4 PM. Do. Weather, made Sail, and Immediately
   8 | 8 |      |         |       | After saw a Fleet, to Leeward. Hauled our Wind and
   9 | 8 |      |         |       | made Sail from them, a Large Sea with Fresh Gales at
  10 | 8 |  10  |         |       | Wore Ship and stood towards the Fleet at 1/2 Past 11
  11 | 8 |   4  |         |       | Carryd away. the Larboard Main Top Sail Sheet, took
  12 | 8 |      |         |       | in the Top Sails
   1 | 7 |      |         |       |
   2 | 6 |      |         |       |
   3 | 6 |      |         |       |
   4 | 6 |      |         |       |
   5 |10 |      |         |       |
   6 | 9 |      |         |       |
   7 | 8 |      | NBE     |       |
   8 | 6 |      |         |       |
   9 | 6 |      |         |       | Broachd 1 Barrel of Beef 2 Bbls. of Pork, 1 Bbl. of
  10 | 4 |      |         |       | Flour, 1 Butt of Water
  11 | 4 |      | SBE     |       |
  12 | 4 |      |         |       | Lattd. Obsd: 47 deg.. 46" N
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+=======================================================
                                  |  _Remarks on Monday Febry. 7: 1780_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+-------------------------------------------------------
   1 | 2 |      | ENE     | WBN   | Begins Fresh Gales and Squally with a Large Sea, we
   2 | 2 |      |         |       | in Chace of the Fleet under our Fore Sail Main and
   3 | 3 |      |         |       | Mizen Stay Sails, at 2 PM. Wore Ship to the Northward,
   4 | 3 |      |         |       | Three Ships out of the Fleet standing towards
   5 | 4 |      |         |       | us, Hove out a Signal to the Livingston the Ship in
   6 | 4 |      |         |       | Company to follow us At 4 Lost Sight of the Fleet.
   7 | 3 |  4   |         |       | got down Top Gallt. Yards.
   8 | 4 |      | SBE     |       |
   9 | 4 |  4   |         |       |
  10 | 5 |      |         |       |
  11 | 5 |      |         |       | At 6 the Weather more Moderate, bore away under
  12 | 5 |      |         |       | our Fore Sail, at 12 PM. Sounded and got Bottom 85
   1 | 4 |  4   |         |       | fathom Gray Sand, at 4 PM. Sounded the same Depth
   2 | 2 |  5   |         |       | of Water, at 6 Moderate thick Weather, Spoke the
   3 | 5 |      |         |       | Livingston desired them to make Sail got up Top Gallt.
   4 | 5 |      |         |       | Yards. sett Top Gallt. Sails
   5 | 5 |      |         |       |
   6 | 5 |      |         |       |
   7 | 5 |      |         |       |
   8 | 5 |  4   |         |       |
   9 | 5 |  4   | ENE     |       | Broachd 1 Bbl. of Beef 1 Cask of Wine
  10 | 5 |      |         | NW.   | No Observation
  11 | 6 |      | NE      |       |
  12 | 6 |      |         |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+=======================================================
                                  | _Remarks on Teusday Febry. 8: 1780_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+-------------------------------------------------------
   1 | 4 |  4   | ENE     | SW    | Begins Moderate Breezes thick & Hazy Weather, at 1
   2 | 4 |  4   |         |       | PM saw the Land bearing from NE to E. which we
   3 | 4 |      |         |       | Judge to be the Penmark, At 5. we were within 1
   4 | 4 |      |         |       | League of the Rocks, WBN from thence, we Halled by
   5 | 3 |      |         |       | the Wind, to the Southd. Sounded 45 fathom Water,
   6 | 3 |      | South   | WSW   | fine Gray Sand, our Consort in Sight, at 9 Sounded
   7 | 3 |      |         |       | 50 fathom, at 10 same Depth Muddy Bottom, Thick
   8 | 3 |      | SBE     |       | Weather, attended with Rain at 11 Tackd At 6 AM.
   9 | 3 |      |         |       | Wore Ship to the Southd. Sounded 60 Fathom of
  10 | 2 |      | SSE     | SW    | Water, fine Gray Sand, Do. Weather, at 9 Sett Main
  11 | 2 |      |         |       | Sail & Main Top Mast Stay Sail & Jibb Discovered
  12 | 2 |  4   | West    | SSW   | the =Land= Head to be Loose
   1 | 2 |  4   |         |       | Broachd 1 Bbl. of Pork
   2 | 2 |  4   | WBN     |       | 1 Box of Candles
   3 | 3 |      |         |       | 1 Cask of Wine
   4 | 3 |      |         |       |
   5 | 2 |      |         |       |
   6 | 2 |      | WNW     | SWBS  |
   7 | 2 |      | South   | SW    |
   8 | 2 |      |         | WSW   | No Observation
   9 | 5 |  4   |         |       |
  10 | 5 |  4   |         |       |
  11 | 5 |  4   |         |       |
  12 | 5 |  4   |         |       |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+===================================================
                                  |  _Remarks on Wednesday Febry. 9th: 1780_
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+---------------------------------------------------
   1 | 3 |      | SBW     | WBS   | Begins Moderate Breezes and Rain Sounded 63
   2 | 3 |      |         |       | Fathom Water, fine Sand, at 6 PM. Close Reefd the
   3 | 3 |      |         |       | Top Sails
   4 | 2 |  4   | SSW     | West. |
   5 | 3 |      |         |       |
   6 | 3 |  4   |         |       |
   7 | 3 |      |         |       | Expended 1 Bbl. of Pork. 1 Cask of Wine
   8 | 3 |      | SBW     |       |
   9 | 3 |  4   |         |       | Broachd 2 Bbls. of Beef 1 Box of Candles
  10 | 3 |  4   |         |       |
  11 | 3 |  4   |         |       | At 10 Sounded 65 Fathom Water,
  12 | 3 |  4   |         |       | At 1 AM. Wore Ship, at 5 Out Reefs, at 6 spoke a
   1 | 4 |      |         |       | Dutch Galliott Bound to Brest she informed us
   2 | 4 |      | ESE     |       | Belslile Bore NNE Distance 8 Leagues
   3 | 4 |      |         |       |
   4 | 4 |  4   |         |       |
   5 | 5 |  4   |         |       |
   6 | 5 |      |         |       | At 11 Belslile a Head fine Pleasant Weather, the
   7 | 5 |      |         |       | Livingston in Company
   8 | 5 |      | NNE     |       |
   9 | 4 |      |         |       |
  10 | 4 |      |         |       |
  11 | 3 |      |         |       | Lattd. Obsd. 46 deg.. 39" No
  12 | 3 |      | NW      | SWBW  |
  ===+===+======+=========+=======+===================================================
                                  | _Remarks on Thursday Febry. 10th: 1780_--
  ---+---+------+---------+-------+---------------------------------------------------
   1 | 1 |  4   | NNW     | West  | Pleasant Weather, and Light Airs of Wind, Belslile
   2 | 1 |      |         |       | still in Sight Sounded 50 Fathom Water, Gravell
   3 | 1 |      |         |       | Stones Expended 2 Bbls. of Beef. At 6 PM. Belslile
   4 | 1 |      |         |       | North End bore NEBN about 3 Leagues Distance, At
   5 | 2 |      |         |       | 7 Sounded 45 Fathom Water with Sand, Hauled up our
   6 | 2 |      | NW      | SBW   | Courses, took in Top Gallt. Sails and settled the
   7 | 2 |  4   |         |       | Top Sails At 4 AM. Lay too
   8 | 2 |  4   |         |       |
   9 | 2 |  4   |         |       |
  10 | 2 |      |         |       |
  11 | 1 |  4   |         |       |
  12 | 1 |  4   |         |       | At 6 made Sail and stood in for the Land,
   1 | 2 |      | North   |       |
   2 | 2 |      |         |       | At 8 Saw the Isle of Groa bearing EBS.
   3 | 2 |      |         |       |
   4 | 2 |      |         |       | At Meridian Close in with Groa,
   5 |   |      |         |       |
   6 |   |      |         |       | Expended 2 Bbls. of Beef
   7 | 5 |      | NEBE    |       | Broachd 1 Bbl. of Flour
   8 | 5 |      |         |       |         1 Pipe of Gin
   9 |   |      |         |       | Recd. 325 lb. Fresh Beef
  10 |   |      |         |       |
  11 |   |      |         |       |
  12 |   |      |         |       |

  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Friday Febry. 11th: 1780_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Pleasant Weather, at 3 PM came to an Anchor, within the Isle of
         | Groa with our Larboard Anchor, the Purser went to L'Orient, at 8
   ESE   | Returnd with Beef. the Livingston likewise came too an Anchor,
         | Broachd 1 Bbl. of Flour
         |         1 Cask of Gin
         | A.M. Employed Cleaning the Ship several Gentlemen on Board from
         | L'Ort.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Satarday Febry. 12th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Fresh Breezes and Pleasant Weather, till Evening, the Captain went
         | to L'Orient, the Boat returned, with 729 lb Beef & 50 lb. Bread,
  "--"   | thick Weather all Night in the Morning Pleasant Weather, People
         | Employd making Points & Gasketts. Knolling Yarns for Spun Yarn.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday Febry. 13th. 1780--_
         | ---------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Fair, But very Cold Weather, People Employd as before,
         | Recd. 717 lb. Beef Broachd 1 Cask of Butter.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday Febry. 14th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Fair and Cold Weather, PM. People variously employed, A M People
         | Employed, making Points and Gasketts, sent 2 Casks to L'Orient
         | for Water
         |
         | Broachd 1 Box of Candles. 1 Cask of Wine,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday Febry. 15th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fair and Cold Weather, People Employd, making Points and Spun
         | Yarn. at 5 OClock got down Top Gallt. Yards, Broachd 2 Bbls. of
  EBS.   | Pork, 1 of them destroyd by the Ratts
         | AM. Do. Weather, People Employd as above, the Boat went to L'Orient
         | with some of the Sick, Recd. 700 lb. Beef
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday Febry. 16th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fair Weather, Moderate Breezes of Wind, People Employd making
         | Points and Spun Yarn. A.M. Do. Weather, Employed washing the Ship
         | Fore and Aft. Received 300 lb. Bread--
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Thursday 17th. February 1780_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Cold Weather Moderate Breezes of Wind, Received from L'Orient
         | 1 Anchor, Wt. 3200 lb. with Orders from Capt. Jones to get an Anchor
  East   | left by the Serapis, In the Evening do. Weather, the People
         | Employed about the Serapis Anchor, Scrubbing their Hammocks and
         | other Necessary Jobbs
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday 18th. February 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fresh Breezes and Fair Weather, got up the Anchor, but could
         | not get up the Cable, without the Ships getting under way, went
         | to the Anchor got it to the Bow, and got in the Cable about 50
         | fathom A M Do. Weather, Light Airs of Wind, Hove up our Anchor,
         | and got under Sail in Order, to get nearer the Port of L.'Orient
         | At Meridian Calm let go our Anchor again
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Satarday 19th. February 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Pleasant Weather, at 1 OClock sprung up a small Breeze got
         | under Sail, and run into the Harbour, Moored the Ship to the
  NW.    | Kings Moorings AM. Dirty Squally Weather, People variously employed,
         | Carpenters on Shore making a New Sett of Tops for the Ship
         | Recd. 531 lb. Beef 300 lb. Bread. 1 Teirce of Gin
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday 20th. February 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Squally Weather, People employd getting down Top Gallt. Masts
         | and Yards. and unseeved the Running Rigging
         |
         | AM. Pleasant Weather, loosed Sails to Dry Recd. 683 lb. Beef 522 lb.
         | Bread
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday 21st. February 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | P.M. Pleasant Weather unbent Sails AM. Ditto Weather.
         | People variously employed 12 of them on shore on Liberty
         | Received 862 lb. Beef
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|_Remarks on Teusday 22nd. February 1780_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fair Cold Weather, People Employed making Points and other
         | Necessary Duty, a Sail Maker from Shore came on board, and
         | Measured our Spars for a New Sett of Sails Recd 294 lb. Bread,
         | Broachd 1 Box of Candles, AM. Ditto Weather People Employd as above
         | At 11 Capt Jones came on board and gave Orders to unrig the Ship
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday 23rd. February 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Pleasant Weather, got down Top Sail Yards. and Top Masts and
         | unrove all the Running Rigging Recd. 650 lb. Beef 522 lb. Bread
         | AM Do. Weather People Employd getting down the Top Masts Rigging
  NNW.   | and other necessary Duty, Capt. Jones and some French Carpenters
         | came on Board. Mr. Darling the Boatswain released from his Confinement
         | and Ordered to resume his Station, and do his Duty
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday 24th. February 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | P.M Pleasant Weather, People Employed Rigging, Carpenters on Shore
         | making sett of Tops, for the Ship, A M Thick Weather, and small
  SE     | Rain, People Employd repairing the Top Mast Rigging, got the Brig
         | that we took the first Cruize, along Side to put our Stores in
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday 25th. February 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Pleasant Weather, People Employd getting our Stores on Board the
         | Brig and overhauling the Rigging A M. Do. Weather Seamen Employd
  SW.    | at the Rigging others getting Stores into the Brig getting Water
         | Casks out of the Hold, sent 50 of them ashore, Recd 800 lb. Beef
         | 504 lb. Bread
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Satarday 26th. February 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fair Weather Fresh Breezes, Employd getting Stores on board the
         | Brig and fixing the Top Mast Rigging, in the Evening Squally &
         | fresh Gales of Wind had about 20 Casks of Powder damaged. by Mr.
  "--"   | Frankford Masters Mate Starting Water in the Hold, so much as to
         | come an Inch up the Casks Heads in the Magazine,--Employd getting
         | out the Powder, Capenters & Gunners Stores and Starting the Water
         | Casks out of the Ground Tier,--
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Sunday 27th. February 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Pleasant Weather People variously employed
  West   | AM Ditto Weather
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday 28th. February 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fair Weather, Moderate Breezes of Wind, People variously employed,
         | A M. Do. Weather, Employed getting out Water Casks and
         | sending them on Shore, and putting Stores on Board the Brig
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday 29th. February 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fair Weather, Moderate Breezes of Wind. Employd fixing the
         | Rigging, the Ship Clearing of her Stores AM. Do. Weather, Seamen
         | Employed getting down the Fore Rigging and Over Hauling it, others
         | getting out Water, unbending the Cables, and putting Sundry Stores
         | on board the Brig
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday March 1st. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Pleasant Weather, Put our Cables on board the Brig the People
         | Employd about the Rigging, Broachd 1 Box of Candles
  WSW.   | AM Pleasant Weather, Employd getting the Fore Rigging aloft
         | and Trimming the Ballast aft. three Caulkers from the Lusanne
         | to Caulk between Decks. Capt. Bell came on Board
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday March 2nd. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fair Weather, Employd about the Fore Rigging and Rigging the
         | Fore Yard, in Order to Lift the Bowspritt (Trimming the Ballast
         | Aft, Carpenters Employed on Shore, making the Tops, Recd.
         | 885 lb. Beef & 524 lb. Bread, Broached 1 Cask of Brandy.
         | AM. Dirty Weather, Employd Knotting of Yarns and other Necessary
         | Duty--
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Friday March 3rd. 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
  West   | PM. Fair Weather. People variously employed,
         | AM Squally Weather and got up the Main Top, and other Necessary
         | Duty
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Satarday March 4th.. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | At PM Squally Weather, Employd getting off some of the Main Rigging
         | and Putting Provisions on board, the Brig, the Carpenters having
  NNE    | finished the Tops. came on Board, Recd. 746 lb. Beef 360 lb Bread.
         | AM. Fine Pleasant Weather, Employed getting down the Main Rigging
         | taking up the Orlop Decks. and other Necessary Jobbs
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday March 5th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Moderate Cloudy Weather, People variously employed, Broachd. 1
  SW.    | Box of Candles, AM. Do. Weather, got out the Bow Spritt, and Cutt
         | 2 feet 2 Inches off the Heel,--Got the Main Top up
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday March 6th..1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Thick Weather, People Employd, fixing the Rigging and other
         | Necessary Duty. Recd. 683 lb. Beef & 480 lb. Bread.
         | AM Ditto Weather got the Bowspritt in again, some Hands employd
         | fixing the Main Rigging, others as Necessary
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday March 7th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fair Weather, got the Fore Top on, and got the Cat Water
         | secured, Hands Employd fixing the Main Rigging others Employd on
  SW.    | Necessary Jobbs.
         | AM Do. Weather, Hands Employd Rigging the Main
         | Mast, Bow Spritt &c.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday March 8th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Moderate Weather, Employd. Rigging the Ship and Trimming the
         | Ballast forward, Recd. 756 lb. Beef 564 lb. Bread.
  SW     | AM. Do. Weather Employd Rigging the Main Mast Bow Spritt and other
         | Necessary Jobbs
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Thursday March 9th: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | People Employd Fixing the Rigging Trimming Ballast forward and
         | other Necessary Duty.
  SW     | AM Fair Weather, Employd as above, 2 Caulkers of the Lusanne at
         | work today. Recd. 768 lb. Beef 564 lb. Bread.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday March 10th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fair Weather, People employd Rigging the Ship and making some
  NE     | Alterations in the Hold.
         | AM Do. Weather Employd as above, 3 Caulkers at Work between Decks
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Satarday March 11th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Pleasant Weather, People Employd about the Rigging stowed the
         | Ballast in the Hold, Delivered the Anchor that we received at the
         | Isle of Groa, to a French Frigate lying here, AM Fair Weather, got
  East   | the Fore Top Mast rigging up, Hands still Employd stowing of Ballast
         | in the Hold, and other Necessary Duty
         | Received 1 Barrel of Tar,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday March 12th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fine Pleasant Weather, Rigging the Ship, and Stowing the Ballast
  WSW    | Recd. 32 Coils of Cordage, 789 lb. Beef & 580 lb. Bread. AM. Wet
         | Dirty Weather, Employd Cleaning the Ship Fore and Aft
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday March 13th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Pleasant Weather, Employd Rigging the Main Top Mast and getting
         | the Main Yard, Fore and Aft. in Order to reduce it Recd. 377 lb.
         | Beef A M Ditto Weather, got the Top Masts up Swayed up the Fore Yard,
         | and got the Mizen Top Sail and Cross Yard athwart
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Teusday March 14th: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Pleasant Weather, got the Fore Top Sail Yard athwart, in the Top
         | People Employd fixing the Rigging, Carpenters reducing the Main
         | Yard. Recd. 858 lb. Beef 480 lb. Bread, Broachd 1 Butt of Gin, 1 Box
         | of Candles AM. Do. Weather got a Lighter along side, in Order to
  South. | put our Gravel Ballast into, Employd Rigging the Ship, and moving
         | the Iron Ballast forward in the Hold, Recd. by 2 French Boats 39
         | Coils of Cordage 38 Skanes of Marline, & 1 Barrel of Tar,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday March 15th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Pleasant Weather, got the Main Top Mast on End, People Employd
         | at the Rigging Reducing the Main Yard, and Building a New Orlop
  WNW    | Deck, AM Cold Weather, People Employd at the Rigging and other
         | Necessary Duty.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday March 16th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Pleasant Weather got the Main Top Sail Yard athwart, & Got the
  West   | Main Yard Rigged & swayed up, Recd. 615 lb. Beef & 516 lb. Bread.
         | AM. Dirty Rainy Weather employd Cleaning the Decks & other Necessary
         | Duty
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday March 17th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Moderate Dirty Weather, People Employed taking the Turns out of
  WSW    | the Moorings, Received 1 Teirce of Salt
         | A M Do. Weather People variously employed.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Satarday March 18th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fresh Breezes and Squally Took down the Gally. and placed the
         | Coppers in the Hold, Carpenters Employd making a New Main Top Gallt.
         | Mast, Laying the Orlop Deck, Altering Carpenters Boatswains &
         | Gunners Store Rooms, Recd. 688 lb. Beef & 600 lb Bread, A M Fresh
         | Gales and Rain Found the Deck under the Gally so Rotten as Obliged
         | us to lay New Plank in that place
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Sunday March 19th. 1780_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fresh Breezes and Dirty Weather People variously employed
  WSW    | Broachd 1 Box of Candles. & 1 Cask of Butter
         | AM. Ditto Weather, People Employd as most Necessary
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday March 20th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Thick Dirty Weather People variously Employd Recd. 833 lb. of
         | Beef & 63 lb. Bread. A M Fair Weather, Employd Tarring the Rigging
         | and other Necessary Duty Carpenters Employd making the Top Gallt
         | Masts and laying the Deck under the Gally, and Building the Store
  SE     | Rooms a new forward, Recd. 2 Bbls. of Tar, sent a Number of Men
         | to the Gun Wharf to get Cannon ready for Shipping--
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday March 21st. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fine Weather, People variously Employed, at 4 a Lighter came
         | along side, with 13 Cannon, 11 of which 18 Pounders, the other
         | 2, Nine Pounders, got purchases fixed for them Hoisting in a
         | Number of Men came along side, that had lately come in a Cartell
  SW     | from England--
         | AM Ditto Weather, Hoisted in the Guns Sent the Lighters for more
         | the Caulkers not on Board to Day.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday March 22nd. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fair Weather People Employd, Tarring Rigging & Blacking the
         | Sparrs. at 4 OClock, the Lighter came along Side, with 12 Eighteen
         | Pounders, Hoisted them in, One of our People Died at the Hospital
         | which is the third since we came in, Vizt. Nathl. Warner,
  West   | Moses Hilton & Henry Wrightenton several others have Deserted
         | Received 1252 lb Beef & 3,000 lb Biscuits A M. Do. Weather
         | sent the Lighter on Shore for the Remainder of the Guns. at 8
         | OClock she Returned with 4. 18 Pounders, & 9---9 do. Recd. 3
         | Coils of Cordage
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Thursday March 23rd. 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fair Weather. Employd. Loading a Hoy with Gravel Ballast
         | and other Necessary Duty AM, Fair Weather finishd. Loading the
         | Lighter and sent her on Shore, to unload the Ballast, Carpenters
  NW.    | Employd Building a Store Room. in the Place where the Boatswains.
         | was. for the Sails, 2 Frenchmen Employd. Covering said Place with
         | Tin
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday March 24th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Pleasant Weather, a Number of People on Shore, Discharging
         | the Duty in the Lighter Ballast, People employd at the Rigging
         | and other Necessary Duty. a Bricklayer came on Board with Mortar,
         | for building the Gally. got the Lighter along Side, again, Recd.
  East   | 565 lb Beef & 36 lb. Bread, & 2 Teirces of Brandy. Broachd one,
         | A M. Ditto Weather fresh Gales of Wind, sent the Lighter. on Shore,
         | for 2 Guns. 1 of 18 Pounder the other of 9 Pounder, got them in.
         | and began. Loading the Lighter with Ballast, got a spar on Board
         | to make a Top Gallt Yard, and some Sheet Lead to lay under the
         | Gally. French Men at work Tinning the Sail Room,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Saturday March 25th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Pleasant Weather, loading the Lighter with Ballast, and getting
         | the Top Gallt. Masts on End, Received 525 lb Beef & 60 lb.
  South, | Bread 1 Box of Candles,
         |
         | AM. Pleasant Weather, finished getting out the Ballast. and
         | sent hands on Shore, to unlade her,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday March 26th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Pleast. Weather, Employd Blacking our Masts and Steering Sail
         | Booms, and other Necessary Duty. Benj. Yewlin Died, at the Hospital
  SSW.   | 2 of the Caulkers at work this Day. Recd. 575 lb. Beef A M.
         | Ditto Weather Employd, Scraping and Washing the Decks got the
         | Top Gallant Yards athwart
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Monday March 27th: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Thick Weather, sent the Lighter for Wood, Received 72lb. Bread
         | AM. Fair Weather, sent the Barge for the Lighter, found the Tides
         | had Nipped her, Left her aground, 3 Bricklayers and 2 Men Tinning
  SE--   | the Sail Room. at work on Board 3 Caulkers, Caulking the
         | Main Deck, and Cabbin
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday March 28th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fair Weather, People variously Employd Recd. 1159 lb. Beef
         | Broachd 1 Tierce of Brandy 1 Butt of Gin
         |
         | AM. Dirty Rainy Weather, sent the Barge for the Lighter People
  West   | Employd, on Board, Knotting of Yarns, & Making Points & Gasketts
         | the Caulkers. Caulking the Orlop Deck. the Bricklayers. & Tinners
         | as before,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday March 29th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fair Weather, got the Lighter along side With Wood, 10 Chord
  SW     | which we took in, AM. Dirty Weather, sent the Lighter on Shore,
         | and brought off 94 Casks, the Caulkers on board
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday March 30th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fair Weather, People variously Employed Recd. 645 lb. Beef
         | 72 lb Bread AM. Thick Weather, Careened the Ship, and Scrubbed
         | her Bottom, on the Starboard Side, as far down as we Could payd
         | her Sides, with Lamb Black & Tallow, Carpenters making some
         | Alterations in the Cock Pitt.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday March 31st. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | P M Clear Weather, Blackd, our Bends. and got the Ship upright.
         | The Tinners not on Board. Recd. 145 lb. Beef A M Squally Weather,
         | Careened Ship, Scrubbed her Larboard Side and Payd it, the
         | Caulkers at Work, Caulking the Main Deck next the Side--
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Satarday April 1st: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fair Weather, Employed taking out the Ballast out of the Spirrit
         | Room, and other Necessary Duty. 3 Caulkers & 1 Carpenters from
  WSW    | the Philadelphia Ship at work, on Board, Received 1247 lb Bread
         | AM Rainy Dirty Weather, employd stowing away Water Casks &c. the
         | Carpenters & 2 of the Caulkers at work,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday April 2nd. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Dirty Weather, People variously employd, Recd. 1233 lb. Beef
         | AM. Thick Gales and Dirty Weather, Put several Potts of Fire, composed
  "-"    | of Combustibles, below. and shut all the Hatchways in Order to cleanse
         | the Ship, and Kill the Vermin on Board,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday April 3rd. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Hard Gales. and Squally, still smoaking the Ship, Broachd, 1
  WNW.   | Box of Candles, AM Dirty Weather, Employd making Points & Gasketts
         | & other Necessary Duty
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday April 4th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fresh Gales and Squally. People employd variously. Recd. 341
         | lb Beef & 3010 lb. Bread. Broachd 1 Cask Arrack, AM Moderate
  NW     | Weather sent the Barge for some Plank, People Employd Knotting
         | Yarns and making Points & Gasketts.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday April 5th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | AM. Fresh Gales. Employd Cleaning out the Spirrit Room and getting
  "-"    | out the Ballast Recd. 595 lb. Beef, 144 lb. Bread. A M Fair Weather
         | variously employed
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday April 6th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fair Weather, got some of the Casks & Ballast out of the Fore
  "-"    | Hold to Enlarge the Magazine Recd. 612 lb. Beef & 72 lb. Bread
         | AM Ditto Weather, Employd getting up the Rigging
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Friday April 7th. 1780_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fair Weather, Employd setting up the Rigging and other Necessary
         | Duty, 6 Carpenters & Caulkers from the Philadelphia Ship at Work,
  NE     | Fresh Gales & Rain, People variously employd,--
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Satarday April 8th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fresh Gales attended with Rain, People variously employd
         | Recd. 1221 lb. Beef Employd as Necessary
         | =====================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday April 9th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fair Weather, Employd as most Necessary, Recd. 8 Bolts of =for=
         | Duck, for making of Hammocks, & some twine Broachd 1 Cask of Arrack,
         | AM Dirty Weather, People Employd scrubbing the Hammocks.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday April 10th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Pleasant. Weather, People variously employd, the Lighter returned
  West   | with Water, Recd. 93 lb. Bread. AM. Ditto Weather
         | unloaded the Lighter. filled 40 Casks.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday April 11th 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Pleasant Weather, People variously employed, the Lighter returned
         | with Water, Recd. 93 lb. Bread. AM Do. Weather unloaded the Lighter,
         | Started the Water into Casks in the Hold filled 40--
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday April 12th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  VBle,  | PM. Pleasant Weather all Hands variously employd; A M Ditto
         | Weather, 3 OClock sent the Lighter for Water
         | Departed this Life Chace Rogers Cooper----
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Thursday April 13th: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fair Weather, the Lighter returned with Water, Hoisted it in and
         | started it into Casks in the Hold, filled 50 Casks, sent the Lighter
         | for more Water Recd. 1912 lb. Beef & 72 lb. Bread, Broachd 1 Cask
         | of Arrack
         |
         | AM. Fresh Gales, the Lighter set out again and got about a Mile,
  Westy. | from the Ship when the People were obliged to leave her, the Wind
         | blowing to Hard to get any further,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday April 14th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fresh Breezes. People variously employed, Recd. 72 lb. Bread,
  NE     | A M Ditto Weather, gave the Lusannes, Carpenters & Caulkers, a
         | Certificate for the Time they had worked on board, got Water a Long
         | side,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Satarday April 15th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fair Weather, Employd getting the Water, and other Necessary
         | Duty, Received 608 lb. Bread, 3028 lb. Beef. A M. Do. Weather sent
  SE.    | the Lighter to Port Louis, for Boxes of Small Arms at Meridian she
         | returnd with 67 Boxes
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday April 16th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM small Showers of Rain, Hoisted in the Arms. the Barge brought
         | off 6 Planks and 2 Knees for Enlarging the Gangways. Recd. 108 lb.
  NW     | Bread Broachd 1 Cask of Arrack, 1 Cask of Butter
         | A M Ditto Weather, People variously employed, Carpenters Lengthning
         | the Quarter Deck, 2 Carpenters 2 Caulkers. from the Lusanne on board.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday April 17th..1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fresh Breezes and Fair Weather, People Variously Employed, Recd
  West   | 983 lb Beef Broachd 1 Box of Candles. A M Ditto Weather, Carpenters
         | and others Employed as most Necessary, Sent the Lighter on Shore
         | for the Remainder, of our Water Cask, and some Coal
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Teusday April 18th: 1780_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fresh Gales, Fair Weather, Variously Employed on Board
  WNW.   | A M Ditto Weather, Carpenters Lengthning the Quarter Deck, Received
         | 10 Chord of Wood,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday April 19th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fair Weather, the Lighter came along Side with the Water Casks
         | and 25 Bushels of Coals. stowed the Water Casks, & Coal, Carpenters
  West   | Employed as usual, A M Ditto Weather, People variously Employed,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday April 20th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fair Weather, People variously employed Recd 847 lb Beef
  NNW.   | 108 lb Bread, 2 Casks of Brandy Contg. 120 Gallons, Broachd one
         | A M. Ditto Weather, Employd as most necessary.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday April 21st: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fair Weather, People variously Employed
         |
         | AM. Foggy Dirty Weather,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Satarday April 22nd. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  SW.    | PM Fair Weather, the People Received one Months Pay Recd 108 lb
         | Bread, and 6 Bushells of Salt, A M Do. Weather, got a Craft with
         | Water along side, filled all our Gang Casks Except 6 Gang Casks,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday April 23rd. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | P M Fair Weather, sent the Craft on Shore, Carpenters at work on
  West   | the Quarter Deck, and Gangways Recd. 2030 lb Beef, Broachd 1 Cask
         | of Brandy, A M. Dirty Weather, People variously employed
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Monday April 24th: 1780_--
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Vble,  | PM. Fair Weather, People Employed on Sundry Jobbs. M M Thick
         | Weather
         |
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday April 25th..1780_--
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fair Weather, People Employd on Sundry Jobbs, A M Thick Foggy
         | Wear.
         |
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday April 26th. 1780_--
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fresh Breezes attended with Rain, Struck Top Gallt. Masts
         | Recd. 108 lb. Bread, & 278 Candles, and 2 Casks of Brandy.
  W.SW   | A M Fair Weather got up Top Gallt. Masts, Mr. Blodgett the Purser,
         | and the Master of the Lusanne came on board, to Survey Provisions
         | People Employed Trimming the Casks.
         |
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday April 27th.. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fair Weather, Coopers Trimming the Provision Casks, Carpenters
  SW.    | Employed as usual, Recd. 2047 Beef Broach 1 Cask of Brandy
         | AM Fresh Winds and Rain
         |
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday April 28th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Dirty Weather, variously Employed, Recd. 324 lb. Beef 108 lb.
         | Bread
  "-"    | A M Ditto Weather,
         |
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Satarday April 29th.. 1780_--
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fair Weather, Coopers Employed, Pickling & Trimming Provisions
         | Carpenters Building the Gang Ways; Recd. 14 Bushells Salt
         | Broachd 1 Box of Candles, A M Do. Weather Employd as usual
         |
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday April 30th.. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | P.M Fair Weather Carpenters Employed as usual,
         |
         | A.M. Ditto Weather,
         |
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Monday May the 1st: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fair Weather People Employd variously, Recd. 1484 lb. Beef & 105
  SE.    | lb. Bread, AM Dirty Rainy Weather
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday May the 2nd. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | AM. Dirty Weather, People variously Employed, Recd 2845 lb. Bread
  ENE    | A M Fair Weather, surveying Provisions, Condemnd 1 Hogshead
         | 2 Teirces & 5 Barrels of Beef
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday May the 3rd. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fair Weather, People variously employed, Broachd 1 Cask of Brandy
         | AM Ditto Weather, came on Board one of the Harbour Pilots, with
         | Orders for us to leave the Kings Moorings, to make room for a 74
         | Gun Ship from the Port, Bent our Cable we received in Holland, to
  Easty. | our best Bower Anchor, and an Old one to the Small Bower and Moored
         | the Ship in 9 Fathom Water, put Service on the best Cable,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday May 4th.. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fine Weather, 2 Plumbers on board Pulling Leads in the Hause
  SSW    | Holes Recd. 1229 lb. Beef & 108 lb. Bread. AM Do. Weather People
         | variously Employed
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday May 5th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fair Weather People variously Employed, AM Thick Weather small
         | Rain, a French Boat came along side with an Eighteen Inch Cable,
         | a Rope for a Messinger 2 Buoy Ropes. a Coil of Bolt Ropes
         | very poor Rigging gave a Receipt for all Except the Messinger,
         | Carpenters Employed finishing the Gang Ways. Caulkers Employd
         | Caulking them. Surveyd some Provisions. Condemnd 2 Barrels.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Satarday May 6th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fair Weather People variously Employd. Recd. 1032 lb. Beef &
  SW.    | 108 lb. Bread AM Thick Weather
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Sunday May 7th: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fair Weather, the Caukers finished Caulking the Gang Ways.
  SW     | Coopers Trimming Provisions, A M Thick Weather Mustered the People
         | several Missing
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday 8th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fair Weather, Recd. 806 lb. Beef 80 lb. Bread & 4 Teirces of Rum
         | Contg. 216 Galls. Broachd one, A M. Thick Weather, some Rain. Recd.
         | 459 Starr Shott, Twelve Pounders. & 262 Nine Pounders.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday Monday May 9th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fresh Gales and thick Weather, People variously Employed. Recd.
         | 33 lb. Beef & 8 Bushells of Salt. AM. Ditto Weather, finished. Overhauling
         | the Provisions, one Barrel more Condemnd.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday May 10th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fresh Gales and Dirty Weather, People variously Employed Recd.
         | 407 lb. Beef 12 Teirces of Brandy. A M Ditto Weather,--
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday May 11th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fair Weather, Carpenters and others Employed as most Necessary
  WSW.   | Recd. 154 lb. Bread. Broachd 1 Barrel of Pork, A M Ditto Weather.
         | People Employed, Cleaning the Guns for Painting
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday May 12th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fair Weather, People variously Employed, Recd. 1070 lb. Beef
         | Broachd 1 Tierce of Rum. 1 Box of Candles, found. 1 Barrel 3/4 of
  SSW    | another of Flour has been taken out of the Brig along Side
         | AM Ditto Weather Employd Painting the Guns----
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Satarday May 13th: 1780_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fresh Gales. & Dirty Weather, Struck Top Gallr. Masts,
         | Struck Yards and Top Masts, miss a Half Bbl. of Pork, out of the
         | Brig, AM. Fair Weather, People variously employed, gave the
  SSW    | Lusannes Carpenters Certificates for thier Work, (Vizt. James
         | Barry 20 days Jas. Clark 20 days. Natl. Boyd 12 days. Christ.
         | Marlin 12 days Wm. White 10 days
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday May 14th: 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  SSW    | PM Fresh Gales and Dirty Weather, Employd Painting the Ship
         | and other Necessary Duty Recd. 1121 lb. Beef 108 lb. Bread,
  North. | A M Ditto Weather Swayed up Yards & Top Masts
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday May 15th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fresh Gales & Dirty Weather, Struck Yards & Top Masts, AM
         | Fresh Breezes and Fair Weather People variously employed
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday May 16th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Pleasant Weather, Employed making Sennett for Waste Netting,
         | Painting the Inside of the Ship, and a Stowing a Quantity Plank
         | in the Hold, Recd. 108 lb. Bread. Broachd 1 Teirce of Rum.
         | A M Foggy Weather, People variously Employed.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday May 17th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Vble.  | PM Fair Weather, People variously Employed. Recd. 1346 lb. Beef,
         | & 3,000 Wt. Bread. A M Ditto Weather, swayed up Yards and Top
         | Masts.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday May 18th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fair Weather, People variously Employed Recd. 12 Bushels of
         | Potatoes, 1 Teirce of Rum we Broached.
  Calm   | AM Ditto Weather, sent our Barge, and another Port to Port
         | Louis for Powder, Employd on Board Painting the Inside Work,
         | Round the Quarter Deck, and other Necessary Duty
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Friday May 19th: 1780_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fine Pleasant Weather, the Boats returned with 67 Barrels of Powder
  Vble.  | Stowed 54 forward in a place, built for that Purpose, abaft, the
         | Magazine received 108 lb. Bread
         | AM Ditto Weather, Employed unrigging the Mizen Mast in Order to
         | Shift it farther Aft.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Satarday May 20th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM. Fine Pleasant Weather, a French Boat Brought along Side, 15
         | Teirces of 1 Bbl. of Pork, we have now on board of 63 Bbls. of Beef
         | 17 Teirces of Ditto, 1 Large Teirce, & 2 Puncheons of ditto, 10 Bbls.
         | & 2 Teirces of Pork, 182 Butts & 10 Puncheons of Water, Recd. 1638 lb
         | Beef & 3 Casks of Rum Contg. 223 Galls. Broachd 1, AM Ditto Weather,
         | Employd stepping the Mizen Mast, and getting up Sheers in Order to
         | Hoist it out, Carpenters fixing the Step for it on the Lower Deck,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday May 21st: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Pleasant Weather, 2 French Boats brought us off 6 Chord of Wood
         | got out our Mizen Mast, and stept it. Broachd 1 Teirce of Rum AM
         | Ditto Weather, Employd Rigging the Mizen Mast, and other Necessary
         | Duty.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday May 22nd. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Pleasant Weather, People variously Employed Recd. 108 lb. Bread
  West.  | AM Fresh Breezes. Employd Rigging the Mizen Mast
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday May 23rd. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  "-"    | PM. Fresh Breezes and fair Weather, Variously Employed, AM. Ditto
         | Weather, Employed Cleaning the Ship, Fore and Aft
         |
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Wednesday May 24th: 1780_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fair Weather, People variously employed
         |
         | AM Ditto Weather, the Boats went to Port Louis for Powder, got the
  VBle.  | Cables, out of the Starboard Orlop, in Order to Paint the End of the
         | New Cable, found one of the Cables, we got in Holland, Eat in several
         | Places by the Ratts, as much as 20 Yarns off
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday May 25th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Fair Weather, Finished Painting the Cable, spliced it to the
         | Part of a Cable, took up with the Serapis's Anchor, Coiled them
         | after wetting them. the Boats returned with the Powder, Stowed 20
         | Barrels in the After Magazines, which filled it, put 29 Barrels on
  SW     | Board the Brig along side. which was all the Boats brought
         | AM Ditto Weather, Employd Cleaning the Ships Sides in Order for
         | Paying them.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday May 26th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Pleasant Weather, People variously employed
         |
         | AM Ditto Weather, employd Blacking the Ships Sides & Painting the
         | Carved Work, 2 French Boats brought off 10 Barrels of Pork.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Satarday May 27th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | PM Pleasant Weather, still Employd Blacking the Ship Two French
         | Boats brought. 57 Sacks of Bread.
  NE.    | AM. Do. Weather, Hands Employed stowing away the Bread
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday May 28th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Begins Moderate & Pleasant, Cleaned Ship got Top Gallt Yards a Cross
  SSE.   | &c. Latter part Moderate and Pleasant
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Monday May 29th: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Begins Moderate & Clear, People variously Employed on board,
  SSW    | Recd. 60 Bags of Bread, Exercised the Cannon. Latter Part Ditto Winds
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Teusday May 30th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Begins Moderate & Clear, People variously, Employed. Shifted the Sheet,
  VBle.  | Bower, and the small Bower Cv Middle Part Hard Thunder, Squalls and
         | some Rain Latter Part Ditto Weather,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday May 31st. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Begins Moderate & Clear, People variously Employed, at Sennett. Points
  SW     | & Gasketts. Middle Part. Exercised the Cannon. Cleaning Ship and
         | other Sundry Jobbs.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday June the 1st. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Begins Moderate & Clear, People variously Employd,
  West   | Latter Part Do. Weather
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday June 2nd. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Begins Moderate and Pleasant Weather. People Employd as Necessary
  SW     | Exercised the Cannon.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Satarday June 3rd. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  NE     | Begins Moderate Breezes and Pleasant Weather. People as Yesterday
         +======================================================================
         |             _Sunday_
         | _Remarks on =Satarday= June 4th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  SSW    | Begins Moderate and Clear Weather, People Cleaning between Decks.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday June 5th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Begins Moderate Breezes and Plenty of Rain, People variously Employed
  West.  | Received 60 Bags of Bread.
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Teusday June 6th: 1780_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
   SW.   | Moderate & Clear People Variously Employed.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday June 7th..1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | Moderate & Clear, some Squalls of Rain, People Employed on Sundry Jobbs
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Thursday June 8th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
   WSW.  | Moderate & Clear, People Employd, on various Occasions
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Friday June 9th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
   SW.   | Begins Moderate & Clear, People as before
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Satarday June 10th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
   -"-   | Begins Moderate & Clear, People as before,
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Sunday June 11th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
   -"-   | Begins Moderate & Clear, People as before
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Monday June 12th..1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins Moderate & Clear, Employd Hauling the Brig from along side
         |  up to the Key the Tide of Ebb making Could not get her up,
         |  Returned with the Boat. & People, Capt. Landy came on board, and took
         |  Command, he said by Orders of Congress, his Orders were read to the
         |  Officers & People, Capt. Landy Orderd all the Officers, that belonged
         |  to the Late Bon Homme Richard, Capt. Jones, on Shore, and any other
         |  Officer, that would not Acknowledge him Capt. of the Alliance,
         |  Capt Jones Officers came on Shore,--Capt Jones, set out for Paris--
         |
         |                End of the Alliances Journall


An Account of Occurrences in L'Orient respecting the Bon Homme
Richards Officers & Crew

  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
  _Winds_|             _Remarks on Teusday June 13th. 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Clear Pleasant Weather all the Officers on Shore waiting
   WSW   |  for Orders
         +======================================================================
         |                _Remarks on Wednesday June 14th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Clear Pleasant Weather, the Officers as before,
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Thursday June 15th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins Clear & Pleasant Weather, still Waiting for Orders
         |                  Commencement of the Ariels Journal
         +======================================================================
         |  _Remarks on Friday June 16th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins Clear & Pleasant Weather, Orders to the Officers, to Attend
         |  on Board, the Ariel Frigate, in the Port of L'Orient, being taken
         |  in the Service of the United States
         +======================================================================
         |  _Remarks on Satarday June 17th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Clear and Moderate Weather, People Employd getting in 6
         |  Chord of Wood, and the Top Mast Rigging, Shrouds and Stays Likewise
         |  got 2 Anchors to the Bow. and bent the Cables to them and then
  SW     |  Hauled the Ship out in the Stream.
         |  Received on Board   24 Sheets of Lead
         |                       1 Bar of Lead
         |                       5 Cables
         |                       4 Hausers
         |                      63 Water Casks


A Journall Kept on Board the American Continental Ship of War, Ariel,
of 26 ... Nine Pounders, Commanded by the Honble. John Paul Jones
Esqr. Commencing in the Port of L.'Orient June the 16th: 1780--

  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|            _Remarks on Sunday June 18th. 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Clear and Moderate Weather, went on Board the Ship
         |  Alliance, with an Order from the Commandant, to Capt Landy, for the
         |  People that belongd. to the late Bon Homme Richard but Capt. Landy
         |  refused letting them come on Shore, without an Order from Capt.
         |  Jones, at 3 PM. the Alliance fired a Gun and Hoisted, an American
         |  Jack, at the Fore Top Mast Head, being a Signal for a Pilot in Order
         |  to go down to Port Louis, at 5 in the Afternoon, the Alliance fired
         |  a Salute of 15 Guns
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Monday June 19th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Messrs. Lunt and Stacey went on Board the Alliance, and got their
         |  Cloaths on Shore, the Alliance fired a Gun, and Hoisted a Signal for
         |  a Pilot, to carry her to the Isle of Groa,
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Teusday June 20th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Morning the Alliance Halled down to Port, Louis at 1/2 Past 7
         |  Capt Jones Arrived from Paris----
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|         _Remarks on Wednesday June 21st: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This morning the Alliance Halled outside of Port Louis, and got
         |  under way with all Sail Sett, Mr. Lunt & self went on board the
         |  Alliance after the People belonging to the late Bon Homme Richard,
         |  Capt. Landy refused the men to come on Shore, as likewise Capt.
         |  Jones Stores, or Barge
         +======================================================================
         |            _Remarks on Thursday June 22nd. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day the Serapis was Sold here for 240,000 Livres.
         |  Nothing more Particular,
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Friday June 23rd. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Nothing
         +======================================================================
         |            _Remarks on Satarday June 24th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  The Alliance Sailed and Came to an Anchor under Groa,
         +======================================================================
         |             _Remarks on Sunday June 25th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This day Commodore Gillon set out for Amsterdam, waited on the
         |  Commandant, Concerning Men that belonged to the Late Bon Homme
         |  Richard, Entered in the Service of the State of South Carolina,
         |  under the Command, of the Commodore,
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Monday June 26th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Halled the Ariel into Port and received Orders to Commence Rigging
         |  her,
         +======================================================================
         |             _Remarks on Teusday June 27th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day fine Weather, and a fresh Breeze of Wind French Riggers
         |  on board the Ariel,
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|          _Remarks on Wednesday June 28th: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day begins with a fresh Breeze, & fine Weather, this Morning
         |  the News of South Carolina being taken by the English Arrived
         |  in Town.--getting Guns on board
         +======================================================================
         |            _Remarks on Thursday June 29th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day Capt. Jones Orderd to send on Board the Alliance for
         |  80 of the best Seamen, and the Carpenters and Joiners to assist
         |  in fitting the Ariel for Sea, and for the Alliance, to come to
         |  Port Louis, these Orders were sent on board by Mr. Livingston,
         |  an Officer in the Service of America, Capt. Landy sent 23 Men.
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Friday June 30th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day begins with Cloudy Weather, and some Rain, Orders were
         |  given to pay the People 5 Guineas pr. Man.
         +======================================================================
         |             _Remarks on Satarday July 1st. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This day Cloudy Weather, and some Rain. People Employed setting
         |  up the Lower Rigging, Over Hauled the Shott on board and found
         |  there to be 780, Round for the 9 Pounders & 200 Double Headed
         |  Shott
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Sunday July 2nd. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day Cloudy Weather, and some Rain, and a Fresh Breeze, of
         |  Wind,--
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|              _Remarks on Monday July the 3rd. 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day Cloudy with Rain. People Employd Rigging the Ship
         |  Received on Board the following Stores. Vizt.
         |   1 Cask of Rum Contg. 60 Gallons
         |  12 Cans
         |  12 Crows               +============================================
         |   1 Gallon of Salt      | _Remarks on Teusday July 4th. 1780_
         |   1 Quart               +--------------------------------------------
         |   1 Pint Pot            | People Employd Rigging the Ship, Received
         |   3 Gill 1-1/2 Pint Pot | Top Masts & 3 Lower Caps. got them over
         |   1 Funnell             | Head and Swayed the Top Masts up,
         |  40 lb Fresh Beef       |     Recd. 42 lb Fresh Beef
         |  42 lb. Bread           |           42 Bread
         +=========================+============================================
         |             _Remarks on Weds.day July 5th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day Cloudy Weather and Rain. People Employd Rigging the Ship
         |  5 French Boys came on Board,
         |  Received the following Stores Vizt.
         |  2 Fore & Main Top Gallt. Caps    |  3 Top Sail Yards
         |  2 Pair of Top Gallt. Cross Trees |  3 Lower Yards
         |  2 Top Ropes                      |  1 Jibb Boom
         |  2  Top Mauls                     | 42 lb. Bread
         |  3  Iron Fidds
         | 32 small Dead Eyes
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Thursday July 6th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day Fine Weather, all Hands Employed Rigging the Ship
         |  Received the following Articles Vizt.
         |  Lanyards for the Top Mast Shrouds
         |  12 Baskets
         |  24 Scrapers
         |   1 Lanthorn
         |  12 Brooms
         |  52 lb. Fresh Beef
         |  54 lb Bread
         |
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|            _Remarks on Friday July 7th: 1780_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day Rain and thick Weather, all Hands Employed Rigging the
         |  Ship, the Officers and Men who were Confined in Goal were
         |  released, and Came on Board, Recd. the followg. Articles Vizt.
         |      12 Crow Bars
         |      12 Hand Spikes
         |      58lb. Fresh Beef
         |      60lb Bread,
         +======================================================================
         |            _Remarks on Satarday July 8th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day begins with fine Weather, all Hands Employd Rigging the
         |  Ship, French Carpenters at work,
         |  Expended 58 lb Fresh Beef
         |           60 lb Bread
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Sunday July 9th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day Fine Weather, the French Carpenters at work
         |  Received 58 lb Beef
         |          100 lb Bread.
         +======================================================================
         |  _Remarks on Monday July 10th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day Fine Weather, all Hands Employed Rigging the Ship,----
         |  Entered Mr. Wheeler, as Gunner, Martin Shaw as Boatswains Mate
         |  3 Americans & 6 Seamen, (French) Cleaned out the Hold, for Stowing,
         |  Received 2 Carpenters from an American Brig, called the Duke of
         |  Leinster. French Carpenters & Riggers as before,
         |  Recd. 63 lb. Beef
         |        73 Bread
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|               _Remarks on Teusday July 11th: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day Fine Weather, Hands Employed Rigging the Ship, Cleaning
         |  the between Decks, Coiling the Cables. in their propper places, a
         |  Number of French Carpenters at work, and some from the Duke of
         |  Leinster
         |
         |  Expended 67 lb. Fresh Beef
         |           66 Bread
         +======================================================================
         |                _Remarks on Wednesday July 12th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day Hands Employed fitting the Ship, Blacking Yards Masts &c.
         |  Mr. Wheeler the Gunner, set out for St. Maloes,  to recruit Men
         |  French Carpenters, and the Joiners from the Duke of Linster,
         |  Provisions Expended 67 lb Fresh Beef
         |                      66 lb. Bread
         +======================================================================
         |                 _Remarks on Thursday July 13th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day Fair Weather, and Clear, Hands Employd as Necessary
         |  French Carpenters & 2 Joiners from the Duke of Leinster as before,
         |  Provisions Expended 140 lb. Beef
         |                         140 Bread
         +======================================================================
         |                 _Remarks on Friday July 14th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day Fine Breezes and Clear Weather, Hands Employed as most
         |  Necessary. took in 147 Pieces of Iron Ballast, Received a Cask of
         |  Brandy. French Carpenters &c. as before
         |  Expended 163 lb. Beef
         |            161 lb Bread
         |              1 Cask of Rum
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|         _Remarks on Satarday July 15th. 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day fine Weather, Hands Employed taking out some Large Iron
         |  Ballast, Provisions Expended 160 lb. Beef
         |                               160 Bread
         +======================================================================
         |  _Remarks on Sunday July 16th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day fine Weather, No People at work.
         |  Expended 101 lb. Beef
         |           161 Bread
         +======================================================================
         |  _Remarks on Monday July 17th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day fine Weather, and Moderate Winds, Hands employed setting
         |  up the Rigging, Carpenters as before,
         |  Provisions Expended 160 lb Beef
         |                      160 Bread.
         +======================================================================
         |  _Remarks on Teusday July the 18th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day Cloudy Weather and some Rain, People Employd as Necessary
         |  Received from Port Louis, as follows
         |       37  Cases  with 33 Arms in each
         |       16  do ... with 25  do..
         |  Provisions Expended 188 lb Beef
         |                      191 Bread
         +======================================================================
         |  _Remarks on Wednesday July 19th: 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day Cloudy Weather, People variously employed. Received from
         |  Port Louis as follows.
         |        34 Cases with  33 Arms in ea
         |        23 Cases with  25  Do
         |         1 Case  with  24  do
         |         2 Cases with  34  do.
         |  Provisions Expended 210 lb Beef
         |                      200 Bread
         |                        1 Cask Rum 55 Galls.
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|                _Remarks on Thursday July 20th: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day fine Weather, Hands Employed about the Rigging stowing the
         |  Hold, &c. French Carpenters as before, Received from Port Louis Vizt.
         |     24 Cases with 33 Arms in ea
         |      6 Cases of do.  34 do
         |      1 Case --- 19 do
         |      1 small do. with Pistols
         |  Provisions Expended. 118 lb. Beef
         |                       118 Bread.
         +======================================================================
         |                _Remarks on Friday July 21st: 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day fine Weather, People Employed as Necessary. At 11 OClock
         |  Hoisted Jack, Ensign, & Pendant, Manned Ship in Complement to a
         |  French Admiral passing by. Received 5 Chord of Wood
         |  Expended 118 lb Beef
         |           118 Bread.
         +======================================================================
         |             _Remarks on Saturday July 22nd. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day Fine Weather, the People stowing the Hold,
         |  Received the following Provisions VIZt.
         |           40 Bbls. of Beef  100 Kegs of Barly
         |           20 Do. of Pork    110 lb. Fresh Beef
         |            2 Do. of Pease   110 Bread
         |           12 Do. of Flour     6 Gallons of Salt
         |            2 Hhds. of Potatoes
         +======================================================================
         |               _Remarks on Sunday July 23rd. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day Fine Weather, the French Carpenters at work as usual
         |  Provisions Expended 118 lb Beef
         |                      118 lb Bread
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|               _Remarks on Monday July 24th. 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours fair Weather, People Employd about Necessary Jobbs
         |  French Carpenters as usual Received on Board 5 Firkins of Butter,
         |  Entered 6 Englishmen from a French Prison
         |  Received 110 lb. Beef
         |           198 Bread
         |             1 Cask of Rum
         +======================================================================
         |  _Remarks on Teusday July 25th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours fine Weather, People Employed, about Necessary Jobbs
         |  French Carpenters as usual, Recd. 5,000 lb Biscuit, Bent Fore Top
         |  Sail and Jibb, Fore Top Mast stay Sail & Mizen, Fore & Main Sail
         |  Received several Robins & Earings, Recd 212 lb Beef 212 lb Bread
         |  Received the following Gunners Stores
         |
         |  40 Gun Takles        |15 Thimbles            | 2 Skanes of
         |  24 Breechings        | 2 Hooks               |   Hambro' Line
         |   1 Pair of Slings    | 9 Rings               | 1 Hammer
         |Beds & Coins for 20    | 8 Crow Bars           | 2 Spare Carriages
         |Carriages              | 2 Hammers             | 4 Spare Beds.
         |   2 Spunges           | 4 Bundle Rings of Wire|
         |   2 Worms             | 3 Sheep Skins         |
         |   2 Ladles            | 1 Piece of Cork       |
         |  30 Cartridge Boxes   |30 Wax Candles         |
         |  15 Powder Horns      | 1 Piece of Bees Wax   |
         |   3 Bouch Barrels     | 6 Seives              |
         | 116 Grape Shott       | 2 Peices of Marline   |
         |  84 Cannister Shott   | 2 Lamps               |
         |1600 Wads              | 9 Side Lanthorns      |
         |   3 Axel Trees        | 1 Pair of Jack Screws |
         |  15 Priming Wires     |10 Aprons of Lead      |
         |   6 Gimbletts         | 1 Sheet of Lead       |
         |   8 Spare Rammers     | 1 Keg of Black Paint  |
         |   3 Marline Spikes    | 1 Keg of White Paint  |
         |   2 Axes              | 2 Skanes of Hausing   |
         |   4 Scrapers          |
         | a Quantity of Matching|
         |   1 Cold Chissell     |
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|            _Remarks on Wednesday July 26th. 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | These 24 Hours fine Weather. People Employd as Necessary
         | Recd. 9267 lb Biscuit
         | Expended 212 lb Beef
         |           212 Bread.
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Thursday July 27th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | These 24 Hours fine Weather, People Employd about the Nettings
         | for the Waist and other Necessary Jobbs. the French Carpenters and
         | Joiners at work as usual,
         +======================================================================
         |               _Remarks on Friday July 28th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | These 24 Hours fine Weather People Employd as most Necessary
         | French Carpenters and Joiners as before, Received 5 Chord of Wood,
         | 96 Hammocks, and a Large Chest for the Masters small stores
         | Expended 220 lb Beef
         |           220 Bread
         +======================================================================
         |             _Remarks on Satarday July 29th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | These 24 Hours fine Weather, Received on Board 2 Pine Tables and
         | a Number of Coils of small Cordage. Halled the Ship out in the
         | Road: and Moored her, to the Moorings
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Sunday July 30th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | These 24 Hours fine Weather & Calm, People Employd. Cleaning Ship &c.
         |
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Monday July 31st. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | These 24 Hours fine Weather, People Employd on Sundry Jobbs French
         | Carpenters & Joiners as before, Received on Board the Medicine Chest
         | and 12 Beds for the Sick,
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|          _Remarks on Teusday August the 1st. 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | These 24 Hours fine Weather People Employd on Necessary Jobbs.
         +======================================================================
         | _Remarks on Wednesday August 2nd. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | This Day Cloudy Weather, & some Rain People Employd on Necessary
         | Jobbs. French Carpenters and Joiners as before,
         | Received on Board the following Stores Vizt.
         |          54 Coils of small Cordage
         |          32 Lengths of Junk 2 fatm, each
         |           2 Cases of Bottled Rum
         |           3 Double Blocks
         |           3 Tribble Blocks
         |          12 Fiddle Blocks
         |          22 Single Blocks
         |           2 Tye Blocks
         |           1 Burton Block
         |           2 Snatch Blocks
         |           2 Top Blocks
         |           1 Cat Block
         |           2 Top Sail Sheet Blocks
         |          25--6 Inch Block
         |           6--8 Inch Block
         |          24 Hook Blocks
         |           8 Strap Blocks
         |           8 Tail Blocks
         |           5 Ribbs
         |          24 Trucks
         |           1 Panell
         |           2 Fids
         |           2 Malletts
         |          38 Belaying Pins
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_| _Remarks on Thursday August 3rd: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Fine Pleasant Weather, People variously employed, some to Work
         |  on the Quarters some Arranging the Anchors on each Bow
         |  Received on Board the following Stores
         |           25 small Single Blocks
         |            8 feet of Lignum Vita for Pins for Blocks
         |            6 Nine Inch Blocks
         |            2 Top Sail Tye Blocks,
         |           12, 2 Inch Blocks
         |            4 Fiddle Blocks, 1 Dozen Trucks. 5 Ribbs
         |            4 Eight Inch Blocks
         |           15 Tribble double Fiddle Blocks
         |           22 Hook Blocks ready finished,
         |            8 Blocks ready Strapped
         |            2 Top Blocks
         |            2 Top Sail Sheet Blocks
         |            1 Catt Block
         |            2 Large double Block
         |           14 Trucks
         |            8 small Tail Blocks
         +======================================================================
         |               _Remarks on Friday August 4th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  The Weather very fine People Employd getting in Single Ballast and
         |  several other Necessary Jobbs.
         |  Received on Board as follows.--Vizt.
         |         8 Shovells             | 10 Thimbles
         |         6 Lanthorns            |  2 Dark Lanthorns
         |         6 Sheets of Tin        |  6 Long Brushes
         |         1 Copper Machine       |  3 Iron Wedges
         |        10 Hooks & Thimbles     |  3 Spun Yarn Winches
         |        10 Staples              |  1 Fish Gig
         |         1 Shark Hook           |  1 Grain
         |        18 Planks               |  2 Barrels of Tar,
         |         1 Half Barrel Pitch    |
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|              _Remarks on Satarday August 5th 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day fine Weather, the Capt. Orderd the Hold to be broke up to
         |  search for a Box of Arms, Received, a long Side a Hoy with Powder.
         |  Stowed away 60 Barrels of it. French Carpenters as before,
         +======================================================================
         |               _Remarks on Sunday August 6th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day fine Weather, Hands still Employed breaking up the Hold,
         |  Found out the Mistake in the Arms, took in the Remainder of the
         |  Powder, being in all 237 Barrells, stowed away the Main Hold, and
         |  Bent the Main Top Sail
         +======================================================================
         |                _Remarks on Monday August 7th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day fine Weather, People Employed, scrapeing and Cleaning the
         |  Gun Deck, this Morning the Carpenters and Caulkers, were Orderd
         |  a Shore, & in the afternoon returned
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Teusday August 8th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day fine Weather, People Employd Cleaning the Cabbin fitting
         |  of Sails in Order to Bend, Bent the Main & Fore Sail Unbent the
         |  Mizen Top Sail, and Bent another, and Bent the Main Top Mast Stay
         |  Sail, Shifted some of the Ballast from Forward too Aft, in Order to
         |  Bring her by the Stern
         +======================================================================
         |  _Remarks on Wednesday August 9th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day fine Weather, People Employd on Sundry Jobbs
         |  Received on Board as follows.
         |  200 Barrels of Powder           5 Bundles Wood Hoops
         |   52 Hammocks                    2 Rudder Irons
         |    5 Breakers                    1 Harness Tub
         |    1 Wood Funnell                4 Futtock Plates
         |    7 Piggins                    12 Boom Irons
         |    6 Breakers.                   2 Irons for the Anchor Stock
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|             _Remarks on Thursday August. 10th: 1780_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day Fine Weather, Hands Employd, Scraping the Ships Sides
         |  and other Necessary Jobbs. Examined the Cask of Potatoes and found
         |  them not fitt to Eat,
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Friday August 11th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  The Fore Part of these 24 Hours Clear, and Pleasant Weather, Winds
         |  from the Westward, Middle and latter part, thunder & Rain
         |  Mr. Stacey taken Sick this day
         |  Received on Board the following Stores
         |           3 Coils of 3 Inch Rope,
         |           3 Coils of 6 Inch Hauser laid
         |           1 Coil of 2 Inch..Do.
         |           3 Pair of Lower Shrouds
         |           1 Coil of 4 Inch for Stays
         |           1 Fish Pendant
         |           1 Fish Pendant of 5 Inch
         |           2 Coils of 3 Inch
         |           1 Fish Hook 1 Catt Block
         +======================================================================
         |             _Remarks on Satarday August 12th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Begins with Clear, Pleasant Weather, Winds Squally. Middle
         |  and latter Part, Squally with Showers of Rain
         |  Received on Board the following Stores Vizt.
         |           50 fathom of 4 Inch Rope
         |            1 Coil of 2 Inch
         |            1 Coil of 3 Inch
         |            2 Coils of 2-1/2 Inch
         |            1 Coil of 3-1/2 Inch
         |            1 Catt Block
         |            1 Large Single 1 Large Double Block
         |           21 Basketts
         |
         |   French Carpenters and Joiners as before,
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|              _Remarks on Sunday August 13th: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day begins with Clear, Pleasant Weather, People Employd
         |  washing the Decks, and scraping the Ships sides, Middle and
         |  latter part Ditto Weather,
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Monday August 14th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  This Day begins, with Clear, Pleasant Weather, People Employd
         |  Received on Board the following Articles Vizt.
         |
         |   2 Main Top Mast Steerg. Sails
         |   1 Mizen
         |   1 Main Steering Sail
         |   2 Jibbs
         |   2 Main Top Gallt. Steerg. Sails
         |   2 Mizen Top Mast Do
         |   1 Sprit Sail Top Sail
         |   2 Barricado Cloths
         |   5 Covering Cloths
         |   1 Wind Sail
         |   1 Quarter Cloth
         |   1 Canvas Hose
         |   6 Tarpaulins
         |   5 Coats for Masts
         |   2 Pumps for Hoses
         |   2 Fore Top Mast Steering Sails
         |   2 Fore Top Gallt. Steering Sails
         |   1 Middle Stay Sail
         |   1 Main Sail
         |   1 Fore Sail
         |   1 Royall
         |  16 Cott Frames
         |   4 Chair Frames
         |   4 Benches
         +======================================================================
         |             _Remarks on Teusday August 15th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  The first part of these 24 Hours. Clear Weather, and the Wind
         |  from the Westward, Received on board 6 Different Flags and 1
         |  English Pendant, the Middle, and Latter Part Do Weather, People
         |  Employd Cleaning the Ship Painters in Painting, thus ends this
         |  24 Hours
         |
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|             _Remarks on Wednesday August 16th: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours Squalls of Wind and Rain, from the Westward,
         |  Received on Board the following Articles Vizt.
         |
         |  1 Drum
         |  1 Peice of Wire
         |  1 Bolt & Shackel
         |  4 Iron Stantions for the Waist
         |  1 Cupboard for the Amourer
         | 73 Brooms
         | 24 Sheets of Tin
         |  4 Kegs of Shott
         |  1 Bag of Flints
         | 51 Peices of Horn for Lanthorns
         |  2 Spare Drum Heads
         |  1 Bag of Amourers Tools
         | 20 Reams of Paper for Musqt. Cartridges
         |  1 Tarpaulin for the Arm Chest
         |  1 Great Coat for the Marines
         |  Painters Painting the Ship
         +======================================================================
         |               _Remarks on Thursday August 17th: 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours Squalls of Wind & Rain from the Westward
         |  Received on Board the following Articles Vizt.
         |   3 Top Armours
         |   4 Waste & fore Castle Cloths
         |   1 Hanging Compass
         |  27 Barrels of Powder, and all the spare Sparrs.
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Friday August 18th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  The Fore Part of these 24 Hours. Clear Weather, fresh Gales from
         |  the Westward. Employd getting the Steering Sail Booms to the
         |  Yards. Received 1 Cask of Brandy, Painters Painting the Ship
         +======================================================================
         |  _Remarks on Satarday August 19th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours Clear Weather and fresh Gales. People on sundry
         |  Jobbs Painters still at work, Received a Number of Fusiez for
         |  the Marines
         +======================================================================
         |                _Remarks on Sunday August 20th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours, Clear & Pleasant Weather. Company Came on board
         |  to view the Ship--Manned Ship at thier departure,----
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|              _Remarks on Monday August 21st: 1780_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours, Clear Weather & fresh Breezes from the Westward
         |  People variously Employed, Received a Number of Sparrs, New
         |  Sails &c.
         +======================================================================
         |             _Remarks on Teusday August 22nd. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Westy. |  These 24 Hours fresh Gales & Cloudy Weather, Received on Board
         |  Viz--
         |        1  Store Chest for the Marines Cloaths
         |        2  Binnacles
         |        2  Racks for the Arms.
         +======================================================================
         |             _Remarks on Wednesday August 23rd. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours fresh Gales. Received, on Board 1 Locker for the
         |  Cook 1 Large Chest for the Capts. Table Linnen &c. 2 Arm Chest
         |  for Tops. 1 4 Hour Glass. People Employd as Necessary--
         +======================================================================
         |             _Remarks on Thursday August 24th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Easty. |  These 24 Hours Winds from the Eastward. People Employed setting
         |  up the Rigging, Received on Board Vizt.
         |            300 Pair of Shoes
         |            300 Pair of Stockgs
         +======================================================================
         |             _Remarks on Friday August 25th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours, fresh Gales to the Eastward, this Being the
         |  French Kings Birth day. Fired 2 Royall Salutes, with the Cannon,
         |  the Marines, fired 2 Feu de Joyes. the People variously
         |  Employed--on Sundry Jobbs--
         +======================================================================
         |            _Remarks on Satarday August 26th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  The Fore Part of these 24 Hours. Begins with fresh Gales from
         |  the Eastwd. People variously employed, Bending Steering Sails,
         |  Recd. 60 Casks of Water.
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|            _Remarks on Sunday August 27th: 1780----_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Easty. |  These 24 Hours, fresh Gales, employed stowing away the Water
         +======================================================================
         |            _Remarks on Monday August 28th: 1780----_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours. Clear, and Pleasant Weather, Finished stowing the
         |  Water Casks, Received on Board the following Articles Vizt.
         |
         |  10 Chord of Wood  |  No. 22 a Large Mortar marked A
         |  No. 1 a Case A    |  No. 23 a Parcell of Sieves
         |      9   Do.       |       5 a Case
         |     10   Do.       |      24 a Barrel of Oyl
         |     17   Do.       |       3 a Case
         |     12   Do.       |       4 a Case
         |     19   Do.       |      20 a Case
         |      7   Do.       |       2 a Case
         |     13   Do.       |      21 a Case
         |     15   Do.       |      25 a Case of Instruments
         |     16   Do.       |       8 a Case
         |     14   Do.       |      11 a Case
         |     18   Do.       |
         |      6   Do.       |
         +======================================================================
         |           _Remarks on Teusday August 29th..1780----_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours begins with Moderate Breezes, from the Westward,
         |  People variously Employed, fitting sundry Jobbs about the Rigging,
         |  Received on Board the following Articles Vizt.
         |
         |  No. 1 a Case marked TR |  No. 2 a Box marked WP
         |      2 a Case FL        |          Box marked <C>
         |        a Box MD         |        a Trunk marked PT
         |        a Box PB         |        a Trunk  W
         |        a Trunk  TR      |        6 Cases of Wine  V
         |  No. 1 a Box  WP        |
         |      2 a Box......TR    |
         |      1 a Trunk ....FL   |
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|  _Remarks on Wednesday August 30th: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Clear Weather, and Fresh Breezes from the Westward,
         |  People variously employed. Received on Board the following
         |  Articles
  Westy- |  1 Pipe of Wine
         |  8 different Ensigns
         |  3 Pendants.
         |  1 Cask of Brandy
         +======================================================================
         |          _Remarks on Thursday August 31st: 1780----_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Clear Weather, and Light Winds from the Westward
   --"-- |  People variously Employed
         |
         +======================================================================
         |  _Remarks on Friday September 1st: 1780----_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours. Hazey. with Rain, People Employed fitting the
   --"-- |  Quarter Deck, for a Grand Entertainment, Received 16 Cases of
         |  Wine--
         +======================================================================
         |  _Remarks on Satarday September 2nd. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours begins with Clear Weather, and Moderate Breezes
         |  from the Eastward, had a Grand Entertainment on Board.. Expended
  EastY- |  2 Cases No. 7 & 20, Fired Salutes, Exercised Great Guns, and
         |  small Arms. the Capt. Kicked Mr. Fanning, Midshipman, and
         |  Ordered him below,--
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Sunday September 3rd. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  ... These 24 Hours. Clear Weather, People & Carpenters variously
   "--"  |  employed clearing the Ship, Exercised the Guns.
         +======================================================================
         |            _Remarks on Monday September 4th. 1780--_
         +---------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours Modte. Weather. Winds from the Westwd. People
  Westy. |  variously employed. Mr. Potter. Mid Orderd in Irons. by the Capt.
         |  for a Thermometer being broke in his Cabbin
  ==============================================================================
  _Winds_|              _Remarks on Teusday September 5th: 1780----_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours. Clear Weather, and Moderate Breezes from the Eastwd.
         |  a Pilot came on board, took the Charge of the Ship, in Order to
  Easty--|  carry her to the Isle of Groa', Sett the Top Sails, Cast off the
         |  Moorings and went without Fort Louis, then set all Sail, made 3 or
         |  4 Tacks and Came to Anchor under Groa', Received on Board, 1 Cask
         |  and a half of Brandy
         +======================================================================
         |            _Remarks on Wednesday September 6th.. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Moderate Breezes from the Southward, a Tumbling Swell
  Southy.|  at 10 A M freshened the Hause, People variously employed on Sundry
         |  Necessary Jobbs.
         +======================================================================
         |             _Remarks on Thursday September 7th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  --"--  |  Begins with Clear Weather & fresh Gales from the Southward, Sent the
         |  Yawl on Shore, for 2 Casks of Water, Struck Top Gallt Yards
         +======================================================================
         |             _Remarks on Friday September. 8th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Cloudy Weather, Showers, of Rain fresh Gales from the
  --"--  |  So.ward Sent the Jolly Boat to L'Orient for Bread & Beef.. Sent up
         |  Top Gallt. Yards. People variously Employed. about Sundry Jobbs
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Satarday September 9th. 1780----_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with fresh Gales from the Westward, sent the Boat for Water.
  Westy. |  afterwards sent her to L'Orient, for Bread & Beef, Hove up the
         |  Anchor, and let it go in 15 fathom Water, Dryd the Sails,--Latter
         |  Part. Cleared the Decks. Handed Sails, Struck Top Gallt. Yards--the
         |  Boat returned--with Beef & Bread.
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|              _Remarks on Sunday September 10th: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Cloudy Weather, and fresh Gales from the Northward
  Northy-|  People variously employed, the Boat came off. with. Bread & Beef
         +======================================================================
         |             _Remarks on Monday September 11th: 1780----_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Moderate Weather.--Light Breezes from the Northward
  --"--  |  Sent the Jolly Boat on Shore, for Bread & Beef. Struck Top Gallt
         |  Yards the Jolly Boat came off,--with Beef & Bread.
         +======================================================================
         |            _Remarks on Teusday September 12th. 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Moderate Weather, Clear, and Light Winds from the
         |  Northwd. Hoisted out the Barge, and sent her to L'Orient, Loosed
  --"--  |  Sails to Dry, at Noon Handed them, the Barge came off with Money
         |  to pay the Wages. to the 16th. of March of the Officers & Men. of
         |  the Late Bon Homme Richard, Struck Top Gallt. Yards
         +======================================================================
         |             _Remarks on Wednesday September 13th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with fresh Gales from the Southwd. Cloudy Weather, a Craft
         |  came a long side. with 20 Casks of Water. and Releiving Takles
  --"--  |  for the Gunner, filled up all the Water Casks, Employed Clearing the
         |  Booms, and stowed the Barge, Sent the Jolly Boat on Shore for Beef
         |  & Bread.
         +======================================================================
         |             _Remarks on Thursday September 14th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Clear Weather, and Moderate Breezes from the Westward
  Westy. |  People Employed making Points, and splicing the Larboard Cable,
         |  the Jolly Boat returned. with Bread & Beef
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|        _Remarks on Friday September 15th: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Cloudy Weather, and Moderate Breezes. the Jolly Boat
  Westy. |  set out for L'Orient for Beef & Bread,  People Employed variously
         +======================================================================
         |         _Remarks on Satarday September 16th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with fresh Breezes of Wind, Westerly, Received on board the
         |  following Stores Vizt.
  --"--  |   7 Casks of Brandy     |   2 Cask of Hams
         |   3 Bales of Blankets   |   3 Barrels of Flour
         |   8 Bags of Cheese      |   1 Barrel of Pease
         |   9 Kegs of Pease       |   1 Large Trunk
         |   9 Kegs of Butter      |   2 Boxes of Candles
         |  32 Boxes of Wine       |   1 Barrel of Brandy
         +=========================+============================================
         |              _Remarks on Sunday September 17th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with fresh Gales, and Showers of Rain, sent the Jolly Boat to
         |  L'Orient at 10 A M Veered out to a whole Cable, and struck Top
  --"--  |  Gallt. Masts, at 1 A M. Hoisted a Signal, and fired a Gun for a
         |  Pilot at 3 a Pilot came on Board, from Groa'. at 4 veered to a
         |  Cable & a Half, Latter part blowing fresh with Lightning, got up
         |  the Lightning Rods
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Monday September. 18th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours Hazy Weather, Hove up the Anchor, found it Clear,
         |  and let it go again, the Jolly Boat returned with Provisions, Heeled
  Vble   |  Ship and scrubbed under Water. Both Sides, Exercised the Great Guns.
         |  sent the Jolly Boat to Town,  for Beef & Bread----
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|              _Remarks on Teusday September 19th: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Fresh Breezes from NW. at Meridian the Jolly Boat
  NW     |  returned with Passengers and Provisions. Received on Board the
         |  following Articles Vizt.
         |   6 Boxes of Wine     |    1 Bale of Blankets   |  1 Barrel of Rice
         |   4 Hhds of Charcoal  |   10 do, of Jackets     |  1 Box of Drafts
         |   2 Barrell Hozes     |   16 Trunks & Boxes     |  3 small Boxes
         |   1 Green Hide        |   23 Hogs               |  1 Large Box markd W.
         |  19 Sheep             |    5 Trunks             |
         |   2 Goats             |    2 Large Cask         |
         |  12 Hogs              |    6 Bags of Hay        |
         |   4 Bags of Oats      |  Fishing Lines & Hooks  |
         |   6 Bags of Potatoes  |  Quantity of Twine      |
         |  14 do. of Pease      |  Spun Yarn & Marline    |
         |   5 do. of BuckWheat  |      & Cotton Yarn      |
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Wednesday September 20th: 1780----_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Heavy Gales from the Westward. Veered out a Cable
  Westy. |  Cloudy and Heavy Showers of Rain, People variously Employed Rousing
         |  up the Cables, and spliced them three on one End, and 2 on the
         |  other, sent the Jolly Boat on Shore, Middle Part Clear, came on
         |  Board a Number of Passengers
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Thursday September 21st: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Moderate Breezes, from the Eastward, Hove in the Cable,
  Easty. |  Clear Weather, the Jolly Boat came off with Beef & Bread. Drying
         |  Sails, came on Board 2 Passengers with thier Baggage,
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|              _Remarks on Friday September 22nd: 1780_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Moderate Breezes from the Westward, the Jolly Boat
  Westy. |  returned, with Provisions, Recd. by a Chace Marey.  the following
         |  Articles Vizt.
         |
         |                         |  3 Baskets Loaf Sugar |
         |  1 Cask of Wine         |  3 Trunks P I         |   3 Boxes Oyl or Wine
         | 10 do. of White Beans   |  1 Box Window Glass   |  12 Cask of Water
         |  1 do. of Hatts         | 15 Hatts              |   8 New Cotts
         |  8 Bales of Stops       |  3 Kegs of Whiting    |   1 Hhd Vinegar
         | 13 do. of Mattrasses    |  1 Half Barrel        |
         |  4 Hampers Bottled Beer,|  1 Jarr,              |
         +=========================+=======================+====================
         |              _Remarks on Satarday September 23rd. 1780----_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours begins with fresh Gales from the Eastward. Cloudy
  Easty. |  Weather sent down Top Gallt. Yards. People Employed on Sundry Jobbs.
         |  fired a Gun for all Capts. of Merchantmen to come on board. Served
         |  out 3 Cotts
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Sunday September 24th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Fresh Gales from the Westward, Came in a Fleet from Nantz, under
  Westy. |  the Convoy of 4 Frigates, People variously Employed. Paid some
         |  of the People a Months Pay. Served the Ships Company with Bedding
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Monday September 25th: 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with fresh Gales, from the Westward. People variously employed
  --"--  |  the Latter Clear Weather & Light Winds. Expended 2 Cask of
         |  Water 1. of  Beef
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Teusday September 26th: 1780_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Westy  |  The Fore Part of these 24 Hours fresh Gales from the Westward. People
  Northd.|  variously Employed. Ends with Modte. Weather, Wind to the Northwd
         |
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|              _Remarks on Wednesday September 27th: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  The Fore Part of these 24 Hours. Light Winds from the Northwd. Hove
  Norty. |  Short a Peak, Loosed Fore Top Sail and fired a Gun. Came on Board
         |  sundry Articles, for the Capt.. the Latter part veered away the Cable
  Westd. |  Sent up Top Gallt. Yards. Received Bread & Beef. Ends with, Light
         |  Breeze from the Wstwd
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Thursday September 28th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  The Fore part of these 24 Hours, fresh Gales from the Westward.
  --"--  |  Veered to a whole Cable, sent the Jolly Boat to L'Orient. Exercised
         |  the Cannon, People Necessary Employed. Ends Squally with Rain
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Friday September 29th. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  The Fore Part of these 24 Hours, fresh Gales from the Westward, at 8
  --"--  |  AM Veered to a Cable, and a Half. & Struck Top Gallt. Masts. the Middle
         |  part, Showers of Rain, and Heavy Seas, People Necessary Employd
         |  Expended 2 Casks of Water
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Satarday September 30th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Showers of Rain, and Heavy Gales from the Westward
  --"--  |  the Middle Part Clear Weather, Exercised the Great Guns. Expended
         |  2 Casks of Water. 1 Cask of Beef
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Sunday October. 1st. 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with fresh Gales. from the Westward. with a Heavy Sea, the
         |  Brigs of our Convoy, slipd their Cables, and went into Port Louis,
  --"--  |  the Middle part a French Frigate & armed Brig Slipd and went in/
         |  Hoisted a Signal and fired a Gun for a Pilot. the Gale & Sea Increasing
         |  with Heavy Squalls of Rain, Expended 2 Casks of Water
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|              _Remarks on Monday October. 2nd. 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Heavy Gales, and Clouds from the Westward, and a Heavy
         |  Sea, Hoisted a Signal, and fired a Gun, every half Hour untill we
         |  got a Pilot--the Gale abated, People Employed on Sundry Necessary
  Westwd-|  Jobbs. about the Ship. Fired 2 Shott at a Brig that was under
         |  American Colours, that went into Port Louis. Expended 2 Casks of
         |  Water, & 1 of Beef  Ends with Heavy Squalls of Rain
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Teusday October 3rd. 1780----_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours begins with Moderate Weather, and little Breezes of
  --"--  |  Wind Hove up the Starboard Anchor, and let go the Larboard one,
         |  Expended 276 lb. Beef
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Wednesday October 4th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours fresh Breezes of Wind, and Moderate Weather, got
         |  Top Gallt. Mast up and stowed the Starboard Anchor, at 4 P.M.
  --"--  |  the Captain went on Shore, Hoisted out the small Boat, and sent
         |  her to Groa' for Passengers
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Thursday October 5th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours. Little Winds to the Northward, Hove Short at  4
  Northwd.| sent the Boat for the Capt. at 9 she returned with the Capt. Received
         |  from L'Orient. as follows.
         |   5 Marline Spikes     | 12--6 Inch Blocks
         |  34 Brooms             | 12--9 Inch Blocks
         |   4 Barrels of Pork    |  3 Sides of Leather
         |   8 Barrels of Beef    | 12 Hooks & Thimbles
         |   2 Casks of Wine      |  1 Bolt of Canvas
         |   2 Casks of Brandy    |  2 Kegs of Butter
         |   4 Barrels of Flour   |  2 Bags of Onions
         |   1 Barrell of Oatmeal |  2 Boxes of Arms
         |   1 Cask of Suett      |
  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|               _Remarks on Friday October, the 6th: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours fresh Breezes of Wind to the Southwd. & Cloudy
         |  Weather, Hove short in Order for getting under way, But the
         |  Weather not proving favourable, veered out the Cable again struck
  Southd.|  Top Gallt. Yards. Hoisted out the small Boat, and sent her on
         |  board. the Merchantmen. with Signals. the Duke of Lienster. one
         |  of our Fleet got under way. in Company with the Lugger, into
         |  L'Orient
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Satarday October 7th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         | These 24 Hours. fresh Breezes of Wind, and Cloudy Weather, Loosed
  "--"-  | the Sails to Dry. Hoisted out the small Boat to send her to the
         | Isle of Groa' for Water, but before she got a Shore made a Signal
         | for her to return.

  ===+===+======+=========+========+======================================================
  _H_|_K_|_[HK]_|_Courses_| _Winds_|      _Remarks on Sunday October 8th. 1780--_
  ---+---+------+---------+--------+------------------------------------------------------
    1|   |      |         |        | Begins with fine Pleasant Weather, fired a Gun, and
    2|   |      |         |        | made a Signal for Sailing, Hove up. and stood off,
    3|   |      |         |        | and fired several Guns. for a Brig and a Lugger,
    4|   |      |         |        | to come out of Port. at 6 PM the Duke of Leinster,
    5|   |      |         |        | came up with us, and spoke us as at 8 PM. did the
    6|  1| 1    | SW      | NW     | Lugger.
    7|  2|      | West    | NNW    |
    8|  2|      |         |        | the West End. of the Island Groa' bore NNW
    9|   |      |         |        | Let 2 Reefs out of the Top Sails, Sett Courses
   10|   |      |         |        | and Stay Sails, Got up Top Gallt. Yards and sett Top
   11|   |      |         |        | Gallt. Sails,
   12|   |      |         |        |
    1|   |      |         |        |
    2|   |      |         |        |
    3|   |      |         |        |
    4|   |      |         |        | At 6 In Top Gallt. Sails, Halled down Staysails
    5|   |      |         |        | At 7 AM Double Reefed, the Top Sails, Isle of Groa,
    6|   |      |         |        | bearing NEBE: distt 6 Leagues
    7|   |      |         |        |
    8|  5|   1  | WSW.    | South  | At 9 Struck Top Gallt. Masts & Yards: Handed Top
    9|  5|   1  |         |        | Sails & Jibb
   10|  4|   1  |         |        |
   11|  1|   1  |         |        | Ends with Heavy Gales
   12|  1|   1  |         |        | No Observation--
  ===+===+======+=========+========+======================================================
                          |   _Remarks on Monday October 9th: 1780--_
  ---+---+------+---------+--------+------------------------------------------------------
    1| 3 |   1  |  WNW    |   SW   | Begins with Heavy Gales. and a great Sea, shipped
    2| 3 |   1  |         |        | much Water the Ship under her Courses. one of the
    3| 3 |      |         |        | Brigs in Sight.
    4| 3 |   1  |         |        |
    5| 4 |      |WBN1/2N  | SWBS   | At 6 P.M. Wore Ship. Sounded 50 fathom Water.
    6| 4 |      |         |        | Housed the Guns
    7| 2 |   1  |         |        | At 7. Down Fore Top Mast & Mizen Stay Sails,
    8| 2 |   1  | NWBW    | SWBW   | Haulled up the Mizen
    9| 2 |      | SSE     |   SW   | At 9 the Ship Water Logged, up Main Sail & Reefed
   10| 2 |      | SBE     |        | him At 10 Handed the Main Sail, the Gale still
   11| 2 |      |         |        | Increasing, sett the Chain Pumps to work, the Ship
   12| 2 |      |         |        | making much Water, at 1/2 Past 11 Handed the Fore Sail,
    1|   |      |         |        | finding the Ship would not right let go the Lee Anchor,
    2|   |      |         |        | in 40 fathom, and Cut away the Fore Mast at 2 AM.
    3|   |      |         |        | the Gale Increasing, the Ship making much Water Cut
    4|   |      |         |        | away Main & Mizen Masts, Hands Employed Pumping
    5|   |      |         |        | and, Clearing the Rack,--the Ship then bringing
    6|   |      |         |        | up and Riding to her Anchor, with a Heavy Sea,----
    7|   |      |         |        |
    8|   |      |         |        |
    9|   |      |         |        |
   11|   |      |         |        |
   12|   |      |         |        |
  ===+===+======+=========+========+======================================================
                                   | _Remarks on Teusday October 10th: 1780--_
  ---+---+------+---------+--------+------------------------------------------------------
    1|   |      |         |        | Begins with Clear Weather, and Heavy Gales from the
    2|   |      |         |        | SW. and a Heavy Sea, Shipped much Water, the
    3|   |      |         |        | Pumps constantly Employed, getting things ready, for
    4|   |      |         |        | Jury Mast Got up a Jury Fore Mast, and Rigged the
    5|   |      |         |        | Sail
    6|   |      |         |        | Expended 2 Casks of Water. 1 of Pork--
    7|   |      |         |        |
    8|   |      |         |        |
    9|   |      |         |        |
   10|   |      |         |        |
   11|   |      |         |        |
   12|   |      |         |        |
    1|   |      |         |        |
    3|   |      |         |        |
    4|   |      |         |        |
    5|   |      |         |        |
    6|   |      |         |        |
    7|   |      |         |        |
    8|   |      |         |        |
    9|   |      |         |        |
   10|   |      |         |        |
   11|   |      |         |        |
   12|   |      |         |        |

  =======+======================================================================
  _Winds_|              _Remarks on Wednesday October 11th: 1780--_
  -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Squally Weather, & Rain with Heavy Seas. Shipped much
         |  Water, Rigged a Pair of Sheers, for a Jury Mizen Mast, and a Yard
         |  athwart them. Bent a Stay Sail & Jibb. at 12 AM. Cut the Cable
         |  and got under way. and stood off WSW. at 4 AM Kept her away ESE. At
         |  8 AM. EBN. at 10 made the Island of Groa, bearing ENE. Distance. 6 or
         |  7 Leagues, stood in for it----
         |  Expended. 2 Casks of Pork,----
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Thursday October 12th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  Begins with Moderate Weather, the Winds from the NW. At 1 PM.
         |  Hoisted a Signal, and fired several Guns for a Pilot at 4 P.M got one
  NW.    |  off from Groa' at 6 P.M Came to an Anchor in 13 fathom of Water, under
         |  the Isle of Groa, the Middle and latter part pleasant Weather
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Friday October 13th: 1780--_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
         |  These 24 Hours, at 12 Hove up the Anchor, and got under Sail, at 5
         |  PM. Came to an Anchor, in the Harbour, of L'Orient. in 5 fathom Water
  SW     |  Moored the Ship, with the Pilots Stream Anchor, and Cable, and our
         |  own Bower Anchor, getting out Boats and Clearing Ship
         |  Recd fresh Beef and Bread
         +======================================================================
         |              _Remarks on Satarday October 14th: 1780----_
         +----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Southd.|  These 24 Hours, begins with fresh Breezes from the Southward. People
         |  variously Employed.--the Pilot, came and took up his Stream Anchor,
  Eastd--|  and Carried out our Sheet Anchor. Ends with Pleasant Weather.
         |  Winds from the Eastward, Received fresh Beef & Bread




APPENDICES




APPENDIX A.

Copies of the Remarks in the Log Book of the _Bon Homme Richard_, now
in the possession of the Selkirk family.


_Remarkes on Wednessday. Sept the 22 1779_

This 24 hourses Begins with a Litte Brieze of wind and Showry weather
att 3 PM saw a Sail and att 4 PM Took him at 1/2 peast 4 took him in
tow and att 6 P.M saw a flet of 16 Sailes Larg and Small Signleled
the prize and Cast him off and made a Signel and made sail after them
the peallice gave Chace to on that was to Leeward and the Veangence
come with us att 7. P M Lost Sitte of them and att 8 got Sitte of on
and gave Chace and att 9 tak Ship

att 11 P M Cam up with the Chace so near as to give hire a gun and
fired a nomber of gunes att hire But Sh Did not Bring too att wore
Ship and spid a Sail ahead which was the Veangance att 1/2 peast 12
saw a Sail and att 1 a m Spok with him & She proved to Be a Bridg
from otterdam we hoisted out the Small Boat and Sent an offsir and
2 hands to take Charge of here and 2 hands to fich the Boat and
prissoners a Bord and mad Sail

att 8 a m Cald all hands to Quarters Saw a Ship in Shore hoisted a
jack att the fore top galmast head for a poilot att 9 we saw 2 poilot
Bots aComing att 10 one Borded us att 1/2 peast 10 the other Borded
the prise we mand first Boat and Sent to the prise and Brought the
other aBord


_Remarkes on Thursday Sept the 23: 1779_

This 24 Hourses Begins with a Litte Breze of wind and Raniey weather
the wind Vearible Att 4 P. M toek the Littel Sloop pulot in tow att
healef peast to sent Shooneur pilot Boat to go a Bord of the prise
Bridg to sink hir But seeing hir make Sail for the Land hald the
Boat to Come Beack att 1/2 Peast 5 the Boat got a Long Sid and we
took hir in tow a Stairn of the other att 6PM Spirean Littes Bor W N
W Distance 6 Leagues att 1/2 peast 11 P M Saw two Sailes att 1 A. M
Cald all hands att 2 A M all to Quearters att 1/2 peast 2 hoistd 3
Littes 1 fowd 1 amid Shipes & 1 afte att 3/4 peast 2 hoistd 2 more
Leites att the mirzon peak Laid the m & mison top Sailes to the mast
the Sailes Shod a Litte att 4 wore Ship att 5 A M hisde a Chuckerd
flag att the mezin peak att 1/2 peast 5 found them to Be the Elliance
and pealaice two of our Cone Sortes or twoo of our flete


_Remarks on Friday 24th.. September 1779_

The First part of this twenty four Hours clear and Pleasant Weather
with Moderate Breeses of Wind---- At 3 P.M. sent the small Schooner
with Mr. Lunt and A Number of Marines in her to Board a =Schooner=
Brigg to the Windward of us at 1/2 past Do. the Alliance hove out
a Signal and bore away we immediately fir'd a gun for the Schooner
to give over Chase and kept away---- at 4 sett Steering Sails fore
and aft (in Chase of two Ships) At 6 P.M. Hoisted a Blue flag Blue
Pendant & a Blue & Yellow Flag At 1/2 past Do. came up with the
largest Ship and engaged her; the Alliance engag'd the small Ship
which soon struck. Att 8 A.M. the Alliance came under our stern and
Rak'd us fore & aft. She then shot just ahead of us and did the like
again, we were all this time closely engag'd with our Antagonist
lying so near each other that our Yard Arms was within her's; at 10
P.M. She Struck her Colours and prov'd to be the Searuppus of 44 Guns
soon after She Struck her Main Mast fell over her side. The People
employed in putting fire out that had catch'd in several parts of the
Ship & in Pomping for we were very near sinking; The Ship that the
Alliance Took prov'd to be the Scarborough of 20 Guns

EDITOR'S NOTE: The foregoing are copies of the entries or Remarks
in "A Log Book for the Ship Bon Homme Richard, the Honorible John
Paul Jones Commander begun at L'Orient Saturday, 8th of May 1779,"
of which a typewritten copy is in the Navy Department Library, and
the original is supposed to be now in the possession of the Selkirk
family at St. Mary's Isle.

Facsimiles of the three Remarks of the 22nd, 23rd, and 24th of
September are also in the Navy Department Library. The entries of
the 22nd and 23rd are in the _same_ handwriting, and of similar
orthography, as are the preceding Remarks in that log. The
handwriting of the Remarks on Friday the 24th is that of Lieut. Henry
Lunt, who also wrote the Remarks on the same day in the _Serapis'_
log book.

There are no entries in the column of Knots, F., Courses, Wind, for
which the pages are ruled, for those days.

If this log was the regular Ship's Journal, it is remarkable that it
should have been kept by a man whose handwriting and orthography were
so bad as to be decipherable with difficulty. That the record of the
transactions on the eventful 24th day of September on the _Richard_
and _Serapis_ and the following days should have been delegated to
Lieutenant Lunt and Midshipman Groube seems to have been thought
desirable by some one in authority.




APPENDIX B.

Copy of a Letter from Captain James Nicholson to Captain John Barry,
Commanding U. S. Frigate _Alliance_.

                                          Philada. June 24th 1781.--

_Dr. Barry_,

After congratulating you on your safe arrival and success, I shall
without any apoligy relate to you what has been Transacting in this
Quarter relative to rank for this week past, it still hangs over our
head & requires every Exertion of Interest to prevent its taking
place. The Attempt has been bold & Daring and is only equaled by the
man who made it.

The Chevalier ever since his arrival in this City has devoted his
time, privately, by making personal application to the Individual
members of Congress to give him rank at the head of our Navy, and
after Interesting (by being an accomplished Courtior), every member
who was week, or of his own stamp in his favor, hands into Congress a
Narritive of his services from the beginning of time containing the
best part of a Quire of paper, and attended with a modest petition
seting forth the injustice he had done him in the Establishment of
rank and desire of redress &ca. This had the desired effect, and he
had a Committee of Congress consistg. of Genl. Vernon, Mr. Mathews &
Mr. Clymer appointed to enquire into his Claim and to make report,
they accordingly did and in his favor. Congress was upon the point
of taking the report up, and I have too much reason to believe woud
have gratified the hight of his ambition had we not by the greatest
accident discovered it, this was done by information a member of
Congress gave Mrs. Reade in whose house he lived, he was also on the
most familiar terms with myself, so far he had proceeded without
the least suspisian on our side. As soon as I was informed of it,
I immediately took my Hat and with very little Ceremony waited
on the President of Congress at his house, & informed what I had
heard, he received me politely & told me my suspisians was just, I
therefore desired as my right that Congress might delay determining
on it untill Cap. Reade & myself in behalf of ourselves & the absent
brother officers equally concerned, should have an opportunity of
being heard, which he promised me his Interest to have done, and that
day Cap. Reade & myself threw in our remonstrance to Congress a Copy
of mine you have Enclosed, the Consequence of which was the Committee
was ordered to reconsider it and to give us notice to attend, we
according did & found Cap. Jones without doors in conferance with
two of them, Cap. Jones did not attend, I desired the Chairman would
send for him, the reason I assigned was that I would say many things
in his presence that I would not in his absence, he sent word that
he would wait on us but never came, we found the President & Mr.
Mathews predetermined in his favor, but Mr. Climer otherwise, after
pointing out the absurdity of his claim which proceeded from a
Brevial from Commodore Hopkins to the Command of the Sloop Providence
were from his own claim, Capts. Whipple, Hallock, yourself, &
Alexander where Capts. before him. I say after pointing out this to
them, the Presidt. appeared to be convinced, but if so in reality
I wont pretend to say. We had a good deal of conversation with the
Committee, Mr. Mathews alone seemed his most strenious advocate and
in my oppinion behaved obstinate & ungentiel. I said many things
pretty severe of the Chevaliers private as well as Public Carrector
too odious to mention and yet unnoticed, upon the whole we acquited
ourselves well. It happened five days ago and they have not yet made
their report. Should it be in his favor again, I have some reason
to believe the honest part as well as those who had been imposed on
from their ignorance about our Naval Transactions and the method
of Establishing rank, are now sufficiently alarmed, and should the
report be taken up at all, they will not determine in his favor.
Your arrival & success came very opportunily and I did not fail to
make use of it I mean outdoors in presence of Cap. Jones & some of
his advocated Members, by observing that you had acquit yourself
well, which they acknowledged. I then told them they could not do
less than make you Admiral also. I had not a sentense of reply. it
irritated the Chevalier so much that he was obliged to decamp. I
yesterday was informed by a Member of Congress a friend of mine that
they had received a letter from Bob Morris (The Financier) that he
would undertake to Fitt out immediately my Ship & the 74 and if they
agreed to it, there would be a necessity for appointing a Cap. to
her immediately, and at the same time asked if I would accept of
the Command of her. I refused but at the same time pointed out the
necessity of the next Senior officer having the offer & so down, and
in case none of them would accept untill it came to Chevalier that
then he should have the offer he seemed convinced from the arguments
I made use of of the Necessity of this mode as the only one that
would give satisfaction and make our Navy of repute. How it will
opperate with Congress I cant undertake to determine. I also let him
understand that you was already appointed to her. I have very good
reason to believe that Bob Morris' views are solely to serve him, but
be that as it may, he has my consent, as I am convinced he will never
get her to sea. It will suit his Vanity & only tend to expose himself
and his friends in Congress.

I have now 120 men onbd., and as Bob Morris has undertaken to supply
us with money expect to get to sea in a fortnight.

I now conclude with assuring you I remain Yrs most sincerely

                                                     Jas. Nicholson.


To His Excellency. the Presidt. & the Honble. the Members of the
United States in Congress Assembled.

The Memorial of Jas. Nicholson, Cap. in the Navy of the United States
Respectfully Shewith,

That your Memorialist has by accident been informed that the
Chevalier Paul Jones hath Petitioned Congress & in consequence
thereof a Committee has been appointed and are now actually siting
for the Purpose of considering his claim of Prior Rank to your
Memorialist, and as your Memorialist conceives any alteration in
the rank of the Navy as at present established will be doing him
a very sensible injury he begs leave to call the recollection of
Congress to their resolves of the 17th Ap. & the 10th Ocbr. of 76
by the latter of which the rank of every Cap. or Commander in the
Navy was established. Your Memorialist therefore prays that Congress
will not deprive him of the rank he has always held in the Navy of
the United States without a sufficient cause (which he presumes does
not exist) as it will convey to the Public at large a suspisian that
your Memorialist has forfeited that rank with which he has been so
long honored by some misconduct. As your Memorialist has not been
informed, certainly, upon what particular grounds Cap. Jones founds
his Claims of Prior Rank, your Memorialist can only refer to the
above mentioned Solemn Acts of Congress which sets forth the rank
that Honble. body fixed for every Cap. & Commdr. in the Navy. Your
MemorIt. has good reason to suppose it must be from his Early Service
should that be the Case. Your Memorialist begs leave to observe what
in his oppinion would be the Absurdity of Cap. Jones' claims viz;
That two of your Memorists. Lieutts. now under his immediate Command
onbd. the Trumbull would take the Commd. from your Memorits. & will
every Capn. Lieutt. that where in the Commodrs. fleet.

If it is thought necessary or proper to call the Congress from their
more Important business, your Memorits. has prepared and will furnish
a history of his services as a Public Off. prior to the Establishment
of rank, but he presumes that it is not necessary and depends
upon the Justice & Candor of Congress. Your Memorilst. therefore
begs leave to subscribe himself with profond respect & Esteem yr.
Excellency, most obedt. Humble. Servt. &ca.

                                                      JAS. NICHOLSON

EDITOR'S NOTE: Captain John Barry, to whom this letter was written,
was then in command of the _Alliance_, lying in Boston Harbor. He
had just returned from an eventful voyage to L'Orient, having taken
Colonel John Laurens to France as Special Commissioner of the United
States.




APPENDIX C.

Copy of Letter from Jones to Commodore Ezekiel Hopkins.

  The Honble. E. Hopkins Esquire
    Admiral of the American Fleet
      Rhode Island.
  P the Brig Sea Nymph
    Capt. W. Hopkins.

  Providence, at Sea in No Latd 37 deg.. 40'
  and W. Longd. 54 deg. Septr. 4th. 1776--

  _Honoured Sir_

I know you will not suspect me of flattery when I affirm that I
have not experienced a more sincere pleasure for a long time past
than the account I have had of your having gained your cause at
Philadelphia in spite of party.--Your late trouble will tend to your
future advantage; by pointing out your friends & Enemies you will be
thereby enabled to retain the one part while you guard against the
other.----You will be thrice welcome to your Native Land and to your
nearest concerns--after your late shock they will see you, as Gold
from the Fire, of more worth and Value, and Slander will learn to
keep silence when Admiral Hopkins is mentioned, but enough of this.

And now for my success--I sent in a Nantucket Whailer by Captn.
Grinnele 27th. Ulto.--She appeared by the voluntary testimony of the
master mate &ca to be the property of Rank Tories who had ordered
their Oil to be Carried to the London Market and the amot. of it to
be ship't out in English goods to Nantucket. Since that time I have
been further to the Southward when I brought too a number of French
Spanish & Danish Ships--but saw no Englishmen 'till the first Currt.
when I fell in with five Sail--one of them being very large we took
her to be either an Old East Indiaman or a Jamaica three Decker--but
she proved to be an English Frigate Mounting twenty six Guns upon one
Deck--She sailed fast and pursued us by the wind 'till after four
hours Chase, the sea running Very Cross, she got within Musquit Shot
of our Lee Quarter--as they had continued firing at us from the first
_without showing Colours_ I was angery at this low piece of Conduct
therefore ordered ours to be hoisted and began to fire at them--they
then hoisted American Colours and fired Guns to leeward--but the bait
would not take for having everything prepared I bore away across
his forefoot and set all our light sails at once so that before her
sails were trimmed and Steering-sails set I was almost out of reach
of Grape & soon after out of reach of Cannon Shot.--Our "Hairbreadth
Scape" and the saucy manner of making it must have mortified him
not a little--had he foreseen this motion and been prepared to
counteract it he might have fired several Broadsides while we were
within pistol shot--but he was a bad marksman and did not hit the
Providence with one of the many shot which he fired.--I met with no
other adventure 'till last night when I took the Brigantine Sea Nymph
bound from Barbados for London with a Cargo of two hundred and twenty
seven Hogsheads of Rum besides Oil Sugar Ginger and Madeira Wine---
I understand by this Brig that the A. Doria is off Bermuda and that
Captn. Weeks hath given a trimming to an English sloop of war off
Martinico.---- I am too late for West Indiamen but will not yet give
up hopes--I am much afraid that the Store Ships come out under Convoy
for who would have expected to find a Frigate with no more than two
Ships a Brig & a Sloop.

If I meet with further success I will write you in Course in the
meantime I rest assured that your good offices will not be wanting in
my favour when the Navy Rank and Seniority comes to be Settled--if I
was worthy of the Rank of Eldest Lieutenant of the Fleet I deserve
not to be superseded in favour of any person who then bore an
inferior or Juniour Commission.

It will be good policy if the Congress or Marine Committee fix the
Parity of Rank between land and sea Officers as it is on the English
Establishment Vizt. An Admiral ranks with a General a Vice Adml with
a Lieun. Genl. a Rear Adml. with a Major Genl. a Commodore with with
a Brigadeer Genl. a Captain with a Colonel a Master & Commander with
a Lieut. Colo, a Lieut. Commanding with a Major & a Lieutenant in the
Navy with a Captain of Foot or Marines--this would prevent numberless
disputes and deuelings which otherwise will be unavoidable--but I
remember that this agrees with your own opinion and therefore I need
use no argument to enforce it.--my best wishes and respects await
yourself and Family and I am with much Esteem and grateful Respect

  Honoured Sir

                            Your very Obliged and most humble Servt.
                                                       JNO. P. JONES

EDITOR'S NOTE: In a letter to Mr. Hewes, dated January 12, 1777,
Jones, in speaking of Hopkins, writes of the latter calling himself a
Commodore, "this _Commodore_ is altogether unfit to command a Frigate
of thirty-two Guns." See Calendar of Jones Manuscripts, Library of
Congress, pp. 15-16, 20-22.




APPENDIX D.

Copy of Letter Addressed by Jones to John Wendell, Esqr., Portsmouth,
N. H.

                                       Ranger, Nantes 11th Decr. 1777.

_My dear Sir_,

The Ranger was wafted by the Pinions of the gentlest, and most
friendly Gales, along the Surface of the Blue profound of Neptune;
and not the swelling bosom of a Friend's nor even of an _Enemis
Sail_, appeared within our placid Horizon, untill after we had passed
the Everlasting Mountains of the Sea, (called Azores) whoe's Tops
are in the Cloud's, and whoe's Foundations are in the Center. When
lo! this Italeyon Season was interrupted! the "gathering Fleets
o'erspread the Sea" and Wars alarms began! nor ceased day or night
untill, aided by the mighty Boreus, we cast anchor in this Asylum
the 2d Currt. but since I am not certain that my Poetry will be
understood, it may not be amiss to add, _by way of marginal note_,
that after leaving Portsmouth nothing remarkable happened untill I
got to the Eastward of the Western Islands; and that from that time
untill my arrival here, I fell in with Ships every day sometimes
every Hour; within Eighty Leagues of Ushant, I met with an Enemies
fleet of Ten Sail bound up Channel, but notwithstanding my best
endeavours, I was unable to detach any of them from the strong
Convoy under which they sailed, I met with and brought too a variety
of other Ships, none whereof proved British Property, except two
Brigantines from Malaga with Fruit for London, which became Prizes,
the one is arrived here, the other I am told in Quiberon Bay; as I
have met with and brought too several Ships in the Night, I had the
most agreeable Proofs of the Active Spirit of my Officers and Men.

I have forwarded my dispatches to Paris, by Express, and determine
not to go myself unless I am sent for. I understand that in Obedience
to Orders from the Secret Committee the Commissioners had, some
time ago, provided One of the finest Frigates for me that can be
imagined, calculated for Thirty-two, Twenty four Pounders, on one
deck, and longer than any Ship in the Enemies Fleet; but that
it has been found necessary to give her up, on account of some
difficulties which they have met with at Court. My Heart glows with
the most fervent Gratitude for this, and every other unsolicited and
unexpected instance of the favo'r and Approbation of Congress; and if
a Life of Services devoted to the Interests of America, can be made
Instrumental in securing its Independance; I shall be the happiest
of Men, and regard the continuance of such Approbation, as an Honor
far superiour to the empty Peagantry, which Kings ever had Power to
bestow.

I esteem your Son as a promising and deserving young Man, I have
just now had some Conversation with him, and am much Pleased
with his diffidence and Modesty, he would not he says accept of a
Commission untill he thinks himself equal to the duty of the office
of Lieutenant; there I think he shows a true Spirit; in the mean
time, he tells me that he is perfectly satisfy'd with his present
Situation, anything within my Power to render his Situation happy and
Instructive, shall not be wanting.

I must rely on you to make my best Compliments receptable to the fair
Miss Wendell, and to the other agreeable Ladies of my acquaintance
in Portsmouth. The Captain of the Raleigh I understand is well, and
has lately been figuring it away at Paris, whereof please to acquaint
my _Sister_ Officer. I should be exceedingly happy to hear from
you, but as my destination depends on what I am to hear from the
Commissioners, I cannot at Present give you my Address, but will drop
you another, How do you do, shortly.

I am with Sentiments of Respect & Regard,

  My dear Sir,
                                               Your Obliged,
                                                  very Obedient,
                                                most humble Servant,
                                                       JNO. P. JONES

  _John Wendell_, Esqr.
  Portsmouth----

EDITOR'S NOTE: In the Calendar of Jones Manuscripts in the Library of
Congress, pp. 31-32, are several letters from John Wendell to Jones
dated Oct., 1777. Mr. Wendell was a merchant and Justice of the
Peace at Portsmouth, N. H.




APPENDIX E.

Fanning's Account of an Entertainment Given by Jones on the _Ariel_.
Possibly the date is wrong. It may be that recorded in the _Ariel's_
log on "September 2nd. 1780----"


About the tenth of December Great preparations were made on board
of our ship in consequence of a great number of people of the first
characters in L'Orient. One prince of the blood royal, and three
French admirals, with some ladies of the first quality, having had
cards of invitation sent them by captain Jones, inviting them on
board of his ship the next day to take dinner with him precisely
at 3 o'clock in the afternoon; and also informing the company
that captain Jones would in the evening of that day, on board of
his ship, exhibit to them a sham sea fight; and that it should in
part represent his battle with the Serapis, particularly her tops.
To go through with a minute detail of all and every circumstance
that related to this scene would, I fear, tire the patience of the
reader; I shall therefore be as concise as possible in my relation
of this exhibition. First then, all the boats belonging to our ship
were busily employed with their respective crews from the time the
approaching scene was known on board, (which was the day before it
was to take place, at ten o'clock in the morning, till about twelve
at night on the day on which the company were to dine, in passing
to and coming from the shore, bringing off all the articles wanted.
And the reader may rest assured that neither cash nor pains were
spared in order that the scene every way should appear magnificent.
In a short time our quarter-deck had the appearance of a lady of
qualitie's drawing-room. Over head was suspended an elegant awning,
the edges of which were cut in scollops, and decorated with a variety
of silk roses, tassils, &c. from a little below the awning: at the
sides were hung thin canvass lined with pink coloured silk, and which
fell down so as to reach the quarter-deck. These sides were hung
with a great variety of French pictures and looking glasses; some
of the first had been drawn by one of the most finished artists in
France, and many of which were quite indecent, especially to meet
the eyes of a virtuous woman. However, in these days they made a
part of French etequette on such an occasion. The quarter-deck of
our ship was covered with the most elegant carpets, the plate alone
which was made use of on this singular occasion was estimated to
be worth two thousand guineas (for my own part I believe it might
have been rated at double that sum.) French cooks, and waiters or
servants, were brought from the shore to assist in this business
and for nearly twenty hours preceding the serving up of dinner, we
were almost suffocated with garlick and onions, besides a great
many other stinking vegetables. A French lady (who was said to
be a great connossieur in the art of cookery, and in hanging and
arranging pictures in a room where the first companies went to dine)
was gallanted on board by captain Jones the evening before the day
on which the company were to dine, and was by him directed to take
upon herself the superintendance of the approaching feast. The next
day was ushered in by thirteen guns, and the dressing of the ship
with the thirteen stripes, and the colours of all nations who were
friendly to the United States. Captain Jones and his officers were
all dressed in uniform, with their best bib and band on, and we
were directed by captain Jones to conduct ourselves with propriety
and to pay implicit obedience to my _lady superintendant_ of the
ceremonies. At a quarter before 3 o'clock in the afternoon the ship's
boats (three in number, each having a midshipman who acted for this
time as cockswains; and the men who rowed the boats were all neatly
dressed in blew broad cloth, with the American and French cockades in
their hats,) were dispatched on shore to bring on board the company.
Jones received them as they came up the ship's side and conducted
them to their seats on the quarter-deck with a great deal of ease,
politeness, and good nature.[30] Dinner was served up at half past
3 P.M. The company did not rise from table till a little after the
sun set, when captain Jones ordered his first lieutenant to cause
all hands to be called to quarters, which was done just before the
moon was rising. I of course, mounted into the main top, which had
always been my station as long as I had served under Jones (of which
and the men at quarters there, I had the command.) Orders were given
before we mounted into the tops that we must be well supplied with
ammunition blunderbusses, muskets, cowhorns, hand granadoes, &c. The
same as if we were now to engage with an enemy; and when the signal
was given (which was to be a cannon fired upon the fore-castle, and
as soon as the gun was fired, the sham fight was to commence.) At 8
o'clock it began, and lasted about one hour and a quarter without
any intermission. Such a cracking of great guns, swivels, small
arms, cowhorns, blunderbusses, &c. such a hissing and poping of hand
granadoes, stink pots, powder flasks, was now heard as they fell
into the water alongside, as was never the like in the harbour of
L'Orient, seen or heard. Some of the ladies were much frightened,
and the sham fight would have continued longer had it not been that
some of them intreated captain Jones to command the firing to cease.
The fight over, a band of music which had been ordered on board by
the commandant, and who had been paraded upon the fore part of the
quarter-deck, now played their part, and all was glee and harmony.
At about twelve at night the company took their leave of captain
Jones, and the boats set them safe on shore, in the same order and
regularity as they came on board, excepting a few who were landed
_half seas over_; these the midshipmen assisted along to their
lodgings, and returned on board to give an account to captain Jones
that we saw all the company safe at their respective places of abode.
For several days after this nothing of any note was to be heard in
conversation among the French at L'Orient, in their coffee houses and
private dwellings, but captain Jones's feast and sham fight. Upon
the whole, I believe it must have cost himself as well as the United
States a vast sum of money. There was certainly a great quantity of
powder burnt, and an abundance of wine (besides other liquors) drank.
The cost of the whole of this entertainment, including the powder,
amounted (by an estimate made by the American agent's first clerk,
and who it seems paid the cash for sundry bills relative to this
business, to 3,027 crowns at 6s. 8d. each, Massachusetts currency.)
Whether captain Jones charged the whole or any part of the expences
of this business to the United States I never learned.

[Footnote 30: The company was superbly dressed, and the prince was
distinguished from the rest by a brilliant star which he wore upon
his left breast.]




APPENDIX F.

The Continuation and End of the Voyage of the _Ariel_ to the United
States.


As the Journal of the _Ariel_ ends on the 14th day of October, 1780,
a brief account of her voyage to the United States, gathered from the
Biographies of Jones, may not be out of place.

Jones continued to prolong his stay at L'Orient more than two months
from the time of his putting back dismasted, and again received the
remonstrances of Franklin for the expenses incurred in the refitting
of the ship.

The arms destined for our army were so much damaged that they were
discharged and abandoned. During this period of delay, Jones was
much of his time in Paris, and beguiled his time in giving elegant
entertainments on his ship, one of which is recorded in the log
on the 2d day of September; the one given on or about the 10th of
December is described by Fanning, Appendix E. Fanning left the
_Ariel_ immediately after this entertainment, and soon after took
command of the privateer _Eclipse_, sailing out of Dunkirk.

The _Ariel_ sailed from L'Orient on the 18th of December, bound for
Philadelphia, and had an eventful voyage. Owing to the lumbered
condition of his ship, Jones was not particularly anxious to meet the
enemies' cruisers. A conspiracy was discovered amongst the English
part of the crew, to take the ship, to defeat which the officers
and passengers prepared to defend themselves. Jones followed an
unfrequented track, taking the southern passage along the edge of the
trade winds. When in latitude 26 deg., near the meridian of Barbados, a
large sail was discovered, apparently a cruiser, from which Jones
endeavored to escape, but failed. The ships came close alongside,
both displaying English colors. A conversation ensued, and the
stranger proved to be a British ship named _Triumph_. A sharp action
took place within pistol shot, when the _Triumph_ struck her colors,
and cried for quarter, but the _Triumph_, having got on the weather
bow of the _Ariel_, made all sail and escaped. The _Triumph_ was
undoubtedly a privateer, not a King's ship. After this action, twenty
of the ringleaders in the plot to get possession of the ship were
identified, and put in irons. No further incidents of note occurred,
and the _Ariel_reached Philadelphia on the 18th of February, 1781.




APPENDIX G.

Fanning's Account of the Storm which Wrecked the _Ariel_.


On the 7th of October, 1780, we set sail from this port for the
United States in the Ariel, at about 6 P.M. and at the time we had
under our convoy fourteen sail of American vessels, among which
were three letters of marque, with the wind blowing a leading gale,
at E.S.E. At 10 P.M. the wind shifted suddenly into the W.S.W and
blew a heavy gale--took in top gallant sails, and close reefed our
top sails--soon after took in our topsails and reefed our courses,
and we carried them as long as the ship would bear them. The night
was very dark, and we lost sight of the fleet. We were obliged to
carry some sail in order to weather the _Pin Marks_, a long range of
sunken rocks about a league from the land, and which we judged to be
to leeward of us. At midnight we were obliged to hand our courses,
as it blew so violent that we could not suffer a single yard of
canvass. The ship at the same time lay in a very dangerous situation,
nearly upon her beam ends, and in the trough of the sea, and leaked
so bad that with both chain pumps constantly going we could not
keep her free. Some French soldiers which we had on board, and who
were stationed at the cranks of the pumps, let go of them, crossed
themselves, and went to prayers. They were driven from this by the
officers to the cranks again; and it became necessary to lift hangers
over their heads, and threaten them with instant death if they quit
their duty, or if they did not work with all their strength; without
this they would again leave off and go to prayers. Soon after, one
of our chain pumps got choked in such a manner that it would deliver
no water. Jones in all this time shewed a great presence of mind,
and kept, with his own hands, sounding with the deep sea lead; and
finding that we were shoaling water very fast, and that we should in
a short time be upon the Pin Marks, without something was soon done
to prevent it. In this extremity a consultation of captain Jones
and his principal officers was had upon the quarter-deck, and the
result was, that orders were given for cutting away our fore-mast and
letting go the sheet anchor; and the latter was executed without loss
of time. We sounded now in thirty-five fathoms of water. The sheet
cable was now paid out to the better end; but she did not look to
her anchor; another cable was spliced to the first, and paid out to
the better end; she did not yet bring up; the third cable was also
spliced to the end of the second; when after paying out about seven
eighths of this last, and the fore-mast cut away at the same time,
and when it had fell over board to the leeward, the ship brought to
and rid head to the wind, and the sea now run mountains high.[31]
By the time of which I am now speaking we had not less than three
hundred fathoms of cable paid out--in a few minutes after the ship
brought to to her anchor. The ship laboured so hard, rolled so deep,
and would bring up so sudden that it sprung our main-mast just
below our gun-deck, and as this was now in the greatest danger of
being ripped up, orders were given to cut away the main-mast above
the quarter-deck, which was immediately carried into execution; and
when this fell over the side to leeward it forced off the head of the
mizzen-mast. By this time, we had freed the ship of water, but when
her masts were gone her motion was so quick and violent that the most
expert seamen on board could not stand upon their legs, neither upon
the quarter-deck nor fore-castle without holding on to something. The
chain pump which had been choked was cleared, and notwithstanding the
gale kept increasing, yet our anchor and cables held on so well, that
some faint hopes were now entertained that our lives would be spared:
however, the gale did not abate much until the morning of the 9th. At
meridian of this day the wind had abated so much that we began to get
up and rig our jury masts. At 4 P.M. we had them erected and rigged,
and what spars and sails we could muster upon them; and there being
at this time but a moderate breeze at about W.N.W, a fair wind for
L'Orient, and the sea tolerable smooth, we hove in our cables till
it was short apeak, and then exerted ourselves every way we could
think of in order to purchase our anchor, and after trying a long
time without being able to weigh it, orders were given by captain
Jones to save all we could of the cable and then cut it away, which
was done and we made sail for L'Orient, where we soon after arrived
and came to anchor. Many of our friends now came on board to see us,
and appeared to be rejoiced at our safe escape, as they said, they
expected we were lost, as the late gale was very violent and did a
great deal of damage even in the harbour, among the shipping and
along side of the keys.

[Footnote 31: This was in the Bay of Biscay.]




APPENDIX H.

Fanning's Account of the Taking Possession of the _Alliance_ by
Landais.


Great alterations were now made by the carpenters on board of the
Alliance frigate in almost every part of the ship, which put the
United States to a vast and unnecessary expence. However, Jones
was no so well suited with the command of her that he would have
everything done and altered to please his fancy on board of her; not
I presume, regarding what it cost, only as a secondary consideration.
The Alliance was however ready for sea by the middle of June, 1780,
and only waited for a wind to proceed to America.

About this time we heard that captain L----, who had commanded this
ship, had arrived in L'Orient, but it seems he went about that place
incog. He soon, notwithstanding this, came publicly forward upon
the stage and acted the part of a leading character as follows: One
day, (I think it was the 23d of June) at 2 o'clock in the afternoon,
captain Jones's officers (who were not then on shore) were below
at dinner, and captain Jones had gone on shore to dine with the
commandant of that place. L---- 's officers at this time were nearly
all upon the quarter-deck (being no doubt in the plot) of which the
first knowledge we (who were down below) had of it, we heard above
three loud huzzas. Such a sudden manoeuver surprised us, and we got
upon the quarter-deck as soon as our legs could carry us. Here L----
was walking fore and aft with a paper in his hand, and the yards
were manned. He immediately gave orders to Mr. Diggs, formerly first
lieutenant to him, to cause all captain Jones's officers to come upon
the deck as he had something to say to them. They were all mustered
accordingly, and as soon as they made their appearance; he, holding
his commission in his hand at the same time, addressed them in nearly
the following words: 'Here, you see gentlemen, the commission that
the Congress did give me (as he did not speak very good English)
for this frigate, and you see I now command her; and that there is
no man in France who has a right to take this commission from me:
therefore, gentlemen, all you who do not acknowledge me to be captain
of this ship you must directly to the shore go, taking with you your
baggage and every thing which belongs to you.' Accordingly, there
was no other alternative left us but to obey these orders; so that
all the officers who had served on board of the Good Man Richard
under capt. Jones were forced to leave the Alliance, excepting one or
two who chose to remain on board. However, L---- forbid any of the
crew quitting her. The Alliance in about three quarters of an hour
after this, with the assistance of part of the crews of several men
of war then lying in the harbour, unmoored her, made sail, passed
the citadel without molestation, and came to anchor under the Isle
of Groix, without gun shot of any of the French fortifications.
Jones being on shore when this singular manoeuver took place, and
not hearing any thing of it till the Alliance was safe at anchor,
as I just observed. Never, I am confident, was a man so dreadfully
enraged. His passion knew no bounds; and in the first paroxism of
his rage he acted more like a mad man than a conqueror. However,
as he now saw that he was out-generaled by L---- his sworn enemy,
he at length became more calm. The French commandant, at whose
table he was sitting when he heard this news, offered him all the
assistance in his power, and he appeared to entertain some hopes of
getting the Alliance again into his possession. For this purpose
he obtained leave of the commandant and French general, to possess
himself of a row galley then lying at the key, and which mounted 2
eighteen pounders forward and one abaft, rowed with sixteen oars,
and was rigged with latine sails. He was also furnished for this
expedition with three hundred (if I am not mistaken) French troops,
who were partly embarked on board of the row galley, and the rest
on board of boats. Jones flattered himself that this force was able
to take the Alliance; and besides, he did not much expect that
captain L----, nor his officers and crew, would make any resistance.
He required all his old officers who had served under him, to join
and lend their assistance in this Don Quixote undertaking; but they
all declined having any thing to do with or acting in this affair,
excepting one of his lieutenants, who, had the honour of commanding
this expedition. He (Jones) very prudently declined embarking, which
in my opinion he ought to have done. In that case I have no doubt
but all his officers would have resigned their lives with him. Every
thing being in readiness, the little squadron moved out of the
harbour wearing American and French colours, and proceeded on towards
the Isle of Groix, where the Alliance was at anchor. The captain
of which,[32] sent a flag with a message to the commander of the
expedition the purport of which was, that 'If they came within the
reach of his cannon he would sink them.'[33] The little fleet then
lay upon their oars a few minutes, after which they turned tail and
returned back into port no wiser than when they set out upon this
wonderful expedition. Jones, upon seeing them return without taking
the Alliance was so enraged that he could hardly contain himself for
some time. He swore bitterly--he stamped--he cursed, and grew almost
frantic with rage. Three French ships of the line were lying in the
harbour at this time, and Jones with the help of the commandant,
endeavored to prevail with the French admiral to send out one or
two of those ships, (which had their sails bent and were ready for
sailing,) in order to force the Alliance to return back to port.
But the admiral refused, and told captain Jones that he should not
interfere in the quarrel between him and captain L----. Besides, he
assured captain Jones that it was more than his commission was worth,
taking his head into the bargain, for him to order the departure of
either of the ships under his command; more especially on such a
piece of service as that was, which captain Jones wished her to be
sent upon. The fact was, this same French admiral was at this very
time as deep in the _mud_ as L---- was in the _mire_; and so was the
commander of the citadel, commonly called Fort Lewis, or Louis. L----
had been to this last place sundry times, as well as on board of the
French admiral, where the plot or conspiracy was first agitated, of
taking the Alliance out of Jones's hands, and where it was brought to
maturity, and succeeded as I have related.

[Footnote 32: L---- had been apprized of their coming to take them,
and was prepared to give them a warm reception, all hands being at
quarters.]

[Footnote 33: They were about a mile from the _Alliance_.]



[Transcriber's note: Obvious printer errors were corrected.
Everything else is as in the original.

Words between = are crossed in the original.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Logs of the Serapis-Allance-Ariel
under the Command of John Paul Jones 1779-1780, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOGS OF THE SERAPIS-ALLANCE-ARIEL ***

***** This file should be named 45011.txt or 45011.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/0/1/45011/

Produced by David Edwards, Christine P. Travers and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from scans of public domain material
produced by Microsoft for their Live Search Books site.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

