Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, March 15, 1881, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Harper's Young People, March 15, 1881
       An Illustrated Weekly

Author: Various

Release Date: March 16, 2014 [EBook #45152]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, MAR 15, 1881 ***




Produced by Annie R. McGuire








[Illustration: HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE
AN ILLUSTRATED WEEKLY.]

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. II.--NO. 72. PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK. PRICE FOUR
CENTS.

Tuesday, March 15, 1881. Copyright, 1881, by HARPER & BROTHERS. $1.50
per Year, in Advance.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: THE FIRST LESSON.]

[Begun in No. 58 of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, December 7.]

TOBY TYLER;

OR, TEN WEEKS WITH A CIRCUS.

BY JAMES OTIS.

CHAPTER XIV.

MR. CASTLE TEACHES TOBY TO RIDE.


When Toby got within sight of the ring, he was astonished at what he
saw. A horse with a broad wooden saddle was being led slowly around the
ring; Mr. Castle was standing on one side, with a long whip in his hand,
and on the tent pole, which stood in the centre of the ring, was a long
arm, from which dangled a leathern belt on a long rope that was carried
through the end of the arm, and run down to the base of the pole.

Toby knew well enough why the horse, the whip, and the man were there,
but this wooden projection from the tent pole, which looked so much like
a gallows, he could not understand at all.

"Come, now," said Mr. Castle, cracking his whip ominously as Toby came
in sight, "why weren't you here before?"

"Mr. Lord just sent me in," said Toby, not expecting that his excuse
would be received, for they never had been since he had arrived at the
height of his ambition by joining the circus.

"Then I'll make Mr. Job understand that I am to have my full hour of
your time, and if I don't get it, there'll be trouble between us."

It would have pleased Toby very well to have had Mr. Castle go out with
his long whip just then and make trouble for Mr. Lord; but Mr. Castle
had not the time to spare, because of the trouble which he was about to
make for Toby, and that he commenced on at once.

"Well, get in here, and don't waste any more time," he said, sharply.

Toby looked around curiously for a moment, and not understanding exactly
what he was expected to get in and do, asked, "What shall I do?"

"Pull off your boots, coat, and vest."

Since there was no other course than to learn to ride, Toby wisely
concluded that the best thing he could do would be to obey this new
master without question; and he began to take his clothes off with as
much alacrity as if learning to ride was the one thing upon which he had
long set his heart.

Mr. Castle was evidently accustomed to prompt obedience, for he not only
took it as a matter of course, but endeavored to hurry Toby in his work
of undressing.

With his desire to please, and urged by Mr. Castle's words and the
ominous shaking of his whip, Toby's preparations were soon made, and he
stood before his instructor clad only in his shirt, trousers, and
stockings.

The horse was led around to where he stood, and when Mr. Castle held out
his hand to help him to mount, Toby jumped up quickly without aid,
thereby making a good impression at the start as a willing lad.

"Now," said the instructor, as he pulled down the leathern belt which
hung from the rope, and fastened it around Toby's waist, "stand up in
the saddle, and try to stand there. You can't fall, because the rope
will keep you up, even if the horse goes out from under you; but it
isn't hard work to keep on if you mind what you are about, and if you
don't, this whip will help you. Now stand up."

Toby did as he was bidden, and as the horse was led at a walk, and as he
had the long bridle to aid him in keeping his footing, he had no
difficulty in standing during the time that the horse went once around
the ring; but that was all.

Mr. Castle seemed to think that this was preparation enough for the boy
to be able to understand how to ride, and he started the horse into a
canter. As might have been expected, Toby lost his balance, the horse
went on ahead, and he was left dangling at the end of the rope, very
much like a crab that has just been caught by the means of a pole and
line.

Toby kicked, waved his hands, and floundered about generally, but all to
no purpose, until the horse came round again, and then he made frantic
efforts to regain his footing, which efforts were aided--or perhaps it
would be more proper to say retarded--by the long lash of Mr. Castle's
whip, that played around his legs with merciless severity.

"Stand up! stand up!" cried his instructor, as Toby reeled first to one
side and then to the other, now standing erect in the saddle, and now
dangling at the end of the rope, with the horse almost out from under
him.

This command seemed almost needless, as it was exactly what Toby was
trying to do; but as it was given, he struggled all the harder, until it
seemed to him that the more he tried, the less did he succeed.

And this first lesson progressed in about the same way until the hour
was over, save that now and then Mr. Castle would give him some good
advice, but oftener he would twist the long lash of that whip around the
boy's legs with such force that Toby believed the skin had been taken
entirely off.

It may have been a relief to Mr. Castle when that first lesson was
concluded, and it certainly was to Toby, for he had had all the teaching
in horsemanship that he wanted, and he thought, with deepest sorrow,
that this would be of daily occurrence during all the time he remained
with the circus.

As he went out of the tent he stopped to speak with his friend the old
monkey, and his troubles seemed to have increased when he stood in front
of the cage calling "Mr. Stubbs! Mr. Stubbs!" and the old fellow would
not even come down from off the lofty perch where he was engaged in
monkey gymnastics with several younger companions. It seemed to him, as
he afterward told Ben, "as if Mr. Stubbs had gone back on him because he
knew that he was in trouble."

When he went toward the booth, Mr. Lord looked at him around the corner
of the canvas--for it seemed to Toby that his employer could look around
a square corner with much greater ease than he could straight
ahead--with a disagreeable leer in his eye, as though he enjoyed the
misery which he knew his little clerk had just undergone.

"Can you ride yet?" he asked, mockingly, as Toby stepped behind the
counter to attend to his regular line of business.

Toby made no reply, for he knew that the question was only asked
sarcastically, and not through any desire for information. In a few
moments Mr. Lord left him to attend to the booth alone, and went into
the tent, where Toby rightly conjectured he had gone to question Mr.
Castle upon the result of the lesson just given.

That night old Ben asked him how he had got on while under the teaching
of Mr. Castle, and Toby, knowing that the question was asked because of
the real interest which Ben had in his welfare, replied,

"If I was tryin' to learn how to swing round the ring, strapped to a
rope, I should say that I got along first-rate; but I don't know much
about the horse, for I was only on his back a little while at a time."

"You'll get over that soon," said old Ben, patronizingly, as he patted
him on the back. "You remember my words, now; I say that you've got it
in you, an' if you've a mind to take hold an' try to learn, you'll come
out on the top of the heap yet, an' be one of the smartest riders
they've got in this show."

"I don't want to be a rider," said Toby, sadly: "I only want to get back
home once more, an' then you'll see how much it'll take to get me away
again."

"Well," said Ben, quietly, "be that as it may, while you're here the
best thing you can do is to take hold an' get ahead just as fast as you
can; it'll make it a mighty sight easier for you while you're with the
show, and it won't spoil any of your chances for runnin' away whenever
the time comes."

Toby fully appreciated the truth of that remark, and he assured Ben that
he should do all in his power to profit by the instruction given, and to
please this new master who had been placed over him.

And with this promise, he lay back on the seat and went to sleep, not to
awaken until the preparations were being made for the entree into the
next town, and Mr. Lord's harsh voice had cried out his name, with no
gentle tone, several times.

Toby's first lesson with Mr. Castle was the most pleasant one he had;
for after the boy had once been into the ring, his master seemed to
expect that he could do everything which he was told to do, and when he
failed in any little particular, the long lash of the whip would go
curling around his legs or arms, until the little fellow's body and
limbs were nearly covered with the blue and black stripes.

For three lessons only was the wooden upright used to keep him from
falling; after that he was forced to ride standing erect on the broad
wooden saddle, or pad, as it is properly called, and whenever he lost
his balance and fell, there was no question asked as to whether or not
he had hurt himself, but he was mercilessly cut with the whip.

Messrs. Lord and Jacobs gained very much by comparison with Mr. Castle
in Toby's mind. He had thought that his lot could not be harder than it
was with them; but when he had experienced the pains of two or three of
Mr. Castle's lessons in horsemanship, he thought that he would stay with
the candy venders all the season cheerfully rather than take six more
lessons of Mr. Castle.

Night after night he fell asleep from the sheer exhaustion of crying, as
he had been pouring out his woes in the old monkey's ears, and laying
his plans to run away. Now, more than ever, was he anxious to get away,
and yet each day was taking him farther from home, and consequently
necessitating a larger amount of money with which to start. As old Ben
did not give him as much sympathy as Toby thought he ought to give--for
the old man, while he would not allow Mr. Job Lord to strike the boy if
he was near, thought it a necessary portion of the education for Mr.
Castle to lash him all he had a mind to--he poured out all his troubles
in the old monkey's ears, and kept him with him from the time he ceased
work at night until he was obliged to commence again in the morning.

The skeleton and his wife thought Toby's lot a hard one, and tried by
every means in their power to cheer the poor boy. Neither one of them
could say to Mr. Castle what they had said to Mr. Lord, for the rider
was a far different sort of a person, and one whom they would not be
allowed to interfere with in any way. Therefore poor Toby was obliged to
bear his troubles and his whippings as best he might, with only the
thought to cheer him of the time when he could leave them all by running
away.

But despite all his troubles, Toby learned to ride faster than his
teacher had expected he would, and in three weeks he found little or no
difficulty in standing erect while his horse went around the ring at his
fastest gait. After that had been accomplished, his progress was more
rapid, and he gave promise of becoming a very good rider--a fact which
pleased both Mr. Castle and Mr. Lord very much, as they fancied that in
another year Toby would be the source of a very good income to them.

The proprietor of the circus took considerable interest in Toby's
instruction, and promised Mr. Castle that Mademoiselle Jeannette and
Toby should do an act together in the performance just as soon as the
latter was sufficiently advanced. The boy's costume had been changed
after he could ride without falling off, and now while he was in the
ring he wore the same as that used by the regular performers.

The little girl had, after it was announced that she and Toby were to
perform together, been an attentive observer during the hour that Toby
was under Mr. Castle's direction, and she gave him many suggestions that
were far more valuable, and quicker to be acted upon, than those given
by the teacher himself.

"To-morrow you two will go through the exercise together," said Mr.
Castle to Toby and Ella, at the close of one of Toby's lessons, after he
had become so skillful that he could stand with ease on the pad, and
even advanced so far that he could jump through a hoop without falling
more than twice out of three times.

The little girl appeared highly delighted by this information, and
expressed her joy.

"It will be real nice," she said to Toby, after Mr. Castle had left them
alone. "I can help you lots, and it won't be very long before we can do
an act all by ourselves in the performance, and then won't the people
clap their hands when we come in?"

"It'll be better for you to-morrow than it will for me," said Toby,
rubbing his legs sorrowfully, still feeling the sting of the whip. "You
see, Mr. Castle won't dare to whip you, an' he'll make it all count on
me, 'cause he knows Mr. Lord likes to have him whip me."

"But I sha'n't make any mistake," said Ella, confidently, "and so you
won't have to be whipped on my account, and while I am on the horse you
can't be whipped, for he couldn't do it without whipping me, so you see
you won't get only half as much."

Toby brightened up a little under the influence of this argument; but
his countenance fell again, as he thought that his chances for getting
away from the circus were growing less each day.

"You see, I want to get back to Uncle Dan'l an' Guilford," he said,
confidentially; "I don't want to stay here a single minute."

Ella opened her eyes wide in astonishment, as she cried: "Don't want to
stay here? Why don't you go home, then?"

"'Cause Job Lord won't let me," said Toby, wondering if it was possible
that his little companion did not know exactly what sort of a man his
master was.

Then he told her, after making her give him all kinds of promises,
including the ceremony of crossing her throat, that she would never tell
a single soul, that he had had many thoughts, and had formed all kinds
of plans for running away. He told her about losing his money, about his
friendship for the skeleton and the fat lady, and at last he confided in
her that he was intending to take the old monkey with him when he should
make the attempt.

She listened with the closest attention, and when he told her that his
little hoard had now reached the sum of seven dollars and ten cents,
almost as much as he had before, she said, eagerly: "I've got three
little gold dollars in my trunk, an' you shall have them all; they're my
very own, for mamma gave them to me to do just what I wanted to with
them. But I don't see how you can take Mr. Stubbs with you, for that
would be stealing."

"No, it wouldn't, neither," said Toby, stoutly. "Wasn't he give to me to
do just as I wanted to with? an' didn't the boss say he was all mine?"

"Oh, I'd forgotten that," said Ella, thoughtfully; "I suppose you can
take him; but he'll be awfully in the way, won't he?"

"No," said Toby, anxious to say a good word for his pet; "he always does
just as I want him to, an' when I tell him what I'm tryin' to do, he'll
be as good as anything. But I can't take your dollars."

"Why not?"

"'Cause that wouldn't be right for a boy to let a girl littler than
himself help him; I'll wait till I get money enough of my own, an' then
I'll go."

"But I want you to take my money too; I want you to have it."

"No, I can't take it," said Toby, shaking his head resolutely, as he put
the golden temptation from him, and then, as a happy thought occurred to
him, he said, quickly: "I tell you what to do with your dollars: you
keep them till you grow up to be a woman, an' when I'm a man I'll come,
an' then we'll buy a circus of our own. I think, perhaps, I'd like to
be with a circus if I owned one myself. We'll have lots of money then,
an' we can do just what we want to."

This idea seemed to please the little girl, and the two began to lay all
sorts of plans for that time when they should be man and woman, have
lots of money, and be able to do just as they wanted to.

They had been sitting on the edge of the newly made ring while they were
talking, and before they had half finished making plans for the future
one of the attendants came in to put things to order, and they were
obliged to leave their seats, she going to the hotel to get ready for
the afternoon's performance, and Toby to try to do such work as Mr. Job
Lord had laid out for him.

Just ten weeks from the time Toby had first joined the circus, Mr.
Castle informed him and Ella that they were to appear in public on the
following day. They had been practicing daily, and Toby had become so
skillful that both Mr. Castle and Mr. Lord saw that the time had come
when he could be made to earn some money for them.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




THE YOUNG VIOLINIST.

BY GUSTAVE KOBBE.


[Illustration: EUGENIO MAURICIO DENGREMONT.]

Mauricio Dengremont, whose portrait is here given, is only fourteen
years old; but he has been playing the violin for eight years or more,
and is now one of the best violinists living. He knew the A B C of music
at an age when most boys have hardly had a glimpse at the A B C in their
spelling-book. His musical talent, like that of many famous musicians,
showed itself early in his life. Mozart, we are told, struck correct
chords on the clavichord--as they called the pianos used in his
days--when he was two years old, and when he was four, he wrote little
melodies which sound very prettily. Mauricio Dengremont's fondness for
music was observed at the same early age. His father led an orchestra in
Rio de Janeiro, and played the violin, and when he was playing at home,
little Mauricio, who was four years old, would sit at his feet and
listen, and he could not be induced to join in the sports of other
children as long as his father was practicing. Then already he asked to
be taught, but he was laughed at, and told he was too young to learn.
But he would not be put off, and kept coming to his father and asking
for lessons on the violin. At last, when he was six years old--the same
age at which Mendelssohn began to learn the piano--his father bought him
a toy violin for twenty cents, and thought he would give him a lesson,
just to see if he was in earnest. Before that, however, he told him how
hard he would have to work if he wanted to be a musician. But Mauricio
said he didn't mind working, he wanted to learn the violin just as soon
as he could. Fancy the father's surprise when he found during the first
lesson that Mauricio played his notes correctly and clearly.

The boy made such wonderful progress that after a few lessons a larger
violin was bought for him. In a few weeks he could play the scales, and
in ten months he was practicing difficult pieces, one of which he
performed in public fourteen months after his first lesson. Soon
afterward he travelled with his father in South America, giving
concerts. In Montevideo and Buenos Ayres he played so well that the
orchestras there presented him each with a gold medal. These youthful
triumphs were very much like those of Mozart; and in the midst of them,
Mauricio, like Mozart, remained a child in his feelings and behavior.
Mozart was so innocent that after one of his performances at court, when
he slipped on the polished floor, and was lifted up by the Empress Maria
Theresa of Austria, he said that he would marry her as soon as he was
old enough. In the same way Mauricio's manners remained unchanged,
though he was brought before the public when so young. Off the concert
stage he remained a child, playing with children, and sharing in their
pastime when he was not practicing. Only a short time ago, immediately
after his arrival here, his first appearance had to be postponed because
he had caught cold playing with snow-balls; and again he was prevented
from being at a concert because he had been eating too much candy.

The success of Mauricio's concerts in South America attracted the notice
of Dom Pedro, the Emperor of Brazil, and he was asked to play before his
Imperial Highness. Dom Pedro was so pleased with the boy's performance
that he gave him a beautiful medal, and promised to give him a good sum
of money every year, so that he could go to Paris and take lessons of
the famous violin-player Leonard. Dengremont's father accepted the
offer, and soon afterward he took the boy to Europe. Mauricio staid in
Paris until two or three years ago, when he began to travel and give
concerts. Everywhere he played he met with great success. People came to
his concerts in great crowds, and applauded him loudly; for he won their
hearts with his beautiful playing and modest behavior. In one of the
German cities he played a piece by Spohr when the composer's widow was
one of the listeners. Spohr himself was a very famous violinist, but the
widow said that Dengremont played the piece better than her husband
could have done, and gave him a piece of music in her husband's
handwriting.

Dengremont has been in this country only a short time, but he has
already made a good name for himself. Almost every one who has heard him
admires the rapidity and delicacy of his playing, and the grace with
which he handles the bow. All this he does in a manner which would be
remarkable for a man of great talent, who had been studying the violin
ever since he was able to hold the instrument, and yet he is not at all
conceited. He does not think he has nothing more to learn. On the
contrary, he will go to Paris in the spring, and study again with
Leonard for six months. After that he will give concerts in Russia.

To young people Mauricio Dengremont's career is a fine example. Of
course he has greater talent for music than hundreds of others. But it
is not his talent only to which he owes his early fame. It is owing as
well to his devotion to his art, his willingness to work, and his
modesty, which makes him feel that there is still room for him to
improve.




[Illustration: THE POOR LITTLE FROG ESCAPES FROM HIS ENEMIES.--DRAWN BY
W. F. BEARD.]

WHAT ONE POOR LITTLE FROG FOUND OUT.


A very young frog--very young indeed, scarcely out of tails (that is to
say, out of tadpolehood)--with a very great ambition and ordinary
ability, set out one morning with the purpose of seeing the world, and
by night-fall bringing back something to astonish the pool. "For," said
he to himself, "I am such a close observer, that I shall be sure to
observe and bring back correct reports of many strange things passed by
in stupid indifference by these commonplace old speckle-backs, who, no
doubt, neglect daily golden opportunities for storing their minds with
useful information, but who see nothing and know nothing but worms,
ants, beetles, and other insects and small animals to put in their ample
stomachs."

So saying, he leaped away gayly, but with eyes open and on the sharp
look-out, almost at the very start. "For," said he, "the most common
things possess a new interest when shown in a new light by the hand of
genius, and the ordinary things of one locality become objects of
curiosity in another where they are not found. Thus I could astonish
vain man, could I speak his jargon, with accounts of many things
familiar to my sight by daily contact in the bottom of the pool, but
which seldom or never meet his eyes."

So he journeyed on, well pleased with himself and what he thought his
life's mission, carefully eying every object in his way, lest some one
of interest should escape his notice. At length a great thistle came
within his gaze. "There," said he, "is something worth investigating."
After looking at it attentively at a little distance, that he might fix
all its _points_ in his mind, he approached for a closer study. Said he,
"I must not forget to ascertain if this strange plant--for plant it
undoubtedly is--has any peculiar odor; for that is very important." Thus
saying, he thrust his inquisitive nose against the prickers, which
brought him to the conclusion that he had carried the investigation
quite far enough; and storing this experience away in his memory for
future use, he went on his way, a little wiser, but no happier, for it
does not add to happiness to have our conceit pricked out, as it were,
by sharp experience.

Now a half-brick partly buried in the mud caught his curious eye.
"That's a singular rock," said he. "What a remarkable color it has! so
regular, too, in its form; it has also a peculiar texture"--as he put
his hand-like forepaw upon it.

Just at this moment he thought he heard something behind him, and
turning to see what, his terrified eye caught the dread form of an idle,
barefooted boy, also in search of adventure, though not for the
instruction of others, or even himself, as was the little frog's grand
motive, but merely for the amusement of the moment.

Young as his frogship was, he knew well enough what boys were, and made
off for his life with all possible speed.

It would, perhaps, have been wiser if he had remained perfectly quiet,
as in all probability the careless boy would not have observed him; but
as the boy seemed bearing right down upon him, the sight was too
dreadful for his nerves, and he sprang forward with desperate leaps,
which, of course, attracted the urchin's attention, and with a shout of
delight he bounded off in pursuit. Hastily clutching the "curious
rock"--half-brick--he aimed to give the frog's head an external
application of this object of interest, and, I must say, with almost
fatal precision. With great nicety of calculation, he threw the brick
where he felt the frog would be when the brick got there. His estimate
was uncomfortably close, the little frog thought, as the brick just
grazed his protruding eye. He winked, dodged back, and started in
another direction with wild leaps.

As the boy went for the rolling brick for another throw the frog hid
himself in a tuft of clover, and though terribly nervous when the urchin
came very near his hiding-place--at length actually kicked the bunch of
clover in his search for him--he summoned all his fortitude, and
remained perfectly quiet, knowing that to be his only safety.

Soon, to his unspeakable relief, the cruel boy gave it up, and went
whistling on his careless way in search of other adventures.

The thoroughly frightened frog prudently waited, nor ventured out until
the boy had quite vanished in the distance. While he still lay in his
hiding-place a curious creature wriggled past, in beautiful sheeny coat
that glistened in the sunlight, and quite delighted him. He made no
motion, however, though he did not much fear this harmless-looking
creature; still, as the supple thing constantly darted out a double
tongue, he felt it more prudent to observe in silence.

When this creature had also gone quite out of sight, he again moved on
his journey, it must be confessed, with less self-confidence and more
caution.

But a little while of safe travelling was, however, enough to cause the
two sentiments to change places again--prudence lessened, and confidence
grew: and this would have cost him his life had it not been his good
fortune to be on the land side of a beautiful white crane, which he very
much admired, as he stood fixedly gazing into the waters of a sluggish
stream. He hopped very near, in his ignorant delight, wondering what the
magnificent creature was, and what could be his reflections as he fixed
his gaze so intently in the amber water. "Something grand, no doubt!" He
did not feel called upon to address him, however, which was lucky again,
since this "splendid bird" was looking for just such fellows as he, but
never suspected one of being so near him in the field.

At length our leaping student of nature tired even of his admiration of
this beautiful bird, and leaped on his journey again in search of other
objects of scientific interest, one of which he soon found in the person
of another curious bird, also with long legs, and not very unlike in
form the one he had just seen, though not near so beautiful.

His general color was a dull brown, varied and mottled with several
shades of the same, from light yellowish to dark spots, and in parts,
such as the crest, back of the neck, etc., deepening to a jetty black.
His neck, though, did not appear long, like that of the white bird, but
his head seemed as near the body as a chicken's; when some noise or
motion in the water, however, attracted his attention, it shot out like
a telescope, as long in proportion as the other's, though the comparison
of the telescope was not froggie's. He knew nothing of such a thing; the
figure suggested to his mind was a snail's eye.

He also bestowed some admiration upon this fellow, and passed on, still
unconscious that he was in dangerous proximity to a mortal foe.

Now as he ascended quite a little hillock, high enough for him to
overlook the fields, he was surprised to see that the very stream upon
the margin of which the two strange birds had stood was the one near
which was his native pool; in fact, upon this stream the inhabitants of
his pond depended for fresh supplies of water to replenish the waste by
evaporation, when it occasionally overflowed its banks in times of
freshets.

He knew the locality by a great rock, which he knew to be near his pond,
and found, too, with some satisfaction, that he was much nearer home
than he would have thought from the distance travelled. He had taken a
circuitous route, as did the stream, before reaching the great rock.
Using this stone as a landmark, he saw that a straight line to it would
be comparatively a short-cut back again.

This discovery was not unpleasant either, for not only his journey, but
his researches as well, began to grow wearisome. Now as he remembered
the events of the day, his adventures, and the strange sights he had
seen, and the discoveries he had made, his heart swelled with pride when
he thought what astonishment it would create when he brought them all
back, as it were, to the banks of the pool.

Settling this comfortably in his mind, he glanced about again, as a
traveller takes a farewell look at a strange land he is about leaving.
But now he made the additional discovery that a grove just before him
was the "forest," as he believed it, he had seen many times in the
distance while sitting on the banks of the pool.

Gazing into its dark recesses, he became suddenly aware of two great
yellow-rimmed eyes peering out of its sombre depths. Cold chills ran
over him. His thirst for knowledge, which his mother, in her croaking
way, called idle curiosity, got the better of his fears, however, as he
became satisfied that he himself was not the object of those eyes'
attention, if indeed anything in particular was, and he began again his
usual wise speculations. "What an eye!" said he. "I remember once, while
lying at the bottom of the pool, to have seen the full moon rising,
while a round leaf upon the brink intervening, darkened the centre,
leaving a yellowish rim; that eye reminds me of it. To whom or what can
it belong, I wonder? Let me see: surrounded by feathers?--yes, feathers!
Well, feathers are only worn by birds, therefore the owner of that eye
_must_ be a bird, that's clear; and that's pretty good logic, too, I
flatter myself."

He was right; the owner of the eye was a bird--an owl; and scarcely had
he "flattered" himself, when he became conscious that now he was the
object of attention by those terrible eyes. Losing no time, he turned
toward the rock, made several desperate leaps in quick succession before
he felt the shadow of the great wings, though he heard no sound, for the
flight of owls is as noiseless almost as that of thistle-down.

Fortunately, again (he was a lucky frog), it was a sunny afternoon, and
the light rather strong for the owls' eyes (by this time another had
joined her mate); so, dodging here and there, he managed to elude them,
always making toward home, however, followed blindly by the owls. Nor
was this all: the tall birds, attracted by the commotion, seeing him
dodging through the grass, joined in the pursuit. The snake he had seen
also made bold to follow with wide-open jaws to devour him, and
creatures of every kind--ducks, more cranes, even a pelican--came from
all quarters, and pursued him to the very brink of the pool.

So numerous were they, indeed, that they obstructed each other's way.
Meantime the little frog was making the best use of the time, lessening
the distance at every bound. But even a race for life must have an end,
either in disaster to the pursued or disappointment to the pursuers, and
just at the moment when the wide-open beak of the admired white crane
was about to close upon him, with all the other eager open jaws close
following, our adventurous student splashed into the waters of the pond.

As he settled, exhausted, in the soft mud at the bottom of the pond,
stirring up a cloud, as it were, his little brothers and sisters, still
in the polliwig state, wriggled around him with anxious inquiry, and
staid old croakers, in coats of green and brown, and mottled trousers,
looked with amazement from him to the bank, where still lingered the
excited throng of his hungry pursuers.

Not a word to the many questions asked could he reply, but stared out
from his muddy security in dazed speechlessness upon the horrid throng
of snapping beaks and jaws he had just escaped. He experienced a feeling
of pleasure upon seeing a disappointed owl pick up a disappointed snake,
and wing his noiseless way back toward the copse, followed by his mate.
Then the disappointed crane fastened upon another snake, and arose like
a white cloud, with his squirming victim in his strong beak. After
considerable quacking, snapping, and hissing, one after another of his
ferocious foes rose upon the wing, and went his way; the bank was
cleared, peace and quiet reigned again.

Our traveller was again asked for an account of his adventures. When he
came to speak of the "strange plant," a laugh from under the yellow vest
of "Old Spots" greeted his ear. And "Old Spots" (they called him "Spots"
on account of his strongly mottled green coat) curtly observed that a
little sharp experience seemed to simplify matters much, and a prick in
the nose to help an inquiring mind to a speedy conclusion. "But," said
he, more seriously, "a closer scrutiny would hardly have failed to
reveal to the eye so important a feature as prickers on a thistle,
without the necessity of thrusting them into one's very nose."

The story of the boy and the brick was allowed to pass without remark
from the older inhabitants of the pool, probably because the little
frog, in this instance, had managed the case as well as any one could
have done.

When he spoke of the tall bird in plumage of shining white, the comment
was, "The white crane! one of the deadliest foes of our race!" The brown
bird, he was informed, was the bittern, commonly called "stake-driver,"
"fly-up-the-creek," etc., also a mortal foe.

When he made rather careless mention of the glistening snake, the old
frogs shuddered as they informed him that of all their enemies this was
most to be dreaded, because of its stealthy way of creeping upon its
victim unawares through the grass, fastening its fangs upon him, and
sometimes taking hours to swallow its prey, which all the while remained
alive, in painful and agonized certainty of his slow-approaching death.

The owls, they said, were less to be dreaded than any of his pursuers;
they were not particularly fond of frogs, would as soon have a snake,
and much preferred mice.

In short, every bird, reptile, and object of peculiar interest, as well
as localities, with all their characteristics, seemed so familiar to
these recently despised "old croakers," that the little frog hardly knew
whether to be most astonished or humiliated at the discovery of this
unboasted knowledge in the possession of his elders, and could but admit
to himself that it was the only discovery of any importance he had made
through the day, since all the others, it seemed, were no discoveries at
all.




A FOOLISH RABBIT.

BY R. K. MUNKITTRICK.


  A meditative rabbit once
    Within a brake sat thinking
  Why he and all his timid kind
    Are always sadly winking.

  He told his story to a wren,
    There in the fragrant grasses.
  The wren replied, "Your eyes are weak;
    Pray try a pair of glasses."

  The rabbit smiled, and took the hint,
    And early in the morning
  The wren observed a dainty pair
    His pleasant face adorning.

  To show the animals the change,
    He went into a clearing;
  But when they saw the wild effect,
    They all set up a jeering.

  His reasoning was long and loud
    And eloquent. Thereafter
  The animals with one accord
    Fell down and rolled with laughter.

  And now he ever hides from view
    Within the woodland passes,
  And winks the more for having tried
    To wear a pair of glasses.




LOUIS XVII. IN THE TEMPLE PRISON.


On the 29th of March, 1785, was born at the palace of Versailles, near
Paris, the most unfortunate of children. Louis Charles was the second
son of Louis XVI., King of France, and Marie Antoinette, his Queen, and
the royal infant seemed destined to know in life only the greatest
luxury and ease. He grew up a fair, graceful boy, his hair light, and
falling in curls upon his shoulders, his eyes blue, his form and
features regular, and he very soon began to show a quick, sensitive,
intelligent mind. When he was about four years old his elder brother
died, leaving him a little dog named Moufflet. He left him, too, heir to
the throne of France, the Dauphin, as the eldest son of the French Kings
was called, and Louis Charles was to be master of all the wide dominions
of his ancestors. He was marked by a strong love for his parents, and
particularly his mother, the graceful Marie Antoinette. The royal family
consisted of the King and Queen, the King's sister, Madame Elisabeth,
and two children--the Princess Marie Therese, who was some years older
than Louis, and the Dauphin. They seemed very happy together in the
splendid palace at Versailles. Louis cultivated a small plot of ground,
or a garden, where he raised flowers, and presented them to his mother.
Every morning, in their season, the child would bring a bouquet to the
fair Queen, who fully returned his tender love. His aunt, Madame
Elisabeth, was always kind and good, and his sister, the Princess,
watched over him with affectionate care.

But suddenly the whole family were overwhelmed by a succession of
misfortunes. The French Revolution began; the foreign kings invaded
France; and the French people looked upon their own royal rulers with
suspicion, and even hatred, because they thought they had called in the
foreign armies. Marie Antoinette was the most unpopular of all. Paris
was filled with terrible disorders. One day a great crowd of savage men
and women came out to the palace of Versailles, and insisted that the
King and his family should come to Paris. He was obliged to yield. The
great coach was ordered, the whole royal family were led almost as
captives to the city, and were lodged in the midst of the enraged
people, in the palace of the Tuileries. At first they were not badly
treated. Louis had brought his dog Moufflet with him, and was even
allowed to cultivate a small garden, where he still raised flowers, and
gave them to his sad, terrified mother. Dreadful scenes and massacres
now took place in Paris. Louis was shown by his mother to the people,
wearing a red bonnet and the tricolor; but every moment seemed to
increase their danger. At last the King (June, 1791) resolved to make
his escape out of France; and one night Louis was called up, half
asleep, and dressed in disguise as a little girl. The poor child was too
young to understand his danger; and when his sister asked him what he
thought they were going to do, said it must be "to act a comedy." They
opened a gate in the palace, went down into the silent street at
midnight, wandered in the darkness over the Pont Royal, at last found
the carriage prepared for them, and escaped from the city. Had they made
haste they might have reached the frontier and safety; but they were
overtaken, seized, and brought back to Paris the prisoners of a savage
mob.

[Illustration: THE ROYAL PRISONERS IN THE TEMPLE.]

Soon after, amidst scenes of massacre and horror, they were all taken to
the Temple (an ancient prison), and shut up in a tower. Here they
remained many months, exposed to the most terrible insults, scantily
fed, and looking for death every moment. But the King employed his time
in teaching his son Louis to read Racine and Corneille, and endeavoring
to prepare him for a useful life. At last he was himself taken out,
tried before a revolutionary tribunal, sentenced to die (January, 1793),
and his head was cut off. Next, Marie Antoinette was taken away from her
family to a solitary prison, and at last was brought to the guillotine.
Her hair had turned white, and her face was rigid with suffering. But as
she mounted the scaffold she showed no sign of fear. Madame Elisabeth,
the most innocent and amiable of her race, was also executed.

The young Prince, now King of France by descent, was left alone, shut up
in his prison at the Temple, and guarded by the horrible men who had
tormented his mother and father. It was the custom of these wretches to
terrify their prisoners by threats, insults, and every malicious art.
Louis Charles was placed under the care of the infamous Simon, a monster
of cruelty. He was left entirely alone. No kind friend came to soften
the sorrows of his lot. Night and day passed over him in his miserable
cell without a joy or hope. His mind had become prematurely active
amidst his sorrows; he knew, no doubt, the fate of his parents and
relations. Simon endeavored to teach him to hate his mother, and the
young Prince would never afterward speak to his horrible jailer. He
would rather be alone in the darkest night in the fearful cell than see
the countenance of his foe. For a long time before his death he remained
utterly silent, refusing to speak, and living in dumb misery. The Reign
of Terror prevailed in Paris; Robespierre and his murderers filled it
with horror, and the Dauphin was left to perish in his solitary cell. He
was now nearly ten years old, but he still preserved his strange
silence, and seemed like a dumb and idiotic child.

Next Robespierre perished, and Louis might have been better treated. But
his long confinement and the filth and horrors of his prison had brought
on a severe illness. He wasted away. Dr. Desault, a famous physician,
was sent to attend him, but died a short time afterward. Louis, it is
said, still remained silent and speechless. He died on the 8th of June,
1795, in his solitary cell, alone, without a friend.

Such was the sad doom of Louis XVII., King of France. The annals of the
poor offer no fate so miserable as that of this descendant of the
proudest and most powerful of European monarchs. By some writers it is
asserted that Louis escaped from his imprisonment, that a child deaf and
dumb was substituted for him, and that the King, or Dauphin, died in
obscurity in some part of Europe or America. But the legend is
improbable, and Louis XVII. sleeps, no doubt, in the cemetery where he
was laid at Paris.




BEATA'S LOCKET.

BY LILLIAS C. DAVIDSON.


Twenty-one pearls!--no, twenty-two; thirteen in the B, and nine in the V
of the monogram, besides the six little nails with heads of real
diamonds! Beata had never seen such a locket, no, not even in a shop
window, and to have had it for her very own for four whole days, and not
be able so much as to wear it!

It had come on Christmas-day--come in a little case all packed with
cotton-wool, and lined with silver paper--a case which Beata's fingers
could hardly open, they shook so with excitement and eagerness; and it
came all the way from Germany and her German godmother, Madame Von
Thausandmal.

"A beautiful locket, certainly, my dear," said Mrs. Vyner, Beata's
mamma, in confidence, to Beata's papa, when locket and case, and
Beata--rosy and joyful and proud--had all vanished with a rush out of
mamma's pretty blue morning-room. "But so utterly unsuitable to a child!
What can Helga von Thausandmal have been thinking of to send her such a
thing? Of course it was exceedingly kind of her, but I'm afraid it will
turn Beata's head, and it won't be the least use to her for years to
come."

"Why not, eh?" asked the Squire, who was deep in the morning paper, and
perhaps wasn't attending as he might have been. "I thought it pretty
enough."

"It's lovely; that's just it. It's too bad to tantalize her with a thing
she can't wear, and no properly brought up little girls wear such
jewelry; even if they did, I should not let Beata do anything so silly
and improper. No; it must be put away for her till she is eighteen, and
'comes out.' Poor child! I won't take it away for a week or two; it
would be cruel; but go it must. Why couldn't Helga have sent her some
books, or a doll, or anything sensible?"

But of all this Beata heard not a word, and her cup of bliss seemed as
if it would run over. Such a locket! as grand as a grown-up young
lady's, and for her very own! She had shown it at least three times over
to every servant in the house, down to Elizabeth Jane, the kitchen-maid,
who had won Beata's genuine respect by her "Law, miss, if it ain't fit
for a duchess at the very least!" and she only sighed to think her
governess had gone home for the holidays, and could not see it for a
whole fortnight.

But now a little shadow, like a small cloud, had come over the sunshine.
What was the good of a locket, and such a locket as Beata's, if other
people didn't see and admire? And how could they see it, if it were not
worn? And what chance had she to wear it?

To be sure, the house was full of visitors, who had come the very day
after Christmas, and Rex and she went down to dessert every night, and
into the drawing-room for half an hour afterward; but somehow Beata
never quite ventured to suggest "Locket," as nurse dressed her in her
well-worn little frock of black velvet, and tied her plain red silk
sash; indeed, she rather fancied she could see nurse's face if she did;
and as to wearing it to church on Sunday--well, even Beata's little head
could dimly understand somehow that God's house wasn't the place for
finery and display; and so--

"But now, to-day, there _is_ a chance," she thought, with a gasp which
was half exultation and half pure fright at her own daring; for Rex and
she were going skating.

Down in the park at Dene Hall there is a beautiful little lake, where
the wild fowl swim in summer, and where Beata and Rex were wont to
paddle about in a flat-bottomed boat, a "tub," Rex called it. But now
the water was covered with firm smooth ice, and the ladies and gentlemen
staying at the Hall had gone down there to skate, and Cousin Cecil had
promised to look after the children if they might come too; and Beata
was tempted.

Rex was shouting from the hall. Without another pause the locket was out
of its case, slipped on a ribbon, and the ribbon tied round Beata's
neck. Was it dread of Rex's scorn or of mamma's observation that made
Beata slip it under her little fur boa as she ran down the old oaken
stairs?

"Rex, you've no overcoat," she said, as they hurried together through
the snow, which lay like a soft white blanket over garden and park. That
hidden locket filled her mind so full that she must speak about it, and
she artfully began to talk about dress, to work the conversation round
to that beloved topic. But all in vain.

"Overcoat!" echoed Rex, in high disdain, swinging Beata's dainty little
skates and his own together. "Who wants an overcoat? The Spartans never
wore 'em."

"But then you're not a Spartan."

"Wish I was." Rex was beginning ancient history, and had a Grecian craze
just now. "Never mind, I mean to harden just as if I was;" but he
couldn't help a shiver all the same.

Beata tried again. "Doesn't the snow look like pearls, Rex?"

"Can't say I see it. Oh, you're thinking about that swell locket of
yours. Now in Sparta they never allowed them to wear bosh like that."

"Then Sparta was a stupid place," began Beata, hotly; but they came
round the corner by the lake, and the sight there put everything else
out of both their minds.

Such a pretty sight! Ice as smooth and clear as sweeping could make it;
white banks of snow gleaming like a wreath about it; crowds of gayly
dressed ladies and knickerbockered gentlemen skimming about, or being
pushed in chairs; the ring of a hundred skates keeping time to the band
that was playing in the rustic boat-house; and another crowd of people,
but not gayly dressed, standing and looking on at it all.

"What a rabble!" said Beata. "These aren't only village people and
servants; some of them look like gypsies. Look at that woman in the red
shawl--she's a tramp."

But here, skating down to them with a pretty grace, her sweet face
glowing above her warm furs, came Cousin Cecil, and just behind her the
fair mustache of Captain Strangways, the children's firm friend; and
after that there could be nothing but delight.

To skate between Cousin Cecil and Captain Strangways, holding a hand of
each, seemed to Beata the summit of human felicity. Rex, still Spartan
even in his pleasures, preferred to stagger about alone. Beata forgot to
try and pretend she was grown up.

All at once she remembered, with a shock of remorse, that Captain
Strangways had never seen the wonderful locket. What an omission! Her
hand went up under her fur boa to bring that neglected ornament into its
proper position; then stopped short. The thin little bit of blue ribbon
dangled aimless there, to be sure, but there was no locket.

I don't think Beata will ever forget that moment, if she lives to be an
old woman. Her face looked almost gray as she turned it up speechlessly
to Cousin Cecil's wondering gaze.

"My locket! oh, my locket!" she managed to gasp.

"Your locket, dear? Why, what's the matter? Oh, Beata, you don't mean to
say you wore it?"

"Oh yes, I did, I did; and now it's gone."

Cousin Cecil looked very grave indeed. "Oh, Beata!" was all she said,
but it was worse than any words almost.

"Oh, do let's find it; do look--do, do!"

"We'll look; but as to finding it--" But Cousin Cecil broke off short.
There was a scream from the other end of the lake, where the village
boys and girls had made a slide--a shrill, sharp cry--and a little tiny
boy, such a ragged, wretched mite, lay flat upon the hard cold ice.
Captain Strangways started to go, but Cecil was there first. She was
down upon her knees, and had the wee dirty face on her arm, before he
could reach her side, for he was heavier and slower than she. She looked
up with a serious face as he bent down to her.

"Poor little mite! I am afraid he's hurt. He was too small to slide. I
must get him home this minute. Where does he live?"

"Please, miss, down to Bill Green's; they're a-lodgin'. Please, miss,
they're tramps; that was his ma that's just gone, her in the red shawl
there," rose in a hubbub of voices.

"Oh, poor wee man! I'll take him home."

"Pray, Miss Vyner, let me," said Captain Strangways, struggling with his
skates.

"Oh no, please don't: I'd rather. It's only a step. He isn't heavy. No,
please. If you'll take the children home for me, I won't be long."

"But you must not go alone, and it's almost dusk."

"Jim shall go with me," and she beckoned to a stable-boy in the crowd.
"Indeed, Captain Strangways, I would much rather you did not come,
really;" and reluctantly he stooped and unfastened her skates, and stood
watching her as she passed quickly down toward the village, with Jim in
attendance, and the little child in her arms.

"It's all right, really," said Rex, trying to cut a double S, and
failing signally. "Don't you know Cousin Cecil is doctor to half the
village?"

"And oh!" said a tearful voice, "could you help me to look for my
locket?"

"By all means," said the kind young soldier, and they set to work with a
will, but without success; no locket was to be seen.

"I'll tell you what, Beata," said Rex, as the fading light warned them
to join the group starting homeward, "it's no go. We'll tell Adams, and
get him to set the gardeners and stablemen to work early in the morning,
but you can't see your own nose now. I believe the woman in the red
shawl boned it. Don't cry; you know the Spartans--"

But there was a sob as they turned away, and even Captain Strangways's
comforting hand-clasp could not quite console poor Beata.

Everybody was having afternoon tea when they reached home. The great
square hall, with its polished walls and rafters, was all aglow with the
light from the great wood fire on the old stone hearth. There was a
pleasant clatter of tea-spoons, and a most appetizing aroma of hot tea
and muffins, and a great deal of chattering and soft laughter from the
ladies in their low easy-chairs, and the gentlemen who were handing
tea-cups. Captain Strangways secured a very big carved chair on the
outside of the circle, and the children nestled down close to him on the
tiger-skin rug. It was only the holiday-time that gained them this
distinguished honor of taking tea down stairs, instead of in the
school-room. But Beata did not feel grown up at all; she was far too
busy mourning over the lost locket, and thinking of the confession that
would have to be made to mamma by-and-by. Rex was very silent too, but
he was busy with the muffins. I don't know whether they had muffins in
Sparta, but on that subject he said not a word.

The laughter and the tea-drinking went on, but no Cousin Cecil appeared.
Captain Strangways had twice gone over to look out at the deepening
darkness, and each time he came back looking graver, when all at once
the great hall door opened softly, there was a sudden rush of cold air,
and in came Cecil, very gently and quietly.

Captain Strangways was on his feet, had unfastened her fur cloak, placed
her in the big chair, and brought her a cup of tea, before Rex had
swallowed the mouthful of muffin upon which he was engaged. When his
speech returned to him, however, he asked, with un-Spartanlike
eagerness,

"Well, and how's the little chap?"

"Better now, dear, but he was really hurt." Then, leaning forward, "Look
here, Beata," she said, very seriously, and dropped something into her
lap.

Beata started up with a little cry, "My locket! oh, my locket!"

"Then I do believe that old red shawl stole it, after all. Has she gone
to prison?"

"Oh, hush, Rex! Listen, children: what sort of a home do you think I
took that poor little man to? Nothing but the shed behind Green's
smithy; no fire, no bed but straw, no food. He had cut his head, but I
soon bound that up, and then--oh, how can I tell you?--his mother, that
poor pale creature in the red shawl, came up to me, just as I was coming
away, and with tears and sobs she gave me this. She said she saw it
fall, and picked it up in hopes of a reward, and then--and then she
thought of the food it would buy for her miserable little starving
babies (there were two more in the shed), and oh, children, _she meant
to keep it_!"

There was a moment's silence.

"Then why--why did she give it to you?" said a somewhat husky voice:
perhaps the hardening process had given Rex cold.

"She said, when I brought the little boy home, she couldn't do it. She
said--and I believe it is true--that it is the first time in her life
she took what wasn't hers, and it was only the starving babies, and the
sight of the glittering locket, that tempted her. Oh, Beata dear, don't
you see now what it is to wear things that may put temptation in other
people's way?"

Something as bright as the diamond nails glistened on the locket on
Beata's lap.

"I'll tell mamma every bit about it," she murmured, with drooping head,
"and ask her to take it away, and never let me even see it till I'm
grown up."

"Yes; and, Beata"--and Cousin Cecil's voice sank so low that no one else
could hear--"when you say, 'Lead us not into temptation,' to-night, ask
to be kept from ever tempting anybody else, and think of poor little
Tom's mother, won't you?"

"But, I say, cousin"--Rex was a little husky still--"are they all
starving and shivering down there now?"

"Oh no; Mrs. Green has taken them in for the night, and Jim has just
gone back with some hot soup and other things for them, and to-morrow we
must settle more. I'm sure Uncle George will help."

"And Beata's and my pocket-money--at least what's left after Christmas
and all those chocolates we bought the other day. Now, Beata, I hope
you'll give up wearing lockets and tomfoolery like that. In Sparta--"

"Have another muffin, Rex, my boy?" said Captain Strangways; and Rex's
valuable items of information respecting that classic land were lost to
the general public--at least as far as that occasion was concerned.




GUESS.


  If all the wealth on earth could be
  To one man given, still would not he
  Be rich as I. O'er land and sea
  I scatter gold. I fill the air
  With precious specks. Ay! everywhere
  I of my treasure give a share,
  And yet have countless stores to spare.




[Begun in HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE No. 66, February 1.]

PHIL'S FAIRIES.

BY MRS. W. J. HAYS,

AUTHOR OF "PRINCESS IDLEWAYS," ETC.

CHAPTER VII.

FAREWELL TO THE CITY.


A day or two later, Phil, wrapped in shawls, was carried by Joe to a
carriage, and the carriage rolled away to a wharf where puffed numerous
steamboats; and here he was taken on board one of the river-steamers,
and safely placed in the midst of a heap of pillows on deck, where he
could see all the busy life about him--see the newspaper boys and the
orange women, and the hurrying hacks and the great teams, and all the
stir and tumult of the city's busiest hours. Miss Schuyler, in her cool
gray suit, was on one side of him, and Lisa, looking tranquil and
thoroughly glad and grateful, on the other, and Joe, just the happiest
darky in the world, sat at his feet ready to take charge of all and
everything.

They sailed and they sailed, away from the city and its many roofs, from
the factory chimneys and the steeples, from the cloud of smoke which
hung between the sky and house-tops, until they came to the hills and
dales of pasture-lands and villages. Then they landed, and were whirled
away in the cars, and Phil enjoyed it all, even the fatigue which made
him sleep; and Joe carried him about as if he were a baby.

It was quite dark when, after a drive over a rather rough road, they
reached the lake-side cottage which was Miss Schuyler's summer home, and
Phil was glad to be put in bed, for the old pain had begun again.

When he opened his eyes the next morning, it was with a strange feeling
of wonder at his new surroundings. Birds were twittering out-of-doors,
and there was a soft lapping of water on the shore. The green boughs of
a cherry-tree almost brushed against the window-panes. He was no longer
in his old garret room, but in a pretty apartment, with bunches of
rose-buds on the walls, and scent-bottles on the toilet table, and
muslin curtains, and a bright carpet, and pretty book-shelves, and
brackets, and lovely child-faces in the engravings; and on a broad table
was a little easel, and a paint-box, and drawing-paper; and here too was
his old box with the violin strings.

"Oh," said Phil, softly, "I wonder if heaven is any better than this!"

He had closed his eyes as he said it, and went over his usual morning
prayer of thankfulness; and when he opened his eyes, there was Lisa with
his breakfast tray--poached eggs and toast and a goblet of milk.

"Lisa, Lisa, is not this too nice for anything?" asked Phil.

"Yes, indeed, dear, it is nice. Miss Schuyler says you must hurry and
get strong, so that you can make the acquaintance of the hens that laid
these eggs for you, and the cow whose milk is to do you so much good."

"What is the cow's name, Lisa?"

"I don't know," said Lisa.

"It is Daisy," said Miss Schuyler, coming in to say good-morning. "She's
a lovely little Alderney, and her milk is like cream. Oh, you will soon
be strong enough to row my boat for me."

"A boat!--have you a boat?"

"Yes, and you are going out on the lake in her this very morning."

"It is just too much happiness, Miss Schuyler."

"Well, we will not overpower you. For a day or two you must rest, and do
nothing but breathe the sweet air. I have to be busy getting things in
order and looking after my garden. Lisa will take her work on the
piazza, and you can lie in one of the easy-chairs. Joe is to wait on
you, and do a little weeding, and keep the paths in order, and bail out
the boat; and the old man seems to be very much at home already. So that
is the order of the day. Now good-by, and don't do too much thinking."

[Illustration: ON THE LAKE.]

"One moment, Miss Schuyler; do you believe in fairies?"

"Just a little," said Miss Schuyler, with a quizzical smile.

"Well, I believe in them," said Phil, "and I think you are one of the
best of them."

"Oh no, I am very human, dear Phil, as you will find out. And now I must
go look after my strawberry beds. Good-by."

"Good-by," said Phil, waving her a kiss. "Only think, Lisa, we will
actually see strawberries growing! It is quite fairy-land for me."

After that he was carried down to the easy-chair on the piazza, where he
could see the lawn sloping down to the lake, and watch the birds
lighting on the rim of a vase full of daisies and running vines. He
could see that the cottage was low and broad, and painted in two shades
of brown; that there were arbors covered with grapevines on one side,
and on the other he knew there were flower beds and fruit trees, for
every once in a while Miss Rachel was to be seen emerging from there in
a broad straw flat, and with buckskin gloves, trailing long bits of
string or boughs of green stuff, with scissors and trowel and
watering-can.

Lisa had her work-basket, and with deft fingers and a little under-tone
of psalmody was fashioning a pretty summer garment. Then Miss Rachel
came and tossed a basketful of early roses and syringa down beside Phil,
and put a little table beside him, with some slender glass vases and a
pitcher of water, and asked him to arrange the flowers for her. This he
was glad to do, and made the bunches up as prettily as his nice taste
suggested. But he was really wearied with great happiness. It was all so
new, so charming, every sense was so satisfied, that at last he closed
his eyes and slept.

It seemed to him only a little while, but when he opened his eyes again,
Lisa was beside him with his dinner; and after dinner he slept again,
and when he wakened the lawn was in shadow, and the sun low in the sky,
and the birds were twittering and seeking their nests, and Miss Rachel
was telling Joe to put cushions in the boat, the _Flyaway_; and
presently Phil found himself floating gently on the lovely water of the
lake, and the cottage and lawn and arbors were looking like a pretty bit
of landscape he had seen in books.

He dipped his fingers in the clear water, and looked down at the pebbly
bottom, and listened to the even dip of the oars, as old Joe rowed
farther out from shore.

"It must be fairy-land," thought Phil, but he said nothing; he was too
happy to talk. And so the day ended, the first day in the country.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




PINAFORE RHYMES.--(_Continued._)


[Illustration]

  Bow! wow! wow! You'd better run;
  I'm just the dog to spoil your fun;
  I'll tear your dresses, and bite your heels,
  Till every one of you shrieks and squeals.
  So, there! I've scared them well, I must say;
  But I'm very glad that they ran away;
  It wouldn't have been such jolly fun,
  If they had made me turn tail and run.

[Illustration]


[Illustration]

  Six chimney-sweeps, each black as a crow,
  Had a big fight with a man of snow.
  They beat him to pieces because he was white,
  And had a triumphant feast that night.
  Their dishes were blackbirds and crows, 'tis said,
  Chimney-soot pudding and charcoal bread.
  And they swallowed a dozen bottles of ink,
  Being very choice in their meat and drink.


[Illustration]

  Here, you little monkey, you,
  I want to see you play with Lu;
  She's such a pretty little miss,
  Shake hands with her, and give a kiss.
            _Won't!_

  Why not, when Lulu wants to play,
  And asks in such a pretty way?
            _Can't!_
  Why not, you little sauce-box, say?
            _Sha'n't!_


[Illustration]

  Here's a dainty little tree,
  With its spreading leaves so free;
  It's so pretty, that I will
  Keep it on my window-sill.




[Illustration: OUR POST-OFFICE BOX]


  RATON, NEW MEXICO.

     My brother and sisters and myself live at Chicorica Park. It is a
     very pretty place, situated in the Raton Mountains. We have had
     parties of as many as three hundred Indians hunting in our canyon at
     once, but it is a year and a half now since we have seen any. We
     have a good many deer here. Seven have been killed since Christmas,
     but one was carried off by a mountain lion.

      We like HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE very much, especially the Jimmy
      Brown stories, and "Toby Tyler." We are all English children, and
      have never lived anywhere in America except in New Mexico. Our
      pets are dogs and cats and a colt. We like the colt best of all.

      We have had some very heavy snow-storms, and the canyon has been
      impassable several times this winter, so we have not received
      YOUNG PEOPLE very regularly. I am twelve years old.

  G. KERCHEVAL M.

       *       *       *       *       *

  CLIFTON HEIGHTS, PENNSYLVANIA.

     I like the life of Lafayette which was published in YOUNG PEOPLE so
     much! I have the lives of generals in my history, but the way they
     are written in YOUNG PEOPLE is so much more interesting! I wish the
     paper was published twice a week, it seems so long to wait to hear
     how Toby Tyler gets along. On Wednesday morning it is "Hallo! has
     YOUNG PEOPLE come?" all over our house. Mamma says it is a great
     blessing. We think the little girl with her first muff in the
     picture in No. 68 is so sweet and chubby and baby-like, that if she
     was alive we should just love her to death.

      I have a dog named Major, who sits up on his hind-legs and hangs
      down his fore-paws pitifully, as if they were broken, and some
      people think they really are; but Major only does it to beg for
      candy. He has many friends, and sometimes they bring him sticks of
      candy all the way from Philadelphia.

      It has been so cold here this winter that some of our sparrows
      fell to the ground half frozen. We brought them into the house,
      and when they got warm we opened the window and let them fly away.

  GEORGY H.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BELLEFONTAINE, OHIO.

     I am six years old. I began to take YOUNG PEOPLE on the first of
     January, and I like it ever so much. I learned the little poem in
     No. 66 about the strawberry vines, and how the snowy blanket
     covered their saucy little heads. I speak it for grandma, and she
     says it is beautiful.

      Christmas papa gave me a beautiful little stove, all
      nickel-plated. I bake pies and cake and other nice things for my
      little friends and myself to eat.

      My uncle brought me a doll from New York city, and my other uncle
      gave me a little trunk to put her clothes in.

  ETHEL B.

       *       *       *       *       *

  DENISON, IOWA.

     I wish YOUNG PEOPLE came every day instead of once a week. I was so
     sorry when "Mildred's Bargain" was finished! but I like the other
     stories ever so much, especially "Toby Tyler." I read all the
     letters in the Post-office Box, and wish I could see all the boys
     and girls who write them. The little girl away down in Texas who
     wrote about the first snow has no idea how much fun we Northern
     children have coasting on the snow crust, sometimes over drifts
     eight and ten feet deep.

      Last Friday I spoke "Lily's Ball," the poem in No. 67 of YOUNG
      PEOPLE, at my school, and next week I am going to speak "My First
      Muff," in No. 68.

  MABEL.

       *       *       *       *       *

  NEW YORK CITY.

     I think Toby Tyler is a great boy. We used to have a monkey named
     Jack. Every night he would put a shawl over his head and go to
     sleep. Sometimes he would hold the kitten in his arms and try to
     put her to sleep. He would get on our pig's back, and hold on to
     his ears, and ride all around, and he would ride horseback to the
     village. When any one went out, he would watch to see if any candy
     were brought home, and if it was, he would stand on his hind-legs
     and put out his paw until the paper was opened. I am almost eight
     years old.

  WILLIE K. T.

       *       *       *       *       *

  HOUSTON, TEXAS, _February_ 22, 1881.

     I wish to notify correspondents that I have exchanged to the full
     extent of my collection, and I beg them not to write to me any
     more.

  H. C. YANCEY.

       *       *       *       *       *

  FOREST LAKE, PENNSYLVANIA.

     My papa promised me YOUNG PEOPLE as soon as I could read it myself.
     I tried very hard after that, and last November, on my seventh
     birthday, sure enough it came. I don't believe any little boy
     enjoys it more than I do. I must tell you of one thing it has done
     for me. I was always afraid to be left alone, especially after
     dark. After reading the story in No. 55 about the little girl who
     broke herself of being so timid, I went every night from garret to
     cellar all alone after dark, and now I am not afraid to go anywhere
     in the house, even if it is very dark.

      I have a little brother named Harry. I love him very much. He
      likes the pictures in YOUNG PEOPLE as much as I do. I think Jimmy
      Brown is jolly.

  WRIGHTIE G.

       *       *       *       *       *

  SAN ANTONIO, TEXAS.

     I have two mocking-birds for pets. They whistle so pretty! I am
     going to have a pretty flower garden this summer. Spring is here
     (February 16), and the peach-trees are budding, and everybody is
     making gardens.

      I like all the stories in YOUNG PEOPLE. I always laugh so hard
      when mamma reads Jimmy Brown to me! I wish he would send another
      story.

  MAY K.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _February_ 24, 1881.

     I have no more pure white coral left, but I have a piece with a
     little red in it which I will send to a boy who sent me a specimen
     of ore, if he will kindly send me his address again.

      I would like to send "Wee Tot" a piece of red coral from the Red
      Sea, if she will send me some ocean curiosities and her address.

  SALLIE KELLEY,
  Kleine St., East Walnut Hills, Cincinnati, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fred Glasier, of Adams, Massachusetts, regrets being unable to make a
return for some favors he has received, as the addresses, although
given, were so illegible that he could not decipher them. Addresses
should always be written distinctly. The Post-office Box is often
compelled to neglect exchanges which are pretty and suitable, because
the address is as mysterious as the hieroglyphics on our Egyptian
obelisk.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Last year my father gave me a Columbia bicycle. We have a bicycle
     club here, with about twenty members, of which I am one. Our suit
     is brown corduroy, with red stockings. The cap is like the suit.

      I would like to exchange some of the first American pennies and
      halfpennies, for foreign coins.

  ARTHUR C. KETCHAM,
  Care of William P. Ketcham. P. O. Box 10,
  Yonkers, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I will exchange bayberry-tallow, for peacock coal, or postage
     stamps from Cape of Good Hope or Barbadoes.

  A. M. FORMAN,
  116 Pierrepont Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.

Bayberry-tallow is greenish in color, and is obtained by boiling the
berries of the bayberry, or wax myrtle (_Myrica cerifera_). This shrub,
which is very aromatic, grows in great abundance all along the Atlantic
coast. It is found in such quantities in some localities of Long Island
that the gathering of the berries and the manufacture of tallow for
candles amount to an extensive local industry.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I have taken YOUNG PEOPLE since the first copy. My brother has
     bound it with strings, and it makes a very pretty volume.

      I have often answered correspondents, always receiving, in
      exchange for foreign stamps, articles of equal value.

      I have nearly two thousand duplicates of foreign stamps, which I
      will exchange for other foreign stamps, or for stamps of United
      States departments. I will also exchange postmarks for anything
      interesting.

  JOHN THOMAS,
  3420 Sansom Street, Philadelphia, Penn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     My mamma says she will make a pretty flower out of any little
     girl's hair, or her mamma's, in exchange for curious shells,
     minerals, or a genuine Indian bow and arrow. A bunch of hair from
     one to two feet long and as thick as a goose quill will make a
     pretty flower.

  ADELLA P. LIPPINCOTT,
  New Hope, Bucks County, Penn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I have four Chilian stamps, which I would like to exchange for
     other South American stamps. I have made a man with a basket on his
     back from Wiggle 17, which I send.

  EDWARD H. PALMER,
  44 Schiffleutstaden, Strasburg, Germany.

Your Wiggle is excellent, and we are very sorry it arrived too late to
be printed with others.

       *       *       *       *       *

     I have noticed in the exchanges there are many who want birds'
     eggs. It does not seem quite right to me, because if we take all
     the eggs, we destroy all the birds. I will exchange shells and
     pebbles from Lake Erie, for any curiosity except birds' eggs.

  JESSIE G. SMITH,
  327 West Fourth Street, Erie, Penn.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following exchanges are also offered by correspondents:

     Postmarks and stamps of all kinds.

  GEORGE LINSCOTT,
  Holton, Jackson County, Kansas.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Twenty-five postmarks, for five stamps from any country except
     Europe, Canada, and the United States.

  F. S. and B. S.,
  P. O. Box 582, Lansing, Mich.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Dried ferns from the highest peaks of the Alleghanies, for pieces
     of silk for a quilt.

  LUCY SHARP, P. O. Box 73, Bridgeton, N. J.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Stamps.

  SAMMY BEANS,
  103 East Seventy-ninth Street, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postmarks or stamps, for stamps.

  JEROME G. EDDY, Lock Box 111, Geneva, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

     A piece of Irish peat, for soil and seed from the far West or
     South, especially cotton seed, or for a piece of lava.

  D. ALLAN WEBER,
  Searsport, Waldo County, Maine.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Stamps.

  N. S. SCHWARZ,
  105 East Seventy-ninth Street, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postage stamps and postmarks, for stamps.

  WILLIAM M. BEAMAN,
  U. S. Naval Asylum, Philadelphia, Penn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     A Canadian coin, for five Montenegro stamps.

  CHARLIE HUBBARD,
  30 Pearl Street, New Haven, Conn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Shells, for Indian relics.

  AARON KING,
  80 Ellison Street, Paterson, N. J.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Texas moss, flints, insects, woods, pressed flowers, and other
     natural curiosities, for foreign postage stamps, woods, Indian
     arrow-heads, and all kinds of minerals.

  J. S. and WILLIE G. DAVIS,
  Care of J. T. Davis, P. O. Box 122,
  Groesbeck, Limestone County, Texas.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postmarks, for stamps, curiosities, or minerals. Ten postmarks, for
     one rare stamp; or twenty, for a good curiosity.

  CHARLIE NICHOLS,
  288 Lafayette Street, Bridgeport, Conn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postage stamps, for stamps, minerals or coins.

  RALPH L. EMERSON,
  P. O. Box 105, Brookline, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postage stamps, for the same, or pressed wild flowers.

  FRED CHENEY,
  41 Fort Avenue, Boston, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Foreign postage stamps.

  HENRY PAYNE,
  Mankato, Minn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Stamps, for coins.

  A SUBSCRIBER OF "YOUNG PEOPLE,"
  First National Bank, Bay City, Mich.

       *       *       *       *       *

     A small piece of sulphate of iron, for foreign postage stamps.

  HARRY W. TOWNLEY,
  Sayreville, N. J.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Stamps, for coins.

  W. T. CRANE,
  124 Washington Street, Hoboken, N. J.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Stamps, for anything suitable for a museum.

  D. G. BARNETT,
  406 Grand Avenue, Brooklyn, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

     German postage stamps, for other foreign stamps.

  ARTHUR E. CAMPBELL,
  222 Prospect Avenue, Milwaukee, Wis.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Five postmarks, for one foreign stamp.

  GUY F. BARKER,
  St Albans, Franklin County, Vt.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Rare postmarks (Illinois especially) and postage stamps, for
     foreign and old issues of United States stamps.

  MANNING A. LOGAN,
  812 Twelfth Street, N. W., Washington, D. C.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Three varieties of internal revenue stamps, for foreign stamps,
     minerals, or curiosities.

  EDWIN E. SLOSSON,
  Sabetha, Nemaha County, Kansas.

       *       *       *       *       *

     United States and foreign postage stamps, for stamps from Hamburg,
     Mexico, and Japan.

  HARRY C. BREARLEY,
  180 Charlotte Avenue, Detroit, Mich.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postage stamps, for specimens of gold, silver, copper, or tin ore.

  ALLY B. HALLIDAY,
  406 West Forty-third Street, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Minerals, fossils, shells, and Indian relics (a large collection of
     the latter), for minerals, shells, and seaweed. Only good specimens
     desired.

  ED GOHL, 7 South Third Street, Harrisburg, Penn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Stones from Connecticut, Texas, and Mississippi, also cotton as it
     comes from the field, for foreign postage stamps.

  JAMES MCKENNA,
  4 West Street, Bridgeport, Conn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     A Norwegian halfpenny, date 1867, two Cape of Good Hope stamps,
     and a flint an inch long, for Indian arrow-heads and petrified
     wood.

  GEORGE E. PRINGLE, Hastings, Minn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Shells from the Indian and Pacific oceans, for fossils of animals
     or plants.

  HENRY W. HAND,
  Green Creek, Cape May County, N. J.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Foreign postage stamps, for Indian relics and curiosities.

  FLAVEL S. MINES, Kirkwood Hotel,
  Kirkwood, St. Louis County, Mo.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postmarks, postage and revenue stamps, and monograms, for postage
     and revenue stamps.

  K. G. EASTON, West Berkeley, Cal.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Thirty foreign stamps, for five stamps of the following countries:
     Newfoundland, New Brunswick, Cape of Good Hope, Hong-Kong.

  H. L. J.,
  Lock Box 721, Granville, Licking County, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postmarks, for stamps.

  JAMES G. BARBOUR,
  25 Fulton Street, Pittsburgh, Penn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Twenty-eight old coins, for any curiosity or Indian relics. A good
     Indian bow and a few arrows especially desired.

  A SUBSCRIBER OF "YOUNG PEOPLE,"
  P. O. Box 930, Rushford, Fillmore Co., Minn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     A few shells from Calcutta, India, for ocean curiosities, or any
     pretty thing for a collection. Mosses and pressed ferns especially
     desired. Flower seeds also exchanged.

  ELLA STULL,
  Greenville, Darke County, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Ten foreign postage stamps, for an Indian arrow-head, or two stamps
     from the Cape of Good Hope.

  FREEMAN WOODBRIDGE,
  Care of Dr. J. Woodbridge,
  New Brunswick. N. J.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postmarks and Canadian postage stamps, for shells from the Pacific
     and Southern coasts, or other curiosities. Correspondents will
     please label specimens.

  MISS M. FRANK LE COUNT,
  South Norwalk, Conn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Stones from the Arkansas River, cotton as it comes from the field,
     cotton seed, postmarks, and scales of the alligator gar-fish, for
     United States or foreign coins. Correspondents will please label
     coins.

  COLLECTOR, care of Postmaster,
  Heckatoo, Lincoln County, Ark.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Old United States and foreign postage stamps, for coins and
     minerals.

  GUSTAVUS SCHAEMBER,
  159 Prince Street, New York City.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Ten Pennsylvania postmarks, for the same number of any other State
     or Territory, or Canada.

  CLIFF C. GARRISON,
  Brookville, Jefferson County, Penn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Twenty-five postmarks, for five rare postage stamps.

  R. C. WILLIAMS, JUN.,
  240 Carlton Avenue, Brooklyn, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

     A stone from Pennsylvania, for one from any other State; or
     postmarks, for foreign stamps--Chinese especially desired.

  WALTER J. WELLS,
  Oswayo, Potter County, Penn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     An ounce of the soil of New York, for the same from any other
     State. Western soil particularly desired.

  ERNEST S. GREEN,
  123 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Sea-shells, for foreign postage stamps.

  C. H. TUCKER,
  63 Cass Avenue, Corner of Adams,
  Detroit, Mich.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Fragments of figured pottery from sites of ancient Mohawk Indian
     villages, for Indian relics from other localities.

  R. C. HALL,
  Canajoharie, Montgomery County, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Stones from the shore of Lake Erie, for stones or ores from other
     localities, or foreign postage stamps.

  FRANK W. FULLKERSON,
  78 Sawtell Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *

     European, Chinese, and Japanese postage stamps, for minerals.

  CLARENCE HENNE,
  39 Frelinghuysen Avenue, Newark, N. J.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Latest issues of German, French, and Italian postage stamps, and
     curiosities, for curiosities.

  L. H. TROTTER,
  22 South Fifth Street, Philadelphia, Penn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postmarks, for fossils and minerals.

  FLETCHER M. NOE,
  165 North Alabama Street, Indianapolis, Ind.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Foreign postage stamps, for foreign stamps, minerals, or fossils.

  HARRY S. JEANES,
  521 Arch Street, Philadelphia, Penn.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Postage stamps, postmarks, minerals, shells, wood, feathers, or any
     Texas curiosity, for copper or zinc ore, ocean curiosities, or
     anything suitable for a museum.

  FRANK D. DAVIS, Groesbeck, Texas.

       *       *       *       *       *

     United States War Department stamps, for foreign stamps.

  MONTGOMERY M. TAYLOR,
  Newport Barracks, Newport, Ky.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Coins, for an Indian tomahawk or pipe, shells, minerals, coins, or
     other curiosities.

  ALFRED W. KERR,
  22 Crescent Avenue, Bridgeport, Conn.

       *       *       *       *       *

G. H.--"The Story of George Washington" ran through ten numbers of
HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, Vol. I., beginning in No. 24, April 13, and
ending in No. 33, June 15.

       *       *       *       *       *

CLEMENT L. AND VIRGINIA H. P.--In 1872, Captain Lawson, an Englishman,
accompanied by a band of natives, explored the island of Papua, or New
Guinea. In the published account of his travels mention is made of Mount
Hercules, which, according to his measurements, is 32,783 feet above the
sea-level, or over 3000 feet higher than Mount Everest. Captain Lawson's
statement has not yet been verified by farther scientific investigation,
and the latest geographies and encyclopaedias continue to name Mount
Everest as the highest known peak on the earth's surface.

       *       *       *       *       *

MINNIE G.--A Brazilian silver milreis, or one thousand reis, is worth
about fifty-one cents, United States currency. The face value of a
ten-reis postage stamp is about half a cent.--Cancelled stamps are
commonly used in exchange by our correspondents, as new ones are
difficult to obtain, especially those of foreign countries.

       *       *       *       *       *

A. A. Y. C.--The cost of material for sail-boat described in YOUNG
PEOPLE No. 66 is about fifteen dollars. For the other information you
require, go to the foot of Court Street, Brooklyn, in which city you
live, and talk with the boatmen and boat-builders there.

       *       *       *       *       *

J. M.--A new boat like the one you describe will cost from seventy-five
to one hundred dollars. You may be able to obtain one second-hand in
good condition for half that sum. The expense of starting a club would
depend entirely upon the outlay to which the members mutually agree. It
might be confined to the price of your boat and rowing suits, and the
rent of some place to store your boat.

       *       *       *       *       *

JOHN T.--A note from Mr. Casey, containing his address and a kind offer
to reply to correspondents, was printed in the Post-office Box of
HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE No. 61.

       *       *       *       *       *

WILLIE B. S.--When the Colonial Congress was in session in Philadelphia
in 1774 a motion was made to open the proceedings with prayer. It was
opposed on the ground that as the members belonged to different
denominations, they would be unable to join in the same act of worship.
But Mr. Samuel Adams, who was a strict Presbyterian, said he could
listen to a prayer from a gentleman of piety and virtue who was at the
same time a friend to his country, and named Mr. Jacob Duche, an
Episcopal clergyman of Philadelphia, as such a person. The motion was
then passed, and Mr. Duche appeared the next morning, and officiated
with great fervor. He subsequently became a traitor to his country, and
even attempted to persuade Washington to desert to the British.

       *       *       *       *       *

WALTER S. D.--The two New York firms that carry and distribute mail
matter within the limits of the city of New York are Boyd's Dispatch and
Hussey's Dispatch. They claim this right in virtue of a special
privilege given them many years ago by the city government. Whatever
this right may be in theory, it certainly holds good in practice, for
the general government has tried time and time again to break up these
concerns, but without avail.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUZZLES FROM YOUNG CONTRIBUTORS.

No. 1.

ENIGMA.

  My first in quill, not in pen.
  My second in duck, not in hen.
  My third in river, not in lake.
  My fourth in biscuit, not in cake.
  My fifth in soon, not in late.
  The capital I of a foreign state,
  Upon whose shore by night and day
  The Pacific dashes in foam and spray.

  DAME DURDEN.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 2.

WORD CHANGES.

1. Rain to snow. 2. Rags to silk. 3. Mill to cent. 4. Sin to woe. 5.
Sold to lost. 6. Line to cord. 7. Nay to yea. 8. Glue to mend.

  FRANK L. L.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 3.

EASY CONCEALMENTS.

Cities and Countries.--1. Here is a new portfolio for Carrie. 2. Ponto
led Oliver to the stream. 3. I shall see Charles to-night. 4. Helen and
Anna may go to the fair.

  M. L. H.

5. He is no liar, men; I am the culprit. 6. Madam, as custodian of the
library, I must forbid you to remove books. 7. I gave orders that he be
set to work immediately. 8. Her picture was set in diamonds.

  BELL.

Trees.--9. Did you know that Will owns a horse? 10. This pin equals an
iron bar in strength. 11. We heard the croak of a raven. 12.
Steam-engines propel many boats. 13. It appeared to me that he was
false. 14. Philip, each one of your sums is wrong. 15. The plumes of
Crecy round him waved.

  ED.

Birds and Beasts.--16. His rib is broken. 17. How did that occur, Lewis?
18. He muttered words none could understand. 19. Jim and Caspar rowed us
over the river.

  MARGARET.

20. I abhor seeing you in that dress. 21. Behind them came Lucy, all in
white. 22. Would you like to be a Russian? 23. Dover is the capital of
Delaware. 24. The medicine is more bitter now than it was at first. 25.
The fairy's wand is broken.

  EMILY and CLARA.

26. Isaac, row faster! 27. The lobsters nip Essie's fingers. 28. Seth
rushed in and told them.

  MILLIE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 4.

CHARADE.

  My first is a troublesome insect.
  My second might be applied to every boy and girl during dinner-time.
  My whole consumes my first.

  NORMAN.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 5.

ENIGMA.

  In cold, not in heat.
  In shoe, not in feet.
  In flutter, not in flaunt.
  In wish, not in want.
  In stone, not in brick.
  In hen, not in chick.
  In rough, not in kind.
  In thought, not in mind.
  To gather my whole on an autumn day
  For country boys is sport and play.

  LENA S. F.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANSWERS TO PUZZLES IN No. 69.

No. 1.

  S P A I N
  P A R T
  A R T
  I T
  N

No. 2.

Tiger.

No. 3.

Across.--1. Stork. 2. Sport. 3. Heron. 4. Civil. 5. Drain. 6. Dregs. 7.
Refer. 8. Flint. 9. Oasis. 10. Sword. 11. Freak. 12. Spare. 13. Dross.
Zigzags--Spring flowers.

No. 4.

          M
        P A R
      F A C E T
    P A N A C E A
  M A C A R O N I C
    R E C O V E R
      T E N E T
        A I R
          C

No. 5.

Lifetime.

       *       *       *       *       *

Correct answers to puzzles have been received from Jessie A. Allen,
H. V. B., Bessie Bolton, Laura Brick, Charles H. Cole, Alice Cantine,
Lulu C., W. Chase, R. O. Chester, "Dawley Boys," Harry H. Dickinson, L.
Jay E., Lena S. Fox, "L. U. Stral," William A. Lewis, Howard B. Lent,
Adella R. Lippincott, C. H. McBride, "Philo S. Opher," Willy Rochester,
D. J. Reinhart, Frank W. Smith, Gilbert P. Salters, "Starry Flag," Dora
N. Taylor, W. I. Trotter, "Ed. I. Torial," Willie F. Woolard, Edith M.
Wetmore, Annie Wheeler, "Young Solver."




HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE.


SINGLE COPIES, 4 cents; ONE SUBSCRIPTION, one year, $1.50; FIVE
SUBSCRIPTIONS, one year, $7.00--_payable in advance, postage free_.

The Volumes of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE commence with the first Number in
November of each year.

Subscriptions may begin with any Number. When no time is specified, it
will be understood that the subscriber desires to commence with the
Number issued after the receipt of the order.

Remittances should be made by POST-OFFICE MONEY-ORDER OR DRAFT, to avoid
risk of loss.

  HARPER & BROTHERS,
  Franklin Square, N. Y.




STRING TRICKS.

BY HELEN P. STRONG.


Every boy and girl knows the mysteries of the "cat's-cradle"--of course
you do, as well as you know your "Aina, maina, mona, mite"--but do you
know that the "cat's-cradle" does not begin to exhaust the possibilities
of a piece of string? "Indian-box" mysteries and "inexhaustible hats"
are not to be compared with it for simplicity of contrivance. Given a
piece of string a yard long, and ten nimble fingers (counting thumbs),
and you have all the apparatus needed to astonish your friends for a
whole evening. I hope the accompanying illustrations and description
will be sufficient to give you the secret of one of these wonderful
string tricks. And now you shall be enlightened as to the

BUTTON-HOLE MYSTERY.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

Secure a piece of strong cord a yard in length, and having tied the ends
firmly together, pass the double end through your button-hole, and a
thumb through each loop, as in Fig. 1. Now slip the little finger of
your _left_ hand under the lower string of the loop which passes over
the _right_ thumb, and the little finger of the _right_ hand under the
lower string of the loop which passes over the _left_ thumb, separating
the hands as in Fig. 2. Now comes the mystery. A quick movement of both
hands, without releasing the string from either thumbs or little
fingers, will give the effect of a tangle which can only be extricated
by cutting the string or the button-hole. You add to the illusion by
sawing a little on the button-hole to direct the attention to the
impossibility of loosening the string at that point; then suddenly,
without letting go either hand, you present the string-free from the
button-hole though still securely tied.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

The secret lies in this: if you look carefully at Fig. 2, you will
discover that the little finger of one hand and the thumb of the other
are really holding the same loop; so you have only to retain your hold
at these points, letting the rest go, to draw the string out of the
button-hole with freedom.

But you may find it rather difficult at first to make the proper thumb
and finger act quickly and in unison, apart from the twin brother of
each; for thumbs, and also little fingers, are like twin children, and,
unless well trained, one always wants to do what the other does. But you
will succeed if you think very hard for a moment, for that is the way
the mind makes naughty hands and feet obey her commands.




THE LOSING BAG.


  Little Harry Careless
    Was always losing things--
  Shoes and hats, and slates and books,
    Pencils, marbles, strings--
  Till at last his mother
    Took a faded flag
  (A great, enormous one it was)
    And made of it a bag.

  "Now, my careless Harry,"
    Said she, with a kiss,
  "When you feel like losing things,
    Pop them into this."
  "That I will," cried Harry,
    Happy as a king;
  And since he's had the losing bag
    He's never lost a thing.




[Illustration: "HOLD YOUR GIRAFFE, SIR?"]

[Illustration: THE GIRAFFE IS HELD.]





End of Project Gutenberg's Harper's Young People, March 15, 1881, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, MAR 15, 1881 ***

***** This file should be named 45152.txt or 45152.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/1/5/45152/

Produced by Annie R. McGuire

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
