Project Gutenberg's Rhymes for Harry and His Nurse-Maid, by Maria Arthington

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Rhymes for Harry and His Nurse-Maid

Author: Maria Arthington

Release Date: March 18, 2014 [EBook #45168]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RHYMES FOR HARRY, HIS NURSEMAID ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Chris Whitehead and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







FRONTISPIECE.

to "Rhymes for Harry and his Nurse-Maid".


[Illustration: Nursery Furniture. _pa 21._]

[Illustration:

    A simple tale will oft prevail,
      When sober prose is spurn'd;
    The charm of rhyme beguiles the time,
      And still a lesson's learn'd.
]




  RHYMES

  FOR

  _HARRY_

  AND

  HIS NURSE-MAID.




  A simple tale will oft prevail,
    When sober prose is spurn'd;
  The charm of rhyme beguiles the time,
    And still a lesson's learn'd.

  Thus lines for youth, in simple truth,
    We never will despise;
  For maxims old, tho' frequent told,
    May still assist the wise.




  LONDON:

  WILLIAM DARTON AND SON,

  HOLBORN HILL.




PREFACE.


It is with feelings of great humility, from a sense of her own
deficiency in the important duties of a mother, that the writer of the
following rhymes submits them to the public. Her wish is to convey a
few useful hints to nurse-maids, as well as to those mothers who have
had but little experience in the care of children.

Many young mothers, more especially in the middle circles of life, have
scarcely leisure to make education a study; while others, perhaps,
do not reflect on the very great importance of early habits; to such
persons, the few practical observations contained in the notes, may
not be unacceptable.

The subjection of the will, in the first place, by _mild_ yet firm and
persevering conduct, will generally ensure success to the parent, and
will save the child _hours_ and even _days_ of fretfulness and sorrow.

The employment of a nurse-maid is a responsible one; those who really
perform their duty from pure and conscientious motives, will not lose
their reward; and though such may feel _themselves_ to be placed in
a very humble situation, they are, in reality, laying the foundation
for future happiness or misery. In the first three years of childhood,
that basis is often formed upon which the conduct of future life is
built. If self-will, and a spirit of contradiction, be allowed to take
deep root in the infant mind, Divine Grace _only_ can counteract their
evils. But, on the other hand, if good feelings be cherished, and the
evil passions (which _all_ have more or less, by nature,) be gradually
subjected, early blossoms of virtue will appear; and, by the blessing
of Providence, those beautiful fruits will be matured, by which the
tree may be known to be good; and by which, from the cradle to the
grave, the designs of the benevolent Creator will be accomplished.

[Illustration: Nurse's first thoughts about her baby. _pa 7._]

[Illustration: Finding a Pin which had pricked baby. _pa 8._]

The writer only wishes to say, that these rhymes were undertaken at
the particular request of a valued friend of hers, who has bestowed
much of his time, with truly benevolent intentions, in adding to the
instruction and amusement of the rising generation; and she cannot but
acknowledge the obligation she feels for the kind assistance he has
lent her in several of the subjects which occupy the following pages.

The design of the writer is, that _each piece_ shall convey some
hint which may tend to the physical or moral advantage of the child,
in those duties which immediately devolve upon a mother, and her
nurse-maid; so that, while they are amusing their little ones with the
recital of a simple narrative, adapted to the most humble capacity,
they may sometimes be pleasantly reminded of their own obligations.

  M. A.




    RHYMES, &c.




    NURSE'S FIRST THOUGHTS ABOUT HER BABY.


    Little Baby, just new born,
    Naked, trembling, and forlorn,
    My hand the willing help supplies,
    To ease thy pain, and soothe thy cries;
    Nor can I tell thee little dear,
    How much we're pleased to see thee here.
    O, it will be my sweet delight
    To serve thee with this milk so white!
    But tho' my babe so nicely feeds,
    I'll only give just what it needs;
    If I the spoon too often fill,
    'Twould make my baby sick and ill.
    Mamma too will be able soon
    To feed her babe without a spoon,
    And _that_ we know is better far
    Than milk and barley-water are.




    FINDING A PIN WHICH HAD PRICKED BABY.


    Hark! I hear my baby weeping,
    Tho' it seemed so nicely sleeping;
    Sure its wrapping is not right!
    I fear there is some string too tight.
    Ah! now I find the reason why,--
    My precious baby well might cry.
    Upon its bosom, close within
    The barrow-coat, I've found a pin;
    But I can tell thee o'er and o'er,
    No pin shall ever prick thee more;
    Some buttons shall be snugly set
    Upon the flannels of my pet.
    Ah, baby dear, so feeble, fair!
    Thou call'st forth many an anxious care!
    Thou canst not speak thy pain or wo,
    Or tell me whence thy pleasures flow;
    Then o'er my babe a watch I'll keep,
    And guard it when 'tis fast asleep.




[Illustration: The crust.--Teething. _pa 15._]

[Illustration: Babes are fretful when suddenly aroused

from sleep. _pa 16._
]




    BABY ASLEEP AGAIN IN THE COT.


    Should any cause of inward pain
    Make baby cry or start again,
    I'll warm its feet before the fire,
    Or see what else it may require;
    Over my shoulder gently throw
    And rock my baby to and fro.
    And now, asleep within the cot,
    It must be neither cold nor hot.
    If cold, I know it shortly will
    Awake, and feel itself quite ill;
    And if 'tis wrapp'd too tight and warm,
    Tho' babe may feel no present harm,
    'Twill be relax'd, and feeble grow,
    And shortly lose its healthy glow.
    But with a blanket _warm_, yet _light_,
    And pillow not too great a height,
    With nothing else to tease or cumber,
    Baby will most sweetly slumber.




    WASHING.


    My baby must be clean and neat,
    With cap and pinafore complete;
    I'll daily sponge its little head,
    And wash its skin, so soft and red.
    My seat must not be over high,
    Lest babe roll off my lap, and cry:
    Upon my knee, I'll safely hold,
    And do it quick for fear of cold.
    Hush, hush, my dear! I'll not be long;
    Washing will make thee stout and strong:
    Thy little nerves 'twill help to brace,
    'Twill make thee have a rosy face.
    Some helpless babes scarce ever get
    A wholesome washing, like my pet;
    Then weak, and weaker still, they grow,
    No sprightliness or pleasure show;
    Whereas, by constant daily care,
    With skin so fresh, and clean brush'd hair,
    They might have stouter grown, and stronger,
    And liv'd in cheerful health much longer.




    RESTLESS NIGHTS.


    When a babe is uneasy and restless in bed,
    "Child's cordial" will soothe it to sleep, it is said;
    And ignorant people, who know not its harm,
    Think this dangerous stuff has a powerful charm.
    But _one drop_ of such poison I never will give,
    Because I would rather my darling should live;
    And I know very well, if this cordial I try,
    That baby will want more and more, till it die.
    Tho' made with such art as to lull and give ease,
    It lays the foundation for lasting disease;
    No mother deserves a sweet babe for her prize,
    Who would poison her infant, to silence its cries.
    And a nurse who loves baby, or values her place,
    Will ne'er use this drug; 'tis a sin and disgrace;
    Well then, I will try with much patience and care,
    To soothe my dear babe, or some food to prepare;
    And the true satisfaction of doing my best
    Will repay all my labour and sweeten my rest.




    A WALK IN THE COUNTRY.


    Must we take a nice walk?--
      Where are spencer and hat?
    Why, my Harry looks pleas'd,
      When I tell him of that!

    We must trip rather briskly,
      Not saunter and stay;
    Then we catch the fresh breeze
      As it hastens away.

    And now for the gate,--
      Let us open it, dear;
    We have got to the field,
      And the daisies appear.

    The cowslips and buttercups[1]
      Make it look yellow;
    Must I pluck one, to give
      To my sweet little fellow?

    Come, look at this flower--
      Ah! now he has caught it;
    Well really, my Harry,
      I scarce could have thought it!

    And now, to his mouth,
      He is bearing the prize,
    Ah! I see very well
      That I have not been wise.

    Some insect may lurk
      On the stalk or the leaves;
    I must take it away,
      Though my darling it grieves.

[1] The writer has been told that one species of the buttercup is
poisonous: and there are many flowers which it would be hurtful for
children to suck.

 NOTE.--Children are sent out into the country for the benefit of
 fresh air and exercise; but it is impossible to say what evils arise
 through the thoughtlessness of some nurse-maids, who will even let
 their helpless babes sit upon the cold grass, in order that _they_ may
 loiter with their associates.




[Illustration: Baby asleep again in the cot. _pa 9._]

[Illustration: Washing. _pa 10._]




    A WALK IN THE TOWN.


    How cheerful is the live-long day,
    When babe and I together stray!
    Among the fields and daisy-flowers,
    We love to spend the happy hours;
    But when Mamma shall send us down
    To make her markets in the town,
    Much we shall see to please the boy
    And make him almost jump for joy:
    Horses and carts will please him well,
    And twenty things we need not tell.
    But then we must not stop too long,
    Mamma would say that we did wrong.
    We must not saunter in the street,
    Or chatter with the folks we meet,
    But hasten homeward with our store,
    Until we reach the well-known door:
    With dirty feet we'll not be seen,
    For Mary's steps are neat and clean.
    If Harry for my basket begs,
    I must not let him break my eggs,
    Or lose my curds, or spill, or waste;
    But find some toy to suit his taste:
    Then Harry, nurse, and basket-store,
    Will safely land at home once more.




    TEETHING.


    Babies, when cutting teeth, oft cry,
      And bite their little thumbs;
    Aught they can seize, they'll often try
      To carry to their gums.

    Some people give them coral bright
      With bells all hung together;
    And some will give them glass to bite,
      Or ivory, or leather.[2]

    But things that are so hard as glass
      Mamma approves of never;
    They grieve and hurt poor babes, alas!
      And make them worse than ever.

    A nurse should _then_ be very kind
      In finding what will please,
    A crust of bread, if they're inclined,
      Will nourish and not tease.

    Their diet should be thought of too,
      With care about their dress:
    Lancing, when teeth are nearly thro,'
      Makes babies suffer less.

[2] The writer was recommended to try a piece of leather, and has found
it to produce less irritation than any of the hard substances so often
used. Some mothers prefer Indian-rubber.




    BABIES ARE FRETFUL WHEN SUDDENLY AROUSED FROM SLEEP.


    Come, come, my sweet deary
      Has slept rather long,
    But now that he's waking
      I'll sing him a song.

    But softly awhile--
      I must not be forgetful,
    That suddenly rousing
      Makes Harry quite fretful.

    I must not with haste
      Toss my baby about,
    If I make too much noise
      I shall grieve him, I doubt.

    Then be-boo, my darling,
      My bosom shall hide thee;
    I'll pat thee, and kiss thee,
      No fear shall betide thee.

    Ah! how sweetly he smiles,
      Now I've gained all my ends;
    For my baby and I
      Can soon make-up good friends.




[Illustration: Learning to walk. _pa 17._]

[Illustration: In-doors play. _pa 18._]




    LEARNING TO WALK.


    My baby trips with steps complete,
    And loves to stand upon his feet;
    But then 'tis only when I hold
    His finger, that he feels so bold;
    Until his limbs are firmer grown
    I must not let him stand alone;
    I'll notice every new desire,
    That, while I _teach_, I may not _tire_;
    His little wants with care supply,
    And guard against each danger nigh.
    We'll sometimes walk, and sometimes rest,
    Just as my darling likes the best:
    For ah! his legs are young and slender,
    His tripping toes are soft and tender;
    Much at once he cannot bear,
    Needing patience, thought, and care.
    Yet frequent walking, not _too long_,
    Will make his little limbs grow strong.




    IN-DOORS PLAY.


    Look out, my dear, how fast it rains,
    Pelting upon the window panes!
    We'll shut them till the storm is o'er,
    Lest it should rain upon the floor.
    When all above seems clear and dry,
    Again we'll throw the windows high;
    The shower makes all look green and fair,
    And wholesome is the freshen'd air.
    Come, Harry, get his ball the while--
    (Harry loves play, it makes him smile.)
    We'll roll it on the floor, and then
    Quickly we'll fetch it back again.
    And, if I think his looks betray
    Some anxious wish for change of play,
    We'll try a hundred little tricks,
    We'll fetch his horse, his cart, his bricks;
    And, when he seems well pleas'd, we'll strive
    To keep good-temper all alive:
    With kindness and obliging aim
    I'll join in every childish game,
    Nor interrupt with thoughtless air,
    Aught that has claim'd my Harry's care.




[Illustration: See how my Harry hangs his head. _pa 19._]

[Illustration: Bed-time.

Now, on the little cap we'll put. _pa 20._]




[Illustration: Never grieve one to please another. _pa 22._]

[Illustration: Warm Feet. _pa 24._]




    HARRY HAS A SISTER.


    When little sister Jane arriv'd,
      Harry was two years old;
    His dimpled cheeks and lively air
      A cheerful temper told.

    Well pleas'd, he sat by nurse's side,
      As she the babe would dress.
    And, though he kiss'd or patted her,
      _Too_ hard he did not press.

    He learn'd to wait upon himself,
      His pinafore to loose,
    Now on he'd nicely put his socks,
      And clasp his little shoes.

    He nimbly went up stairs or down,
      At nurse or mother's call;
    But then, he took _fast hold_ the while,
      Lest he should get a fall.




    BED-TIME.


    See how my Harry hangs his head,
      And rubs his little peepy;
    'Tis time to trot up stairs to bed
      When babies are so sleepy.

    Then let us put his playthings by,
      Jane's rattle, and her dolly;
    We must not leave all things awry,
      To make more work for Molly.

    Come trip up stairs with nimble feet,
      --A kiss for dear Mamma;
    Hark, hark, she says "farewell my sweet,"
      And Harry says, "ta, ta."

    (He does not say--"Mamma, do let
      Me stop a little longer?"
    Indulgence soon would spoil her pet,
      And make his will grow stronger.)

    Now, we must all the windows shut,
      And let the curtains down;
    Now, on the little cap we'll put,
      And now the sleeping gown.

    My Harry must lie still, and keep
      The bed-clothes nice and even;
    "Ta, ta,"--he'll soon be fast asleep,
      For, hark! the clock strikes seven.




[Illustration: Harry has a Sister. _pa 19._]

[Illustration:

  And, though he kiss'd or patted her,
  _Too_ hard he did not press.

_pa 19._]




    NURSERY FURNITURE.


    Harry can skip, or jump, or play,
      Just at his own desire;
    But once he was a careless boy,
      And went too near the fire.

    And had not nurse, with watchful eye,
      Beheld, and quickly turn'd
    His pinafore had caught the flame,
      His hair had all been burn'd.

    Papa had seen a guard so nice,
      That fitted round a fire;
    He order'd one for Harry's room,
      With closely platted wire.

    See now he plays with nimble step,
      And fearless of all harm;
    And yet he can, on Winter days,
      His little fingers warm.

    A lamp, two yards above the floor,
      Is fasten'd to the wall;
    For candles, on a table put,
      Might quickly get a fall.

    A basin and a jug, and soap,
      With water from the well,
    Plac'd on a little frame of wood,
      Suit nurse and Harry well.

    And nicely furnish'd is our room,
      With things that will not spoil;
    Mamma too kind and thoughtful is
      To make much care or toil.

    She likes her darling babes to play
      At liberty and ease,
    And still, in having useful things,
      Takes care they do not tease.




    NEVER GRIEVE ONE TO PLEASE ANOTHER.


    Poor Jane! what is it grieves her so?
      Why sobs her little heart?
    She cries, because she wants to have
      Her brother's nice new cart.

    But Harry now is so intent
      Unloading all his store,
    She must, my darling, wait awhile,
      Until his game is o'er.

    To please and gratify, we must
      Not rob and grieve another;
    Justice should always be our guide,
      And feeling for the other.

    And tho' 'tis pleasant, when a child
      Will _freely_ give or lend;
    If we _oblige them to be kind_,
      We soon defeat our end.

    We'll pacify with kindest art,
      And other thoughts excite;
    We'll try, with tender care, to lead,
      The infant wish aright.

    We _must_ a good beginning make
      For every useful lesson;
    We _must_ enforce from earliest years
      The practice of submission.

 N. B.--A little publication, entitled "Hints for the Improvement
 of Early Education," the writer recommends to the increased
 attention of every conscientious mother.--These rhymes make but very
 humble pretensions, and are likewise much limited, from various
 considerations; so that many of the more important subjects of
 education could not be touched upon.




    WARM FEET.


    Harry looks so sick and ill,
    Harry is so cold and chill,
    Nurse does almost think, and fear,
    Something's the matter with her dear.
    Let me feel his little feet,
    If they're nicely warm, my sweet!
    Ah! they are both damp and cold;
    And that should never be, I'm told.
    Let us fetch the little tub,
    And water warm, his feet to rub;
    We'll bathe them well; then by and by
    We'll wash them clean, and wipe them dry.
    If feet are cold, Mamma can tell
    Her children will not long be well;
    And often have I heard her say,
    "That case admits of no delay."




    HARRY AT DINNER.


    My Harry is not quite so good
      At dinner as I wish;
    He sometimes is a dainty boy,
      Unless he likes the dish.

    He, sometimes says he does not like
      His pudding and his meat,
    If, on the sideboard he can see
      A pie or custard sweet.

    But mother does not choose her boy
      Should follow ways like these;
    And if his plate he does not clean,
      He has no pie nor cheese.

    Mamma knows that, whate'er she gives
      Her boy, is always good;
    And she is never pleas'd to hear
      Remarks about his food.

    How many a half-starv'd little boy
      Has nought whereon to feed!
    While happy Henry, day by day,
      Has all that he can need.

 NOTE. What a privilege those children enjoy who are allowed to take
 their meals with their parents! Many children are really brought up
 in habits of daintiness and gluttony, through the mistaken kindness
 of nurses, who are not aware that they are laying the foundation for
 future misery. And who is more miserable than the epicure? surrounded
 by the blessings of a bountiful Giver,--and yet dissatisfied with
 _all_! Surely poverty, with thankfulness, is not half so wretched a
 condition!




[Illustration: Nurse telling Harry a tale, about catching flies.

_pa 27._]

[Illustration: The girl who hurt herself with the table.

_pa 30._]




    TAKING MEDICINE.


    What have I got in this blue cup?
    'Tis senna-tea: come, drink it up.
    Now come, my little Harry, haste;
    What! say he does not like the taste?
    These raisins, with a crust of bread,
    Will make a pleasant taste instead,
    There! now 'tis gone,--both taste and smell;
    My little boy has managed well;
    Mamma shall know her darling can
    Drink senna-tea, just like a man:
    For, tho' it is not nice to take,
    Med'cine oft cures both pain and ache.
    Some naughty children will not try
    To drink their senna-tea, but cry;
    Then worse and worse they grow, instead,
    And often lie for weeks in bed,
    When early care, without delay,
    Might send their poorliness away.
    When nurses have a sickly charge,
    Their stock of patience should be large;
    Their kindness and obliging care,
    Should teach them peevishness to _bear_;
    But _then_, in what is _needful_,--_right_,
    Their hold should be both _firm_ and _tight_;
    Then love and confidence would still
    Meet in obedience to their will,
    And children would not dare to be
    Unruly with their senna-tea.

 NOTE. The practice of giving children sweet things, such as comfits
 and lozenges, cannot be too much reprobated. They fill children
 with ill-humors, by impairing digestion; they disorder the bowels,
 by producing an unnatural fermentation; they prevent the relish and
 enjoyment of plain food, and create in the little sufferer a continual
 craving for indulgencies. A little dried fruit, on proper occasions, is
 not unwholesome.




    NURSE TELLING HARRY A TALE, ABOUT CATCHING FLIES.


    Now, Harry, I've a tale to tell,
      So sit upon this chair;
    It is of what one day befell
      A little maid so fair.

    She had a trick of catching flies,
      And as I understand,
    Regardless of their shape or size,
      Would clasp them in her hand.

    A sly young bee that knew the way
      Some window-plants to gain,
    Yet choosing an unwise delay
      Was creeping on the pane:

    The thoughtless child, on mischief bent,
      Soon caught him by the wing;
    But she, on cruelty intent,
      Was punished with a sting.

    Nurse heard a cry of pain and grief,
      And tho' it seems quite funny,
    The little girl soon found relief
      From poultice made of honey.[3]

    Now since that time, I do expect,
      She'll hurt poor flies no more;
    The little maid will oft reflect
      On all she's done before.

    O, Harry, it is sad, indeed,
      To hurt a living thing!
    And those who do it, _really need_,
      A _rod_, if not a _sting_.

[3] Spirits of hartshorn, if immediately applied, will likewise
effectually remove the pain of a sting.

Spirits of turpentine, in case of a burn or scald, is a valuable
acquisition to a nurse-maid's closet. Its constant application till
the fire is extracted, prevents those bad consequences which sometimes
arise from neglect, or inefficient means.




[Illustration: A little Boy who was afraid in the dark. _pa 32._]

[Illustration: Nurse's reflections on the advantages of truth and

sincerity. _pa 34._]




    ANOTHER TALE.


    A little girl, I also knew,
    With cheeks of red, and eyes of blue;
    And though she was at learning quick,
    She had full many an awkward trick.
    She ate so fast,--so often spoke,--
    Mamma was much afraid she'd choke;
    Her spice she ate, too, with such haste,
    She would not let her brother taste.
    And habits such as these 'twas thought,
    She learn'd from what her nurse had taught.[4]
    This little girl would often climb,
    And so it happen'd that, one time,
    Attempting more than she was able,
    She fell against a dining table.
    Loud did she cry "I've hurt my head!
    O, naughty table!" then she said,
    And sobbing loud, and crying more,
    Began to beat the table sore.
    Mamma was sadly griev'd to find
    Her darling to such tricks inclin'd,
    But watchful care, with language mild,
    Soon check'd this temper in the child.
    "Such foolish ways, my Harry! shock!
    _He_ knows a table feels no knock:
    And, if it did, he would not _like_,
    He would not even _dare_, to strike.
    He knows the maxim of the good--
    'Do as you wish that others should.'
    Revenge makes naughty passions grow,
    It plants the root of endless wo;
    A boy that follows long this plan,
    Will fight when he is grown a man."

[4] In order to induce children to take their food, some persons are
apt to say, "Come, my dear, make haste, or brother (or sister) shall
have it! no, no, brother! you shall not have it!" Now every expression
of this kind will infallibly create selfishness and greediness. A mode
of conduct directly opposite should be enforced; that children may be
taught to find their chief happiness in promoting the pleasure of their
brothers and sisters, even by the sacrifice of their own.




    NURSE'S THIRD TALE, ABOUT A LITTLE BOY WHO WAS AFRAID IN THE DARK.


    Young Andrew Fearful was a child
      Most pleasing to behold,
    His temper was so sweet and mild,
      And he was four years old.

    But one sad failing Andrew had,
      Tho' gay as any lark,
    With scarce one habit that was bad,
      He did not like the dark.

    As soon as candlelight appear'd
     On evening fireside table,
    To walk about he scarcely dared,
      Though he was strong and able.

    And shadows flitting on the wall,
      Made Andrew jump and stare;
    He thought some mischief would befall
      With such great monsters there.

    Mamma, in many a pleasant way,
      Contriv'd the help he needed;
    And glad I am that I can say,
      Her care at last succeeded.

    She took him to a room quite dark,
      And led him by the hand
    To some known object, as a mark,
      And then they both would stand.

    The room shut in, without a light,
      He did not much enjoy,
    And Andrew fear'd to step aright;
      So foolish was this boy.

    But growing bolder, he would try
      The furniture to handle;
    And Andrew, _fearless_ by and by,
      Scarce wish'd to have a candle,

    Mamma, a paper nicely tied.
      Would place behind the curtain,
    With figs, or Pomfret cakes, supplied,
      And then the joy was certain.

    The shadows which he used to fear,
      Became his great delight;
    With joy mamma beheld her dear
      So pleas'd with candlelight.

    Thus many a pleasant hour beguil'd,
      Young Andrew's courage grew;
    Mamma was happier in her child,
      And he was happier too.

 NOTE. Nurses are not sufficiently aware of the importance of guarding
 against early impressions of fear. In this respect, as in many others,
 it is much easier to prevent a bad habit, than to cure one. Too much
 care and tenderness of feeling cannot be used towards those children
 who have unfortunately imbibed a fear of the dark; yet, on the other
 hand, judicious care should be exercised, that the habit may not be
 fostered by over-indulgence.




[Illustration: Harry at dinner. _pa 24._]

[Illustration: Taking medicine. _pa 26._]




    NURSE'S REFLECTIONS ON THE ADVANTAGES OF TRUTH & SINCERITY.


    If children are taught the whole lesson of truth,
    "'Twill bud in their childhood, and blossom in youth."
    This maxim I learnt from the pen of a sage,
    Whose vigor of mind was still green in old age:
    And much do I wish that my charge may be found
    On that ladder of learning where Truth is the ground;
    The foundation so broad makes the ladder stand even;
    And Truth's certain steps lead with safety to Heaven.
    Then, first, I'll be careful what language I use,
    That simple chaste words may express all my views:
    I'll watch o'er my actions with studious aim,
    That I may not, in future, deserve any blame;
    That bad habits may not from my errors proceed,
    Or my fair little plants be o'ergrown with a weed,
    My word and my promise shall always abide.
    And Truth and Sincerity sit side by side.
    Should I promise a thing which I do not perform,
    I lay the foundation for much future harm:
    If children learn falsehood from nurses or mothers,
    When grown up they will practise deceit upon others.
    Then nought but the truth to my child shall be spoken:
    If I once make a promise, it _shall not be broken_.[5]
    As the best thing of all, I will constantly try
    To watch over _myself_ with a vigilant eye;
    My passions and faults so to mend or remove,
    That all may be lost in obedience and love;
    That, in practice, I never may knowingly swerve,
    From the wishes of those whom I honour and serve:
    But with eye _singly fix'd_, to my duty inclin'd,
    Let me show forth a meek and a teachable mind;
    On reproof or instruction not daring to trample,
    May I always remember the _force of example_!

[5] Nurses should also be very cautious how they use threats to
children. If they threaten to tell Mamma any thing, or to withhold any
indulgence in case of naughtiness, let it be strictly attended to. If
it be _not_ attended to, children are great observers, and will soon
find that but little regard is paid to truth; and thus incalculable
evils may be the result. Some nurses, and even mothers, are apt to
bribe their children in this way: "If my dear will do this, I'll
give him a sugar-plum;" or, "Will he do so or so, if I give him a
sugar-plum?" thus bringing down the standard of parental authority to
the petulance or caprice of the child.--Can obedience ever be expected
from one whose self-will is thus nurtured? Surely it must be from want
of reflection, that mothers entail so much trouble upon themselves and
their children!




     FINIS.


     J. May, Printer, &c. Dover.




[Illustration: A walk in the country. _pa 12._]

[Illustration: A walk in the town. _pa 14._]




  ONE SHILLING BOOKS,

  With Copper-plates.


  Bird Fancier, (The British) _plates_.
  Book of Trades, 12 mo. _cold._
  British Sovereigns, from William the Conqueror to William the Fourth,
    12mo. _cold._
  Crocus (The) containing Original Poems for Young Persons, by I. E. M.
    12mo. _plts. col._
  Early Seeds, to produce Spring Flowers, by Mary Elliot, 12mo. _cold._
  Industry and Idleness.
  Ladder to the Alphabet, 12mo. _cold._
  Little Scenes, 12mo. _cold._
  Little Truths better than great Fables, 2 parts.
  Pet Lamb; (The) to which is added the Ladder to Learning, &c. 12mo.
    _cold._
  Plain Things for Little Folks, by Mary Elliot.
  Present for a Little Boy, 12mo.
   ----   ----  Little Girl, ditto.
  Rational Exhibition, 12mo.
  Rose, (The) containing Original Poems, by Mary Elliot, 12mo. _cold._
  Rural Amusements, 12mo. _cold._
  Simple Studies. Natural History. Quadrupeds, 12mo. _cold._
  Ditto,          ditto,           Birds,      ditto.
  Simple Scenes in Rural Life, 12mo. _cold._
  Wild Garland, (The) 12mo. _cold. plates_.
  Yellow Shoe Strings, or the Good Effects of Obedience to Parents,
    18mo.




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE:

Obvious printer errors have been corrected. Otherwise, the author's
original spelling, punctuation and hyphenation have been left intact.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Rhymes for Harry and His Nurse-Maid, by 
Maria Arthington

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RHYMES FOR HARRY, HIS NURSEMAID ***

***** This file should be named 45168.txt or 45168.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/1/6/45168/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Chris Whitehead and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
